==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
LiDAR-assisted control for wind turbines
Cedric Denis Steinmann Perez
DTU Wind-M-0623
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0623 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Alan Wai Hou Lio
Fanzhong Meng
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Cedric Denis Steinmann Perez
Title:
LiDAR-assisted control for wind turbines
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I extend my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Fanzhong Meng and Alan Wai
Hou Lio, for their invaluable inspiration, unique opportunity, and excellent support, guidance, and
advice throughout this project.
I am also immensely grateful to my family, Philippe, Midori, Melanie, and Carolina, friends, and loved
ones, who have supported me not only during this project but throughout my entire academic journey,
keeping me motivated and focused.
I would also like to express my heartfelt appreciation to my professors, whose expertise and guidance
have been instrumental in expanding my knowledge and shaping my academic growth.
Lastly, I would like to extend my thanks to my DTU classmates and teacher assistants, as well as
everyone else who has been by my side throughout this incredible journey.
Your support and encouragement have been truly invaluable, and I am deeply grateful for the oppor-
tunity to have shared this experience with such amazing individuals.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The application of LiDAR technology for measuring upstream wind speed has shown promise in
wind turbine control to reduce structural fatigue loads and improve rotor speed regulation. Coher-
ence analysis is commonly employed to assess the correlation between LiDAR measurements and the
wind speed experienced by the wind turbine which is then used to develop low-pass filters to miti-
gate high-frequency signals. However, further investigations are needed to explore the applicability
of commercially available fixed-beam LiDAR systems in larger wind turbines and address potential
limitations.
Additionally, there is limited research on the performance and implementation of two well-known
LiDAR-assisted feed-forward control methods - Schlipf and Bossanyi, particularly regarding changes
in wind turbine size and uncertainties in wind speed to pitch angle mapping used in the feedforward
controller.
The main objective of this thesis is first to investigate LiDAR coherence and configurations for large
wind turbines. Specifically, we explore the effects of using the turbulence box in aeroelastic simulations
through a test bench that evaluates the turbulence box grid size. The influence of the number of LiDAR
beams, the preview distance, and the mean wind speed on the coherence will also be studied. Secondly,
a thorough analysis of two well-known LiDAR-assisted control methods (Schlipf and Bossanyi) will be
investigated not only on their impact on load reduction but also, considering wind turbine size, and
uncertainty in inaccurate pitch angle mapping with the upcoming wind speed.
Numerical simulations showed that when using fixed LiDAR beam configuration, a consistent coher-
ence bandwidth can be achieved with a turbulence box with a minimum height and width of 64 x 64
and employing at least 8 LiDAR beams covering between 40% and 60% of the rotor radius to achieve
higher coherence.
Furthermore, findings showed that using a low pass filter would influence a time-delay to wind signals.
If the cut-off frequency is too low, it becomes a challenge. Specifically, it was found that the time
required to compensate for the time delay caused by the filter can exceed the available preview time
in larger wind turbines because the coherence bandwidth for large wind turbines with limited LiDAR
beams is not high.
Lastly, the Schlipf approach was found to perform overall better for load reduction while Bossanyi,
when the baseline controller does not have interaction with system low-damped natural frequencies.
Nevertheless, the latter experienced deficiencies such as frequency transfer and higher excitation in
existing system natural frequencies, This is due to the utilization of the actual pitch angle for calculat-
ing the feedforward pitch rate, as well as inaccuracies or sub-optimal calculations of the steady-state
pitch angle which also, can increase rotor rotational speed. It was found also that these effects become
more pronounced in larger wind turbines.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives and description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
4
2.1
LiDAR configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Lidar assisted Pitch control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Collective pitch control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Individual pitch control (IPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3
Field testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Background concepts
7
3.1
LiDAR measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Measurement coherence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Signal filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.1
Feedback Wind turbine control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.2
Feedforward controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
LiDAR setup and turbulence box coherence analysis
14
4.1
LiDAR and test bench configuration setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.1
LiDAR Simulations in turbulent wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Discussion and summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
Turbulence box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.2
Number of LiDAR beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.3
Preview distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.4
Wind speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Investigation and Evaluation of Lidar-Assisted Control
22
5.1
Control implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Butterworth filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.2
Switching function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.3
Schlipf approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.4
Bossanyi approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
IEA 10 MW wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.1
The problem of poor coherence in large rotor, filtering, and time delay . . . . .
26
5.3
NREL 5MW
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3.1
NREL 5 MW Rigid tower evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.2
NREL 5 MW Frequency reduction of generator speed filter
. . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Discussion and summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusions and future work
40
6.1
Conclusion and key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
References
43
A Appendix
45
==PAGE:6==
B NREL natural frequencies
45
4
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
During most part of the past two centuries, the use of fossil fuels has contributed to an acceleration
in climate change leading to an increase in the global temperature. Moreover, fossil fuel resources
are becoming scarcer while the electric and energy demand keeps increasing. For this reason, many
countries have set the goal to reduce the use of fossil fuel-based technologies and substitute them
with renewable energy sources. Notably, the European Union has established ambitious goals for 2030
which include the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 40% with at least 32% share for renewable
energy[1].
To meet these goals, important advancements in renewable energy sources have been developed, es-
pecially wind energy, which is playing an important role and is one of the most promising sources to
do so. Hence, wind turbines have increased notably in size and complexity, but lowering its electricity
production cost is needed in order to keep them competitive. One of the key challenges in this process
is the structural loads, which can be problematic as the size increases, thus, minimizing the structural
loads on wind turbines needs to be solved in order to keep increasing the size and its lifetime.
Different solutions can be set to reduce the structural loads, mainly using the control system, which is
not only in charge of operating the wind turbine at its optimum efficiency but also of reducing fatigue
and extreme loads. One of the key challenges when designing control systems for wind turbines, is
that typical control systems are based on feedback mechanisms. That is, the controller reacts upon
the changes in the measurements. In other words, the control actions happen after the wind inflow
hits the turbine. Generally, inputs are based on nacelle-mounted anemometers, which are disturbed
by the rotor and often provide only one point of measurement.
One of the key challenges when designing control systems for wind turbines is the fact that it is not
possible to measure the upstream inflow, which forces the control systems to be based on other inputs,
such as nacelle-mounted anemometers which are disturbed by the rotor. Moreover, this input often
provides only one point of measurement.
Lidar technology is a promising technology that is able to remotely measure the velocity of the particles
in the air, and thus, estimate the wind speed. Thus, if the system is mounted on a wind turbine, it
can measure the upstream wind speed that will be then experienced by the wind turbine. With this
information, the control strategies can be designed to react to the Lidar wind speed disturbances and
potentially reduce structural loads.
Different simulations and studies [2], including field tests [3], have been conducted to evaluate the
effectiveness of LiDAR-assisted control for wind turbines. These investigations have concluded that
LiDAR-assisted control can lead to promising load reductions and other beneficial effects, which will
be further discussed in this project. However, there are still several implications that need to be
addressed regarding the implementation of LiDAR systems into the controller and their application
in larger wind turbines.
One crucial aspect to consider is the choice of LiDAR systems and configuration, as they have a
significant influence on the accuracy of LiDAR measurements. Various types of LiDAR systems can be
used for wind turbine control, such as scanning LiDAR systems that offer good resolution and coverage
of the wind inflow, even though at a high cost. On the other hand, fixed beam LiDAR systems are
more commercially accessible but provide wind speed measurements at only a few locations, which
may result in inaccuracies in high-frequency wind variations.
In the literature, coherence analysis is commonly employed to evaluate the correlation between the
1
==PAGE:8==
LiDAR measurements and wind speed experienced by the turbine which is then used to develop the
low-pass filters. Such filters are crucial to remove undesired high-frequency wind signals and improve
the quality of the LiDAR preview. The choice of LiDAR configuration will interact with the applied
filter, as the configuration directly impacts the quality of the LiDAR preview and so, the coherence.
These considerations highlight the importance of carefully selecting the appropriate LiDAR system
and configuration in order to obtain reliable measurements for effective wind turbine control. Further
investigation in this area is necessary to enhance the benefits of LiDAR-assisted control in larger wind
turbines.
With this in mind, the first motivation of this project is to investigate LiDAR coherence and possible
configurations using commercially available fixed-beam LiDARs to investigate its applicability in larger
wind turbines and use the information effectively.
Besides considering LiDAR coherence and configurations, the effective utilization of LiDAR signals
in wind turbine control applications is crucial for achieving the desired objective of load reduction.
One particular area of focus in this regard is the examination of two prominent feed-forward control
methods found in the literature: Schlipf and Bossanyi.
Therefore, the second motivation of this project is to conduct a thorough investigation of these two
control methods investigating not only their impact on load reductions but also their interaction with
feedback controllers and wind turbine generators. Furthermore, to investigate across various wind
conditions and different sizes of wind turbines, to achieve a comprehensive understanding of their
performance across a range of scenarios.
1.2
Objectives and description
In this project, the main objectives are first, to investigate LiDAR configurations and the effects of
using the turbulence box in aeroelastic simulations. Also, the number of LiDAR beams, the preview
distance, the mean wind speed, and their effect on coherence on large wind turbines are studied. Sec-
ondly, a thorough analysis of two well-known LiDAR-assisted control methods (Schlipf and Bossanyi)
will be investigated not only on their impact on load reduction but also, considering wind turbine size,
and uncertainty in inaccurate pitch angle mapping with the upcoming wind speed.
Two key challenges are addressed in this project:
1. How to use and treat LiDAR information effectively.
2. How to design a controller that uses the advanced knowledge from the LiDAR effectively.
To address the challenges, several phases of the project are proposed. The first challenge will be
covered in Chapters 2 and 3 where a literature review, investigation of signal processing, LiDAR
signals, and control are covered. Moreover, in Chapter 4 a test bench will be defined to evaluate the
influence of the turbulence box used by the high-fidelity aero-elastic wind turbine simulation tool,
HAWC2 [4], on the LiDAR signal as well as the influence of the number of LiDAR beams, the preview
distance, and the mean wind speed on the coherence to explore optimal LiDAR configuration. Finally,
the development for the appropriate use of LiDAR information and integration of the knowledge into
the controller will be executed.
The second challenge will be covered in Chapter 5 where the investigation of different ways of im-
plementing LiDAR-assist controller, baseline LiDAR controller replication, and comparison of the
before-mentioned controllers will be developed mainly in Matlab based on the findings of Chapter 4
and coupled to HAWC2.
2
==PAGE:9==
Lastly, Chapter 5 will also cover thorough investigation, evaluation, and validation of the controller
with HAWC2 analyzing and comparing the controller performance and fatigue loads to drive the
conclusions of the project.
Additionally, the Thesis will answer the following research questions:
1. Low-pass filters are often used in filtering the LiDAR signal. The cut-off frequency of the low-
pass filter is defined by maximum coherent wavenumber k. This number sometimes is defined as
the frequency where the magnitude-square coherence is 0.5 or 0.7. What would be the optimal
number?
2. Commonly used LiDAR-assisted control can be divided into two classes: Schlipf [5] approach
and Bossanyi [6] approach. What are the highlights and challenges of both methods? Would
the size of the turbine or the uncertainty in wind speed to pitch angle mapping affect their
performance?
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature review
This chapter will discuss the essential literature on the topic of LiDAR-assisted control of wind tur-
bines, which is relevant to this project. Other publications, articles, and materials were used to acquire
a deeper understanding and information about the major and surrounding themes, which will be cited
and introduced throughout the project as needed but will not be mentioned explicitly in this chapter.
2.1
LiDAR configurations
Ervin Bossanyi et al. in [6] conducted a research work based on simulations using different Lidar
configurations along with feedforward addition to a baseline controller. In the research, the authors
studied the use of both Pulsed and continuous-wave LiDAR systems ranging its focal distances, sam-
pling rates, number of fixed beams (pulsed only), circular scanning at various angles between beam
and center-line, various numbers of samples per scan and Nacelle mounted, spinner or blade mounted
options. The configurations were then compared in terms of the root mean square (RMS) error be-
tween the LIDAR estimate and the true rotor-averaged quantity and were simulated for a 10-minute
simulation with 13 m/s mean wind speed and class 1A turbulence conditions
The research work emphasizes the importance of achieving good coverage of the rotor swept area when
using LiDAR technology for wind parameter estimation in wind turbines. While a variety of patterns
and configurations can be utilized, the authors found that simple circular scans can be as effective as
complex patterns. Also, larger angles between the LiDAR beam(s) and the turbine’s centerline enhance
wind direction estimation but compromise accuracy in estimating longitudinal wind speed and shear
gradients. Sharply-focused measurements are not always advantageous, as a more distributed sample
along an angled beam can represent a larger swept area with reduced look-ahead time precision.
LiDAR mounted on the spinner or nacelle yields similar results, and a fixed blade-mounted system is
also effective. Optimal configurations for wind speed, shear gradient, or direction estimation depend
on specific control objectives in wind turbine design.
Simley et al. in [7] analyzed scan pattern optimization from a theoretical perspective by using fre-
quency domain methods to calculate mean square rotor effective wind speed measurement error and
measurement coherence bandwidth for different continuous wave and pulsed LiDAR scenarios. The
models were extended to include the mean square generator speed error calculation for a feedforward
control scenario. The analysis focused on optimizing scan patterns for rotor effective wind speed mea-
surement while noting that optimal configurations for measuring shear or wind direction may differ.
Key findings include: (1) Measurement locations should approximate a rotor disk average, with large
cone angles penalized by line-of-sight errors and long preview distances penalized by wind evolution
errors. (2) Increasing the number of beams reduces measurement/generator speed error. (3) Among
the scan patterns considered, a circularly-scanning continuous wave LiDAR achieves the lowest mea-
surement/generator speed error. Optimal parameters for the circular pattern are a scan radius of 60%
rotor radius and a preview distance of 60% rotor diameter for a 126 m-rotor diameter turbine. (4) For
a 4-beam pulsed LiDAR configuration, combining measurements from multiple range gates, optimal
parameters are a scan radius of 85% rotor radius and a preview distance of 110% rotor diameter for
the farthest range gate, resulting in a cone angle of 21.1 degrees.
2.2
Lidar assisted Pitch control
2.2.1
Collective pitch control
Early work from Ervin Bossanyi[6] investigated the topic of collective pitch control, calculating a
collective pitch rate considering the steady-state pitch angle corresponding to the LiDAR-measured
wind speed, the look-ahead time, and the current pitch angle. Then, the pitch rate is added to the exit
4
==PAGE:11==
of the feedback controller. The feedforward controller is combined with a conventional PI controller for
above-rated operation arguing that feedforward controller can take up upon the low-frequency speed
regulation duty making it possible to re-optimize the feedback PI controller reducing the gains in
order to achieve pith activity and thrust-related loads reduction. The controller’s performance results
showed reductions in high wind operation with turbine mounted LiDAR providing a few seconds of
look-ahead time in the tower base fore-aft and blade root out of plane of 16-20% and 6-12% respectively
[6]. Moreover, the pitching moment was reduced due to lower pitch activity. Extreme loads were also
assessed finding possible extreme load reduction mainly in the blade root out of plane moment and
tower base fore-aft bending moment with no other systematic change in the remaining loads.
On the other hand, early work from David Schlipf [5] investigated the topic of collective pitch control,
calculating the rotor effective wind speed from the entire wind field stating that the LiDAR mea-
surements can mathematically be described as a set of three-dimensional wind speed vectors at each
point in time and space. With that information, then a feedforward controller is designed for full
load operation with the goal to maintain the rated generator speed despite changing wind speed by
adjusting the pitch angle demand. This is accomplished using steady-state pitch angles derived from
simulations and adding the pitch to the pitch angle command of the feedback controller. Moreover,
for the implementation, instead of adding directly the feedforward angle in the output of the feedback
controller, the authors adjusted the method by adding the feedforward pitch rate into the integrator
included in the feedback controller [5].
The controller’s performance then was evaluated using a turbulent wind field in both perfect and
realistic wind previews. Results show load a reduction on the tower base, shaft, and blade root by
around 20%, 5%, and 10%. Furthermore, Kuhn and Schlipf conclude in [8] that fatigue and extreme
loads on the tower, drive-train, and blades can be reduced significantly without higher pitch dynamics
using a fairly similar control as in [5] and achieving a decrease in the standard deviation of the rotor
speed by 70% to 80%.
Meng et al [9] explore the possibility to use a new LiDAR-assisted adaptive control algorithm based
on extremum seeking control (ESC) based on the LiDAR information on the wind preview for optimal
power coefficient tracking at below-rated wind speed region. Results of the proposed method show as
good behavior as its baseline optimal tip-speed-ratio (TSR) tracking control in the below-rated wind
speed region noticing the advantage of not requiring accurate value of power coefficient (Cp) allowing
the application on wind turbines where their aerodynamic properties have changed. The standard
deviation and the short-term damage equivalent loads of the blade root flapwise bending moment are
all reduced when using the proposed LIDAR-assisted ESC controller[9]. Moreover, the author explores
the use of LiDAR-assisted controllers based on the previously mentioned LiDAR-assisted feedforward
approaches, for wind turbines above 5 MW. When evaluating the performance using the DTU 10
MW wind turbine, it was found reductions in the rotor speed standard deviation and load reduction
notably in the tower fore-aft, side to side, and shaft torsion with approximately 3%, 3% and 11%
respectively while the other components remain unaffected when the feedback gains are re-optimized
at 90% and measurement coherence is correctly considered in the controller.
Lio et al. [10] also explore the possibility of using LiDAR-assisted control as a retrofit solution so
that it can be implemented without modifications of existing conventional feedback controllers. The
author, in this case, proposes three methods:
• Method 1: The rotor speed measurement is modified and is based on before discussed Schlipf
approach [5] obtaining the feedforward angle based on a steady state look-up table
• Method 2: The rotor speed measurement is modified with the current pitch angle measurement
and is based on E.Bossanyi approach [6] using the proposed pitch rate.
5
==PAGE:12==
• Method 3: The pitch angle demand and rotor speed measurement are modified. Here, the author
uses a feed-forward pitch demand derived from the before discussed feedforward controller from
E. Bossanyi et al[6].
The results show fatigue load reduction notably in tower fore-aft, side to side, and blade flap-wise in
the three methods with reduction ranging from 5-8%, 3-5% and 3% respectively without deterioration
of the rotor speed deviations at its appropriate feedback gain reduction demonstrating the potential
of LiDAR applications in wind turbine control.
2.2.2
Individual pitch control (IPC)
Besides the development and benefits of LiDAR-assisted control in collective pitch feedforward con-
troller, Individual pitch control enhancement with LiDAR systems has been also investigated. Similar
to the sub-chapter below, Bossanyi investigates the possibility of using turbine-mounted LiDAR sys-
tems. In [6], the author uses two LiDAR configurations (Continuous wave and pulsed) selected with
good performance in estimating shear gradients and a LiDAR feedforward technique very similar to
the collective pitch case. The controller then was tested and compared with 4 cases: no IPC, only
IPC, LiDAR IPC, and LiDAR-assisted IPC. In this study, IPC generates once-per-revolution individ-
ual pitch demand increments at each blade to offset the effect of a linear wind speed gradient across
the rotor with standard PI controllers for horizontal and vertical shear compensation. LiDAR IPC
refers to the use of feedforward control in a very similar way to the collective pitch feedforward from
the same author without the need to re-optimize PI gains as both controls relatively slowly varying
asymmetric loads. For the cases, setting zero gain gives LiDAR-only IPC. Results show that using only
LiDAR IPC still reduces loads but is not as significant as conventional IPC. moreover, LiDAR-assisted
conventional IPC does not generate a remarkable improvement.
Similarly, Dunne et al in [11], three feed-forward individual pitch control were investigated concluding
no overall improvement over baseline conventional individual pitch control increasing tower sway
except for the optimized finite impulse response (FIR) filter controller with an average of 5% overall
load reduction.
2.2.3
Field testing
To confirm the previously mentioned benefits, field testing of a similar collective pitch feedforward
controller as the one proposed by D. Schlipf[5] was conducted under real conditions using a scanning
LiDAR installed on the nacelle of the CART2 (Controls Advanced Research Turbine, 2-Bladed) wind
turbine at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, NREL[3]. For the test, a campaign with a
pulse LiDAR was executed with a circular trajectory measuring six focus points at five different focus
distances equally distributed [3]. The raw data from LiDAR measurements is the line of sight wind
speed, which was averaged, and the longitudinal wind component is calculated considering zero lateral
and vertical components. Results conclude that the benefits of LiDAR-assisted control found through
simulations can also be achieved under real applications improving the overall collective pitch control
by noticing the importance of the correlation between the turbine and the LiDAR system. It is found
that bad correlation is not beneficial for the wind turbine with an increase in the standard deviation
of the generator speed by around 30% and tower loads increase by around 20%. Nevertheless, a good
correlation showed an improvement in the standard deviation of 30% and tower loads reduction of
20% respectively. Lastly, it was found load reduction of 10% on the blade for any of the cases.
6
==PAGE:13==
3
Background concepts
The present section deals first with the necessary background to understand, evaluate and apply
LiDAR measurement information for potential use in wind turbine controllers. Then, the chapter will
focus on the theory and concepts of conventional feedback and feedforward wind turbine control that
will be used throughout the project.
3.1
LiDAR measurements
The idea behind LiDAR systems for wind turbine control is to use the line-of-sight (LOS) measure-
ments, which are in the direction of the laser beam, provided by the LiDAR to estimate the wind
speed in front of the rotor disk, often called rotor effective wind speed(REWS). Typically, the LIDAR
can measure the wind speed at various points along its beam and the placement of the optics in the
LIDAR setup, also known as the focus point, determines the maximum measurable distance.
Common commercially available LiDAR setups usually have a fixed placement and direction, and
two types are available; pulsed and continuous wave. This project uses the latter. In particular, in
this LiDAR system, a focus distance is selected along the beam, and the measured outcome value
is derived from a weighted average along the beam according to a Lorentzian weighted function[5]
which is ideally characteristic of the LiDAR system. Moreover, it is common to align the LiDAR
beam at a certain angle, called a half-cone angle, so that more measurement points of the wind field
can be obtained. These measurements for themselves are not appropriate to assist control operations
since wind parameters such as the rotor average wind speed, wind shear, and wind direction have
more relevance. Thus, appropriate wind models and assumptions must be considered to estimate the
parameters of interest.
Figure 3.1: LiDAR measurement for a 2-D wind vector at one point.
Since the LiDAR measurement is a projection of the wind speed vector onto the LOS, considering
that the wind is directed toward the LiDAR system and not in a fixed frame, with no shear and inflow
angle, then, the measured LOS wind speed when positioned with a half-cone angle, VLOS, can be
calculated as;
VLOS = Ucos(θ) −V sin(θ)
(3.1)
Where V corresponds to the lateral wind speed components. Consequently, the measured wind speed
can be computed when assuming no yaw misalignment and no vertical and lateral components:
Vmeas = VLOS
cos(θ)
(3.2)
Where θ is the half-cone angle, which is the angle between the LiDAR beam and the actual wind speed.
7
==PAGE:14==
When incorporating several beams, the effective rotor average wind speed can usually be computed
assuming uniform wind speed across the rotor simply as an average as:
Veff = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Vmeas
(3.3)
Where N corresponds to the number of beams. With the estimated REWS, then, the measurement
quality needs to be assessed as discussed in the following section.
3.2
Measurement coherence
Assessing the quality of the measured REWS is crucial when evaluating and using LiDAR signals for
control. The magnitude squared coherence is a key parameter for assessing the correlation between
the actual LiDAR measurements and the wind speed experienced by the rotor [10],[5]. It is common
to define this parameter for such applications as follows [10],[5],[12]:
γ2(k) =
|Sv0,v0,L(k)|2
Sv0v0(k)Sv0,Lv0,L(k)
(3.4)
Where Sv0,v0,L, is the cross-power spectral density between both, the rotor effective wind speed ex-
perienced by the wind turbine and the LiDAR measurement signals, and Sv0v0, Sv0,L,v0,L are the
power spectral densities of the rotor effective wind speed and the LiDAR measurement respectively.
Typically, the REWS experienced by the wind turbine can be estimated by a wind speed estimator
or in some occasions, with the hub-height anemometer. However, in this work, a rotor-averaged wind
speed is chosen as a reference to verify the coherence with the LiDAR REWS.
The magnitude-squared coherence is typically a frequency-dependent function, where a value of one
indicates a perfect correlation between the wind at two locations, while a decreasing value approaching
zero indicates decreasing correlation. The results in the frequency domain can be translated into the
wavenumber domain when considering the Taylor’s frozen turbulence hypothesis and is computed with
equation 3.5 [12]. Here, the wavenumber (k) describes the size of a turbulence fluctuation; where a
small wavenumber indicates a spatially large fluctuation, while a larger value, the opposite[13].
f = k¯u
2π
(3.5)
Additionally, the maximum coherent wavenumber, denoted as k0.5, is introduced and computed from
equation 3.5 [12]. This parameter represents the frequency at which the magnitude-squared coherence
(γ2) drops below 0.5 and is commonly used as a performance indicator to quantify the correlation
between the LiDAR measurement and the wind speed experienced by the rotor. Moreover, it serves
as a parameter for determining the cut-off frequency of the Butterworth filter, which will be employed
in the implementation to remove uncorrelated and undesired high frequencies. Further explanation of
this filter will be provided in sub-Chapter 3.3.
3.3
Signal filter
Previous sections discussed the reconstruction of wind speed from LiDAR measurements and how
to assess its quality.
Generally, LiDAR systems can accurately capture only low frequencies [5].
Therefore, to utilize LiDAR information in a control system, it is necessary to filter out uncorrelated
and unwanted frequencies to prevent incorrect control actions that could potentially harm the wind
8
==PAGE:15==
turbine [14]. Various types of filters can be applied for LiDAR-assisted control applications, with
low-pass filters being particularly relevant. Among these, Butterworth filters are commonly used due
to their simplicity of implementation and their filtering curve that approximates coherence behaviour
[5, 9]. Typically, first or second-order Butterworth filters are employed in LiDAR applications [12, 5],
and their cut-off frequency is determined using Equation 3.5 when the magnitude-squared coherence
γ2 drops below to k = 0.7 or k = 0.5[5, 10].
A Butterworth filter is a low-pass filter whose normalized amplitude response is:
|H(jω)| =
1
r
1 +

ω
ωc
2n
(3.6)
Where ωc corresponds to the cut-off frequency of the filter, and n represents the order of the filter. The
gain of this specific filter is close to 1 for low frequencies and will gradually decrease as the frequency
increases, rejecting higher-frequency components. The specific behaviour of this transition will heavily
depend on the chosen filter order, which highlights the importance of selecting an appropriate value.
Generally, higher filter orders will result in steeper transitions.
To apply the Butterworth filter, from the normalized amplitude response its transfer function can be
obtained:
Hn(s) =
1
(s −s1) (s −s2) · · · (s −sn)
=
1
sn + an−1sn−1 + · · · + a1s + 1
=
1
Bn(s)
(3.7)
Where Bn(s) is the nth order Butterworth Polynomial whose coefficients can be either calculated or
found in the following tabulated lookup table for the first orders:
n
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
a6
a7
a8
1
1
2
√
2
1
3
2
2
1
(3.8)
With the normalized filter and transfer function, it is possible then design the filter for the desired
cutoff frequency by ’scaling’ the normalized filter. This is done by replacing ω with
ω
ωc in Hn(ω) or in
Laplace domain replacing s with
s
ωc in Hn(s).
With Equation 3.5 and Equation 3.6, it is clearly visible that the filter is defined by the coherent
wavenumber k and thus, directly related to the estimated REWS measured from the LiDAR. Hence,
as the wind speed changes, so does the filter cut-off frequency.
The nature of filtering generates phase shifts which need to be considered when incorporating the
Butterworth filter for LiDAR-assisted control of wind turbines. The time delay created by the filter
needs to be taken into account as well as several other delaying effects. These delays can be accounted
for with the following expression [9]:
Td = X
¯U −Tfilter −τe
(3.9)
9
==PAGE:16==
Here, the first term corresponds to the Taylor’s frozen turbulence hypothesis, which states that tur-
bulent structures remain unchanged when transported by the mean wind speed [9], which is valid up
to a bandwidth of 0.125 rad/m. X is the measurement distance while ¯U is the mean wind speed.
Tfilter corresponds to an approximation of the time delay introduced by the Butterworth filter and
approximated using work from K. Manal and W. Rose [15] and τe counts for modelling errors.
3.4
Control
3.4.1
Feedback Wind turbine control
Standard collective pitch PI controller for regulating power is often used in commercial wind turbine
applications with the objectives to optimize power production at below-rated wind speed and limit
power and loads at high wind speeds.
In this method, the entire blade is pitched to change the angle of attack along the blade length. This
can be particularly effective since the power can be adjusted by decreasing or increasing the angle
of attack. For below-rated regions, maximum power point tracking is enhanced by varying the rotor
speed, and for rated wind speeds, power limitation, and load reduction by adjusting the pitch angle.
Moreover, feedback-controlled wind turbines are based on the use of control variable errors to perform
actions that counteract these deviations. Thus, the nature of the controller allows only compensation
after the disturbance has been acquainted by the control variables and the compensations will have
some delay.
Three main regions in the operation range of wind turbines are typically defined as shown in Figure 3.2,
which can be described as follows: Below rated, transition, and the above-rated regions. Each one of
the regions has its own strategy as described below.
Figure 3.2: Control regions.
- Region 1
In this region, the main objective is to keep the pitch angle at optimum and use generator torque
to obtain the optimal tip speed ratio in a torque equilibrium. In this region, the main target is to
maximize the power output through optimum Cp tracking. The rotor speed regulation is achieved by
changing the generator torque. For a specific wind turbine, this can be found through an expression
for the optimal generator torque that optimizes the power output and has the form of:
10
==PAGE:17==
Qg = KΩ2
r
(3.10)
Here,Ωr corresponds to the rotor speed K is called the optimal torque constant and is an expression
completely consisting of known quantities.
By considering that the wind turbine is operating at
optimal pitch angle and optimal tip speed ratio, which depends on the wind speed, then K is equal
to:
K = KHSS = ηρAR3Cp (θopt, λopt )
2ngλ3
opt
(3.11)
- Region 2
This region can be considered as a transition between regions 1 and 3, which is when the rotor speed
reaches its rated value but the power is still below the rated power. In such case, its objective is speed
regulation where the pitch angle is kept at its optimum and the generator torque is used to regulate
rotor speed to the rated speed with a PI controller.
- Region 3
This region is for above-rated wind speed, the main target is to maintain the rated power while
reducing the loads on different components with a PI controller. The control strategy is to regulate
rotor speed by pitching and the generator torque is set as constant power mode to regulate the power
or simply constant torque mode. Conventional control for this region is seen in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Pitch control strategy for region 3.
In this investigation, as stated before, the focus is on Region 3 applying collective pitch control with
constant power.
3.4.2
Feedforward controller
In comparison with traditional feedback controllers, feedforward control aims to respond to perturba-
tions or changes in command in a predefined way based on predictions of the plant behaviour. Thus,
11
==PAGE:18==
usually, feedforward controllers can react before the error occurs avoiding delays in comparison with
feedback controllers.
In order to respond in a predefined way, ideally, the model of the plants needs to be perfectly known
where its transfer function can be invertible. Then, it is possible to adjust the output of the controller
with a perfect feedforward term which will create an output that perfectly follows the setpoint. If
the effects of the perturbation cannot be predicted or if the system mismatches with the model, then
the feedforward controller will not be accurate. Most of the models are not perfect and its system
dynamics cannot be perfectly modeled due to the complexity of the system, finding a perfect transfer
function is not always possible, and thus, neither it’s inverse. Consequently, there will be some residual
errors between the model and system outputs. In the case of wind turbine applications, due to its
complexity in the aeroelastic turbine model and wind evolution complex process[5] development of a
transfer function and its inversion cannot be performed.
Due to this, the common approach is to integrate the feedforward controller alongside feedback con-
trollers, as illustrated in Figure 3.4.
The REWS exhibits low coherence and is mapped onto the
pitch angle, which also exhibits low-frequency variation. Thus, the design philosophy is that the feed-
forward controller takes over the responsibility for managing the low-frequency variation of the rotor
speed, while the feedback control handles the high-frequency variation caused by factors such as model
mismatch, high-frequency wind variations, and structural vibrations.
Figure 3.4: Feedforward control implementation.
For LiDAR-assisted control applications, a simplified feedforward controller can be used[5]. Feedfor-
ward controllers such as the one proposed by Schlipf [5] or Bossanyi[6] aim to maintain the rated
generator speed as stable as possible when facing changing wind speeds and consist to calculate the
feedforward output from a disturbance compensation model based on a lookup table of the steady
state pitch values for each wind speed. This approach is used for above-rated wind speeds and if given
a perfect wind preview, can compensate for the effect of wind on the generator speed reducing loads
in the main components such as tower, blades, and shaft. Matching the LiDAR measurement to the
rotor effective wind speed, REWS, experienced by the wind turbine is a crucial step in implementing
the feedforward controller. Therefore, it is important to consider time delay and filters as discussed
in sub-Chapter 3.3. To calculate the time delay, Equation 3.9 is used.
As commented before, two proposed methods are studied in this project, which are to be explained
departing with Schlipf class and continuing with Bossanyi class feedforward approaches.
12
==PAGE:19==
- Schlipf approach:
Schlipf in [5] calculates the feed-forward output pitch angle based on the steady-state pitch curve with
some preview time defined as:
θff(t) = θss (v0(t + T))
(3.12)
Where θff is the feedforward addition to the pitch command, θSS is a function of the wind speed,
which is simply a one-to-one lookup table of the steady state pitch and the wind speed obtained
usually from aeroelastic turbine model and T is the preview time. Although in principle, adding the
output of Equation 3.12 into the output of the feedback controller is feasible, for practical reasons
when accomplishing the implementation[5, 10], the feedforward pitch rate ˙θFF is instead added to
the input of the integral term of the feedback controller. In this investigation, it is approximated as
follows.
˙θFF(t) = θSS (v0(t + T)) −θSS (v0(tprev + T))
dT
(3.13)
Where θSS(v0(tprev + T) is the resulting feedforward output at a previous time step and dT is the
time step of the simulation. With this approach, both of the controllers, the feedback and feedforward
controllers are independent and do not obstruct each other, meaning that the feedforward controller
does not counteract the control action provided by the feedback controller [5].
- Bossanyi approach:
On the other hand, a very similar approach proposed by Bossanyi[6] is to implement a simple feed-
forward controller very similar to Schlipf’s approach with the difference of the need of the current
pitch angle measurement and look ahead time calculated as in Equation 3.14, where θSS (v0(t + T)),
similar as D. Schlipf approach, corresponds to the steady state corresponding pitch angle from the
LiDAR-measured wind speed at the look-ahead time T and θ(t) is the current measured pitch angle
of the wind turbine.
˙θFF(t) = θSS (v0(t + T)) −θ(t)
T
(3.14)
With this approach, it is possible to move the current pitch angle gradually to the target steady-state
angle[9]. The feedforward pitch rate is also combined with the feedback PI controller so that it takes
part of the low-frequency speed regulation task so that the PI controller can be re-optimized in order
to still achieve good speed control but with a reduction in thrust-related loads and pitch activity[6].
The implementation of Equation 3.14 can be modified to add directly a feedforward pitch angle output
to the output of the feedback controller instead of the pitch rate. In this project, this is equivalent to
the following equation based on Lio et al[10].
θFF(t) =
Z t
0
θss (v0(τ + T)) −θa(τ)
T
dτ
(3.15)
Where θa corresponds to the current pitch angle measurement of the wind turbine.
Both approaches are fairly similar which will be compared further in this project.
13
==PAGE:20==
4
LiDAR setup and turbulence box coherence analysis
To address the first challenge of this project, different tests based on simulations are covered to
explore optimal LiDAR configuration and the influence of the turbulence box used by high fidelity
aero-elastic wind turbine simulation tool, HAWC2. This section explains how the theory is applied,
the assumptions and parameters considered for the investigation, and the analysis and discussion
obtained from the simulation results.
Using LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) effectively to measure the wind speed in front of the
rotor disc is crucial for correct feedforward control implementation. Thus, optimal LiDAR configura-
tion should be used in order to achieve the highest coherence wavenumber. The research is based on
simulations using widely-use aeroservoelastic software HAWC2 which includes capabilities for mod-
elling LiDAR sensors, notably continuous wave (CW) LiDAR. In this section, a sensitivity analysis
is performed with a proposed test bench to understand (i) the influence of the half-cone angle, (ii)
number of LiDAR beams, (iii) wind speed, and (iv) turbulence grid box when simulating LiDAR
measurements for optimum configuration and accuracy. Moreover, this section deals with the output
signal processing of LiDAR for control integration.
4.1
LiDAR and test bench configuration setup
The wind speed estimation can be carried out using different LiDAR setups, which can range from a
simple single beam in a straight pattern to more intricate configurations like Rosette and Lissajous.
Another approach involves incorporating additional fixed LiDAR beams, ranging from 2 to 8, with
either rectangular or circular patterns[6]. The proposed test bench primarily focuses on the latter con-
figuration. The coherence will be taken as the key performance indicator estimated with Equation 3.5
and is evaluated for each configuration when changing the turbulence box grid size (accuracy), the
opening angle (preview distance), the number of LiDAR beams, and the wind speed.
For the simulations, a nacelle-mounted LiDAR model using continuous wave (CW) technology pointing
straight upwind (Zero mean yaw misalignment) is utilized. The model’s parameters, which can be
found in Table 1, are based on a commercially available Windar photonics LiDAR [16]. The sample
points are positioned at various angles in a circular pattern, as depicted in Figure 4.1. Additionally,
the assumption that the LiDAR system is mounted on the nacelle is made, and that it has either 4 or
8 beams, without taking into account any blockage caused by the blades.
Table 1: Assumed parameters for numerical LiDAR.
Parameter
Value
No. beams
4-8
Focus length
100 m
half-cone angle
5-40 deg
Rayleigth length
18.67
The test bench scenarios that are being proposed encompass the following aspects:
• Turbulence box grid dimensions of 32, 64, and 128 points in both width and height.
• The number of LiDAR beams being either 4 or 8.
• Opening angles that range from 5 to 40 degrees, with an increment of 5 degrees.
• Two distinct wind speeds exceeding the rated speed: 14 m/s and 20 m/s
14
==PAGE:21==
The generation of the turbulence box is performed using the Mann model with HAWC2 provided tool,
following the guidelines set by the IEC standard for class A wind turbines. The turbulence box has
a duration of 700 seconds. The wind turbine employed in the simulations is a modified version of
the DTU 10 MW wind turbine developed by the IEA, specifically the IEA10 198 RC1 model. The
characteristics of this wind turbine can be found in Table 2.
(a) Front view
(b) Lateral view
Figure 4.1: LiDAR configuration overview
Table 2: Main parameters of IEA 10 MW used for simulations.
Parameter
Value
Wind Regime
IEC class 1A
Rotor Orientation
Clockwise rotation - Upwind
Control
Variable Speed-Collective Pitch
Cut-in wind speed
4 m/s
Cut-out wind speed
25 m/s
Rated wind speed
11 m/s
Rated electrical power
10MW
Number of blades
3
Rotor Diameter
198.0
Airfoil series
FFA-W3
Hub Diameter
4.6 m
Hub Height
119.0 m
Drivetrain
Direct-drive
Minimum Rotor Speed
6.0rpm
Maximum Rotor Speed
8.68rpm
Gearbox Ratio
N/A
Maximum Tip Speed
90.0 m/s
Hub Overhang
7.1 m
Shaft Tilt Angle
6.0deg.
Rotor Precone Angle
−4deg.
Blade Prebend
6.2 m
15
==PAGE:22==
4.1.1
LiDAR Simulations in turbulent wind
The simulation procedure went as follows: Firstly, a simulation was conducted for each of the 8
different opening angles. Secondly, for each opening angle, simulations were performed using 3 different
turbulence boxes. These simulations were carried out at two different wind speeds. To account for
variability, the entire process was repeated 6 times, each time using different seeds for the turbulence
box. Furthermore, the procedure was repeated, but this time with a change in the number of LiDAR
beams from 4 to 8. A diagram depicting this procedure can be found in Figure 4.2. Overall, this
procedure generated a total of 576 simulations. Each aeroelastic simulation had a duration of 700
seconds and was conducted according to wind class 1A, with turbulence intensity corresponding to its
respective wind speed, following the guidelines of the IEC 61400-1 standards.
Figure 4.2: Simulation procedure diagram.
Once the simulations were completed, the data was processed first by calculating the average of the
LiDAR wind speed v0,L of the applied beams with Equation 3.3, Then, a second-order Butterworth
filter was applied following the theory discussed in sub-Chapter 3.3, and finally, a time shift considering
the different time delays (see sub-Chapter 3.3) was calculated with Equation 3.9 where the distance
X is the distance where the LiDAR measures calculated as DL = Lfcos(θl) where Lf corresponds
to the focus length of the LiDAR configuration and θl to the half cone angle integrated into the
implementation. An example of the results can be seen in Figure 4.4a.
Additionally, the coherence was calculated with Equation 3.4 and 3.5 for each case by assuming linear
interpolation of the points around the wavenumber k0.5 with the objective to find where the coherence
would be equal to 0.5. This seems a reasonable assumption due to the linear behaviour between each
obtained value. An example of results can be seen in Figure 4.4b. Finally, statistical values such as the
minimum, maximum, and standard deviation of the seeds for each radius percentage were calculated
and can be seen in the next section.
16
==PAGE:23==
It is important to mention that in order to minimize the effect of spectral leakage (smearing of spectral
content due to the finite length of the FFT) when calculating the coherence, windowing is often used. A
hamming window was applied and overlapped to recover the information lost by the windowing when
calculating the cross-spectrum of the signals, In LiDAR-assisted controller applications, Hamming
window is often used with 50% overlap with equal length based on the sampling frequency of the
LiDAR system [14].
This intends to minimize measurement noise and the bias of the coherence
estimate.
LiDAR measurement signals are measured at some ahead time, in order to correctly implement, and
use them in the feedforward controller, data needs to be adjusted with a buffer. For this, the delayed
time was calculated as in Equation 3.9, and a first in first out (FIFO) buffer was implemented into
the code. This means that for every new measurement, the oldest is read and removed. The data is
first stored in the head of the buffer and the reading of the data is from the tail. For this application,
the buffer size, n, needs to be calculated with Equation 4.1 considering the before-mentioned delay
time, Td , and the frequency of the LiDAR measurement fLiDAR which in this case, is the same as the
aero-servo-elastic simulation.
n =
Td
fLiDAR
(4.1)
The buffer follows the Taylor frozen hypothesis and is considered all along the implementation and
has been proven to be valid up to a wavenumber of 0.125 rad/m validated experimentally in [17].
Figure 4.3: LiDAR measurement for a 2-D wind vector at one point.
Additionally, the LiDAR opening angle can be translated into a percentage of the rotor radius that is
covered by the circular pattern when the focus distance, df, is fixed. From Figure 4.3, R is the rotor
radius and r represents the radius of the circular pattern, then this percentage can be calculated with
Equation 4.2. Moreover, when changing the half-cone angle and fixing the focus length, the preview
distance is equally changed.
R% = dfsin(θ)
R
(4.2)
17
==PAGE:24==
(a) LiDAR measured wind speed for different half-cone angles vs REWS
(b) Coherence wavenumber for different half-cone angles
Figure 4.4: Example of results from simulations for the case at a wind speed of 14 m/s with a
turbulence box grid size of 128 x 128 in width and height for varying half-cone angles.
4.2
Results
In this section, the results from the test bench are presented. As already mentioned in sub-Chapter
4.1, the test bench evaluates the half-cone angle (preview distance), number of LiDAR beams, wind
speed, and turbulence grid box with the coherent wave number as the key performance indicator.
Firstly, the values of the 0.5 coherence wavenumber, k0.5 were calculated for each seed and then
averaged together. The results can be observed in Figure 4.5 for the configurations with 4 and 8
LiDAR beams when changing the turbulence grid box and half-cone angle(%R).
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.5: k0.5 vs R of Average seeds for a wind speed of 14 m/s with 8 LiDAR system.
The results reveal intriguing patterns. Firstly, as the resolution of the turbulence box increases, there
is a general decreasing trend in the coherent wave number. This trend holds true for both wind speeds
of 14 m/s and 20 m/s, as well as for configurations with 4 and 8 LiDAR beams. Furthermore, it
becomes apparent that as the average wind speed rises, the coherent wave number exhibits a similar
decreasing behaviour. However, it is important to note that as the number of LiDAR beams increases,
the coherent wave number also shows an upward trend. This seems logical, as increasing the number
of beams can effectively capture more details for the same portion of the rotor area when arranged in
a circular pattern. By doing so, a more comprehensive representation of the incoming wind speed can
be obtained, resulting in improved approximations for the rotor-equivalent wind speed (REWS).
On the other hand, it is also evident that as the cone angle increases (and the focus length remains
unchanged) and subsequently expands the coverage area of the LiDARs over the rotor radius, the
coherence shows a consistent upward trend until reaching a peak points between 50% to 60% of the
rotor radius. However, beyond this point, the coherence experiences a sharp decrease. This observed
behaviour holds true across all simulated cases and aligns with findings from [14]. The study indicates
that, for large wind turbines, the best correlation is achieved when measurements are taken over
the rotor disc above 50% of the rotor radius, further supporting the coherence trends observed in
this study. These observations highlight the complex relationship between turbulence accuracy, wind
speed, and the number of LiDAR beams in influencing the coherent wave number.
Next, the standard deviation is evaluated and calculated for each of the cases presented as error bars
and visible in Figure 4.6.
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.6: Simulation results with STD presented as error bars.
The findings of this study reveal that increasing the preview distance (by modifying half cone angle,
see Figure 4.3) of the LiDAR system yields a noticeable increase in the standard deviation indicating
a greater dispersion of data points relative to the mean. This effect is particularly pronounced within
the range of 30 to 60% of the rotor radius where the coherent wave number attains its highest values
and it is the most captivating and operationally significant range for conducting simulations. It is
within this interval that the LiDAR system demonstrates enhanced sensitivity to variations in wind
patterns.
Furthermore, the data analysis uncovered a noteworthy trend regarding shorter preview distances,
specifically ranging from 10% to 25% of the rotor radius. Within this range, it was observed a higher
degree of dispersion of the coherent wavenumber at lower wind speeds. However, as the wind speed
was increased, the dispersion shifted towards greater preview distances, within the range of 40% to
60% of the rotor radius.
Additionally, it was found that generally, the turbulence box with 32 x 32 dimensions in height
and width presented higher deviations. This seems logical since this turbulence box possesses fewer
grid points, and thus, less information. Moreover, turbulence box 128 x 128 was found to have less
dispersion when using shorter preview distances from 10 to 40% of the rotor radius while turbulence
box of 64 x 64 presented less dispersion all along the simulations in the range of 40% - 60%. This
behaviour may explain the change in the coherence order seen in Figure 4.5 since values between 40
and 60% of the rotor radius experience higher variations. This needs to be taken into account when
applying for the coherent wave number when applying the parameters to the filter in order to keep an
acceptable signal of the predicted wind speed.
20
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Discussion and summary
From the above analysis, some conclusions can be drawn about the size of the turbulence box, the
number of LiDARs, preview distance (changing the half-cone angle and fixing the focus length, the
preview distance is changed), and wind speed.
4.3.1
Turbulence box
By changing the turbulent box from 32 up to 128, the coherence wavenumber decreases its value in
most of the studied scenarios suggesting that more accurate turbulent boxes will lead to the worst
correlation. This seems a valid trend as the resolution increases, a less optimistic coherence is obtained
from the simulation, expecting less error and thus higher fidelity. This should be validated experi-
mentally for large wind turbines.
Higher variations have been found when using a low-resolution
turbulence box while 64x64 achieves constant low dispersion among the different seeds. For shorter
preview distances, turbulence box 128 presented less dispersions while turbulence box 64 for higher
preview distances.
This information can be used when the range have been declared to improve
simulation results.
When looking at the statistics, it is noted that using a turbulence box of 32x32, a slightly higher
standard deviation in the peak area where we are interested is noted as well as higher minimum and
maximum values while turbulence boxes of 64x64 and 128x128 are more close to each other.
4.3.2
Number of LiDAR beams
By Increasing the number of LiDAR points in the measurements, the coherent wavenumber increases.
This suggests a benefit for LiDAR-assisted control implementation as more information is captured.
Nevertheless, it should be investigated how much more can the coherent wavenumber increase by
further adding LiDAR beams.
4.3.3
Preview distance
By increasing the preview distance, so does the coherence wavenumber up to 60% of the rotor radius
where, after that point, it decreases drastically. This is especially important for a proper implementa-
tion, where previous analysis of the applied LiDAR needs to be considered in order to obtain the best
possible signal quality and coherence. Nevertheless, across different seed, it is noted higher dispersion
and varying coherence at increasing wind speeds which marks the importance of previous evaluation
to identify key parameters such as cut-of-frequency for low pass filters.
4.3.4
Wind speed
When increasing the wind speed, a decrease in the coherence is observed. This is particularly impor-
tant for LiDAR-assisted controllers since the filter cut-off frequency is dependent on the coherence
wavenumber and thus, needs to be adjusted for every mean wind speed that the wind turbines face
during its operation.
Derived from the observations, the consequent simulations will be performed using a 64x64 turbulence
box, since it provides a balance between accuracy and computational time. Ideally, a turbulence box of
128 should be performed but is very computationally demanding, hence more powerful devices should
be considered before such big simulations.
21
==PAGE:28==
5
Investigation and Evaluation of Lidar-Assisted Control
Control systems play a crucial role in maximizing power output and mitigating excessive loads above
rated wind speeds in modern wind turbines. This section focuses on the implementation and evaluation
of feedforward LiDAR-assisted controllers, specifically, the approach proposed by Bossanyi and Schlipf
(refer to sub-Chapter 3.4). A comparative analysis is conducted, contrasting these controllers with a
conventional feedback Proportional-Integral (PI) controller designed for variable-speed wind turbines.
To establish a baseline, the DTU reference controller [18] is adopted as the benchmark controller for
this assessment.
The evaluation of the feed-forward controllers is held in Region 3, which encompasses above-rated
wind speeds. In contrast, the remaining operational regions rely entirely on the feedback controller.
This section aims to assess the feedforward controller by analyzing various control variables.
Furthermore, the evaluation extends to examining the load reduction capabilities of the feedforward
controller.
Specifically, the focus lies on mitigating loads experienced by key components of the
wind turbine. The evaluated moments include tower base fore-aft and side-side, blade-root in-plane
and out-of-plane, as well as shaft torsion. These areas of investigation align with prior studies that
have reported significant load reduction benefits with the evaluated approaches. By comprehensively
assessing the feedforward controller in terms of control variables and load reduction potential, this
section aims to gain valuable insights into its overall effectiveness and potential benefits for wind
turbine operation and structural integrity.
5.1
Control implementation
The LiDAR-assisted feed-forward controller is implemented utilizing a Matlab-HAWC2 interface,
which facilitates the integration, modification, and computation of essential parameters associated
with the feedforward controller. This interface enables bidirectional communication between Mat-
lab and HAWC2, allowing for the exchange of modified controller settings from Matlab back to the
HAWC2 simulation platform. By utilizing the interface, measurement data from various available
channels can be extracted and manipulated.
Following the approach outlined in sub-Chapter 4.1 and based on the findings in Chapter
4, the
investigation commences with the same wind turbine and LiDAR model configuration. This configu-
ration involves employing 8 beams arranged in a circular pattern, with a preview distance equivalent
to 50% of the rotor radius (see Figure 4.3). As mentioned in sub-Chapter 3.4.2, the implementa-
tion of the feedforward approach requires the utilization of a disturbance compensation model which
can be approximated by using the steady-state pitch angle values corresponding to each wind speed.
Consequently, the steady-state simulations conducted in HAWC2 provide the basis for extracting this
compensation curve. Figure 5.1 showcases the extracted static pitch angle curve utilized for the sim-
ulations, with the left curve representing the simulation results, and the right curve depicting the
extracted static pitch angle values.
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.1: Simulation results (left) and Static pitch curve (right).
5.1.1
Butterworth filter
Next, a filter as explained in sub-Chapter 3.3 is implemented. Depending on the wind speed, the
cutoff frequency, fc of the Butterworth filter needs to be adjusted. For this project, values are adjusted
manually at every changing wind speed following results found through simulations and available in
Figure 5.2. These values were found in a similar way as in sub-Chapter 4.1.1, meaning that 6 different
seeds were used to perform simulations ranging from 11 to 24 m/s. Then the coherent wavenumber
was found through linear interpolation and finally calculating the average of the seeds at each wind
speed. It is worth noting that, as observed in Chapter 4, as the wind speed increases, the coherent
wave number tends to decrease. Another approach is the use of adaptive filters as seen in Schlipf
approach [5] but it is outside the scope of this investigation.
Figure 5.2: Coherent wavenumber for different wind speeds.
5.1.2
Switching function
In addition to the filter, additional steps must be taken to ensure a successful simulation when imple-
menting the feedforward control. Since the feedforward control is activated beyond the rated speed,
directly adding the feedforward signal could result in excessive aggressiveness for the ongoing feedback
controller, leading to increased error and feedback gains. To address this, a gradual integration of the
23
==PAGE:30==
feedforward signal is employed by multiplying the signal output with a gain that starts at 0 and grad-
ually increases to 1. One possible approach for achieving this is through the use of a ramp function.
However, even with the gradual integration, the integration of the signal into the existing controller
may still exhibit some aggressiveness. To mitigate this, a step function is introduced at the desired
moment of activating the feedforward controller. A discrete first-order low-pass filter, as outlined in
[19], is then applied to smoothen the integration process. This filter ensures that the desired coefficient
slowly converges to 1, ensuring a smooth and controlled integration. The implementation of this filter
follows Equation 5.1.
f1 (τ; ¯xk−1, xk, xk−1) = a1¯xk−1 + b0xk + b1xk−1
(5.1)
where,
a1 = 2τ −∆t
2τ + ∆t,
b0 =
∆t
2τ + ∆t,
b1 = b0
(5.2)
Here, τ is a user-defined time constant which increases or decreases the time to reach the final value,
xk is the original signal at the index k of the current time step, ∆t is the time step of the simulation
and ¯xk−1 corresponds to the filtered signal at the previous time step. In Figure 5.3 the filter gains are
shown for different values of τ. For the implementation, a value of τ = 10s is chosen since it provides
enough time for the feedforward angle to be implemented to the feedback controller without being
aggressive achieving a complete integration in 70 s.
Figure 5.3: Filter response to step function.
Up to this point, the remaining task is to implement the feedforward controller. The two studied
classes then are then incorporated in the following way.
5.1.3
Schlipf approach
Considering Equation 3.13, first the measurements from the LiDAR beams are averaged and filtered
following explanations in sub-Chapter 3.1. Then, the feedforward angle is found directly from the
static pitch lookup table based on Figure 5.1. With this implementation, several points need to be
taken into account:
• Although mathematically equivalent, directly adding a feedforward angle to the output of the
feedback controller may result in an increase in the integral part of the DTU controller if the
24
==PAGE:31==
feedforward steady-state pitch angle is imprecise. Consequently, this can lead to a rotor speed
offset, requiring an increase in the integral component of the feedback controller to compensate
for the inaccuracy.
• If using HAWC2 and DTU Wind Energy controller, then an interface must be created to have
access to the input of the integrator of the PI controller and add the feedforward pitch rate as
suggested by the author.
5.1.4
Bossanyi approach
Similar to Schlipf approach, a pitch rate is introduced into the controller but considering the current
pitch angle of the wind turbine. θss is determined by the steady-state pitch angle table similar to
Schlipf approach at the look-ahead time and measurement of the pitch angle from the pitch actuator,
θa is extracted directly from HAWC2 with the used interface. No specifications or recommendations
are given on how this is implemented into the simulations, thus, two options are available; the addition
of the pitch rate into the input of the integrator of the feedback controller as in the previous approach
and, the addition of the pitch angle into the output of the feedback controller.
Considering the first option, the feedforward pitch angle can be calculated with Equation 3.14 and
added directly to the input of the integral term of the feedback controller with the same interface as
with Schlipf approach.
For the second option, the output feedforward angle can be calculated with Equation 3.15. While
doing this implementation, some points need to be considered.
• Due to the integral term in the calculation of the feedforward pitch angle, it is possible an increase
in the feedback signal, mainly when the difference between the actual pitch and the look-ahead
pitch is significant due to some innacuracies, thus, the feedback pitch command can reach its
maximum pitch reference limit causing the wind turbine to stop being controlled correctly and
failing with the control strategy and premises. An example is visible in Appendix A.
The interface is implemented based on the following equation:
∆θ = kp(Ω−Ωr) +
Z t
0
(ki(Ω−Ωr) + ˙θff) dt
(5.3)
Where kp and ki are the proportional and integral gains of the feedback controller, and ˙θff is the
feedforward pitch rate.
The following sections present the evaluation process using the above-mentioned controller implemen-
tation showed in Figure 5.4
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.4: Evaluation diagram for LiDAR-assisted control.
5.2
IEA 10 MW wind turbine
The initial simulations were conducted utilizing identical turbulent wind conditions, as outlined in
subsubsection 4.1.1 with a selected wind speed of 18 m/s. Both approaches (Schlipf and Bossanyi)
were directly implemented using the MATLAB-HAWC2 interface, employing k0.5 = 0.0155 to calculate
the cut-off frequency for the Butterworth filter, in accordance with the findings provided in Figure 5.2.
5.2.1
The problem of poor coherence in large rotor, filtering, and time delay
It was quickly observed that utilizing these parameters led to a value for the preview time of -0.09
seconds, chosen to be the time delay, Td, as calculated using Equation 3.9. This situation is not feasible
as it means that the measured wind speed already passed the wind turbines. A certain amount of
look-ahead time is required when implementing LiDAR-assisted control. In the studied scenario, the
time required to compensate for the time delay caused by the filter exceeds the available LiDAR
preview time.
Upon further examination of the problem, Equation 3.9 can be divided into three distinct components.
The first term corresponds to Taylor’s frozen turbulence, represented as (X/ ¯U)), which incorporates
a LiDAR dependency on the measurement distance (X = VLOScos(θ)). The second term accounts
for the time delay induced by the filter (Tfilter) and is influenced by the LiDAR measurement through
the cut-off frequency. Consequently, the cut-off frequency will vary, either increasing or decreasing,
depending on the selected value (a higher coherence bandwidth will result in a smaller Tfilter, as per
Equation 3.5). The final term, τe, is disregarded as its value is considered negligible (τe = 0).
Three primary solutions can address the issue at hand; 1) improving the coherence and accuracy of the
LiDAR to reduce the filter delay. 2) Choose to operate at a higher wavenumber below the performance
indicator, k0.5 in order to reduce the filter delay and 3) utilizing a custom LiDAR with an extended
focus distance to increase the preview time, TTaylor, to reduce the effect of the filter delay. These
solutions are further discussed below:
1. The previous investigation conducted in this work has shown that the capabilities using 4 and
8 LiDAR setup cannot achieve much higher coherence for this scenario. Therefore, studying
alternative configurations and patterns to enhance coherence would necessitate separate research
26
==PAGE:33==
which is outside the scope of this investigation.
2. It is possible to use a filter with a higher cut-off frequency, which would result in a smaller time
constant. This in turn, would allow longer preview time as Td = D/ ¯U −tfilter. However, using
a filter with a higher cut-off frequency means the acceptance of a more uncorrelated signal at
high frequency, which impacts the accuracy of LIDAR REWS.
3. While feasible in simulated environments, it is important to note that the implementation of
this particular LiDAR configuration would not align with commercially available options as the
one used in this project, as specifications include a determined focus distance which would be
modified. Therefore, practical considerations regarding the availability and accessibility of such
a customized LiDAR system should be taken into account.
It is important to acknowledge that the commonly employed performance indicator, k0.5, appears
to be derived from the filtering time constant, which strikes a balance between coherence and the
necessary filtering requirements. Utilizing LiDAR measurements with a coherence above the range of
0.5-0.7 can result in a negative preview time when applying filters to eliminate high frequencies from
the measurements. The specific threshold may vary depending on the particular setup, necessitating
careful evaluation by the designer prior to utilizing LiDAR measurements and guaranteeing high
enough coherence.
Among the available options, the third solution is selected based on considerations regarding the
remaining alternatives. Opting for a new focus distance of 150 m that ensures that Tfilter is always
smaller than the preview time. This selection is made due to the implications associated with the
other options, which may pose additional challenges or limitations in addressing the filter delay issue.
The coherence wavenumber then was obtained similarly as in sub-Chapter 4.1.1 for 6 different seeds
in the range of 11 to 24 m/s. Results can be seen in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Coherent wavenumber for different wind speeds with LOS=150 m
Simulations were conducted for LiDAR-assisted control using both approaches alongside with the
baseline. Gain optimization was performed, in general, the reduction in the integral gain (Ki) should
be the square of the reduction in the proportional gain (Kp). For Schlipf’s approach, simulations
were carried out as per the author’s recommendation to halve the proportional gain of the feedback
controller [12]. Furthermore, Bossanyi’s approach followed the findings in Meng et al. [9] optimizing
the gains to 90% of the original feedback signal [9]. In these simulations, a value of k0.5 = 0.016
rad/m was used, resulting in a time constant for the filter (Tfilter) in Equation 3.9 of 4.91 seconds.
This achieved a preview time (Td) of 2.3 seconds. The simulations are presented in Figure 5.6, at a
turbulent wind speed of 18 m/s.
27
==PAGE:34==
(a) LiDAR measured wind speed vs REWS
(b) Collective pitch angle
(c) Rotor speed
(d) Blade pitch rate
Figure 5.6: IEA 10 MW. Simulation results from time series of LiDAR measured wind speed, Col-
lective pitch angle, rotor speed and blade pitch rate.
The simulation results demonstrate notable improvements in speed control, particularly in reducing
the standard deviation, as depicted in Figure 5.7. The implementation of the Schlipf approach yields a
significant 33% decrease in standard deviation, while the Bossanyi approach achieves a 15% reduction.
These findings align with expectations, as LiDAR controller can reduce the influence of the wind
disturbance on the rotor speed at low frequencies and improve the rotor speed regulation. However,
the average value of the rotor speed increases when employing the Bossanyi approach. This observation
is linked to the implementation that allows access to the input of the integrator of the PI controller.
In this context, when perfect steady state pitch angles and wind preview are considered, the θff
term in Equation 5.3 would ideally be oscillating around zero.
However, if the calculation of the
steady state pitch angle lacks accuracy, a residual error may persist, which the integral term cannot
effectively address. Consequently, leading to a rotor speed offset and impacting the loads. A more
detailed analysis of these effects is provided in sub-Chapter 5.3.1. It is important to note that these
effects are not present when employing the Schlipf approach, as it does not consider the current pitch
angle, thereby eliminating the possibility of residual errors in the integral term.
Furthermore, a decrease in the standard deviation of the blade pitch rate is observed, which can be
attributed to the reduction in high-frequency pitch activities associated with the feedback controller.
The decreased gains in the feedback controller contribute to this reduction, potentially providing
advantages in terms of mitigating fatigue loads on the blade pitch-bearing system.
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.7: IEA 10MW results for simulation at 18 m/s for 1 seed. Left: damage equivalent load
reduction of tower bottom fore-aft (Tower Mx), tower bottom side-side (Tower My),
blade flapwise (Blade Mx), blade edgewise (Blade My), and shaft torsion (Shaft Mz).
Right: statistics of the standard deviation of rotor speed and pitch rate.
Following this, the damage equivalent loads (DELs) were calculated to evaluate the fatigue loads on
critical components and compare them to the baseline. The results, depicted in Figure 5.7, reveal
significant reductions in loads. Notably, both the Schlipf and Bossanyi approaches result in decreased
tower loads, particularly in the tower side-to-side direction, with reductions of 11% and 20% respec-
tively. These reductions can be attributed to two factors. Firstly, the excitation of the first tower
side-to-side mode decreases due to reduced vibrations in the rotor speed. Additionally, the Bossanyi
approach experiences a decrease in aerodynamic torque due to the change in rotor speed, further
contributing to load reduction.
Examining the blades, only the Schlipf approach shows a decrease in loads. Specifically, there is a
decrease in blade flapwise loads resulting from reduced thrust. In contrast, the Bossanyi approach
exhibits an increase in blade edgewise loads due to the change in rotor speed reference.
Lastly, the decrease in shaft torsion corresponds to the decrease in the standard deviation of the rotor
speed.
Due to the contradictory findings compared to existing literature and change in rotor speed, first,
simulations were repeated using different seeds and wind speeds, resulting in similar findings, both in
loads and rotor speed behaviour. Thus, it was decided to investigate the controllers using a smaller
wind turbine. The objective was to determine if similar behavior was observed and to analyze how
the size of the turbine influenced controller performance. The NREL 5MW reference wind turbine
was selected as the new baseline, utilizing its technical report [20] for the turbine’s specifications.
5.3
NREL 5MW
In a similar fashion to the IEA wind turbine, simulations were conducted for LiDAR-assisted control
using both approaches, in addition to the baseline controller. The feedback gain optimization for
both approaches remained the same as described in sub-Chapter 5.2. The coherence wavenumber was
recalculated, resulting in a value of k0.5 = 0.0205 rad/m. This value was utilized to determine the time
constant of the filter, Tfilter, in Equation 3.9, which yielded a value of 3.83 seconds. Consequently,
the preview time, Td, of 1 second was achieved. The simulations were carried out at a turbulent wind
speed of 18 m/s and the results are presented in Figure 5.8.
29
==PAGE:36==
(a) LiDAR measured wind speed vs REWS
(b) Collective pitch angle
(c) Rotor speed
(d) Blade pitch rate
Figure 5.8: NREL 5 MW. simulation results from time series for LiDAR measured wind speed,
collective pitch angle, rotor speed and blade pitch rate.
The simulation results reveal that the average rotor speed does not exhibit a significant increase when
employing the Bossanyi approach compared to the IEA 10 MW turbine. However, there is still a
slight increase in the average rotor speed of 0.36%. Upon closer examination, it is observed that the
Schlipf approach leads to a reduction of 13.3% in the standard deviation (STD) of the rotor speed.
In contrast, the Bossanyi approach experiences a 16% increase in the STD, despite the use of LiDAR
system, thereby indicating a deterioration in rotor speed control. Conversely, the pitch rate shows
improvement of 35% and 28% with the Schlipf and Bossanyi approaches, respectively.
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.9: NREL 5MW DELs results for simulation at 18 m/s for 1 seed. Left: Damage equivalent
load reduction of tower bottom fore-aft (Tower Mx), tower bottom side-side (Tower My),
blade flapwise (Blade Mx), blade edgewise (Blade My), and shaft torsion (Shaft Mz).
Right: statistics of the standard deviation of rotor speed and pitch rate.
When examining the DELs, it becomes apparent that both approaches yield a decrease in tower fore-
aft loads. This reduction can be attributed the diminished influence of wind disturbances on rotor
speed at lower frequencies, facilitated by the LiDAR system as depicted in Figure 5.10a and to a slight
thrust decrease. However, the tower side-to-side loads experience a significant increase, particularly
when employing the Bossanyi approach.
Turning to blade loads, including blade flap and edge-wise, both approaches achieve reductions, with
the Schlipf approach demonstrating superior performance, achieving a 6% reduction compared to
Bossanyi’s 1.7% reduction. This outcome contrasts with larger wind turbines, where blades were more
adversely affected when applying the investigated approaches.
To gain further insights into the increase in tower loads, the power spectral density (PSD) of rotor
speed, pitch rate, and pitch angle were computed. The results can be found in Figure 5.11.
31
==PAGE:38==
(a) rotor speed
(b) pitch rate
(c) Pitch angle
Figure 5.10: NREL 5 MW. PSDs for simulation at 18 m/s for rotor speed, pitch rate and pitch
angle.
In analyzing the power spectral density (PSD) of the controllers, a notable peak at the first tower
side-to-side natural frequency (0.32 Hz) is observed for both the feedback and feedforward controllers.
Interestingly, both feedforward approaches appear to amplify this frequency, with the Bossanyi ap-
proach exhibiting a more pronounced effect. This can be attributed to the fact that the Bossanyi
approach incorporates the actual pitch angle, allowing any baseline controller-induced frequencies to
propagate into the Bossanyi feedforward controller, as evidenced by the pitch rate PSD in Figure 5.10b
and 5.10c.
As a result, this excitation is noticeable in the PSD of the tower My (bending moment), as illustrated
in Figure 5.11b. The increased power at the first tower side-to-side natural frequency contributes to
the elevated loads experienced by the tower.
32
==PAGE:39==
(a) Tower Mx
(b) Tower My
Figure 5.11: NREL 5 MW. PSDs for simulation at 18 m/s for tower loads.
The simulations were repeated using different seeds and wind speeds, leading to similar results.
Building upon the findings, the investigation proceeded to examine the increase of frequencies by
the feedforward controllers that already have been exited in the system.
The aim was to clarify
the results, to determine whether this behavior originates from the feedforward controller itself, and
assess its performance in the absence of these frequency peaks. Two distinct scenarios were derived
and described in the subsequent sections, as depicted in Figure 5.4 involving the assessment of control
performance under rigid tower simulation and the frequency reduction of the generator speed filter.
5.3.1
NREL 5 MW Rigid tower evaluation
In this section, the focus is shifted toward the implementation of rigid tower simulation as part of
our investigation. Building upon the findings from the previous chapter, the objectives are to clarify
the results, to assess the control performance under this specific scenario and to gain deeper insights
into the behavior of both feedforward control approaches used and their potential to increase the
frequencies that have already been exited. Schlipf and Bossanyi approach remains untouched as well
as their respective settings in the gains of feedback controller. Only the tower and tower top was
changed from a flexible to a stiff structure.
The anticipated outcome is an increase in the high-frequency content of the tower, accompanied by
a decrease in the lower-frequency content. This shift in frequency distribution may result in higher
DELs. As for the blade and shaft DELs loads, a marginal increase is expected, but they are anticipated
to remain relatively similar to the baseline values observed in the case of a flexible tower.
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.12: NREL 5MW rigid tower DELs results for simulation at 18 m/s for 1 seed. Left: Damage
equivalent load reduction of tower bottom fore-aft (Tower Mx), tower bottom side-side
(Tower My), blade flapwise (Blade Mx), blade edgewise (Blade My), and shaft torsion
(Shaft Mz). Right: statistics of the standard deviation of rotor speed and pitch rate
During the load evaluation process, a distinct contrast in the performance of the two approaches be-
comes evident when examining Figure 5.12. The Schlipf approach demonstrates a consistent reduction
in all major wind turbine loads, whereas the Bossanyi approach exhibits a significant increase in tower
side-to-side and blade edgewise DELs. To gain further insights, power spectral density (PSD) analyses
were conducted specifically for these loads, and the results are presented in Figure 5.13.
(a) Tower My
(b) Blade My
Figure 5.13: NREL 5MW rigid tower. PSDs for simulation at 18 m/s for tower loads with rigid
tower
In the analysis of the implemented feedforward controllers, PSD of the tower fore-aft load reveals
notable peaks at approximately 0.8 Hz mainly for Bossanyi approach. Additionally, a higher peak
at 1.20 Hz, corresponding to the 6P frequency (Natural frequency table available in Appendix B), is
observed exclusively with the Bossanyi approach. Examining the PSD of the blade edge-wise moment,
it becomes evident that the Bossanyi approach also amplifies the peak at 0.2 Hz corresponding to
1P frequency, which is typically associated with shear and is modeled in this aeroelastic simulation.
Furthermore, a frequency around 1 Hz, corresponding to the first blade backward edge, also experiences
34
==PAGE:41==
amplification in the Bossanyi approach. Translating the latter into a non-rotating frame, it effectively
corresponds to the 0.8 Hz peak, as commented before. These amplifications can be attributed to two
factors. Firstly, as previously mentioned, there is a frequency transport phenomenon resulting from
the utilization of the current pitch angle to calculate the feedforward pitch rate. Secondly, departing
from Equation 5.3, Bossanyi implementation results in the following equation:
θsetpoint
p
= kp (Ω−Ωr) +
Z t
0

ki (Ω−Ωr) + θss −θ(t)
Td

dt
(5.4)
When considering how the controller can be implemented into aeroelastic code, the integral term of
the Equation 5.4 can be rewritten as follows where k corresponds to the time step:
θI
p(k) = θI
p(k −∆k) +

ki(Ω−Ωr) + θss −θ(k)
Td

∆k
(5.5)
Equations 5.4 and 5.5 highlight the roles of the integral term in the control strategy. Firstly, it ad-
dresses the rotor speed error, actively correcting deviations from the desired operating point. Secondly,
it incorporates the provided feedforward pitch rate, aiming to compensate for any discrepancies be-
tween the actual pitch angle and the desired steady-state value (θss) under the assumption of accurate
perturbance input. However, in scenarios where the accuracy of θss is compromised, residual errors
may persist. Consequently, the integral term strives to compensate for these errors, which address
distinct objectives.
This, in turn, causes a counteraction between both objectives and affects the
controller output influencing the excited frequencies and, consequently, DELs.
The interplay in the integral term of the feedback control and feedforward term, coupled with the
time delays induced by rotor inertia, ultimately contributes to changes in the rotor speed and the
subsequent impact on the excited frequencies and DELs.
The simulations were replicated with different seeds as well as recalculating and using steady-state
pitch angles, obtaining similar results. The work proceeded to reduce the frequency of the generator
speed filter to avoid interaction with tower-side-to-side frequency taking as a basis the first scenario
with no rigid tower.
5.3.2
NREL 5 MW Frequency reduction of generator speed filter
In this section, our objective is to evaluate the feedforward approaches in a scenario where the exci-
tation of the tower’s side-to-side natural frequency from the baseline is minimized. To achieve this,
the frequency of the generator speed filter was reduced from 0.4 Hz to 0.25 Hz in all controllers. The
settings of Schlipf and Bossanyi’s approach, along with the gains of the feedback controller, remain
unchanged.
In this case, it is expected that the controller become slower and less responsive to high frequencies.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.14: NREL 5MW freq. gen sp filt. 0.25. DELs results for simulation at 18 m/s for 1 seed.
Left: Damage equivalent load reduction of tower bottom fore-aft (Tower Mx), tower
bottom side-side (Tower My), blade flapwise (Blade Mx), blade edgewise (Blade My),
and shaft torsion (Shaft Mz). Right: statistics of the standard deviation of rotor speed
and pitch rate
Significant reductions in critical loads are evident in Figure 5.14. Most loads exhibit a decrease, except
for the tower side-to-side load when utilizing the Schlipf approach. The tower fore-aft load experiences
a substantial reduction of approximately 33%. This reduction can be attributed to the decrease in
the generator speed filter within the baseline, which adversely affects rotor speed control. However,
the implemented feedforward control methods effectively mitigate this issue by adjusting the output
pitch angle to align with the predefined desired value, compensating for the disturbance.
In the case of the tower side-to-side load, a slight increase of around 4% is observed with the Schlipf
approach, while the Bossanyi approach shows a slight decrease of approximately 1%. This difference
can be explained by the higher variance present in the side-to-side moment. When calculating the
damage equivalent loads (DELs), rainflow counting is employed to determine the number of full cycles
within a specific variable range, in this case, the moment. The Schlipf approach exhibits a greater
occurrence of full cycles in higher range moments compared to both the Bossanyi approach and the
baseline, as depicted in Figure 5.15. Consequently, this leads to a slight increase in the DELs. This
behavior can be attributed to the accuracy of the steady-state pitch angle (θss) estimation.
(a) Rainflow counting of My for Schlipf method (b) Rainflow of My counting for Bossanyi method
(c) Rainflow counting of My for Baseline
Figure 5.15: Rainflow counting for simulations at 18 m/s for tower side-side moment, My.
36
==PAGE:43==
When computing the PSD of tower loads, visible in Figure 5.16, the tower side-to-side natural fre-
quency amplification caused by Bossanyi approach is much less noticeable when compared with pre-
vious scenarios along with decreasing other low-frequency peaks which explain the load reduction.
Moreover, reductions in tower foreaft moment can be attributed to the diminished influence of wind
disturbances on the rotor speed at lower frequencies, facilitated by the LiDAR system which is more
apparent in this case.
(a) Tower Mx
(b) Tower My
Figure 5.16: NREL 5MW freq. gen. sp filt. 0.25. PSDs for simulation at 18 m/s for tower loads
with rigid tower. Blue: Schlipf approach, Red: Bossanyi approach, Black: baseline
On the other hand, for comparative purposes, this scenario was compared to the scenario where no
frequency reduction of the generator speed filter was applied, using the baseline configuration without
any reduction in the generator speed filter.
Figure 5.17: Results for simulation at 18 m/s for 1 seed.Left: damage equivalent load reduction of
tower bottom fore-aft (Tower Mx), tower bottom side-side (Tower My), blade flapwise
(Blade Mx), blade edgewise (Blade My), and shaft torsion (Shaft Mz). Right: statistics
of the standard deviation of rotor speed and pitch rate
Some interesting points can be noted. First, Schlipf approach seems to achieve similar results in terms
of load reduction in both scenarios. This, as expected, indicates that acts more independently when
taking over the low-frequency speed regulation. Even if some inaccuracy is present in θss. Opposing
37
==PAGE:44==
this, Bossanyi approach seems to be highly sensitive, but, when the interaction with the tower-side-
to-side frequency is avoided from the baseline, can achieve load reduction. Second, the study revealed
that decreasing the frequency of the generator speed filter led to an overall improvement in load
reduction when utilizing the studied feedforward approaches.
This information can then be used
alongside with the proportional and integral gains for further feedback optimization. Third, Schlipf
approach performs better in reducing blade loads while Bossanyi can offer a better tower load decrease.
Tower side-to-side remains the most affected load.
5.4
Discussion and summary
The investigation into the potential load benefits of the studied approaches involved the creation of
various scenarios, which revealed interesting characteristics of the chosen implementations.
On the one hand, compensating time delay caused by the filter in LiDAR-assisted control presents
challenges in larger wind turbines. In order to address this issue, new patterns and configurations
to enhance the coherence bandwidth or an increase in the LiDAR focus distance are required. The
latter can potentially reduce the coherence bandwidth, which directly impacts the applied filter by
increasing the time required to compensate for its time delay. This extended time may exceed the
available preview time, posing a challenge to the effectiveness of the feedforward control. In smaller
wind turbines, the commonly used evaluation metric, k0.5, has demonstrated satisfactory results by
providing an adequate preview time and good low-frequency correlation. It even allows for the utiliza-
tion of higher evaluation metrics, such as k0.7, as coherence is still high enough while still maintaining
a positive preview time for the feedforward controller to operate effectively. Thus, the need to define
specific minimum bandwidth requirements depending on the turbine size can guarantee its appropriate
use.
In contrast, larger wind turbines will require a larger preview distance and/or higher coherence to
effectively apply the same evaluation metrics. This is due to the time delay of the filter becoming larger
than the available preview time. However, this poses challenges for future larger wind turbines, as an
excessively large preview distance can lead to the scanning of wind conditions that differ significantly
from the actual wind experienced by the wind turbine. Therefore, it becomes important to focus on
increasing the coherence bandwidth and further investigate and optimize methods to ensure accurate
and reliable measurements in larger wind turbines.
On the other hand, tower fore-aft, blade flapwise, and shaft torsion loads presented a positive benefit
in most of the studied cases when implementing feedforward approaches. These findings align with
the reviewed literature and can be attributed to the role of the feedforward controller in handling
low-frequency actions, while the feedback controller addresses higher frequencies. As a result, several
factors contribute to these load reductions, including the reduced impact of wind disturbances on
rotor speed at lower frequencies, facilitated by the LiDAR system, potential thrust reduction, and
gain reduction in the feedback part of the controller.
Nevertheless, the effect of inaccuracies in the calculation of θff was found to have different effects in
each of the methods. While Schlipf can present low sensibility to inaccuracies and can present higher
variance in the moments, Bossanyi’s approach presents more sensitivity and consequences such as the
possibility of higher excitation in existing low-damped modes of the system. This should be avoided
as higher fatigue will be experienced which can affect the structural integrity of the wind turbine
reducing its lifetime.
As examined, this is mainly attributed to the way the feedforward pitch rate is calculated, which
makes use of the current pitch angle of the wind turbine. This in hand, can transport frequencies of
the feedback controller as well as residual errors. This becomes even more relevant with larger rotors
38
==PAGE:45==
as seen in Figure 5.6c. This naturally is not visible when using Schlipf method since this approach
does not account for the actual pitch angle as it is separated from the feedback controller which
highlights the idea of two degrees of freedom. This idea refers to completing two tasks for controllers
independently by the feedback and feedforward controller without obstruction. In this case, reference
signal tracking and disturbance compensation.
When assessing the overall loads. Schlipf method was found to overall perform better than Bossanyi
approach and it is apparent that Schlipf method is better suited for blade-related loads. This may
be explained by the pitch rate calculated for each method; Schlipf method presents a lower power
in frequency content and less variation than Bossanyi, which leads to a decreased pitch action, and
thus, a decrease in their respective DELs. Moreover, simulations point out that bigger turbines will
benefit from the feedforward controller in tower load reduction while smaller wind turbines in blade
reduction. This seems logical due to the significant change in the rotor inertia in larger wind turbines.
Continuing further with the findings, decreasing the frequency of the generator speed filter has been
found to contribute positively to both of the studied approaches as loads were decreased or unaf-
fected. The scenario performed in this case, shows potential benefits of Bossanyi approach when the
excitation of low-damped natural frequencies of the wind turbine (tower side-to-side) is reduced. This
highlights the close relationship with Bossanyi approach. If the baseline feedback controller presents
some deficiencies, the feedforward controller will neither perform optimally. Moreover, the capacity of
the feedforward controllers to adjust the output of the feedback controller to compensate for perturba-
tions was highlighted with Figure 5.17 which confirms the potential use of LiDAR-assisted controllers.
When further comparing, Schlipf method was found to achieve similar load reduction regardless of the
filter reduction, which implies the effectiveness to take over the speed regulation duty independently.
39
==PAGE:46==
6
Conclusions and future work
6.1
Conclusion and key findings
In this study, the initial focus was the effective application of the information measured by commer-
cially available LiDAR systems. LiDAR configuration such as the number of LiDAR beams, preview
distance, and the influence of the turbulence box used by the high fidelity aero-elastic wind turbine
simulation tool, HAWC2, on the LiDAR signal, was evaluated.
The obtained results reveal several notable trends when changing the turbulence box in the simulations.
Firstly, it was observed that increasing the accuracy of the turbulence box leads to a decrease in
the coherent wavenumber. This is due to the reduced error in the simulation, resulting in a more
conservative estimation of the coherence.
Secondly, low-resolution turbulent boxes exhibited high
dispersion among different seeds, which can be attributed to the larger size of the turbulent grid.
Additionally, the results indicated that turbulence boxes of size 64 x 64 and 128 x 128 produced similar
overall outcomes. However, for shorter preview distances, the 128 x 128 turbulence box exhibited
less dispersion, while the 64 x 64 turbulence box displayed similar behavior but for higher preview
distances.
The analysis of LiDAR configuration revealed significant insights into its impact on coherence. In-
creasing the number of LiDAR beams was found to enhance coherence, as it captures more information
within the measurement area. Changing the half-cone angle with fixed focus distance (and thus, the
preview distance), showed that performing measurements between 40 and 60% of the rotor radius re-
sulted in the highest coherence. Operating outside this range led to a significant decrease in coherent
wavenumber. Additionally, higher dispersion was observed, particularly in low-resolution turbulence
boxes, when doubling the number of LiDAR beams. Furthermore, it was observed that as wind speed
increases, coherence decreases, highlighting the need for adaptive filters to account for changing wind
conditions. These findings emphasize the importance of carefully selecting and configuring LiDAR
parameters to optimize coherence and accuracy in wind turbine simulations.
Based on the analysis conducted in the thesis scenario, using LiDAR effectively in aeroelastic simu-
lations requires using a turbulence box with a minimum height and width of 64 x 64 and employing
at least 8 LiDAR beams for measurement purposes. Moreover, the LiDAR measurements should be
taken at a minimum distance of 40% of the rotor radius.
In the second stage, the focus shifted toward the implementation of feedforward control implementation
evaluating specifically Schlipf and Bossanyi’s approach for load reduction. Simulations were performed
with IEA 10 MW wind turbine as well as with NREL 5MW.
The study identified certain challenges related to correcting the time required to compensate for
the time delay caused by the filter in LiDAR-assisted control using a low-pass Butterworth filter.
Specifically, it was found that the time required to compensate for the time delay caused by the
filter can exceed the available preview time. This is due to the interplay between the measurement,
coherence, and the cut-off frequency of the filter. These findings highlight the need of high coherence
and for careful consideration and optimization of the filter parameters to ensure that the time delay is
effectively compensated for without compromising the available preview time. Addressing this issue
may consist in either optimizing measurement to increase the coherence bandwidth or extending the
measurement distance.
Alternatively, when assessing the performance indicator k0.5 have been found to work well with the
smaller size of wind turbines as preview time is not severely reduced allowing the use of higher evalu-
ation metrics as k0.7. This is permitted for such scenarios due to the increased coherence bandwidth.
Nevertheless, for larger wind turbines, this metric cannot be applied so easily as stated before, can
40
==PAGE:47==
compromise the preview time as the coherence bandwidth is not high enough. Hence, the performance
metric should be revised and possibly define in terms of the minimum bandwidth required depending
on the wind turbine size and the filter.
When evaluating the damage equivalent load reduction, the Schlipf approach demonstrated overall
better performance compared to the Bossanyi approach. The Bossanyi approach exhibited certain
deficiencies, such as frequency transport, higher excitation in existing low-damped natural frequencies
of the wind turbine, and a change in the rotor speed of the wind turbine. These issues are related
to the utilization of the actual pitch angle for calculating the feedforward pitch rate, as well as
inaccuracies or sub-optimal calculations of the steady-state pitch angle. These effects become more
pronounced in larger wind turbines, where the influence of rotor inertia becomes more significant. In
contrast, the Schlipf method has demonstrated the ability to act independently while fulfilling its two
primary objectives(reference signal tracking and disturbance compensation). It provides more robust
and reliable performance in load reduction, making it a favorable choice for implementing feedforward
control in wind turbines. Moreover, the study shows that under the simulated circumstances, larger
wind turbines will benefit from the feedforward controller in tower load reduction while smaller wind
turbines in blade reduction. The capacity of the feedforward controller to adjust the the output of
the feedback controller to align with the desired output was highlighted.
6.2
Future work
The investigation into the application of LiDAR technology for wind turbine control can introduce
future work for further research and development. Here are some potential areas:
• Field Testing: Conduct field tests to validate the findings from the simulated analysis and
compare the achieved coherence bandwidth with the simulated results. This can provide real-
world data and insights into the performance of the commercial LiDAR system used in controlling
wind turbines.
• LiDAR Pattern Optimization: Explore and optimize different LiDAR measurement patterns
and configurations for larger wind turbines. The circular pattern used in the project can be
expanded upon by investigating new patterns and combinations using different focal distances.
This can help improve the accuracy and effectiveness of LiDAR measurements for wind turbine
control.
• Wind Shear Estimation: Utilize LiDAR measurements to estimate wind shear, which can
provide valuable information for optimizing wind turbine control strategies. Investigate meth-
ods to incorporate wind shear estimation into the feedforward control algorithms to enhance
performance.
• Unavailability of LiDAR Systems: Extend the load simulations to scenarios where the Li-
DAR system becomes unavailable or experiences downtime. This can help understand the impact
of temporary loss of LiDAR measurements on the control performance and explore alternative
control strategies during such periods.
• Wind Misalignment Consideration: Account for some wind misalignment with the rotor
in the simulations, as this is a realistic operational scenario for wind turbines. Evaluate the
effects of wind misalignment on the control performance and investigate strategies to mitigate
its impact.
• Comparison of LiDAR Technologies: Replicate the project using different LiDAR technolo-
gies, such as pulsed LiDARs, to assess their performance and identify possible future trends in
the technology.
41
==PAGE:48==
• Extended Feedforward Control Analysis: Further evaluate the feedforward control ap-
proaches not only for equivalent loads at one wind speed but throughout the above-rated speed
range of the wind turbine. Incorporate adaptive filters into the control algorithms to enhance
their performance under varying wind conditions.
Assess short-term and lifetime equivalent
fatigue loads and consider different design load cases (DLC) for a comprehensive analysis.
• Modification of Bossanyi Approach: Explore modifications to the Bossanyi approach to
address its potential inefficiencies and limitations.
• Perform robustness analysis to evaluate the performance of the analyzed approaches under var-
ious operating conditions and disturbances.
By continuing research in these areas, the application of LiDAR technology for wind turbine control
can be further enhanced, leading to improved control strategies and more efficient and reliable wind
turbine operation.
42
==PAGE:49==
References
[1] EU, “2030 climate and energy framework - existing ambition.” ”https://climate.ec.europa.eu/
eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/2030-climate-energy-framework en”.
[2] E. Simley, H. F˘AˇLrst, F. Haizmann, and D. Schlipf, “Optimizing lidars for wind turbine control
applications-results from the iea wind task 32 workshop,” Remote Sensing, vol. 10, no. 6, 2018.
[3] D. Schlipf, P. Fleming, F. Haizmann, A. Scholbrock, M. Hofs¨aß, A. Wright, and P. W. Cheng,
“Field testing of feedforward collective pitch control on the cart2 using a nacelle-based lidar
scanner,” 2012.
[4] Torben Juul Larsen and Anders Melchior Hansen, “How 2 hawc2, the user’s manual,” 2021.
[5] D. Schlipf, Lidar-Assisted Control Concepts for Wind Turbines.
PhD thesis, University of
Stuttgart, 2016.
[6] E. Bossanyi, “Wind turbine control applications of turbine-mounted lidar,” No. 555 in Conference
Series, IOP, 2014.
[7] E. Simley, H. F¨urst, F. Haizmann, and D. Schlipf, “Optimizing lidars for wind turbine control
applications—results from the iea wind task 32 workshop,” 2018.
[8] D. Schlipf and M. K¨uhn, “Prospects of a collective pitch control by means of predictive disturbance
compensation assisted by wind speed measurements,” UpWind, 2008.
[9] F. Meng, W. H. Lio, and G. C. Larsen, “Wind turbine lidar-assisted control: Power improvement,
wind coherence and loads reduction,” 2022.
[10] W. H. Lio, “On lidar-assisted wind turbine retrofit control and fatigue load reductions,” Phys.:
Conf. Ser. 2265 032072, 2011.
[11] F. Dunne, E. Simley, and L. Pao, “Lidar wind speed measurement analysis and feed-forward
blade pitch control for load mitigation in wind turbines,” 2011.
[12] D. Schlipf, “Lidar assisted collective pitch control,” UpWind, 2011.
[13] D. P. Held and J. Mann, “Lidar estimation of rotor-effective wind speed – an experimental
comparison,” 2019.
[14] D. Schlipf, F. Haizmann, N. Cosack, T. Siebers, and P. W. Cheng, “Detection of wind evolution
and lidar trajectory optimization for lidar-assisted wind turbine control,” logische Zeitschrift,
vol. 24, no. 6, 2015.
[15] K. Manal and W. Rose, “A general solution for the time delay introduced by a low-pass but-
terworth digital filter: An application to musculoskeletal modeling,” Journal of Biomechanics,
vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 678–681, 2007.
[16] Windar Photonics A/S, “Modelling specifications for windar photonics lidar products.”
[17] D. Schlipf, D. Trabucchi, O. Bischoff, M. Hofsab, J. Mann, T. Mikkelsen, A. Rettenmeier, J. Tru-
jillo, and M. Kuhn, “Testing of frozen turbulence hypothesis for wind turbine applications with
a scanning lidar system,” Detaled Program ISARS, 2010.
[18] F. Meng, W. Lio, and T. Barlas, “DTUWEC: an open-source DTU wind energy controller with
advanced industrial features,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Online), vol. 1618, 2020.
[19] M. H. Hansen and L. C. Henriksen, “Basic dtu wind energy controller,” tech. rep., 2013.
43
==PAGE:50==
[20] J. Jonkman, S. Butterfield, W. Musial, and G. Scott, “Definition of a 5-mw reference wind turbine
for offshore system development,” 2009.
44
==PAGE:51==
Appendix
A
Appendix
Example of the increase reference pitch angle if the feedforward steady-state pitch angle is imprecise:
Figure A.1: Caption
B
NREL natural frequencies
Table 3: NREL natural frequencies
Mode
Description
Natural frequency
1
1st Tower Fore-Aft
0.3240
2
1st Tower Side-to-Side
0.3120
3
1st Drivetrain Torsion
0.6205
4
1st Blade Asymmetric Flapwise Yaw
0.6664
5
1st Blade Asymmetric Flapwise Pitch
0.6675
6
1st Blade Collective Flap
0.6993
7
1st Blade Asymmetric Edgewise Pitch
1.0793
8
1st Blade Asymmetric Edgewise Yaw
1.0898
9
2nd Blade Asymmetric Flapwise Yaw
1.9337
10
2nd Blade Asymmetric Flapwise Pitch
1.9223
11
2nd Blade Collective Flap
2.0205
12
2nd Tower Fore-Aft
2.9003
13
2nd Tower Side-to-Side
2.9361
45
