==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Unsupervised Machine Learning
For Analyzing Network Security Logs
Marta Perea (s212497)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Network Intrusion Detection Systems play a crucial role in assessing and enhancing
the security measures within companies. These systems yield network security alerts
for different hosts displaying different behaviours in a network. These network security
logs can be leveraged in order to perform host clustering. In this research the focus
is made on creating groups of hosts exhibiting similar behaviours which is something
that can yield powerful information regarding malicious hosts or can help creating
supervised models for virulent behaviours.
To this extent, an implementation is
carried out leveraging the power of two different data structures and unsupervised
machine learning. Once having extracted these features a clustering pipeline where
different perspectives have been studied in order to yield the best possible clusters
is carried out so as to obtain an insight on how hosts behave and could be grouped
given the notions of intra-cluster cohension and inter-cluster separation.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Masters degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 1, 2023
Marta Perea (s212497)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Christian D. Jensen and to the
company Muninn for providing me with the opportunity to develop this Master thesis.
Special thanks to Sajad Homayoun for co-supervising this project and providing me
with guidelines and recommendations that have led to the successful completion of
it.
Moreover, I am most thankful for the unceasing and unconditional support that
my family has always given me from the distance, even when diﬀicult situations have
come our way.
Additionally, I would like to thank my roommates, that have helped me deal with
the process of conducting this Master thesis, their support and encouragement have
made a significant impact in the process. Lastly, I would like to also thank my friends
that have accompanied me in these two years, always backing me up when needed.
For much more years to come.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Papers retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Papers findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Literature Review Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Chapter Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Background
17
3.1
Approaches taken . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Tools and libraries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Chaper Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Datasets
31
4.1
Dataset A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Dataset B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Chapter Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Implementation
35
5.1
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Chapter Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Results
49
6.1
Graph-based K-Means clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Extracted Features Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Chapter Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
Discussion
69
7.1
Graph Edit Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Graphs and time series feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.4
Chapter Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8
Conclusion
77
A
Implementations
79
A.1 LSTM Feature Extraction Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B
Implementation Results
81
B.1
Dataset A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.2
Dataset B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Network intrusion detection and response systems are proven cybersecurity methods
against many different attacks in the network layer, i.e. Denial of service attacks
or Botnets. These intrusion detection systems are known to generate several secu-
rity alerts based on host behaviors (signature-based or anomaly-based). A network
consists of many different types of hosts such as workstations, file servers or domain
controllers, each of them having different behaviors and security patterns. Further-
more, behavior that is typical from one type of host might be anomalous for another
type of host. This makes data distribution diversified and makes it complicated for
human analysts to come to conclusions.
In order to reduce the workload this can carry for analysts, different approaches
have been taken involving supervised machine learning methods. However, the cre-
ation of training datasets with a normal flow of traﬀic is a hard task having to deal
with these many hosts. On one hand, creating a model for each host in the network
such that it represents normal behavior for said host is first, not scalable for big net-
works, and in addition, small changes on the host behavior patterns can result in a
false positive, as the model would treat them as anomalous. On the other hand, cre-
ating a single approach for the network as a whole can solve the scalability problem
the previous one presents, but by taking too many hosts together details get lost, and
it would result in a considerable amount of missed positives.
Clustering is an area of Machine Learning which, in regards to Unsupervised Ma-
chine Learning, focus on grouping unlabelled data into groups with similar features
by finding hidden patterns within the data. Clustering involves the organization of
data in such a way that there is high intra-cluster and low inter-cluster similarity.
When it comes to network traﬀic, large volumes of data are generated in even the
simplest communication. Thus, it can be really hard for humans to analyze and un-
derstand everything that is going on without the help of machine learning algorithms.
Here, Unsupervised Machine Learning comes into play for it can automatically detect
and group similar network traﬀic by means of different features.
In this project, focus will be made on network security logs data with the purpose
of identifying different groups of hosts with similar security behavior which can be
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
helpful in many situations.
For the first of the scenarios where clustering network traﬀic in terms of security
alerts can be beneficial is for helping human analyst to carry their work. When a
security network manager analyst finds a pattern or something that can be spotted as
an anomaly, a study needs to be carried out in order to discern whether this anomaly
can turn into a hazard or not. All this study and work can be simplified with the
help of clustering algorithms where similar behavior hosts are grouped together and
thus providing the analyst with information about whether this situation has been
already spotted in similar hosts as the one being studied.
Another situation in which clustering can be of help is as stated above, for creating
supervised models of machine learning algorithms. Moreover, as clusters are being
computed in terms of the behavioural aspect of the hosts, if a malicious host is found
in one of the clusters, one can suspect of other hosts clustered with the malicious
ones, as it would mean their behaviours are similar enough to have them grouped
together.
Host clustering can also be an advantage when detecting outliers. Outliers are
data points significantly different from others and thus, not corresponding to any
cluster. When it comes to host clustering, hosts that exhibit different behavior from
others in the same cluster can be identified as potential outliers. For example, in this
case that hosts are being clustered due to their security behavior, an outlier would
mean a different behavior or communication pattern, which can imply a security
threat in the system.
Finally, cluster analysis can also help in reducing the complexity of network traﬀic
data, which simplifies its visualization and analysis. The clustering outcomes can be
used by the analyst to generate visualizations that expose the distinct traﬀic groups,
making it easy to identify patterns or anomalies in the data swiftly.
In order to achieve these hosts clusters, unsupervised machine learning will be
leveraged not only in order to perform clustering, but also to extract features that
can characterize the different hosts based on their behaviour. For this, different data
structures will be forged from the available security alerts data, being these two struc-
tures graphs and time series. As said before, features will be extracted from these
structures in an unsupervised manner and with the help of deep learning methods,
which will provide feature vectors characterizing each of the hosts involved in a net-
work.
These graphs and feature vectors will be used for clustering purposes, using a
graph-based K-Means algorithm for the graphs structure and a traditional K-Means
algorithm as well as a fuzzy clustering algorithm by the name of C-Means for both
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
of the feature vectors approaches.
Different facts regarding the clustering process such as random initialization or
data codifications using different number epochs as well as the clustering outputs
will be evaluated using different metrics that assess intra-cluster cohesion and inter-
cluster separation. Moreover, some other plots and graphs will be displayed in order
to determine to which extent this solution is both, possible and yielding a good output.
By the end of this project some insights are made when it comes to the power
of graphs and time series structures in generating informative vectors, the usage of
C-Means, which by means of its membership scores provides insights beyond hard-
assigning algorithms such as K-Means and how internal clustering metrics serve as
useful indicators for assessing various aspects of the clustering process. Nonetheless
it is also clearly stated how without access to ground truth information, the exact
accuracy of the clustering cannot be conclusively determined.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
Prior to the development of the project itself, a study has been carried out through
all the existing literature in order to gain a broad perspective of how Machine Learn-
ing, in particular, Unsupervised Machine Learning has been used in Network Traﬀic
related problem during the last years.
In order to find the relevant papers that would help with the literature that pro-
vides a good and deep insight into this matter, the PRISMA [23] flow diagram has
used, creating queries for the different literature database engines and filtering out
and adding in new and insightful information. Moreover, an analysis has been carried
out on the extracted literature leveraging information that comes within the papers
publications, like dates, authors or citing count.
Once having retrieved all this information, the actual literature review has been
conducted, highlighting the findings and supporting them with publications in which
the different approaches have been undertaken.
This literature review provides the reader with a great insight of different ap-
proaches that have been taken when conducting unsupervised machined learning
models on network security logs and has also provided this project with great and im-
portant information that has been taken into account carrying out tasks that provide
this project with value.
2.1
Papers retrieval
In order to follow a logical and computerised process, use was made of the PRISMA
flow diagram.
The PRISMA [23] flow diagram depicts the flow information through the different
phases of a systematic literature review. It maps out the number of records identified,
included and excluded and the reasons for exclusions.
In other words, it provides a structured and transparent overview of the review
process, ensuring that all essential components are considered and reported accu-
rately. It helps researchers and readers to understand the study selection process,
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Literature Review
identify potential sources of bias, and assess the quality and generalizability of the
findings. By following the PRISMA flow diagram, researchers can ensure that their
systematic reviews adhere to rigorous reporting standards.
The PRISMA workflow includes the steps that can be seen in Figure 2.1, which
cover removing duplicate records, screening and filtering out records by means of their
title and abstract or papers that, due to different limitations, are not accessible.
Research questions are the first step in any literature review. They establish the
bases for all the subsequent carried out study. In this case, the research questions
have been meticulously crafted to direct this investigation. These questions have been
created to cover important facets of this study topic and to provide the investigation
a focused direction. Focus is made on clarifying key issues in the area and offering
insightful contributions by looking at and responding to these research topics.
• How are Unsupervised Machine Learning techniques used within Network Se-
curity Logs?
• What approaches have been taken in order to perform clustering using Network
Security Traﬀic data?
• How can one leverage different Unsupervised Machine Learning methods to
perform host clustering based on hosts security behavior?
2.2
Papers findings
In this section, all the above explained theory will be put into practice, showing and
analyzing the results.
2.2.1
Keywords for search queries
This section highlights keywords that have been extracted from the research questions
in order to conduct a research aiming at exploring and investigating the relevant lit-
erature. Choosing the right keywords is of great importance and they will greatly
impact the retrieval of relevant information. These words need to capture the essence
of the research in order to conduct a comprehensive analysis and gather valuable
findings.
In this case, the following keywords have been selected. Note the * symbol means
more than one word is involved.
• TITLE: ( cluster* OR classif* ) AND ( network* OR internet ) AND ( alert*
OR alarm* OR notification* )
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Papers findings
7
• ABSTRACT: ( security OR ids OR alarm* OR alert* OR notification* )
Cluster* for cluster/clusters/clustering
Classif* for classification/classifying
Network* for network/networks/networking
Alert* for alert/alerts
Alarm* for alarm/alarms
Notification* for notification/notifications
2.2.2
Advanced Search Queries for Research Questions
Following the previously mentioned keywords, different search queries have been cre-
ated for each of the selected search engines. Also, all these search engines provide one
with an advanced search functionality that will help to retrieve precise and focused
results that align with the objectives of this research.
The selected publishers or paper repositories in which the papers have been
searched in this case are four search engines, these being:
• Scopus
• IEEE Xplore
• DTU Find It
• ACM Digital Library
These are four well-known databases or digital libraries commonly used in aca-
demic research. They offer extensive coverage of scholarly publications enabling ad-
vance search functionalities and providing access to reputable sources within specific
domains.
Nevertheless, schemes for the advance search functionality differs from one search
engine to another. Therefore, tailored search queries for each of the search engines
can be subsequently found:
• SCOPUS: TITLE ( ( cluster* OR classif* ) AND ( network* OR internet )
AND ( alert* OR alarm* OR notification* ) ) AND ABS ( security OR ids OR
alarm* OR alert* OR notification* )
• IEEE Xplore: ((”Document Title”: cluster* OR ”Document Title”: classif*
) AND ( ”Document Title”: network* OR ”Document Title”: internet) AND
(”Document Title”: alert* OR ”Document Title”: alarm* OR ”Document Ti-
tle”: notification* )) AND (”Abstract”: security OR ”Abstract”: IDS OR ”Ab-
stract”: alarm* OR ”Abstract”: alert* OR ”Abstract”: notification*)
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Literature Review
• DTU Find It: title:(cluster* OR classif*) AND title:(network* OR internet)
AND title:(alert* OR alarm* OR notification*) AND abstract:(security OR ids
OR alarm* OR alert* OR notification*)
• ACM Digital Library: [[Title: cluster*] OR [Title: classif*]] AND [[Title:
network*] OR [Title: internet]] AND [[Title: alert*] OR [Title: alarm*] OR [Ti-
tle: notification*]] AND [[Abstract: security] OR [Abstract: ids] OR [Abstract:
alarm*] OR [Abstract: alert*] OR [Abstract: notification*]]
2.2.3
Advanced Query Results
This section presents the results obtained from the advanced queries conducted in the
above mentioned search engines. Results can be observed in Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: The PRISMA workflow with for this research [23].
As it can be seen in the figure, a first duplicate records screening has been made
where 66 reports have been filtered out. On a next step, another 38 records have also
been left out based on their abstract. By the end of the PRISMA flow, this literature
review will be based in mainly 13 records.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Papers findings
9
A collection of graphs extracted from the comprehensive literature review above
are subsequently displayed. The aim of these graphs is to visually summarize and
present key findings and trends identified in the literature related to the research
topic. The selected graphs offer a concise representation of the data extracted from
the reviewed studies, providing valuable insights into the current state of knowledge
in the field.
With the help of these graphs one gets the chance to enhance their understanding
of the research landscape as well as discover some research gaps that could turn out
to be interesting for studying. They also provided a greater insight into the main
topic, getting to understand whether is an emerging field or how long has it been
studied, as well as some other relevant information.
Figure 2.2: Screened relevant papers by year.
To start, Figure 2.2 allows one to gain a great insight involving the historical
context of out research topic. From the graph it can be seen how the research area is
rather a modern one, with the first paper being found in 2005 and the last one just
last year. Moreover, it can be observed how from 2005 this area has been studied pe-
riodically thorough the rest of the years, with one or two studies every couple of years.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Literature Review
Figure 2.3: Papers citation count.
From Figure 2.3 information regarding each paper’s impact and influence within
the academic community is gathered, so to as how the different papers have influenced
the subsequent research in the topic. From the values in the graph it can be inferred
their high importance and relevance in the field and how their outputs have resulted
in valuable insights. In particular there are 3 papers that have been cited around 12
and 17 times and a paper that has been cited around 42 times. These 4 papers show
a great importance in the literature and thus need to be handled more in depth. In
addition to the four highly important papers mentioned earlier, it is noteworthy that
some other papers in the research exhibit a respectable citation count. This indicates
that the study has identified a substantial number of valuable and impactful papers
that have contributed to the research area. Consequently, these papers are expected
to have a positive influence on this research and provide valuable insights and support.
Figure 2.4: Number of authors by paper.
Lastly, from Figure 2.4 one can observe the number of authors per paper. The
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Papers findings
11
graph shows in most of the papers a value greater than one, which means almost all
the papers have been written in collaboration with other scientist. More authors in
papers suggests that multiple researchers have contributed to the study, potentially
bringing different perspectives and expertise to the research.
All of these factors contribute to the richness of the literature review and enhance
the overall findings derived from it.
As a final detail, it is worth mentioning how, throughout all the literature and
the search of papers that would cover this project topic, a notable gap was identified
concerning the utilization of network security logs. Several papers have been found on
host clustering, nevertheless, most of them focused on raw network security logs such
as communication and connection properties. Moreover the little literature found on
security logs involved the use of Supervised Machine Learning, or didn’t focus in hosts
behaviour features and properties.
With all this, one can argue how in this project is, to the best of our knowledge,
a new field which cover the use on Unsupervised Learning techniques for both, hosts
behaviour features extraction and host clustering.
Thus, this study will provide
the research community with new and interesting information that can be therefore
extended and further studied.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Literature Review
2.3
Literature Review Findings
When it comes to finding the state-of-the-art approaches taken regarding network
security logs, different fields are widely explored such as wireless mobile [4], optical
[12] or internet networks [14]. More specifically, when it comes to internet network
in which different hosts are involved, security logs are a very common notion as nowa-
days many companies have chosen relying in Intrusion Detection Systems in order to
gather information regarding malicious activity in their private networks.
Network security alerts raised by network can be leveraged to many different ends,
such as retrieving information regarding the security status of a company, creating
models for alert patterns or just studying the behavior of the different hosts among
a network. From the gathered literature in which these security alerts are taken into
practice, different insights have been obtained.
A predominant use of these security alerts in the literature comes within the clus-
tering of the different alerts. IDS can produce a large number of alerts which are
overwhelming to the human. For example, a single IDS sensor can generate tens of
thousands of alerts in a day [34]. Moreover, methods involving supervised machine
learning due to this big volume of alerts are not operable. As supervised learning
needs labeled data, the data extracted from large optical networks may require man-
ual labeling which is costly and time consuming. Moreover, such labeling is prone to
error because of the human involvement which suggests that trained machine learning
models may only recognize failures identified by human experts [12].
Furthermore during the study of the literature, it has also been observed how,
among these big volumes of security alerts, many false positives and redundant alerts
can be complicated to spot. This is why most of the approaches towards security
alerts lean towards performing alert clustering in order to identify potential false
positives, create meta-alert classes encompassing different kind of attacks and also,
creating rule models for security patterns.
While some of these approaches focus on hand crafted features of the alerts, some
others leverage the correlation that can exist among them in order to extract features
and perform the clustering.
Different structures can be used when it comes to security alert for performing
clustering aiming at different goals.
Such structures can involve generating alert
groups with each group representing malicious activity for the same external host.
These detected alert groups are then sent to the clustering module which either as-
signs the group to a cluster or regards it as an outlier [33]. In this approach, alerts
containing information regarding its occurrence time, its IDS signature or protocols,
among others, are divided into sessions, so alerts in one session are associated with
the same external IP address and if an incoming alert with no session is observed it is
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Literature Review Findings
13
considered the first alert in another sessions. After having this data structure cluster-
ing is performed with centroids being identified by a sequence of sorted signature IDS.
Moreover structural correlations, or shared features, among security alerts are
leveraged also in [30] in order to group alerts aiming at finding false positives and
redundant information. Here, a pipeline consisting on alert normalization, preprocess-
ing, dimensional reduction using PCA and clustering is implemented to, on a final
stage, determine an alert ranking and verification. On the first stage, features such
as alert names, source or destination are encoded as numbers, normalized and then
reduced in order to find the principal components of the alerts, i.e., the attributes
vector that can describe the alerts exactly and suﬀiciently, but not redundantly. Four
different unsupervised clustering algorithms are afterwards used in this research in
order to find groups of alert with similar features, being the Expectation Maximiza-
tion the clustering algorithm providing the best results. These kind of approach, in
which shared features on alerts are used along with the EM algorithm can be seen
more than once among the literature, but with differences when it comes to the fea-
ture extraction methods, for which in other researches it is performed by defining the
concept of feature saliency and using the EM algorithm to estimate its value [5].
Other intrinsic features within the alerts such as the fact that they are sequenced
are leveraged in other approaches in order to perform clustering aiming at discovering
behaviour rules. In [19] data mining algorithms are applied to discover the correla-
tions among these alerts and thus help locate the underlying causal relationships
between different network faults. The clustering here is made by means of these alert
sequences, where alert clustering has been proposed to mine for alert patterns such as
correlations, trend, and associations based on their behavior proximity. In order to
determined a similarity measure for these alert correlations two new similarity met-
rics suitable for fixed length interval-based alert clustering are presented in this paper.
Nonetheless, other approaches use the expectation maximization (EM) [9]. The
EM algorithm uses a probabilistic measure, rather than a strict distance measure, to
determine which objects belong to which clusters. Instead of choosing a point for
each dimension and computing a distance, the EM algorithm considers a bell curve
for each dimension, with a mean and standard deviation. As a point falls within the
bell curve, it is assigned to a cluster with a certain probability.
Alerts time distributions are also clustered using the DBSCAN clustering algo-
rithm, that clusters the alerts according to their time distributions to dynamically
divide the alert transactions [16]. In this specific case, these clusters are then fed to
a FP-Growth algorithm to mine the association rules of alerts.
Alert sequences are also combined with Neural Network algorithms with Autoen-
coders [12]. The aim in this approach is at identifying failure alert by means of the
encoding and decoding notions regarding the Autoencoders. For this, alert features
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Literature Review
are extracted and normalized using a MinMax scaler.
Later on, the Neural Net-
work combined with Autoencoders which aims at reconstructing an input sequence,
is trained at reconstructing uncleared alerts data and reconstruction loss i.e., mean
squared error between reconstructed input and original input was minimized dur-
ing training. For testing, unique alerts raised due to an attenuation failure event
were provided to the Neural Network. A threshold is defined on the reconstruction
loss, and it can be observed how the reconstruction loss for failure alerts exceeds the
threshold so these can be distinguished from the already existing alerts in the system.
Other approaches exists in which authors classify network intrusion detection sys-
tem (IDS) alerts using frequent itemset mining and data clustering techniques, the
two principal phases that have been carried out in the pipeline [34]. In the frequent
itemset mining step, the authors extract frequent patterns from the IDS alerts. These
patterns represent combinations of alert features that occur frequently together, in-
dicating possible attack patterns. This step helps to reduce the dimensionality of the
alert data and identify relevant features for classification. The next step involves data
clustering, where frequent feature sets are used to group similar alerts. Clustering
allows the identification of distinct groups or clusters of alerts, each representing a
specific type of attack or network behaviour. The authors employ a clustering algo-
rithm to divide alert data into clusters based on similarity measures.
Lastly, clustering is also made using these alerts in order to provide unified alert
descriptions or categories [25].
Revisiting the initial research questions, through this literature review different ap-
proaches of how unsupervised machine learning techniques are used regarding network
security logs have been stated, such as neural networks or autoencoders. Moreover,
different approaches of different goals or information one can gain from performing
clustering in this kind of data has also been given, such as for isolating false positives
or grouping security patterns in order to defined rules.
For the final research question on how can unsupervised machine learning be
leveraged for host clustering no literature have been found. There exists literature
regarding host clustering by leveraging internet network traﬀic, nonetheless, no secu-
rity behavioral aspects can be derived form this kind of data. Nevertheless, through
this literature it has been seen how features can be extracted from security alerts,
which is something that will be moulded in this research towards characterizing hosts
through these security extracted features.
This means that in this project, network security logs will be leveraged in an
innovative manner, and that the research conducted in this project can serve as a
starting point for further exploration on the area.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Chapter Synthesis
15
2.4
Chapter Synthesis
In this chapter, the PRISMA framework [23] has been followed in order to extract lit-
erature providing this project with the state-of-the-art approaches taken concerning
network security logs. Research questions have been defined from which keywords
and search queries have been created.
Extracted records have been analyzed and visual representation concerning these
record publications years, number of citations and number of authors have been pro-
vided along with insights that can be retrieved from these graphs.
Lastly, a systematic literature review has been carried out, aiming at responding
the initial research questions and highlighting different approaches in which network
security alerts have been used along with unsupervised machine learning. Although
not all questions have been completely answered, guidelines towards how this research
can be carried out has been given. Furthermore this fact demonstrates how this is a
new and innovate approach that will sheds light on this emerging field.
==PAGE:26==
16
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Background
In this chapter, an overview will be given in the theoretical background this projects
solution lies in. After having researched the state-of-the-art approaches in the net-
work security log clustering field, an analysis has been made regarding the different
approaches that will be taken in this project in order to perform hosts clustering.
As previously stated, use will be made of unsupervised machine learning in order
to develop a solution for the problem. In this specific case two different unsupervised
techniques are researched, being unsupervised hierarchical learning and unsupervised
data clustering.
Hierchical learning is defined as learning simple and complex features from a hier-
archy of multiple linear and nonlinear activations [32]. It involves the transformation
of raw data into a quantifiable and comparable representation, which is specific to
the property of the input but general enough for comparison to similar inputs. On
another hand, data clustering aims to find hidden patterns in unlabeled input data
in order to group similar behaviors. In networking, clustering techniques are widely
deployed for applications such as traﬀic analysis and anomaly detection in all kinds
of networks. Clustering can be divided into three main types [36], being hierchical,
bayesian and partitional clustering.
These machine learning techniques will be applied to two different data structures,
graphs and time series. Additionally, the tools and libraries used in the implementa-
tion process will be discussed, highlighting their relevance to the project and finally,
an overview of the methods employed to evaluate the performance of the clustering
will be provided.
3.1
Approaches taken
In this section, a literature review on the main approaches that have been taken
in order to deal with the problem is presented.
This literature review has led to
implementing various solutions and obtaining different results which will be later on
presented.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Background
3.1.1
Graph based
Data and how storing it has always been a concern in the real world. As companies
grow they need to ensure all their sensitive data is secure and protected as well as
well preserved so it doesn’t corrupt or get lost. Storing data in relational or non-
relation databases is the traditional way that even nowadays, most companies use.
Nevertheless over the last few years it’s getting more and more common to use Graph
Databases. In graphs databases, all the data is stored as nodes which are connected
to other nodes in terms of a connection or relationship between the data.
A data structure is an eﬀicient way of organising data so it can be easily accessed
and effectively used. Graphs are data structures which represent data in a non-linear
form consisting of nodes (or vertices) and edges (or paths). A graph can be termed as
a data structure consisting of data that is stored among many groups of edges (paths)
and vertices (nodes), which are interconnected. [28]
There are different types of graphs: weighted, unweighted, directed or undirected
graphs. Moreover, depending on the way you storage your data into the graphs, dif-
ferent data structures can be followed, such as adjacency lists or adjacency matrices,
and different methods or algorithms to search for nodes such as DFS (Depth-First
Search) or BFS (Breadth-First Search) [28].
Since the discovery of their capabilities, graphs have also been used in Machine
Learning approaches, leveraging all the advantages they present as a data structure.
Particularly, graph-based clustering methods can capture manifold information so
that they are available for the non-euclidean type data, something that is not pro-
vided by the traditional K-Means algorithm [15].
Nevertheless, the term ”graph clustering” is somewhat ambiguous and can refer
to many different types of clustering problems, including [29]:
• Network community: finding clusters in the graph without any control on the
number of clusters.
• Graph clustering: clustering any kind of data by first converting the whole
dataset into a graph.
• Graph partitioning : separating the graph into clusters while constraining the
size of the clusters.
• Graph based clustering: clustering a set of graphs where each data object is a
graph of its own.
In this case, focus is made in the last of the cases, where each object is encoded
into a graph, and we perform clustering in these objects.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Approaches taken
19
In order to perform clustering, a first and essential feature that is needed is a way
of computing the similarity between two graphs, just like Euclidean distance is used
in the traditional K-Means algorithm in order to compute the distance between two
different points. For this purpose, the Graph Edit Distance (GED) is presented as
the best solution. Graph Edit Distance is also of great importance when it comes to
computing the set median graphs for a set of graphs, which is an essential step for
finding the center of a cluster.
The key idea of Graph Edit Distance is to define the dissimilarity, or distance, of
graphs by the minimum amount of distortion that is needed to transform one graph
into another. A standard set of distortion operations is given by insertions, deletions
and substitutions of nodes and edges [26].
Given two graphs, the source graph g1 and the target graph g2, the main idea
of graph edit distance is to deletes some nodes and edges from g1, and relabel and
insert some other nodes in g2. Thus a sequence of operation leads from one graph to
another. This path is called the edit path between g1 and g2. Multiple paths exists
and in order to find the most suitable one, one introduces costs for each of the edit
operations, measuring the strength of the corresponding operation. Consequently, the
graph edit distance is defined as the minimum cost edit path between two graphs [26].
Thus, the set median graph ˆg [7] is defined in graph theory in the following fashion:
ˆg = arg min
g∈S
∑
gi∈S
ged(g, gi)
(3.1)
where S is a set of graphs and the arg min function makes sure the minimum cost
path is taken.
Nevertheless, traditional GED comes with a big complication, which is that it is
extremely heavy and consumes a lot of time and resources. This is mainly due to how
is the graph edit distance computed (when it comes to operation costs) and to which
algorithm is used to select which edit path is optimal. Different libraries output dif-
ferent values for GEDs, due to these factors. As an example, the well-known library
Networkx uses an A* based algorithm while other libraries such as Gmatch4py uses
an algorithm that transposes the GED to an Assigment Problem. Therefore, eﬀi-
ciency, accuracy and resources and time can vary depending on the GED computing
approach that we define.
Another well-studied and complication that comes within graph clustering is com-
puting the set median graph for a set of graphs. The main complication is given
by the fact that GED needs to be computed in between all of the graphs. In or-
der to tackle this drawback, different approaches have been taken. To deal with the
high time and space complexity of the median graph calculation, some approaches
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Background
suggest computing a generalized median graph [7], others suggest speeding up GED
by means of bipartite matching and an assignment algorithm used to solve the linear
sum assignment problem [6]. As previously stated, when experimenting with different
algorithms, one will obtain different computations for Graph Edit Distances (GEDs).
It is also worth mentioning how using graphs embeddings is also a widely used
methodology used in many of the approaches for graph clustering. When computing
vectors for graph embedding, different methodologies can be followed. One of these
methodologies consists on comparing a graph to a number of prototype graphs obtain-
ing this way a vectorial representation of the graph in which each entry corresponds
to the GED from the initial graph to each one of the ones in the prototype set. After
having computed the graph vectors, algorithms such as Kernel K-Means can be used
in order to create clusters [26].
This same methodology has also been used in order to compare set median graphs,
encoding graphs and using the median Euclidean distance between them, measure
that will on a later stage used to reconstruct the graph obtaining the set median
graph [7]. Moreover, once again, the same approach for graphs embedding is also
used in order perform clustering with the help og Self-Organizing Maps (or SOMs),
where a limitation of SOM is the representation of patterns in terms of feature vectors
only [3].
Nevertheless, this kind of graphs embedding exhibit two critical limitations being:
(1) Many of them do not provide explicit graph embeddings. (2) The substructures
(i.e., walk, paths, etc.) leveraged by these kernels are ‘handcrafted’ i.e., determined
manually with specific well- defined functions that help extracting such substructures
from graphs. Moreover, when such handcrafted features are used on large datasets
of graphs, it leads to building very high dimensional, sparse and non-smooth rep-
resentations and thus yield poor generalization. Therefore approaches that replace
handcrafted features with ones that are learnt automatically from data could help to
fix both the aforementioned limitations. [22]
Graphs embedding approaches which leverage unsupervised machine learning be-
come useful in this matter. In [22] an implementation that learns the distributed
representations of graphs by extending the most recent proposed document embed-
ding techniques in Natural Language Processing or NLP for multi-relational data can
be found. This kind of unsupervised approach can succinctly capture the generic
characteristics of entire graphs in the form of their embeddings providing graphs
representations that have been proven to outperform other graph kernel embedding
techniques like the aforementioned techniques, in which hand-crafted techniques like
graph edit distances or shortest paths are hampered by problems such as poor gener-
alization.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Approaches taken
21
3.1.2
Time series based
For this last approach, the main idea is to create embedding for individual hosts. To
this end features are needed to characterizing them. To achieve this, the focus is
on retrieving relevant features from time series data and leveraging them to perform
host clustering. This approach involves using Deep Learning methodologies that have
been proven to work when it comes to unsupervised machine learning.
Time series is a set of observations xt, each one being recorded at a specific time
instance t. Compared with other types of data, time series data contain complex tem-
poral dependencies and are often high-dimensional, making them challenging to model
and analyze. Time series analysis mainly includes classification, forecasting/predic-
tion, anomaly detection and clustering [18]. None the less, most of the approaches
for time series classification and forecasting/prediction make use of labelled data, and
are thus mostly supervised machine learning approaches.
In this case by means of time series this research specifically aims at leveraging
their ability to learn features from raw data automatically. Performance of approaches
like traditional feature-based method may lack of accuracy and quality due to that it
depends on the quality of the hand-crafted features. However it is diﬀicult to design
good features to capture intrinsic properties embedded in time series data, which is
something that deep learning can provide one with. Deep learning in this case, learns
a hierarchical representation of raw data naturally [37].
In order to obtain features from these time series, in this research use has been
made of Long Short-Term Machine together with Autoencoders. An LSTM Autoen-
coder is an implementation of an autoencoder for sequence data using an Encoder-
Decoder LSTM architecture. Once fit, the encoder part of the model can be used to
encode or compress sequence data that in turn may be used in data visualizations or
as a feature vector input to a supervised learning model.
There exists different types of Autoencoders, from the simple Autoencoer to De-
noising Autoencoders where a corrupted copy of the input is created by intruducing
some noise which helps to avoid autoencoders to copy the input to the output without
learning features about the data, or Sparse Autoencoders, which have hidden nodes
greater than input nodes. More types of autoencoders are the Convolutional autoen-
coder or the Variational Autoencoder.
For this approach a Deep Autoencoder will be used to extract features. Deep au-
toencoders consist on two identical deep believe networks, one to encode the data and
another to decode it. The encoder part compresses the data by its internal structure
of shrinking number of free parameters of network layers. The decoder part decodes
the encoded data by its structure of expanding number of free parameters of layers.
The final layer of the decoder part has an output that has the same dimensionality
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Background
as the input dimensionality. When training Autoencoders, the target values are the
input values [31].
All in all, the design of the autoencoder model purposefully restricts the architec-
ture to a bottleneck at the midpoint of the model, from which the reconstruction of
the input data is performed. This can be seen even clearer in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Deep Autoencoder [35].
For a given dataset of sequences, an encoder-decoder LSTM is configured to read
the input sequence, encode it, decode it, and recreate it. The performance of the
model is evaluated based on the model’s ability to recreate the input sequence. Once
the model achieves a desired level of performance recreating the sequence, the decoder
part of the model may be removed, leaving just the encoder model. This model can
then be used to encode input sequences to a fixed-length vector.
Keras provides a way to create an LSTM Autoencoders.
This be achieved by
implementing an Encoder-Decoder LSTM architecture and configuring the model to
recreate the input sequence.
In this architecture, an encoder LSTM model reads the input sequence step-by-
step. After reading in the entire input sequence, the hidden state or output of this
model represents an internal learned representation of the entire input sequence as a
fixed-length vector. This vector is then provided as an input to the decoder model
that interprets it as each step in the output sequence is generated.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Tools and libraries
23
After configuring all the layers in the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model,
it is crucial to select an appropriate optimizer. The optimizer plays a significant role
in determining how the model learns and updates its weights during the training pro-
cess. Different options exists and can be found more appropriate depending on the
specific problem, the characteristics of the dataset, and the desired training behavior.
Some of the most well-known optimizers are the Stochastic Grandient Descent or
SDG, the Nesterov accelerated gradient or Adam. Different optimizers have different
update rules and characteristics, which can impact the convergence speed and gener-
alization performance of the LSTM model. Within the use of optimizers another key
concept comes into play, the gradients.
Gradients contain information utilized in the RNN parameter update as they in-
dicate the direction and magnitude of the updates that need to be applied to the
parameters to minimize the loss. Whenever this gradient value becomes extremely
small or excessively large a phenomenon called gradient vanishing or gradient explod-
ing, respectively, happens. This phenomenon prevents the model to keep up with a
meaningful learning process and it’s called gradient explosion. In order to counteract
this event two approaches include re-scaling the gradients given a chosen vector norm
and clipping gradient values that exceed a preferred range. Together, these methods
are referred to as “gradient clipping.”
3.2
Tools and libraries
In this chapter an overview of some of the most important tools and libraries that
have led to the different implementations will be given. The effective application of
these tools and libraries has played a crucial role in the successful execution of the
projects and achieving the desired outcomes. They will be defined and their main
applications in this project will be pointed out.
3.2.1
MongoDB
MongoDB is source-available cross-platform document-oriented database program.
Classified as a NoSQL database program, MongoDB uses JSON-like documents with
optional schemas. It has cultivated a reputation as a versatile, flexible database and
is currently used today as the backend data store of many high-profle business and
organizations.
MongoDB’s four main advantages resides in:
• Flexibility: MongoDB uses documents that can contain sub-documents in com-
plex hierarchies making it expressive and flexible. MongoDB can map objects
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Background
from any programming language, ensuring easy implementation and mainte-
nance.
• Flexible Query Model: The user can selectively index some parts of each docu-
ment or a query based on regular expressions, ranges, or attribute values, and
have as many properties per object as needed by the application layer.
• Native Aggregation: Native aggregation allows users to extract and transform
data from the database. The data can either be loaded into a new format or
exported to other data sources.
• Schema-less model: Applications get the power and responsibility to interpret
different properties found in a collection’s documents.
In this project, MongoDB has been selected as the primary data repository due
to its ability to eﬀiciently store and manage large volumes of data. MongoDB offers
powerful features that facilitate data visualization and enable seamless retrieval of
specific features as needed. With MongoDB, it becomes possible to group and ag-
gregate data, making it easier to analyze and extract valuable insights. Additionally,
MongoDB supports data flattening, allowing for eﬀicient and streamlined data pro-
cessing. Overall, the choice of MongoDB as the data repository enhances the project’s
data handling capabilities, enabling effective data visualization, retrieval, grouping,
and flattening operations.
3.2.2
StellarGraph
StellarGraph and Networkx are both python libraries. The StellarGraph library offers
state-of-the-art algorithms for graph machine learning, making it easy to discover pat-
terns and answer questions about graph-structured data. It can solve many machine
learning tasks:
• Representation learning for nodes and edges, to be used for visualisation and
various downstream machine learning tasks;
• Classification and attribute inference of nodes or edges;
• Classification of whole graphs;
• Link prediction;
• Interpretation of node classification.
StellarGraph is built on TensorFlow 2 and its Keras high-level API, as well as
Pandas and NumPy.
It is thus user-friendly, modular and extensible.
It interop-
erates smoothly with code that builds on these, such as the standard Keras layers
and scikit-learn, so it is easy to augment the core graph machine learning algorithms
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Tools and libraries
25
provided by StellarGraph.
In this project, StellarGraph has played a crucial role in extracting graph data
from the Neo4j database. Leveraging one of StellarGraph’s APIs, we have seamlessly
loaded graph information from Neo4j, ensuring fast and eﬀicient retrieval. By harness-
ing the capabilities of this powerful library, this research has managed to successfully
create graph objects within Python allowing to perform a wide range of operations
on the graphs. StellarGraph’s seamless integration with Neo4j and its comprehensive
set of functionalities have empowered us to eﬀiciently work with graph data in our
project, enabling insightful analysis and driving meaningful results.
3.2.3
Graph2Vec
Graph2Vec is a python library implemented following the principles stated in [22].
This implementation of the graph2vec library is defined as a neural embedding frame-
work insipired by the success of proposed neural document embeddings models in the
field of Natural Language Processing, which are in this implementation extended to
learn graph embeddings.
These NLP models exploit the way words/word sequences compose document to
learn their embeddings. Analogically, graph2vec suggests viewing entire graph as a
document and the rooted subgraphs around every node in the graph as words that
compose the document and extend document embedding neural networks to learn
representations of entire graphs.
3.2.4
Keras
Keras is the high-level API of the TensorFlow platform: an approachable, highly-
productive interface for solving machine learning problems, with a focus on modern
deep learning. It provides essential abstractions and building blocks for developing
and shipping machine learning solutions with high iteration velocity.
Keras empowers engineers and researchers to take full advantage of the scalability
and cross-platform capabilities of the TensorFlow platform: you can run Keras on
TPU or on large clusters of GPUs, and you can export your Keras models to run in
the browser or on a mobile device.
The core data structures of Keras are layers and models. The simplest type of
model is the Sequential model, a linear stack of layers. For more complex architec-
tures, the Keras functional API allows to build arbitrary graphs of layers, or write
models entirely from scratch via subclasssing.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Background
In this research, Keras has been of critical importance when it comes to Deep
Learning approaches. This library has provided the research with an implementation
for Long Short-Term Machines with Autoencoders which has allowed to effectively
capture and model temporal dependencies within the data, enabling to uncover valu-
able patterns and representations.
3.2.5
Scikit-learn
Scikit-learn is a Python module integrating a wide range of state-of-the-art ma-
chine learning algorithms for medium-scale supervised and unsupervised problems.
This package focuses on bringing machine learning to non-specialists using a general-
purpose high-level language. Emphasis is put on ease of use, performance, documen-
tation, and API consistency. It has minimal dependencies and is distributed under
the simplified BSD license, encouraging its use in both academic and commercial set-
tings [24].
As an open source machine learning library, it supports supervised and unsuper-
vised learning. It also provides various tools for model fitting, data preprocessing,
model selection, model evaluation, and many other utilities. In this research, this
library has been widely for clustering algorithms, clustering metrics and also, an end
for data standardization.
In addition to the mentioned libraries, several other auxiliary libraries such as
Pandas [21], Numpy [8], or Yellowbrick [1], have been employed in this project, con-
tributing significant value to the various implementations and results study.
3.3
Evaluation metrics
This chapter contains information regarding the different metrics that become of
help when assessing some of the parameters used prior to the data fitting, and as an
evaluation method after the data fitting. These metrics are critical for evaluating the
effectiveness and performance of the models and algorithms employed in this research.
3.3.1
Elbow Method
The elbow method is a technique used to determine the optimal number of clusters in
a clustering algorithm, such as K-Means. It helps to find the point where the addition
of more clusters no longer significantly improves the model’s performance, thus, it
helps with defining values that provides the most out of the fittings.
This method involves plotting the number of clusters on the x-axis and the corre-
sponding evaluation metric (such as within-cluster sum of squares) on the y-axis. As
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Evaluation metrics
27
the number of clusters increases, the evaluation metric typically decreases, indicating
better clustering. However, beyond a certain point, the rate of improvement dimin-
ishes, resulting in a smoother curve that resembles an elbow.
In this research, the evaluation metric used for the Elbow Method will be the Dis-
tortion. The Distortion is calculated as the average of the squared distances from the
cluster centers of the respective clusters to each data point. Typically, the Euclidean
distance metric is used.
This metric is chosen to be used with the elbow method as it directly measures the
compactness or tightness of the clusters by summing the squared distances between
data points and their cluster centroids, therefore is a simple and easy to interpret
metric.
Some other metrics can be used, nevertheless, these are often more com-
putationally challenging as they involve different aspects of cluster separation and
cohesion and are hence more complicated and less intuitive to interpret.
3.3.2
Clustering Validation Metrics
Clustering targets in finding meaningful subgroups in a given dataset. Here, the defini-
tion of “meaningful” is problem-dependent. For a given clustering algorithm, multiple
results can be obtained from the same dataset by varying parameters. Ultimately,
the validity of any subgrouping depends on whether computationally-discovered sub-
groups actually uncover/expose a domain-specified variation that is meaningful and
significant in the domain application [10].
To guide a successful cluster analysis, one uses a quality measure to quantitatively
evaluate how well the resulting set of partitions fits the input data. Cluster validity
refers to the formal procedures used to evaluate clustering results in a quantitative
and objective fashion after the data fitting is made [11].
Since clustering has come out as a fundamental tool for data exploration, many
approaches and studies have focused on how to determine the quality of a clustering
output in order to choose parameters and compare algorithms. Contrary to Super-
vised Machine Learning, in Unsupervised Machine Learning one cannot count with
a ”ground-truth” of labelled data that can be used for carrying out cross-validation.
The problem of clustering quality have been studied for years and has led to the key
idea of using intra-cluster cohesion and inter-cluster dispersion for determining how
well-separated the clusters are. These two concepts form the basis for several widely
used unsupervised machine learning metrics [17].
Another way of understanding the intra and inter-cluster notions comes with the
concepts of ”compactness” and ”separateness”. In clustering, compactness is defined
as a measure on how close members of each cluster are to each other, i.e. cluster
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Background
similarity or homogeneity, while separateness measures how separated are the clus-
ters from each other. The assumptions of a good clustering comes within yielding
compact and well-separated clusters.
However, a key thing to consider is the level of separateness and compactness de-
sired may vary by domain application since clustering is data-driven. Lying in purely
clustering validations indices can also derive in a potential flaw, as these values are
simply numerical values and lack of understanding of the underlying structure of the
data.
Some of the most commonly used clustering validating indices are:
• Silhouette Score (SI) [27]: measures both, the compactness (using the distance
between all the points in the same cluster) and separation of the clusters (based
on the nearest neighbor distance). This metric results in the range of 1 to 1. A
larger score indicates a better overall quality of the clustering.
• Calinski-Harabasz index (CH) [13]:
Measures between-cluster isolation and
within-cluster coherence. It is based on average between- and within-cluster
sum of squares by computing its between-cluster isolation and within-cluster
coherence. Maximum values determine the optimal clustering configuration.
• Dunn’s index [20]: defines inter-cluster separation as the minimum pairwise
distance between objects in different clusters and intra-cluster compactness as
the maximum value of the largest distance between a pair of objects in the same
cluster. A maximum value is optimal.
• Xie-Beni index (XB) [20]: defines the inter-cluster separation as the minimum
square distance between cluster centers and the intra-cluster compactness as
the mean square distance between each data object and its cluster center. A
minimum value is an optimal result.
• Davies-Bouldin index (DB) [2]: measures the average value of the similarity
between each cluster and its most similar cluster.
The index computes the
dispersion of a cluster and a dissimilarity measure between pairs of clusters. A
lower DB index implies a better cluster configuration
A summary of the different clustering validation can be seen even in Table 3.1 for
a smoother visualization of what exactly they measure. From this table, it can be
clearly seen how four out of the five clustering validation indices measure the same
thing. Nevertheless they differ in the way they compute the scores. Differences can
be seen even clearer in Table 3.2
Once having the results for the both calculations, all the metrics are computed
dividing the intra-cluster compactness by the inter-cluster separation, but the Silhou-
ette Score, in which the the measure of intra-cluster cohesion is substracred from
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Evaluation metrics
29
Clustering validation index
Measure
Silhouette Score (SI)
Within-cluster compactness and between-cluster separation
Calinski-Harabasz index (CH)
Within-cluster coherence and between-cluster isolation
Dunn’s index
Intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster separation
Xie-Beni index (XB)
Intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster separation
Davies-Bouldin index (DB)
Similarity between each cluster and its most similar cluster
Table 3.1: Clustering validation indices.
CVI
Intra-cluster compactness calculation
Inter-cluster separation calculation
SI
Distance between all points in the same cluster
Nearest Neighbor distance
CH
Sum of squared distances between the cluster centroids
and the overall centroid of all data points
Sum of squared distances between each data
point and its respective cluster centroid
DI
Maximum value of the largest distance
between a pair of objects in the same cluster
Minimum pairwise distance between
objects in different clusters
XB
Mean square distance between each
data object and its cluster center
Minimum square distance
between clusters centers
Table 3.2: Differences in calculating intra- and inter-cluster metrics.
the measure of inter-cluster separation to later on divide this values by the maxi-
mum number of either inter-cluster separation or intra-cluster cohesion. By taking
the maximum value between inter cluster separation and intra cluster cohesion, the
denominator is ensured not to be zero, avoiding any division errors.
Other external validation indices that require ground-truth values are widely uti-
lized in various approaches and research studies where such values are available. These
indices provide additional insights and quantitative measures to assess the perfor-
mance and validity of unsupervised machine learning algorithms. Furthermore, they
help with providing an absolute measure of clustering quality or indicate how well
the clusters align with the true underlying structure. Such indices are the Adjusted
Rand Index (ARI) and the Jaccard Index. Due to that in this particular research
these ground-truth values are not provided, no further insight will be given regarding
these indices.
3.3.3
Silhouette Visualizer
The Silhouette Visualizer displays the silhouette coeﬀicient for each sample on a per-
cluster basis, visually evaluating the density and separation between clusters. The
score is calculated by averaging the silhouette coeﬀicient for each sample, computed
as the difference between the average intra-cluster distance and the mean nearest-
cluster distance for each sample, normalized by the maximum value. This produces
a score between -1 and +1, where scores near +1 indicate high separation and scores
near -1 indicate that the samples may have been assigned to the wrong cluster.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Background
In Silhouette Visualizer plots, clusters with higher scores have wider silhouettes,
but clusters that are less cohesive will fall short of the average score across all clusters,
which is plotted as a vertical dotted red line.
3.4
Chaper Synthesis
In this chapter background information regarding the different apporaches that will
be subsequently implemented have been provided. From graph theory, with graph
edit distance as a way of computing graphs similarity by means of nodes and edges
addition and removal to unsupervised graph embedding models based on NLP theory
and methods. Moreover, information regarding how deep learning approaches such
as how LSTM machines can be used in order to extract feature vectors with the help
of autoencoders has also been covered.
Tools and libraries that will make possible to carry out these implementations
have also been described. Lastly, metrics that will help with assessing the cluster-
ing performance have also been highlighted as well as where do their scores come from.
All the knowledge gained from this study sets the stage for the practical imple-
mentation of the theoretical concepts, which will be described in detail in the next
chapter.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Datasets
For the present work, two different datasets have been used for two different compa-
nies. For the first of the companies, from now on company A, the dataset contains
information regarding the company internal network where some VLANs have been
filtered out in order to avoid noises and obtain a more reliable and stable dataset
for the experiments. For the second company, the dataset contains more real-world
scenario data, this dataset will be called dataset B. In this section, information re-
garding these datasets will be provided.
These datasets contain alerts raised by hosts in a company’s internal network,
which are provided through an Intrusion Detection System. These alerts are gath-
ered by sensors which trigger a security notification whenever a non usual behavior
is noted. All this is done with the help of machine learning and signatures that are
able to spot suspicious behavior as well as characterizing it. Table 4.1 gather some
information regarding these alert features. Note that filed name are modified in order
to meet the Non-Disclosure Agreement compliance.
It is also worth mentioning how all the provided data is anonymized in order to
ensure that the data used in the research cannot be traced back to participant com-
panies, thereby safeguarding their privacy and confidentiality.
As can be seen, the most interesting data for our research is given by the field
”event inspection”. In this field, information such as the source and destination ip
addresses which raised the alert are stored, as well as some other valuable informa-
tion such as how harmful is the alert, the confidence ratio that the alert raised is a
true positive or the type of algorithm which caught the alert. All this apart from
identifiers for each of the hosts, networks and local nets.
In order to get a better insight and understanding regarding the different datasets,
some information will be provided for each of them.
4.1
Dataset A
The first of the datasets contains information regarding the internal network of a
company through a time period of three months, where some of the VLANs inside
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Datasets
Property
Description
alert registration time
Time the alert is registered into the system.
alert id
Identifier for object in the system.
sensor id
Sensor capturing the alert.
impact degree
Score of how harmful the action that triggered the alert is.
Can take three different values: low, medium, high.
event inspection
source ip
Source IP of the connection generating a alert
destination ip
Destination IP of the connection generating a alert
ml score
For the ML algorithm involved, its score. When event type is ”Notice”,
score equals to 0.5
event type
Can take two different values: ”Notice” or ”ML”
event category
Information regarding the alert. Can take up to 52 values
is private source
True if source IP is private, false otherwise
is private destination
True if destination IP is private, false otherwise
source host information
id
IP address identifier
is active
True if host is active in the moment the alert goes off,
false otherwise
destination host information
id
IP address identifier
is active
True if host is active in the moment the alert goes off,
false otherwise
local network
Local network of the destination host
network
id
Identifier for the network in which the alert goes off
network name
Name for the network
Table 4.1: Dataset alerts properties.
the company network have been filtered out in order to obtain more concrete and re-
liable information. The dataset runs from the first of February 2023 to the thirtieth
of April 2023.
Table 4.2 shows retrieved information regarding number of alerts, the total number
of IP addresses, and the private IP addresses contained in this dataset.
Total number of alerts
≃5K
Total number of IP addresses
863
Number of private IP addresses
146
Table 4.2: Dataset A information.
It is worth mentioning how in this research, all efforts will be driven towards the
private IP addresses, which are the ones providing with information withing the com-
panies internal network traﬀic and the most interesting one when it comes to their
behaviour and clustering it.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Dataset B
33
In order to gain a better insight and delve into the data contained in this dataset,
some statistical measurements have been derived from the number of alerts for each
host in the dataset. This information can be seen in Table 4.3. Note that only private
addresses have been considered for this statistics.
Number Of alerts Mean
60.38
Number Of alerts Median
7
Number Of alerts Mode
2
Number Of alerts Standard Deviation
225.52
Number Of alerts Harmonic Mean
4.47
Table 4.3: A Dataset Number Of alerts Statistics.
Through this table, it can be observed how the number of alerts that repeats the
most among all the alerts raised by each of the private IP addresses is 2. Apart from
this, it can be seen how half of the IP addresses fall under seven alerts, which can be
a lower value than desired. Nevertheless, and even with this, the mean of the alerts
is quite high compared to seven, which shows how some IP addresses raise a great
amount of alerts.
On another note, values such as the standard deviation provides information re-
garding the variability or dispersion of the alert counts across the hosts. In this case,
it shows how the alert counts among the hosts tend to deviate, in average, by approx-
imately 225 alerts from the mean. This being a high value, it suggests a wider spread
of alert counts among the hosts.
4.2
Dataset B
The last of the dataset belongs to a second company displaying a more real-world and
unmodified scenario of the traﬀic flow within an arbitrary company private network
during a time stamp of three months as well. Due to this, values for both, number of
hosts and number of alerts increases.
Due to privacy constraints, in this case only information regarding the number of
alerts and hosts is shown in Table 4.4.
Total number of alerts
≃27K
Total number of IP addresses
1977
Number of private IP addresses
346
Table 4.4: Dataset B Information.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Datasets
4.3
Chapter Synthesis
This section has covered the different dataset in which the different implementations
will be carried on. For this research use will be made of three different datasets of two
different internal network companies. These dataset contains information regarding
security alerts that have been raised among the companies hosts. All the data is
encrypted so to comply with the companies’ privacy regulations.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In this chapter, the different approaches that have been explored to address the com-
pletion of the project are explained when it comes to their implementation. These
approaches encompass different techniques for data scheme creation and different li-
braries in order to extract features from this data.
A pipeline has been followed for the different final clustering approaches which
can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Pipeline for the whole clustering process.
The first stages of this pipeline consists of retrieving the data and processing
it, this is cleaning and filtering out public security alerts raised from public traﬀic
navigation. Once having the data, two different paths are open towards creating the
different time structures that will be used in this research. Once having created them,
features are extracted in an unsupervised manner using different number of epochs.
After this, an study on the optimum number of epochs as well as the optimum num-
ber of clusters is carried out to finally apply clustering. Moreover, graphs are also
used in their original form to perform graph-based clustering.
This chapter focuses on the feature extraction steps as well on the different clus-
tering algorithm implementations. Every step on the process will be explained and
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Implementation
a reasoning will be given when it comes to implementation choices.
Additionally,
some encountered challenges and limitations will be addressed, highlighting these
challenges with their corresponding solutions. Steps such as the study on the number
of epochs or clusters will be discussed on following chapters.
As a global insight for all of the approaches, data retrieval has been made always
in the same manner, which is by using pymongo. All data is initially stored a Mongo
Database. In order to retrieve this data directly from the database to the code, py-
mongo library is used in order to create an instance of a Mongo Client. Through this
instance the database and collection containing the data is accesses, and thus, data
is retrieved.
As only the private hosts are the focus in this research, a first filtering is done
in the dataset so the alerts regarding only public hosts are discarded. Also, all IP
private addresses are retrieved and stored so they can be afterwards used.
For the rest of the chapter, two feature extraction methods will be first described
to later on focus on three different clustering algorithms which will also be discussed.
5.1
Feature extraction
For extracting features to characterize hosts, two different data structures are used in
order to leverage their intrinsic properties. These two data structures are graphs and
time series. From creating a graph and a time sequence for each of the hosts different
properties will be withdrawn which vectors will be used to perform clustering.
5.1.1
Graphs feature extraction
As this approaches are based on graphs, it comes without saying, that the first step
consists on creating the graphs that will be fed to the different clustering algorithms.
Graphs consist on nodes and edges, in this particular case nodes will represent
hosts whereas edges will represent the alerts. Two hosts will be linked by an edge if
an alert has been risen between them.
When it comes to constructing the graphs, use has been made of the python li-
brary StellarGraphs (subsection 3.2.2). The aim is to create a graph for each of the
IP addresses, which will be then fed to the clustering algorithms. For this, once re-
trieving all the distinct unique IP addresses, for each of them all the alerts in which
the IP address is involved are retrieved, this data will serve as the edges and will be
used to construct the graphs. Apart from the edges, a dataframe containing all the
nodes involved in the edges is also provided for the graph creation.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Feature extraction
37
While running the process for all the IP addresses, graph results are stored in a
dictionary of the form {IPaddress:graph}. Once having all the graphs representation
of the distinct hosts, two different approaches have been runned on them for cluster-
ing purposes.
In order to obtain features out of these graphs, vector embeddings will be created
for each of the graphs. These embeddings are provided by the Graph2Vec python
library (subsection 3.2.3). Graph2Vec extracts features from the graphs in an unsu-
pervised manner. Thus, in this case, the algorithm extracts 127 different features for
each of the clusters.
In order to perform the feature extraction to get graph embeddings, each graphs
needs to be translated into a json file containing all its edges. Thus, for each graph,
all of its edges are retrieved and saved into a json file. After having saved all these
json files in a directory, the following command is called:
1 cmd = "python graph2vec/src/graph2vec.py --input-path jsons/ --output-path ./
results.csv --epochs nOfEpochs"
Listing 5.1: Graph2Vec command to obtain graph embeddings.
The output of this command is a csv file in which each line belongs to a graph
embedding that gathers all the information of each of the graphs.
5.1.2
Time series feature extraction
In this section the process of retrieving and preparing data for time series analysis
using an LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) model will be explained.
5.1.2.1
Data retrieval and time series creation
Data retrieved from the Mongo Database contains both, numerical and categorical
features. For time series processing, all values need to be numerical, so features can be
extracted from them based on this numerical values. For converting categorical val-
ues into numericals, one-hot encoding is used in categoricals, obtaining a new feature
for each of the categories in which 1 will be the value for the corresponding category
of the row, and 0 for the categories that don’t belong to the row. At this stage, the
dataset is transformed into a purely numerical representation while retaining all the
original information.
The features that have been selected in order to characterize the alerts are impact
degree, ml score, event type and event category. It is worth highlighting how the fea-
tures type and category differs from one another. These two features maintain a 1:N
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation
relationship meaning that multiple categories belong to one type of alert, existing a
wide range of categories. This is important because when dealing categories that are
underrepresented it can be diﬀicult to extract features out of them. The type feature
here helps the algorithm to extract features out of it as it can link these kind of less
represented categories to other alerts that are of the same type.
When using data in time series forecasting and prediction, the data needs to be
sequential. For this reason in this particular case, a sequence of data, or time series,
needs to be constructed for each host. Later on, clustering will be made using this
sequence of data that will characterize each host. In order to construct the time series
to feed the LSTM model, time series will be given by the sequence of alert in which
a host is involved. This also mean that a host will appear at least in two different
sequences of alerts, one in which the host is a source and another in which the host
is a destination.
For this, the previously made list of unique IP addresses is made use for. For each
of the IP addresses, all the alerts in which the IP address is involved in is retrieved
and stored in an array of the form [alert n1, alert n2, alert n3, ...] , being each
alert a row of the dataset containing all the features. These time series and later on
merged in another array in which all the other time series for all the other private IP
addresses are also stored.
This all concludes in a tensor of the form [IP address 1, IP address 2, IP address
3, ...], each of the IP address objects containing a number of alert, which, in turn,
contain a number of features. The final time series shape is [samples, time steps,
features], where samples are the number of private IP addresses, time steps are the
number of alerts for each host, and features are the data store in each of the alert rows.
Once having the data structure set, two more operations are applied to it. The
first of them is scaling the data so to maintaining the stability and eﬀiciency of the
LSTM network during training by preventing issues associated with imbalanced gra-
dients and disparate feature scales. The second operation is, as not all the IPs have
the same number of alert, padding them in order to obtain time series of the same
length which is essential to achieve uniform input dimensions as it facilitates the con-
sistent handling of sequences by providing uniform input dimensions.
All this processing leads to three timeseries, one for each of the datasets we have
made use of in this research stated in chapter 4. The shapes of these time series
following the structure [hosts, alerts, features] is as follows:
• Dataset A: (146, 1903, 34)
• Dataset B: (267, 5619, 40)
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Feature extraction
39
There is a noticeable difference in the number of features between datasets A and
B. This is due to one-hot encoding being used for the categorical values. This means
that there can exists categories of attacks in dataset B that do not exist in datasets
A and thus, less features are extracted from it. Next the different number of features
will be broken down:
• 34 features for:
– 1 for ml score
– 3 for impact degree
– 2 for event type
– 28 for event category
• 40 features for:
– 1 for ml score
– 3 for impact degree
– 2 for event type
– 34 for event category
5.1.2.2
Features extraction
In order to extract properties, the power of Autoencoders together with Long Short-
Term Machines will be made use of, as previously explained in subsection 3.1.2. It
is worth highlighting that what this LSTM machine does is reconstructing an input
time sequence, encoding and decoding the data through its layers.
Figure 5.2 provides an overview of LSTM defined model in dataset A. Summary
models of the rest of the datasets can be found in Appendix A.1. In this summary
it can be observed some information about the process, like the output shape of the
data once going through the layers as well as the number of parameters that are
computed in each of them.
In order to constrcut this LSTM model, the Tensorflow library has been used as
can be seen in the following code snippet:
1 model = Sequential()
2 model.add(Masking(mask_value=-1., input_shape=(lstm_input_padded.shape[1],
lstm_input_padded.shape[2])))
3 model.add(LSTM(100, activation='relu'))
4 model.add(RepeatVector(lstm_input_padded.shape[1]))
5 model.add(LSTM(100, activation='relu', return_sequences=True))
6 model.add(TimeDistributed(Dense(lstm_input_padded.shape[2])))
7
opt = SGD(learning_rate=0.0001, momentum=0.9, clipvalue=0.5)
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
Figure 5.2: Dataset A LSTM Model summary.
8 model.summary()
Listing 5.2: LSTM Model.
Next, the different layers of the model will be explained:
• Masking: the masking layer is in charge of disregarding all the time series that
have been padded in with the purpose of obtaining the same dimensions for
time series. For each time step in the input tensor, if all values in the input
tensor at that time step are equal to mask_value, then the time step will be
masked (skipped) in all downstream layers (as long as they support masking).
In this case, padding was performed with the value -1, due to -1 being the first
of the values that doesn’t make sense in the dataset, and thus, mask_value in
this case is -1. Furthermore, the input shape of the time series is also passed to
this layer, as it is the first layer and the layer that received a first instance of
the data.
• LSTM: the Masking layer output is used as an input for the LSTM layer, which
is in charge of learning the long-term dependencies between time steps in time
series or sequenced data. This layer outputs an encoding for each of the time
series of size 100. This vectors contains characteristics and features of the host
based on its behaviour and alert raised, which will serve us in order to perform
the clustering.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Feature extraction
41
• Repeat Vector: the repeating vector layer is the bridge step for the reconstruc-
tion or decoding of the time series. The repeat vector creates a vector for each of
the time steps or, in this case, alert, in order to reconstruct the whole sequence.
• LSTM: this LSTM layer is in charge of the reconstruction or decoding of the
information.
• Time Distributed and Dense: lastly, the Time Distributed along with the Dense
layers are in charge of creating a Dense layer of size the number of features,
which will be use to compute the product with the matrix from the previous
layer in order to obtain the final output.
Apart from the model, in the code snippet, the optimizer used can also be ob-
served. For the optimizer, different options leverage different aspects as discussed
in subsection 3.1.2. In this research, after experimenting with different optimization
algorithms and different hypertunning settings, the Stochastic Gradient Descend op-
timizer has been proven to yield the best results.
When it comes to its hyperparameter, they have also been set by means of trial
and error. When it comes to deciding their values, different data sets with different
data may yield different results, thus, one has to find the optimal values for their
data set. The learning rate has been chosen to be lower in order to, although having
a slower convergence, generate more accurate results. When having this low learning
rate, although being less likely, NaN values were output as a result for the loss func-
tion, mainly due to gradient explosion, that is why other hyperparameter such as the
momentum or the clipvalue come into play.
The momentum is a parameter in SDG optimizer that helps accelerating the op-
timization process, specially in the presence of sparse or noisy gradients. Together
with the clip value, which is a technique used in Machine Learning in order to prevent
gradient explosion during the training helps us to control the algorithm convergence
speed as well as avoiding exploding gradients. In particular the clip value defines a
threshold, and if the norm of the gradients exceeds this threshold, they are re-scaled
to ensure they stay withing the specific range. In this case, this range runs from -0.5
to 0.5.
Once having defined the model with the right parameters that can lead to the
desired results, the model is compiled and the data is fitted in the following manner:
1 model.compile(optimizer=opt, loss='mae')
2 model.fit(lstm_input_padded , lstm_input_padded , epochs=nOfEpochs, verbose=2)
Listing 5.3: LSTM Model Compilation and Fitting.
In this approach the Mean Absolute Error has been chosen as the loss function
for the LSTM model. This error rate has been chosen due to its robustness to out-
liers and also, because it is usually one of the most used loss functions among the
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
literature. For the data fitting, it is having a further insight into the number of epochs.
Epochs are the times he whole dataset is passed forward and backwards through
the Neural Network during the training. Thus, different number of epochs yield dif-
ferent outputs and therefore, also different encodings of the data. In this research the
model has been run using different values for the number of epochs in order to find
different encodings of the data and perform clustering in each of them.
The fitting time of the algorithm depends on the number of epochs being used for
it. Thus, the fitting time for each of the dataset is stated in Table 5.1.
Dataset A
Dataset B
Number of Epochs
Time (seconds)
Number of Epochs
Time (seconds)
10
142.14
10
960.38
25
594.96
50
4834.81
50
1910.03
100
9681.41
100
3453.71
Table 5.1: Fitting time for the different datasets with different epochs.
Through the table it becomes obvious how for dataset B the feature extraction
process is heavier due to the increment in number of hosts and alerts, and thus it
takes more time. Moreover, an error in the computation of the loss function lead the
prediction for 25 number of epochs to fail. Thus, metrics are not shown for dataset
B with 25 epochs.
As a last step, it is important to define the model output as the encoded features,
as these encodings, containing the new features for each host, is what we are seeking
to find. In order to do so, once having fitted the data and before performing the
prediction, the following is needed:
1 model = Model(inputs = model.input, outputs= model.layers[1].output)
2 pred = model.predict(lstm_input_padded , verbose=2)
Listing 5.4: LSTM Model Prediction.
With the Model function the prediction is made to ouput what’s on the first LSTM
layer, which is the data encondings we are interested in.
Thanks to this approach features of the hosts which contains a behavioural aspect
in term of the alerts they raise and different properties such as severity levels, type
or category have been extracted. Results from this implementation will be shown in
following chapters.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Clustering
43
5.2
Clustering
Both, the first created graphs and the data extracted from the above explained ap-
proaches, will be fed into different clustering algorithms that will be therefore here
presented.
5.2.1
Graph-based K-Means
When creating a K-Means implementation from scratch, there are some notions one
needs to be aware of. The first of them, and as explained in the literature, has to
do with which measures will be used when computing the similarity between the dif-
ferent graphs. This metric is crucial for different tasks during the clustering such as
computing the set meadian graphs for the clustering recalculation or choosing which
cluster to assign an object to.
On a first instance, a self-made graph edit distance was carried out as a trial. The
complications here were given on the different operations and their assigned costs. It
became diﬀicult to establish the different operation costs given that is a very subjec-
tive task and depends a lot on the domain of the problem that is being dealt with.
Furthermore, determining whether substitution or deletion and insertion would be
best in different situation would also vary a lot the different results. Because of all
of this use was made of a python library in which these choices and operation costs
would be fixed.
When it comes to Graph Edit Distance computation libraries, the first research
one was Networkx. Networkx’s graph_edit_distance, computes the minimum cost
edit path transforming a Networkx graph g1 to graph isomorphic to graph g2. Nev-
ertheless, during different experiments, this library graph edit distance computation
proved to take too much time and resources, making it little usable for this specific re-
search where multiple graphs with multiple number of nodes and edges are being used.
At this stage, focus was moved into the python library GMatchy4Py. This library,
after several trials showed an improvement towards the previous one when it came
to performance. This library outputs good results without taking too much time and
resources to compute independently of the complexity of the graphs. This is due to
the way the algorithm is in this library implemented in, which transposes the graph
edit distance to an Assignment Problem.
Another important notion when creating a K-Means algorithm from scratch is
defining the set median graph. This function takes as input a set of graphs, and out-
puts the median one, in other words, the most similar graph to all of the other ones
in the set. For this end, the graph edit distance is used to compute similarity between
graphs. In order to find the set median graph, first it is needed to compute the pair-
wise distance between all of the graphs. Once having computed pairwise distances for
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation
each of the graphs, values are sum in order to get the minimum of the values, which
is the graph that is the most similar one to all of the others. The implementation of
this function can be seen in the following code snippet.
1 def set_median_graph(graphs):
2
3
distances = []
4
for i in range(len(graphs)):
5
distances_i = []
6
for j in range(len(graphs)):
7
distances_i.append(
8
ged_gmatch4py(graphs[i], graphs[j])
9
)
10
distances.append(distances_i)
11
12
sum_distances = np.sum(distances, axis=1)
13
median_index = np.argmin(sum_distances)
14
median_graph = graphs[median_index]
15
16
return median_graph
Listing 5.5: Set Median Graph computation.
This set median graph function will become useful when finding the new centroids
over the different iterations.
Lastly, and before defining an implementation for the model itself, a last crucial
step is defining an initialization method for the algorithm. Different initialization
methods exists such as the ramdon initialization or the K-Means ++ initialization.
In this case, the used method will be the random initialization. In this initialization
method, random objects, or in this case, graphs, are chosen as the initial centroids
to which the rest of the graphs will be assigned to in the first iteration according to
similar are to each of them.
Other initialization algorithms have also been tried out, like the K-Means++ ini-
tialization. In this algorithm the aim is assigning the first centroid to the location of
a randomly selected data point, and then choosing the subsequent centroids from the
remaining data points based on a probability proportional to the squared distance
away from a given point’s nearest existing centroid. The effect is an attempt to push
the centroids as far from one another as possible, covering as much of the occupied
data space as they can from initialization. This algorithm was also implemented but
due to time limitations and resources it was also discarded. When working with a big
amount of graphs, it didn’t show a good performance. Moreover when tried out with
a smaller number of graphs, it made clustering extremely sensitive to these initializa-
tions, as clusters were as separated as each other as possible most of these clusters
turned out as isolated clusters with no more IP addresses joining them.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Clustering
45
Once having all this functions, the implementation of the clustering algorithm
can be carried out. As already mentioned, the algorithms follows the same struc-
ture as the traditional K-Means algorithm but with the only difference that instead
of Euclidean distance between points, graph edit distances are computed to decide
which cluster to assign a graph to.
In this created approach, iterations will keep
running until either the maximum number of iterations is reached, in this case 300,
or centroids among two consecutive iterations converge, meaning that the computed
centroids over the two iterations are the same.
A big and important disadvantage of this approach is first, it becomes complicated
to come up with metrics for both, number of clusters and intra-cluster cohesion and
inter-cluster separation. This is because these would also need to be implemented
developing new ways of performing the operations with graphs. Nevertheless, in this
approach it has been decided to use 25 clusters, as an approximation of the value
obtained by other approaches elbow methods. Moreover, after different trials the
algorithm has proven to work quite slow with a big number of graphs and additionally
not yielding optimum results, something that will be further studied and analyzed in
further chapters.
5.2.2
K-Means
The traditional K-Means algorithm is used in this research. In this algorithm each
data point, or in this case host, will be assigned a single cluster. In K-Means ini-
tial centroids are selected from the set of data, and all of the others data points are
assigned to its nearest centroid. After having assign each data point to a cluster,
centroids are recomputed and the assigning process is again started. This loop runs
until either a maximum number of iterations is reached or centroids converge, mean-
ing that they are the same from iteration to iteration. With this algorithm, every
cluster will end up having at least one host in it, namely the data point that serves
as the centroid itself.
In order to implement K-Means, the library Scikit-learn provides an implementa-
tion of the algorithm that will be used in this research. Its implementation can be in
the following code snippet.
1 model = KMeans(n_clusters=nOfClusters)
2 model.fit(data)
Listing 5.6: K-Means Model.
The number of clusters that will be used in order to cluster data is information
typically provided by the elbow method and that can be different for different datasets.
Lastly, the fit function is in charge of computing the K-Means clusters.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation
5.2.3
Fuzzy C-Means
The fuzzy clustering algorithm works as the previous one but introducing the notion
of cluster belonging probabilities. During the calculations, the fuzzy logic gives the
fuzzy values of any particular data point to be lying in either of the clusters. Thus,
fuzzy clustering assigns a membership degree between 0 and 1 for each data point
for each cluster. From this, in order to determine which are the clusters, data points
can be assigned to the cluster in which the probability is the maximum they are in.
In this way, clusters can end up being left empty if its own cluster centroid is more
likely to belong to any other of the clusters because of having a higher probability.
For implementing this algorithm, once more use has been made of the Sciki-learn
library, which provides an implementation of the fuzzy C-Means algorithm in the fuzz
library. The implementation is as follows:
1 cntr, u, u0, d, jm, p, fpc = fuzz.cluster.cmeans(
2
data.T, n_clusters , 2, error=0.005, maxiter=1000, init=None
3 )
Listing 5.7: C-Means Model.
The different variables prior to the model itself are the model outputs, and are
defined as follows:
• cntr: cluster centers or centroids obtained from the fuzzy c-means clustering
algorithm
• u: membership matrix that assigns a membership value to each data point
for each cluster. The shape of u is (n_clusters, n_data_points), where each
element u[i, j] indicates the membership value of the jth data point to the ith
cluster.
• u0: initial membership matrix.
• d: array of Euclidean distances between each data point and each cluster cen-
ter. The shape of d is (n_clusters, n_data_points), where each element d[i, j]
indicates the Euclidean distance between the jth data point and the ith cluster
center.
• jm: objective function history, i.e., the values of the objective function (cluster
objective function) at each iteration of the clustering algorithm.
• p: partition coeﬀicient, which is a measure of the fuzziness of the clustering. It
is a scalar value that ranges between 1 and infinity, with higher values indicating
higher fuzziness.
• fpc: fuzzy partition coeﬀicient, which measures the quality of the clustering
result. It is a scalar value ranging from 0 to 1, with values closer to 1 indicating
better clustering quality.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Chapter Synthesis
47
Through the before mentioned variables one is able to obtain useful information
regarding the clustering. Moreover, next, the parameters to the algorithm itself will
be explained. For the data, it is passed in a transposed way using data.T. This is
used to to convert row vectors to columns vector. This operation is performed to
align the dimensions of the input data and the cluster centroids.
Moreover the error states the stop criteria, stopping early if the norm of (u[p] -
u[p-1]) < error. A maximum number of iterations is also determined. Lastly, a initial
fuzzy c-partitioned matrix can be provided for the init parameter. In this specifically
research this parameter has not been used.
5.3
Chapter Synthesis
In this chapter the implementation of the different approaches studied in the litera-
ture have been carried out. Starting with the feature extraction approaches based in
graphs embedding and time series features extraction form LSTM machines with the
help of autoencoders, all the steps taken when creating these implementations from
the data structures creation to the unsupervised models parameters, these all have
been explained along with the reason behind decisions taken.
Moving towards the host clustering aspect of the project, different clustering algo-
rithms have been used and thus, have been explained. Starting with the graph-based
implemented K-Means algorithm, where notions regarding how to compute different
parts of it such as graph edit distance or set median graphs for graphs centroids have
been explained. Furthermore, K-Means and C-Means algorithms have been used in
this research and thus, they have also been explained and their differences, being the
main one the hard versus the soft clustering assignment, have been discussed.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In this section, results from the different approaches in the different datasets will be
presented. By utilizing some of the metrics that have been previously explained a
quantitative evaluation of them can be made. Furthermore, by analyzing the results
valuable information will be given regarding each approach.
6.1
Graph-based K-Means clustering
After having implemented a graph clustering K-Means algorithm from scratch, the
two different datasets have been fed to the algorithm in order to obtain some results
that will be hereby shown.
Unfortunately, and as stated before, for this approaches it is not possible display
metrics scores, and thus, no elbow method could be run in order to determine the
optimum number of clusters. This is the reason why it was decided to proceed with 25
clusters, which other approaches showed to be an approximate good value for number
of clusters.
Some of the information that can be retrieved from this implementation can be
observed in Table 6.1 and will be subsequently commented.
Dataset A
Dataset B
Number of iterations
4
7
Clustering time (seconds)
558.92
12227.25
Table 6.1: Iterations and Clustering Time for self-implemented K-Means.
From this table we can see how there is a difference between the number of itera-
tions that were run for datasets A and dataset B. This means the number of times the
clustering algorithm have been run before achieving convergence. When it comes to
the clustering time, it can also be seen how much more time is taken until convergence
in dataset B. The increment in both iterations and clustering time in B is explained
due to the number of IP addresses contained in this dataset. While dataset A contain
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Results
rouhgly 150 hosts, dataset contains double these hosts. Moreover, this algorithm has
been run in another machine due to privacy regulations, which is something that may
have affected the performance of the algorithm.
This table shows how this algorithm is not that scalable when applied to bigger
datasets. When trying to get cluster results for data in a more real-life scenario as
six months of security alerts or even a whole year, this approach, to the best of our
knowledge and judging by this research experiments, can take up to several days.
The different number of IP addresses clustered in each of the iterations have been
retrieved and stored. For the sake of this written report, only the last iteration’s
results, will be hereby displayed. Figure 6.1 shows the final results for the clustering
algorithm in all of the datasets. Note that the total number of hosts are displayed
above each of the clusters bars and that the y axis is logarithmic in order to ease the
visualization of the graphs.
(a) Graph-based
K-Means
results
in
dataset A
(b) Graph-based
K-Means
results
in
dataset B
Figure 6.1: Graph-based K-Means results for each dataset.
These results can, at a first glance seem odd, as almost all of the hosts there is a
big difference when it comes to the different clusters. Moreover, when comparing the
different centroids obtained in each of the iterations, they are quite constant. While
this could seem as that these hosts are outliers, it is a pattern that happens every
time the algorithm is run. This last fact exposes how sensitive this algorithm is to
its initialization, as it is not that likely that out of approximately 350 hosts for the
second dataset, the random initilization has exactly chosen the outliers.
The achievement of these bizarre outcomes can be due to different factors. All
this will be further explained and analyzed in chapter 7.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
51
6.2
Extracted Features Clustering
In this section, extracted features from graphs and time series clustering outputs will
be presented for the three of the datasets. Prior to this, study on K-Means ramdon
state is carried on the different datasets in order to determine how resistant they are
towards different clustering initializations.
6.2.1
Random Initialization Study
In K-Means clustering, the hyperparameter random_state determines the random
number generation for centroid initialization.
K-means clustering results are ex-
tremely sensitive to the initial centroid, this is, that different initial centroids can
yield very different clustering results. Metric results can provide good insights into
the sensitivity of the algorithm to difference initializations.
If metrics consistently have similar values across different values for the random
state, this suggests the algorithm is stable and not really biased by the random ini-
tialization. On the contrary, if metrics fluctuate widely over the different values, this
means the algorithm in extremely sensitive to its initialization and thus, it implies
that the choice of initial centroids can have a substantial impact on the resulting
clusters. A trivial encoding and number of clusters have been selected to run this
first exploration in which random states fluctuate in a range from 1 to 50 and metrics
results have been gathered.
The different embedding approaches yield different results when it comes to sen-
sitivity towards clustering initializations. Figure 6.2 shows results for the graph em-
bedding approach, while Figure 6.3 shows them for the time series features extraction.
Note the y scale in these representations is logarithmic due to the wide range of dif-
ferent values to help ease the interpretation and visualization of the data. Moreover
it is also worth mentioning that even data being represented as a connected line over
the different values, it does not imply the continuity or the interpolation of them.
Nevertheless lines are used to help recognise patters in an easier manner.
Each figure in the set of three figures displays the five metrics used for assessing
the data fitting and clustering performance for each of the datasets. The first and
most noticeable difference among the two set of figures is how the graph embedding
vector produces a much more stable output when it comes to random initialization of
the data which shows how this approach when extracting features is not that sensitive
to cluster initialization.
Furthermore, Table 6.2 shows the results for the different datasets as the metrics
maximum and minimum values as well as their difference for the graph embeddings
approach. In this specific case, it can be seen how the values for the different datasets
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Results
(a) Random
initializations
results
for
dataset A
(b) Random
initializations
results
for
dataset B
Figure 6.2: Results for random initializations in graphs embeddings.
(a) Random
initializations
results
for
dataset A
(b) Random
initializations
results
for
dataset B
Figure 6.3: Results for random initializations in time series feature extraction.
are constant through all the different random initializations values.
Dataset A
Dataset B
Metric
Min
Max
Var
Min
Max
Var
SI
0.63
0.65
0.02
0.56
0.63
0.07
CH
351.51
402.29
50.78
17.40
18.58
1.19
DI
0.55
0.74
0.19
0.09
0.10
0.19
XB
0.10
0.11
0.01
4.18
4.36
0.18
DB
0.22
0.24
0.02
1.19
1.40
0.21
Table 6.2: Graph embedding features minimum, maximum and variation of the met-
rics in the different datasets.
Adversely, this is not the case for the time series extracted features vectors, where
it can be clearly seen how these values greatly fluctuate among the axis compared to
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
53
the previous ones.
Moreover, it can also be noted how the Xie-Beni is the metric that fluctuate the
most among the different initialization values. When it comes to the Dunn’s Index,
unless from the information in the graph it can seem there is also big fluctuations of
the values when it comes to this metric, it is worth baring in mind how the y axis of
the plots are logarithmic and these fluctuation aren’t as wide as the previous metric.
The insights mentioned above are further illustrated and reinforced in Table 6.3.
Dataset A
Dataset B
Metric
Min
Max
Var
Min
Max
Var
SI
0.29
0.33
0.03
0.26
0.37
0.11
CH
33.55
36.00
2.45
162.85
174.80
11.95
DI
0.05
0.24
0.19
0.01
0.10
0.09
XB
1.65
29.65
28.00
4.24
451.88
447.63
DB
0.79
0.97
0.18
0.60
0.86
0.26
Table 6.3: Time series features minimum, maximum and variation of the metrics in
the different datasets.
These big fluctuations in the metrics can mean two different things. In one case
it can just mean that they are not good metrics and thus, it should be disregarded,
or that it captures information that no other metrics captures, in which case, makes
this metric extremely important as it provides really valuable information that all
the other metrics do not.
In order to find a cause, the Xie-Beni metric has been studied. As stated before,
the way the score is computed in this metric is using square distances from data
object to its cluster centers and between cluster. After some research has been made
it has been found this index to be widely used in literature in order to find the num-
ber of clusters and m in the fuzzy clustering algorithms. Moreover it has also been
found that it poorly performs in these algorithms when aiming at finding the optimal
number of clusters for big amounts of clusters as well as for when subclusters close to
each other are considered as a big cluster. Because all of these reason, in this research
this index will be disregarded or taken less into consideration compared to the other
ones.
After this study, it has been proved how, while the graphs embeddings are more
resistant to different initializatios than the obtained vectors from the time series
features extraction. Due to this results, it can be concluded how, when it comes to
clustering using the time series approach in this kind of datasets, clustering should
be run more than once, checking the different metrics and selecting the best of the
clustering outputs.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Results
6.2.2
Dataset A
Next, the whole pipeline of how the optimal clustering results are gathered will be
presented for the first of the datasets.
This pipeline involves stages such as data
encodings selection, number of cluster selections and results interpretation and will
be presented for both approaches, namely the graph based one and the time series
based one.
When it comes to the first stage of this pipeline, the data encoding selection, this
comes as different epochs have been used when extracting the data in both of the
approaches. Epochs here refer to the number of times the data is propagated forward
and backwards in the training process. Increasing the number of epochs typically
results in better result, and although it can be thought to lead to overfitting, in this
case which merely structure relational information present in graphs is being captured
and represented as vectors, the notion of overfitting does not apply. Different number
of epochs turns in different encodings for the data. Clustering with different number
of clustering have been run to this data, leading to different results. All this data has
been collected through these experiments will be hereby presented and interpreted.
6.2.2.1
Graph features
Figure 6.4 represents the values of the Silhouette Score and and Davies Bouldin
Index score throughout different number of epochs as well as different trivial number
of clusters.
(a) Silhouette
Values
With
Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(b) Davies-Bouldin Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
Figure 6.4: Silhouette and Davies-Bouldin Values With Different Epochs and Num-
ber of Clusters.
For the three lines stating the number of clusters, it can be seen how they more or
less follow the same fashion, increasing and decreasing at the same time. It is worth
reminding how for the Silhouette Score optimum outputs are as close to 1 as possible,
while for the Davies-Bouldin index values should be as low as possible. Increasing
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
55
the number of clusters deteriorates the metric performance for the Silhouette Score,
while for the Davies Boulding index, the number of clusters have a smaller impact on
the metric.
When it comes to selecting the data providing the best outputs, peak values are
obtained in different epoch values for the different clusterings for the Silhouette Score,
while the peak values for the Davies Boulding index lie in the range of 150 to 250
epochs.
For this reason, and baring in mind other metrics that can be found in
appendix B.1.1, from now on the following results will be set using 250 epochs for
the training when embedding graphs. Table 6.4 shows the exact values for all of the
metrics when using the encodings provided by using 250 epochs.
NOfClusters
SI
CH
Dunns Index
XB
DB
15.0
0.61
102.53
0.26
0.32
0.18
30.0
0.59
808.22
0.65
0.24
0.28
45.0
0.16
746.86
0.55
0.53
0.80
Table 6.4: Metrics for data encoding using 250 epochs.
These values serve as a guide on choosing the optimal number of clusters. From
the table, one would say that around 15 and 30 clusters would be the optimal number
of clusters, as it can be seen how the values for the metrics get slightly worse in when
using a maximum of 45 hosts. Nonetheless, in order to obtain the exact number of
optimal clusters one can make use of the elbow method. Figure 6.5 shows the opti-
mal number of clusters for this dataset based on the distortion score as well as on the
fitting time. This plot mainly shows the point in which adding clusters would stop
improving the performance of the model.
In fact, this figure shows how the best results are obtained when using 30 clusters,
which is something that also aligns with the previously calculated metrics. Moving
forward using 30 clusters clustering results can be checked using the Silhouetter Vi-
sualizer. This plot will provide an insight on clusters density as well as how well
separated are ones from others. The Silhouetter Visualizer can for the specific data
can be seen in Figure 6.6.
From this figure one can see how there exists two dense clusters containing the
majority of the hosts. These clusters, together with some others surpass the average
silhouette score, which shows that they are cohesive. For some of the other clusters,
that are almost invisible in this case, the number of hosts that fall into them is only
one. This can be seen in a more clear way in Figure 6.7.
Clusters in which only one host has been clustered suggest these host to be re-
garded as outliers or hosts that have different behaviours as the other ones when it
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Results
Figure 6.5: Elbow Method for 250 epochs dataset.
Figure 6.6: Silhouetter Visualizer for 30 clusters.
comes to their security activity.
Now in this kind of problems, where the nature of the data can lead to hosts
having the possibility to belong to more than one cluster or having an uncertain
membership, fuzzy clustering have been run in order to obtain more information re-
garding the different hosts.
Figure 6.8 represents the clustering results from the fuzzy C-Means algorithm. In
this plot blue bars represent the sum of the membership degrees in each of the cluster,
while the green ones represent the hard assignment of hosts in each of the cluster. For
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
57
Figure 6.7: Number of hosts contained in each cluster.
Figure 6.8: Fuzzy C-Means memberships vs. hard assignments.
this hard assignment, hosts have been assigned to the cluster to which they have the
greatest membership.
This plots provides insightful information about all of the hosts, and how fuzzy
they are represented over the different cluster. It can be observed how while all of
the clusters contain a certain amount of total membership, in only 6 of them hosts
have been hard-assigned. Moreover from this graph we can extract how clusters in
which the membership degree values is greater than half of the hard assigned host
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Results
count, like in clusters 0 or 20, hosts assigned to these clusters have a greater degree of
membership than hosts that are clustered in clusters where this threshold is not met.
This means hosts in clusters 0, 9, 20 and 21 are belong with quite a big membership
to these clusters, while hosts in cluster such as 17 or 28 are quite spread among the
different cluster but having its maximum degree to these clusters.
Moreover, after some research has been made within the clusters, it has been
observed how hosts clustered in clusters 0 and 20, and clusters 9 and 21 have similar
scores for degree memberships, thus, these clusters could be merged in one for both
of the pairs. In order to illustrate this fact, ?? in appendix B.1.1 shows the different
hosts in a greyscale plot where darker colors belong to higher membership degrees
and lighter ones to lower degrees.
6.2.2.2
Time series features
Following the same pipeline as followed in the previous approach, first a study on the
most suitable encoding for the dataset is carried out. Figure 6.9 shows the results
for running the clustering algorithm with the different epochs, while the rest of the
metrics can be found in appendix B.1.2.
(a) Silhouette
Values
With
Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(b) Davies-Bouldin Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
Figure 6.9: Silhouette and Davies-Bouldin Values With Different Epochs and Num-
ber of Clusters.
For all the clusterings it can be seen how the best results are obtained when encod-
ing the data using 50 epochs for most of the metrics. Thus, it has been decided to use
this number of epochs when encoding the dataset for this case. Table 6.5 shows the
different scores for all the metrics obtained among the different number of clusters
when using 50 epochs in the data codification.
In this case, values for the different metrics are quite similar for the different num-
ber of clusters, except for the Xie-Beni index. Nevertheless, according to the study
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
59
NOfClusters
SI
CH
Dunns Index
XB
DB
15.0
0.28
33.55
0.11
3.52
1.01
30.0
0.31
34.59
0.05
29.65
0.82
45.0
0.31
38.21
0.09
7.30
0.69
Table 6.5: Metrics for data encoding using 50 epochs.
previously carried out regarding the random state initializations, this metric in this
case can be disregarded. Next, the elbow method will be used in order to obtain the
exact number of clusters yielding the best output, along with the silhouette visualizer
in order to obtain a first impression on the clustering output. These plots can be
observed in Figure 6.10.
(a) Elbow Method for 25 epochs dataset
(b) Silhouetter Visualizer for 24 clusters
Figure 6.10: Elbow method and Silhouette Visualizer.
For this dataset, the elbow method indicates 29 clusters is the optimum number
of clusters, something that aligns with the previous approach. Moreover, in the Sil-
houette Visualizer it can be observed how there is a prominent cluster being more
dense than the rest. Moreover, the majority of the biggest clusters are cohesive as
they overpass the average silhouette score. The density of the different clusters is
also represented in Figure 6.11.
The fuzzy clustering algorithm has also been applied to this dataset. In order to
interpret the results from this clustering, we are helped by Figure 6.12.
Values are more spread among the clusters than in the graph approaches. These
results are better interpreted with the help of Figure B.4. Cluster 19 presents a high
membership score as well as a high number of hosts when assigned to an only cluster,
which suggests that hosts assigned to this cluster greatly contribute to the result of
the membership degree score. Clusters 11, 27 or 28 also suggests hosts clustered in
these clusters highly belong in them. Nevertheless this is not the case for the rest
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Results
Figure 6.11: Number of hosts contained in each cluster.
Figure 6.12: Fuzzy C-Means memberships vs. hard assignments.
of the clusters in which the two measures are combined, where hosts’ membership
degree is quite spread among all the other clusters.
6.2.3
Dataset B
This dataset contains data that is different from the previous one above as it counts
with non-edited information from a real-world scenario of an unknown company.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
61
In this subsection, certain steps in the pipeline will be summarized to conserve
space in the paper and avoid unnecessary repetition. The emphasis will be on pre-
senting and interpreting the results obtained. Please refer to the appendices for any
missing graphs or additional details.
6.2.3.1
Graph features
When it comes to the different data codifications, this dataset shows a pattern for
all of the different values for the different number of clusters. These graph can be
seen in appendix B.2.1, and show the best results when using 250 epochs. Table 6.6
displays the different metrics for different number of clusters using this data encoding.
NOfClusters
SI
CH
Dunns Index
XB
DB
15.0
0.65
21.45
0.16
1.98
1.35
30.0
0.73
21.84
0.17
1.26
1.28
45.0
0.74
31.52
0.17
0.67
1.07
Table 6.6: Metrics for data encoding using 250 epochs.
Figure 6.13: Elbow Method for 250 epochs dataset.
In order to find the optimal number of clusters, use is made of the elbow method
as can be seen in Figure 6.13. Nevertheless, in this specific problem, this method is
not outputting optimal results. Judging by other approaches and knowing the nature
of the problem, the results obtained from this method do not yield the best results,
as to the best of our knowledge, using only 4 cluster wouldn’t output a significant
clustering output.
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Results
This is why, this specific approach will be guided by scores obtained in the differ-
ent metrics rather than in the elbow method. As commented beforehand, the elbow
method and its outputs will be discussed in following chapters.
In order to do so, the algorithm will be fitted using a larger amount of clusters,
instead of only the three that can be seen in Table 6.6. From this table we can observe
how the more number of clusters, the better the scores the metrics yield, which can
serve as a guide towards the best values.
In order to ease the visualization of the data, Figure 6.14 plots the different met-
rics along the different number of clusters (in the x axis). Note the y axis in this figure
being logarithmic, in order to get a clearer visualization of the data that otherwise,
as having a big variety of values becomes diﬀicult to observe.
Figure 6.14: Metrics for different number of clusters.
It can be seen from the graph how values stay quite stable until 46 clusters are
reached, where indices start oscilating. In number of clusters 47 it can actually be
seen a maximum for the Silhouette, the Calinski-Harabasz and the Dunn Index scores,
although there is also some maximums in non-desired metrics such as tha Davies
Boulding index. There is not a clear sign on the number of clusters that should be
used, thus, for this approach 47 clusters will be used. Metrics for this number of
clusters can be seen in Table 6.7.
Figure 6.15 shows the distribution of the different hosts among the clusters in two
different ways. From the Silhouette Visualizer plot it can also be noticed how clusters
yielded are quite cohesive, although many clusters contains only one host.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
63
NOfClusters
SI
CH
Dunns Index
XB
DB
0.74
34.29
0.17
0.60
1.05
Table 6.7: Metrics for 47 clusters.
(a) Silhouetter Visualizer for 45 clusters
(b) Number of hosts contained in each
cluster
Figure 6.15: Silhouette Visualizer and Bar plot for clusters density.
It can be seen how there is a three clusters containing most of the hosts. Next,
it will be checked whether the same happens when applying membership degrees to
the different clusters. Once, again, using C-Means clustering is perform and the re-
sults can be observed in Figure 6.16 and in Figure B.6, the last one contained in the
appendix B.2.1.
Figure 6.16: Fuzzy C-Means memberships vs. hard assignments.
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Results
The first thing that comes obvious with this last figure is how both cluster 7 and
17 contain most of the hosts which membership is very low, given by the difference
between the hosts count and the total membership degree. Moreover, from the gray
scale plot we can see how there is again a pattern on hosts that have a high mem-
bership degree to a different number of clusters. In fact, when it comes to clusters
having the same membership degree, so as clusters 24, 33 and 34, or 43 and 44, or
18, 27, 30, 36 and 40, hosts clustered in these sets of clusters belong with a rather
high and similar membership degree to the other, which means they can actually be
merged in the same cluster and that the number of clusters is not as optimal as it
seems.
6.2.3.2
Time series features
For the different encoding of the data provided by different number of epochs used
when extracting data form time series, the different metric scores are shown in ap-
pendix B.2.2. Due to time limitations, encodings were performed with different values
as in the previous dataset, being only 10, 50 and 100 epochs.
For most of the metrics, optimal values are found when using 50 epochs to encode
our data. Thus, from now on, focus will be made in this data codifications and a fur-
ther study will be carried out, now targeting number of clusters. Validation metrics
for this data encoding and different clusters can be seen in Table 6.8
NOfClusters
SI
CH
Dunns Index
XB
DB
15.0
0.37
147.56
0.09
3.53
1.06
30.0
0.29
169.38
0.03
43.78
0.64
45.0
0.30
187.13
0.11
4.35
0.61
Table 6.8: Metrics for data encoding using 50 epochs.
From this metrics, one can see how almost all values also increase while increasing
the number of clusters. Nevertheless, the elbow method will be again used in order
to determine the exact optimal value for number of clusters in this specific problem.
Figure 6.17 shows how the value in which the addition of more clusters no longer
significantly improves the model’s performance is, in this case 27 clusters. Performing
clustering using 27 clusters yield the results when it comes to metrics that can be
seen in Table 6.9
NOfClusters
SI
CH
Dunns Index
XB
DB
0.29
85.87
0.07
6.54
0.83
Table 6.9: Metrics for 27 clusters.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Extracted Features Clustering
65
Figure 6.17: Elbow Method for 50 epochs dataset.
Although metric such as the Silhouette Score are not as optimum as desired, the
clustering results seem to be good enough, thanks to all of the other metrics. More-
over, with the help of the Silhouetter Visualizer in Figure 6.18 it can be seen how the
imbalance is not as high as it was in previous approaches, and moreover, how this
clusters are more cohesive, as more of them reach the Average Silhouette Score.
Figure 6.18: Silhouetter Visualizer for 27 clusters.
As in the last approaches, the exact number of hosts clustered in each of the clus-
ters can be seen in Figure 6.19.
==PAGE:76==
66
6 Results
Figure 6.19: Number of hosts contained in each cluster.
For this clustering output, it can be seen again how 15 out of the 29 clusters
contain either only one or two hosts, which possibly means this hosts are outliers
and are very different from the rest of hosts. It can be seen how there are 4 big clus-
ters containing most of the hosts, whereas the rest contains roughly four or five hosts.
Next step in the pipeline comes withing discovering how much are the different
hosts spread over all the different clusters. In order to illustrate this, use is made of
Figure 6.20 and Figure B.8, being this last figure in appendix B.2.2.
From these figures one can see how all the membership degrees are distributed
mainly, over three big clusters, being cluster 1, 7 and 15. This can also be seen in the
grey scale plot, where these clusters are the ones having the darkest colors, meaning
the hosts belong to its cluster much more than to any other cluster. Apart from this,
judging from the graph, it can also be observed how cluster 0 has a big correlation
in the number of hard-assigned hosts and the total membership score. All the other
hosts seem to be quite spread among the rest of the cluster, with even having cluster
with only on host as can be seen in clusters 9 or 10, which potentially means the
existence of outliers in these clusters.
6.3
Chapter Synthesis
In this chapter the results for the implementation pipeline have represented for all
of the approaches and all of the datasets. Starting with the graph-based K-Means
implementation results, in which unfortunately not many insights can be given, to
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Chapter Synthesis
67
Figure 6.20: Fuzzy C-Means memberships vs. hard assignments.
later on moving towards the clustering vector implementations.
When it comes to the clustering pipeline for feature vectors with graphs and
timeseries as sources, a first study has been carried out in how these datasets are
influenced by different random initializations of the clustering process. Results have
shown how while timeseries based features yield a more sensitive behaviour towards
initializations, graph-based one stay quite constant thus, yielding really similar clus-
tering results with different initializations.
Once having studied this fact and baring in mind when performing the clustering,
a study has been carried out on different data encodings by use of different number of
epochs when extracting data features. Out of this study internal validation metrics
have served as a way of assessing which data encoding would yield the best results
when it comes to intra-cluster cohesion and inter-cluster separation. Moreover differ-
ent number of clusters have been used when running the clusterings so to as getting
a first glance on what would the optimum number of cluster would be.
Once having decided on which data encoding would provide the best results, the
elbow method has been used in order to assess the optimum number of clusters
prior to the data fitting. After this, clustering has been performed and assess using
both, internal validations metrics and plots helping one to visualize in the K-Means
approach how many hosts have been assigned to each cluster, and in the C-Means
case to envision how the membership of the different hosts affect the different clusters.
These outputs in the different datasets have led this research to come to some
interesting insights that will be subsequently discussed in the next chapter.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this chapter, different aspects of the different results will be discussed and substan-
tial valuable information out of them will be extracted as well as analyzed. Different
sections will be created for different topic in order to help with this paper outline
become more clear.
7.1
Graph Edit Distance
To start with, the results obtained from the graph-based K-Means clustering will be
examined. As previously stated in the report, these results do not output a significant
result and they are greatly biased by the clustering algorithm initialization. In this
case, a random initialization has been used due to the great computation time a K-
Means++ initialization algorithm consumed. The K-Means++ initialization focuses
on obtaining the furthest away data points in order to state them as the cluster cen-
troids when initializating the algorithm. Due to computational resources limitations
in this project, this kind of initialization could not be carried out.
Nonetheless, it is clear that the problem resides in the graph edit distance com-
putation. It becomes diﬀicult to determine which costs should each operation have
as well as the choice of which operation to perform. As said before, this has been
a greatly explored and analyzed field in data science as graphs constitutes a great
structure for storing data. Nevertheless, and although different approaches have been
tried in this research in order to find a suitable graph edit distance that output fair
values in a fair computational time, it hasn’t been enough for out dataset.
Moreover, in this research specific datasets and graphs, two important hazards
are also implied. One of this hazards being having very big graphs with multiple
nodes and edges compared to really simple ones containing only one edge between
two different nodes. This big difference in terms of nodes and edges makes the com-
putation time increase as more editing operations need to be taken to align or match
the corresponding nodes and edges. A second hazard comes within the possibility of
a big amount of alerts been raised among two hosts. This would make graphs to have
a very high frequency when it comes to edges between these two nodes. This high-
frequency edges can introduce noise or ambiguity in the graph comparison process,
as it might be challenging to determine which edges should be matched or aligned
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Discussion
during the graph edit distance calculation.
Finally, and as commented before, after research has been made in this area it
becomes clearer and clearer how work should be done in the graph domain, as most of
the most state-of-the-art research that exists focus on embedding graphs as vectors,
avoiding the need of computing this graph edit distance.
7.2
Graphs and time series feature extraction
When it comes to the features extraction process, two different approaches have been
taken in this research. These two different approaches have advantages and disad-
vantages when it comes to performing them, and in this subsection these will be
addressed.
The first and most important difference between them comes within how the fea-
tures in order to represent the different data structures are extracted. On one hand
there is graphs, in which the information regarding security alerts can be perfectly
stored also creating a more visual representation of it, which helps visualizing the
information in a more clear way. Nevertheless, when it comes to extracting features
from it, only the structure is considered. With this, what one wants to say is that
properties in the edges, i.e. the alert properties are not considered during the graph
embedding. Many approaches and libraries exists for graph handling, nevertheless
almost all of them focus on embedding nodes rather than graphs, and to the best of
our knowledge, no implementation covering the edge features exists.
Nevertheless, some found implementations, like the one used in this research offer
a good unsupervised manner of extracting features from the different connections
that exists among graphs not being very costly in terms of performance. This is what
has lead in this project to checking much more different epochs when running this
unsupervised feature extraction method, something that has not been a possibility
when extracting features used time series.
When it comes to the time series approach using Recurrent Neural Network, a big
withdraw for this project has been a limitation in the computational resources. The
neural networks have been run in a machine in which very large number of epochs or
even the provided datasets takes too much time and consumes too much resources.
This has limited the different data codifications that have been generated for this
approach compared to the previous one.
Moreover another big diﬀiculty this ap-
proach has comes within the hyperparameter tunning for the neural network. Large
datasets as the one this project has dealt with can make the forwards and backwards
propagation of information ”get lost” in the training process, thus producing gradient
explosion in which values get lost and no output is obtained. In order to deal with
it, in this project gradient clipping has been used as explained in the implementa-
==PAGE:81==
7.3 Clustering
71
tion section. By trial and error values have that have been found for the different
parameters have luckily enough worked for all of the datasets. Nevertheless, using a
more dense dataset may lead to the readjusting of these parameters. This last fact
has been considered out of scope for this project and has not been studied.
Nevertheless this second approach and way of extracting features has provided
the research with more meaningful information regarding the security aspects of the
hosts. When extracting features this way, some different aspects of the alerts such as
their sequence in an ordered manner or different properties of the alerts themselves
are considered.
As a conclusion of the feature extraction methods, these two approaches focus on
different aspects of hosts behaviour. While the graph approach highlights the security
alerts that has been risen between a nucleus host and all its other neighbors, so in
like the relationship between hosts, the second approach with the time series focus on
the sequence of alert in which each host is involved in, letting aside with which other
host is this alert raising with. These difference on what features are being extracted
from each approach provides the research with two different clustering outputs, both
focusing on the hosts behaviours but in different aspects.
7.3
Clustering
Next, this section will cover different aspects that have been spotted during the
clustering pipeline and can be observed in the results. Moreover clustering outputs
will be analyzed and the difference among the different approaches will be pointed
out.
7.3.1
Random initialization
Although an in dept-discussion of the outputs of the random initialization have been
carried out in its section, here we take back the results in order to point out how the
addition of hosts makes this kind of clustering algorithm less and less stable. There-
fore, clustering outputs are less stable as we navigate through the different datasets,
as the hosts numbers increase in each of them.
Here, it becomes clear that the addition of data to the datasets affects the con-
vergence behavior by the increased data complexity. High-dimensional data can in-
troduce challenges such as the curse of dimensionality, where the data becomes more
sparse, and the distance between points becomes less meaningful. This can make it
harder for the algorithm to find consistent clusters or patterns, leading to increased
instability in the metrics.
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Discussion
It has been seen how, even in the graph extracted features, in which metrics stay
quite constant, they fluctuate more and more when applied to the different datasets.
Moreover it is something that also happened in the time series approach, even thought
these metrics being quite unstable in all of the cases.
7.3.2
Number of epochs
As stated in previous chapter, the use of unsupervised machine learning for feature
extraction lead to different data encoding provided different number of epochs when
performing the data extraction. These different data encoding yield different results
when clustered and a study has been carried out in each of the dataset and in each
of the approaches in order to perform clustering using the data encodings providing
the best results when compared based on their internal validations scores.
Through these experiments it has been observed how for the three different datasets
similar values for number of epochs have been selected as the data encodings provid-
ing the best clusterings.
For the graphs data encodings it has been found the the best results have been
obtained when using of 200 in datasets A and B. When it comes to the timeseries
embeddings, data codifications using epochs close to 50 have been found to perform
the best when clustering.
Provided these insights one can come to the conclusion of how these are the number
of epochs that work the best when performing data extraction in datasets with this
nature.
7.3.3
Elbow method
Once starting with the clustering process, the elbow method has been selected as a
metric in order to decide how to make the data fitting providing information regard-
ing the number of clusters to use. Although it is a quite extended and used method in
all the literature, it can sometimes be deceiving as it has been noticed in this research.
For the last of our datasets, the elbow method has proven not to output a mean-
ingful for the graphs clustering approach. While knowing the nature of the data and
the problem that a vast amount of hosts with different profiles exists in a network,
in this specific case, dealing with a more real-world data, it is not logical using just
four clusters.
This can be seen as another case in which the addition of data to the dataset has
had a negative influence in the computation of the distortion metrics, which is the
metric in charge of helping with the elbow method. A few possible reason for this
==PAGE:83==
7.3 Clustering
73
under fitting of the distortion metric can come within a lack of well-defined clusters
within the dataset. The elbow method assumes that some kind of pattern exists in
the data which can exhibit a clear separation between the data points. Moreover data
being too complex can also lead to a poor performance. Lastly, and most likely being
the main problem in this specific case, the chosen metric, in this case distortion, does
not fit well to the data distribution.
This, once again, here it becomes clear how metrics can guide to the optimum
performance of the algorithms, but it is important always baring in mind the na-
ture of the problem and how to interpret these scores, critically evaluating the data
and considering the underlying characteristics and complexities that may affect the
clustering process.
7.3.4
K-Means vs. C-Means
Two different algorithms have been used in this research for clustering data points,
in this case vectors containing data features in different groups. While K-Means pro-
vides a hard assignment process in which each point is clustered towards it nearest
centroid, C-Means asings membership degrees to each host to each of the clusters,
this way allowing hosts to have a more spread membership to the different clusters.
This notion is defined as a soft membership.
During the project, it has been seen the difference between K-Means and C-Means
clustering outputs, where for C-Means the total membership degree of the cluster has
been given as well as the count when applying a hard assignment to the cluster each
host has the highest membership to. The utilization of this last algorithm reveals
that a considerable number of hosts in the dataset exhibit uncertain membership, as
their membership values are distributed across multiple clusters.
This is something that aligns with the nature of the problem. Hosts can exhibit
many different behaviours and do not necessarily need to always display the same one.
Nevertheless, for some hosts is have been seen how they predominantly belong to one
cluster, thus, from these ones one can infer how they maintain a rather constant be-
haviour when it comes to their security aspect, and can then be easily characterized
according to the rest of the hosts.
Moreover, something that also comes obvious when studying and comparing the
different gray scale plots is how when it comes to graph approaches, the three of the
datasets display a pattern that is hosts having high memberships, having them to
two different clusters. This is something that may also happen for hosts with smaller
membership degrees, nevertheless is more noticeable in higher membership degree
ones. Having these high and similar membership to two different clusters exhibit
how these hosts could be assigned to both the cluster or even the two cluster being
==PAGE:84==
74
7 Discussion
considered as one, as hosts in these clusters share common behavioral attributes that
are present in both clusters. Happening this situation with graph embeddings and
not with time series, can also suggest how data in graph embedding can have a bigger
degree of similarity.
Lastly, it can be concluded that the use of fuzzy algorithms provides a more
nuanced perspective on the association of hosts with clusters, allowing for greater
flexibility and capturing the complex relationships between hosts and their behavioral
patterns. It can also be concluded how clusters showing a high value for membership
degree as well as a high number of hosts when performing hard assignation are hosts
that belong together and having common security characteristics, nevertheless for
hosts in clusters having a lower membership degree value than number of hosts, it
can be challenging to assign them to an specific behaviour or to group them with
other ones as their membership is quite spread over all of the clusters.
7.3.5
Clustering metrics
All the metrics that have been used in this research in order to assess the fitting of
the data are internal validation indices. For this research a big detriment and limita-
tion has been counting with ground-truth information that can lead to compare the
clustering results with actual knowledge of the dataset.
While some other metrics as the Adjusted Rand Index evaluate the clustering
performance towards an external validation, which can, in fact, be the ground truth
of the clustering, during the project we have not been provided with this information
due to privacy and security regulations. These privacy and security regulations are of
critical importance, as any person involved in this project may be able to identify a
company and become aware of their security vulnerabilities due to the nature of the
data that is being handled in this project. alerts and alert can uncover vulnerable
hosts and this information can be leveraged in order to exploit some of the hosts in
their internal network.
Privacy and data security are of the utmost importance in this sort of project,
and severe precautions have been taken to guarantee the confidentiality of the infor-
mation involved. Again, emphasis is made in all of the data utilized in this study
being handled with the utmost care and adhered to stringent encryption measures
to protect it. Due to the same fact, no information has been provided around the
different hosts characteristics or properties, thus any kind of external validation has
not been possible to perform.
The absence of this ground truth greatly impact this project as it implies the
impossibility to contrast the obtained results. In this case ground truth would have
served as as a benchmark for comparing and assessing the performance of clustering
==PAGE:85==
7.4 Chapter Synthesis
75
algorithms. It would have provided a reference point against which the clustering
results can be measured, allowing for the quantification of the quality and accuracy
of the clustering solution.
Nonetheless, internal validation indices have been used to evaluate the fitness
of the clustering algorithms despite the lack of ground truth.
Internal validation
measures assess the internal cohesiveness and separation of clusters based on the
inherent properties of the data itself, including silhouette score, Calinski-Harabasz
index, Dunn index, Xie-Beni index, and Davies-Bouldin index. These metrics offer
information about the distinctness and separation of the detected clusters as well as
how well the clustering solution performed within the available data.
Despite the fact that the lack of ground truth is a clear limitation, use of internal
validation measures has enabled this project assess and compare various clustering
algorithms based in their internal consistency and separability. Thus, regardless of
the absence of external validation sources, the above procedure guarantees that the
clustering results are optimal according to the data at hand.
7.4
Chapter Synthesis
In this chapter we have discussed the findings and results obtained through the imple-
mentation of our research. The chapter provides an overview of the key discoveries
and insights that have emerged from our analysis and experimentation.
Focus has been first made on the possible factors that have led the graph-based
implementation to fail or provide a less insightful information and encouraging more
research in the graph edit distance area. Next an analysis on the different features
extraction approaches has been made highlighting their similarities and differences in
mainly which information they bring to the table.
Furthermore, a great insight has been provided regarding the whole clustering
pipeline, covering different stages such as the random initialization or the epochs
studies carried out. Additionally, insights on the different clustering algorithms and
clustering metrics have been given in order to end clearly stating once again the
limitations of this project when it comes to external validations metrics.
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This project aims at solving the problem of host clustering based on the hosts security
behaviour within a network. This problem can help assess the security challenges of a
network when it comes to identifying malicious hosts or solving problems by compar-
ing similar hosts behaviours. Moreover, it can also be of help when trying to derive
different host behaviour models that may be of use for creating supervised machine
learning models.
In order to come to a solution, different data structures as well as their intrinsic
features have been extracted and clustering have been performed in them. Unsuper-
vised Machine Learning techniques have been used for both, the data extraction and
the subsequently clustering. Moreover, when it comes to the clustering three differ-
ent approaches have been performed and studied, including a graph-based K-Means
approach on graphs, and the traditional K-Means and fuzzy C-Means algorithms on
the extracted feature vectors.
From all the clustering algorithms, one can conclude that clustering yield better
and more meaningful results when using vectors embeddings for the data structures
rather than when using the structures themselves as was the case with the graph-
based K-Means algorithm. In this specific case, an effort was made on implementing
this kind of algorithms, nevertheless due to computational resource limitations and a
lack of literature addressing the problems that come with it, not very relevant results
were obtained out of it.
In order to assess the different data extracted feature vectors from different num-
ber of epochs as well as for assessing the K-Means random initialization or the cluster-
ing outputs different metrics have been used, being all these metrics internal clustering
validation indices. The big drawback of not being able to compare clustering results
with a ground-truth due to privacy regulations have limited this research to evaluate
the obtained results using these kind of internal metrics, rather than external ones.
Nevertheless, it can be said that the results shown on this report are the optimum
results one can obtain when it comes to intra-cluster cohesion and inter-cluster sepa-
ration.
Lastly, when it comes to the final clustering output it has been observed how in
==PAGE:88==
78
8 Conclusion
this case, and for the nature of this kind of datasets, a fuzzy algorithm can provide
a wider insight on each hosts behaviour, whether if it sticks to a fixed behaviour or
to a behaviour similar to other ones or on the contrary it displays a more diffuse
behaviour and it can be more problematic to characterize.
Overall, in this research a new and different way of performing hosts clustering
approach have been provided. A study has been carried out towards optimizing the
different unsupervised machine learning models results, in both data extraction and
clustering outputs. Finally the implementation has been carried out in two different
datasets yielding different results and providing different insights when comparing
them.
As already mentioned, this work provides the first steps towards this new ap-
proach for characterizing different hosts behaviors. For future work, more research
ought to be made towards the features extraction methods. When it comes to graph
embedding, focus needs to be put on taking into account nodes and edges features.
For autoencoders investigation can be carried out towards using more layers in the
LSTM model in order to assess if clustering output improves. Moreover focus can
also be made on finding the optimum parameters for the model and thus, obtaining
optimum data encodings for the different time series. Lastly, different clustering al-
gorithms can also be studied in order to assess whether they yield better results for
these specific datasets containing security alerts.
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX A
Implementations
A.1
LSTM Feature Extraction Models
Figure A.1: B Dataset LSTM Model summary.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX B
Implementation
Results
B.1
Dataset A
B.1.1
Graph approach
(a) Calinski-Harabasz Values With Differ-
ent Epochs and Number of Clusters
(b) Dunn’s index Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(c) Xie-Beni Values With Different Epochs
and Number of Clusters
Figure B.1: Metric Values With Different Epochs and Number of Clusters.
==PAGE:92==
82
B Implementation Results
(a)
(b)
Figure B.2: Greyscale plot for membership of different hosts in the different clusters,
where darker colors imply a greater membership degree and lighter ones
a lower membership.
==PAGE:93==
B.1 Dataset A
83
B.1.2
Time series approach
(a) Calinski-Harabasz Values With Differ-
ent Epochs and Number of Clusters
(b) Dunn’s index Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(c) Xie-Beni Values With Different Epochs
and Number of Clusters
Figure B.3: Metric Values With Different Epochs and Number of Clusters.
==PAGE:94==
84
B Implementation Results
(a)
(b)
Figure B.4: Greyscale plot for membership of different hosts in the different clusters,
where darker colors imply a greater membership degree and lighter ones
a lower membership.
==PAGE:95==
B.2 Dataset B
85
B.2
Dataset B
B.2.1
Graph approach
(a) Silhouette Score Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(b) Davies Bouldin index Values With Dif-
ferent Epochs and Number of Clusters
(c) Calinski-Harabasz Values With Differ-
ent Epochs and Number of Clusters
(d) Dunn’s index Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(e) Xie-Beni Values With Different Epochs
and Number of Clusters
Figure B.5: Metric Values With Different Epochs and Number of Clusters.
==PAGE:96==
86
B Implementation Results
(a)
(b)
Figure B.6: Greyscale plot for membership of different hosts in the different clusters,
where darker colors imply a greater membership degree and lighter ones
a lower membership.
==PAGE:97==
B.2 Dataset B
87
B.2.2
Time series approach
(a) Silhouette Score Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(b) Davies Bouldin index Values With Dif-
ferent Epochs and Number of Clusters
(c) Calinski-Harabasz Values With Differ-
ent Epochs and Number of Clusters
(d) Dunn’s index Values With Different
Epochs and Number of Clusters
(e) Xie-Beni Values With Different Epochs
and Number of Clusters
Figure B.7: Metric Values With Different Epochs and Number of Clusters.
==PAGE:98==
88
B Implementation Results
(a)
(b)
Figure B.8: Greyscale plot for membership of different hosts in the different clusters,
where darker colors imply a greater membership degree and lighter ones
a lower membership.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
Benjamin Bengfort et al. Yellowbrick. Version 0.9.1. November 14, 2018. doi:
10.5281/zenodo.1206264. url: http://www.scikit-yb.org/en/latest/.
[2]
N. Bolshakova and F. Azuaje. “Cluster validation techniques for genome ex-
pression data.” In: Signal Processing 83.4 (2003). Genomic Signal Processing,
pages 825–833. issn: 0165-1684. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-
1684(02)00475-9. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0165168402004759.
[3]
Horst Bunke. “Self-organizing map for clustering in the graph domain.” In: Pat-
tern Recognition Letters 23 (February 2002), pages 405–417. doi: 10.1016/
S0167-8655(01)00173-8.
[4]
Guanlin Chen and Ying Wu. “A wireless intrusion Alerts Clustering Method for
mobile internet.” eng. In: China Communications 13.4 (2016), pages 108–118.
issn: 16726626, 16735447. doi: 10.1109/CC.2016.7464128.
[5]
Siyue Chen, Henry Leung, and Maxwell Dondo. “Characterization of computer
network events through simultaneous feature selection and clustering of intru-
sion alerts.” eng. In: Proceedings of Spie - the International Society for Optical
Engineering 9121 (2014). Edited by JJ Braun, page 912107. issn: 1996756x,
0277786x. doi: 10.1117/12.2052852.
[6]
Stefan Fankhauser, Kaspar Riesen, and Horst Bunke. “Speeding Up Graph
Edit Distance Computation through Fast Bipartite Matching.” In: May 2011,
pages 102–111. isbn: 978-3-642-20843-0. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 20844-
7_11.
[7]
Miquel Ferrer et al. “Graph-Based k-Means Clustering: A Comparison of the Set
Median versus the Generalized Median Graph.” In: January 1970, pages 342–
350. isbn: 978-3-642-03766-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-03767-2_42.
[8]
Charles R. Harris et al. NumPy: Fundamental package for scientific computing
with Python. 2020. url: https://numpy.org.
[9]
Sizu Hou and Xianfei Zhang. “Analysis and Research for Network Management
Alarms Correlation Based on Sequence Clustering Algorithm.” In: 2008 Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Computation Technology and Automation
(ICICTA). Volume 1. 2008, pages 982–986. doi: 10.1109/ICICTA.2008.263.
==PAGE:100==
90
Bibliography
[10]
Khalid K. Al-jabery et al. “7 - Evaluation of cluster validation metrics.” eng. In:
Computational Learning Approaches To Data Analytics in Biomedical Applica-
tions (2020), pages 189–208. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-814482-4.00007-3.
[11]
Anil K. Jain. “Data clustering: 50 years beyond K-means.” In: Pattern Recog-
nition Letters 31.8 (2010). Award winning papers from the 19th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pages 651–666. issn: 0167-8655.
[12]
Lareb Zar Khan et al. “Optical Network Alarms Classification using Unsuper-
vised Machine Learning.” eng. In: Oecc/psc 2022 - 27th Optoelectronics and
Communications Conference/international Conference on Photonics in Switch-
ing and Computing 2022 (2022), 3 pp. doi: 10.23919/OECC/PSC53152.2022.
9849872.
[13]
Marcin Kozak. “”A Dendrite Method for Cluster Analysis” by Calinski and
Harabasz: A Classical Work that is Far Too Often Incorrectly Cited.” In: Com-
munication in Statistics- Theory and Methods 41 (January 2011), pages 2279–
2280. doi: 10.1080/03610926.2011.560741.
[14]
Feng Li et al. “Network Security Intrusion Detection and Mass Alarms Under
Cluster Computing Platform.” eng. In: Proceedings - 2022 7th Ieee International
Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace, Dsc 2022 (2022), pages 405–412.
doi: 10.1109/DSC55868.2022.00062.
[15]
Xuelong Li, Hongyuan Zhang, and Rui Zhang. “Adaptive Graph Auto-Encoder
for General Data Clustering.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence PP (November 2021), pages 1–1. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
2021.3125687.
[16]
Peng Lin et al. “DCSA: Using density-based clustering and sequential associ-
ation analysis to predict alarms in telecommunication networks.” eng. In: Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems
- Icpads 2019- (2019), pages 1–8. issn: 15219097. doi: 10.1109/ICPADS47876.
2019.00010.
[17]
John Lipor and Laura Balzano. “Clustering quality metrics for subspace clus-
tering.” eng. In: Pattern Recognition 104 (2020), page 107328. issn: 18735142,
00313203. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2020.107328.
[18]
Ya Liu et al. “Unsupervised Deep Learning for IoT Time Series.” In: (February
2023). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.03284.
[19]
Yan Liu et al. “Sequential Proximity-Based Clustering for Telecommunication
Network Alarm Correlation.” In: volume 5264. September 2008, pages 30–39.
isbn: 978-3-540-87733-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-87734-9_4.
[20]
Yanchi Liu et al. “Understanding of Internal Clustering Validation Measures.”
In: 2010 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. 2010, pages 911–916.
doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2010.35.
[21]
Wes McKinney et al. pandas: Powerful data analysis toolkit. Version 1.3.0. 2021.
url: https://pandas.pydata.org.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
91
[22]
Annamalai Narayanan et al. graph2vec: Learning Distributed Representations
of Graphs. 2017. arXiv: 1707.05005 [cs.AI].
[23]
Matthew J. Page et al. “The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline
for reporting systematic reviews.” eng. In: International Journal of Surgery 88
(2021), page 105906. issn: 17439159, 17439191. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2021.
105906.
[24]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.” In: Journal of
Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), pages 2825–2830.
[25]
Roberto Perdisci, Giorgio Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. “Alarm clustering for intru-
sion detection systems in computer networks.” eng. In: Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence 19.4 (2006), pages 429–438. issn: 18736769, 09521976.
doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2006.01.003.
[26]
Kaspar Riesen and Horst Bunke. “Kernel k-Means Clustering Applied to Vector
Space Embeddings of Graphs.” In: July 2008, pages 24–35. isbn: 978-3-540-
69938-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-69939-2_3.
[27]
Peter J. Rousseeuw. “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and
validation of cluster analysis.” In: Journal of Computational and Applied Math-
ematics 20 (1987), pages 53–65. issn: 0377-0427. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0377- 0427(87)90125- 7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0377042787901257.
[28]
Siddharth Siddhu. Graph Storage Technique. https://medium.com/@siddarthsiddhu58/
graph-storage-technique-7d32861956f0. Accessed on <access date>.
[29]
Sami Sieranoja. “Adapting k-means for graph clustering.” In: Knowledge and
Information Systems 64 (January 2022), pages 1–28. doi: 10.1007/s10115-
021-01623-y.
[30]
Maheyzah Md Siraj, Mohd Aizaini Maarof, and Siti Zaiton Mohd Hashim. “In-
telligent alert clustering model for network intrusion analysis.” eng. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Advances in Soft Computing and Its Applications 1.1 (2009),
pages 33–48. issn: 20748523.
[31]
Tauno Toikka, Jouko Laitinen, and Kari Koskinen. “Failure Detection and Iso-
lation by LSTM Autoencoder.” In: March 2022, pages 390–399. isbn: 978-3-030-
96793-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-96794-9_36.
[32]
Muhammad Usama et al. Unsupervised machine learning for networking: Tech-
niques, applications and research challenges. 2017.
[33]
Risto Vaarandi. “A Stream Clustering Algorithm for Classifying Network IDS
Alerts.” In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and Re-
silience (CSR). 2021, pages 14–19. doi: 10.1109/CSR51186.2021.9527926.
[34]
Risto Vaarandi and Ka￿rlis Podiņš. “Network IDS alert classification with fre-
quent itemset mining and data clustering.” In: 2010 International Conference
on Network and Service Management. 2010, pages 451–456. doi: 10.1109/CNSM.
2010.5691262.
==PAGE:102==
92
Bibliography
[35]
Bhavik Vachhani et al. “Deep Autoencoder Based Speech Features for Improved
Dysarthric Speech Recognition.” In: August 2017. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.
2017-1318.
[36]
Rui Xu and Donald Wunsch II. “Survey of clustering algorithms.” In: IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 16.3 (2005), pages 645–678.
[37]
Yi Zheng et al. “Time Series Classification Using Multi-Channels Deep Convo-
lutional Neural Networks.” In: WEB-AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT,
WAIM 2014. Edited by F Li et al. Volume 8485. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. 15th International Conference on Web-Age Information Management
(WAIM), Macau, PEOPLES R CHINA, JUN 16-18, 2014. 2014, pages 298–310.
isbn: 978-3-319-08010-9; 978-3-319-08009-3.
