==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH TO OP-
TIMIZE ACOUSTIC FEEDBACK CANCELLATION
SYSTEMS
Peishan Zhang s202728
Supervisors:
Tommy Sonne Alstrøm (DTU)
Anders Meng (Oticon A/S)
Alan Wiinberg (Oticon A/S)
Smørum 2765, Danmark 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The acoustic feedback problem has been extensively discussed in the research com-
munity, and various solutions have been proposed to mitigate or eliminate this issue.
These solutions can be broadly categorized into feed-forward suppression and feed-
back cancellation. Feed-forward suppression methods aim to attenuate the frequency
components of the feedback signal. In contrast, feedback cancellation methods esti-
mate the impulse response of the acoustic feedback path and subtract it from the
microphone signal to obtain the filtered signal.
In this thesis, we establish a baseline model comprising a forward-path system
with a linear-phase FIR filter, frequency shifter, compressor, and an adaptive filter
that utilizes the Normalized Least Mean Square (NLMS) algorithm to estimate feed-
back path coeﬀicients. To explore the potential for further improvement over the
baseline model, we incorporate a feed-forward neural network into the adaptive filter
to learn the parameters of the NLMS update rule. The performance of both the base-
line model and the proposed method is evaluated by the Normalized Mean Square
Error (NMSE) metric to assess the accuracy and the Perceptual Evaluation of Speech
Quality (PESQ) to evaluate the sound quality of the filtered signal.
We aim to determine whether incorporating a simple learning algorithm can en-
hance the system’s performance by comparing the results obtained from the baseline
model and the proposed method. The evaluation metrics will provide insights into the
accuracy and sound quality achieved by the respective methods. This research con-
tributes to the ongoing exploration of eﬀicient approaches for addressing the acoustic
feedback problem in audio signal processing.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark and department of Audiology in
Oticon A/S company under supervision of Associate Professor Tommy Sonne Alstrøm
from Technical University of Denmark, Principal DSP Engineer Anders Meng and Se-
nior DSP Engineer Alan Wiinberg from Oticon A/S in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Electrical Engineering with
studyline Acoustics.
The work was carried out in the spring of 2023 and the project covers a workload
of 30 ECTs points.
Smørum 2765, Danmark, June 16, 2023
Peishan Zhang s202728
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the individuals who have contributed
to the completion of this master thesis on potential future trends in the field of
Acoustic Feedback Cancellation systems. Without their support, guidance, and en-
couragement, this research would not have been possible.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Principle DSP Engineer
Anders Meng and Senior DSP Engineer Alan Wiinberg from Oticon A/S, along with
Associate Professor Tommy Sonne Alstrøm from DTU. Their patience, expertise, and
invaluable insights have been instrumental throughout this entire process. Despite
encountering numerous challenges while developing the codes and writing the thesis,
their unwavering positivity and assistance made the journey both relaxing and en-
joyable. I am truly grateful for their mentorship, as well as the time and effort they
invested in my research. Thank you for your guidance and inspiring discussions.
I am also deeply indebted to my parents, Lizhong and Rong, whose unwavering
support and encouragement have been the cornerstone of my academic pursuits. In a
society where many of female engineers were pressured into early marriage and domes-
tic life, my parents are open-minded and supportive for my educational aspirations.
Their belief in me provided the courage I needed to go to a foreign country to pursue
a master degree. Despite facing criticism and judgment from relatives for my decision
to study abroad, they always stood by my side. I am profoundly grateful for their
love, understanding, and constant presence in my life.
Furthermore, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my boyfriend, Emile.
His love and unwavering belief in my abilities provided motivation during the diﬀi-
cult time of this thesis. His constant reassurances that I am intelligent and capable
encouraged me to persevere even when I faced moments of self-doubt and depression.
I cannot overstate the importance of his presence in my life during this period, as he
helped me navigate the challenges and stresses that arose.
Additionally, I would like to extend my appreciation to my friends and dormmates.
Adjusting to life in Denmark was very challenging and isolating, but your companion-
ship and support brought happiness and lightness to my days. Thank you for being
there and brightening my journey.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acknowledgements
Finally, I extend my appreciation to all the individuals who have supported and
encouraged me throughout this long master’s journey. Your contributions, whether
big or small, have made a significant impact on my personal and academic growth.
Your belief in my abilities and the motivation you provided were invaluable. I am
deeply grateful for your assistance and for being a part of this transformative experi-
ence.
Once again, I express my thanks to everyone who supported and encouraged me
during this academic journey.
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Acoustic Feedback Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Remaining Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Goals of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.5
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Methods and Theory
15
2.1
Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Proposed Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Experiments, Results, and Analysis
27
3.1
Dataset Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Test Bench
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Experiments with Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model . . . . . . .
38
4
Conclusion
55
4.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Over the past few decades, significant advancements have been made in hearing aid
technology, from the simple analog devices available years ago to the implementation
of digital signal processing in 1996, which marked a turning point in the development
of hearing aids, ultimately leading to substantial improvements in their performance
and functionality[AMP12]. Nowadays, more than 93% of customers opt for complex
hearing aids that incorporate multiple digital signal processing algorithms [Lev07].
These advancements have expanded the range of processing options available in hear-
ing aids, resulting in enhanced user experiences.
Despite the remarkable progress, certain challenges persist in hearing aids, affect-
ing their overall effectiveness. This project aims to address one such issue: feedback
problems.
Feedback, often characterized by whistling or squealing sounds, occurs
when the amplified sound from the hearing aid escapes and is picked up by the micro-
phone, leading to a loop of sound amplification. Feedback problems can significantly
degrade the listening experience and reduce the utility of hearing aids for individuals
with hearing impairments.
The primary focus of this project is to explore and develop solutions to mitigate
feedback problems in hearing aids. By investigating novel approaches and employing
advanced signal processing techniques, we aim to enhance the performance and us-
ability of hearing aids, ultimately improving the quality of life for individuals with
hearing impairments.
Note: in this report, all the vectors will be drawn with a line under the symbol,
and the matrix will be drawn with a double line under its respective symbol.
1.1
Acoustic Feedback Problem
1.1.1
Problem Statement
Acoustic feedback, audio feedback or the Larsen effect, was discovered by Danish
physicist Søren Absalon Larsen in 1911 [Lar11]. This phenomenon occurs when mi-
crophones in a sound system pick up sound signals from the loudspeakers and amplify
them continuously, leading to a positive feedback loop. The resulting exponential in-
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
crease in sound level can cause performance degradation and undesirable howling
effects [Spr+08].
Acoustic feedback encompasses the unwanted coupling between
loudspeakers and microphones and the howling effects resulting from this coupling
[VM10]. Controlling the feedback loop can be challenging, as even minor changes in
the sound system’s components, such as speaker placement or microphone sensitiv-
ity, can initiate or terminate the feedback [VM10]. Acoustic feedback is particularly
prevalent in sound systems used in live performance environments, such as concerts,
and in public address systems employed in large venues and outdoor settings.
In hearing aids, acoustic feedback refers to the acoustical coupling path between
Figure 1.1: Acoustic Feedback
the receiver (microphone) and the loudspeaker. This coupling can lead to significant
distortion of the desired signal and even increase howling effects when the gain is in-
creased. Figure 1.1 illustrates the acoustic feedback problem in a hearing aid. Prior
to the formation of the acoustic feedback path, an input signal x(n) is captured by
the microphone and processed by the forward system k(n), which represents the regu-
lar signal processing path of a hearing aid, including operations like compression and
noise reduction. The initial output signal (loudspeaker) can be expressed as:
u(n) = kT (n)x(n)
(1.1)
Here, n = 0, 1, 2... represents the discrete-time index.
Following the regular signal processing in the forward path, the output signal u(n)
is played through the loudspeaker. Due to the coupling between the loudspeaker and
the microphone, a portion of the output signal u(n) is fed back into the microphone.
The impulse response of the feedback path between the loudspeaker and the micro-
phone is represented by h(n). Consequently, the feedback signal v(n) can be expressed
as:
v(n) = hT (n)u(n)
(1.2)
As a result, the microphone signal is the sum of the input signal and feedback signal:
y(n) = x(n) + v(n)
= x(n) + hT (n)u(n)
(1.3)
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Related Work
3
The microphone signal y(n) becomes the new input to the forward system k instead
of a simple input signal x(n). Based on Equation 1.1, the loudspeaker signal u(n) is
given by:
u(n) = kT y(n)
(1.4)
The presence of feedback path h(n) may cause instability in the hearing aid system,
which also leads to sound quality degradation[VM10].
1.1.2
System stability
To assess the stability of a closed-loop system, a measure from control system theory
known as the open-loop transfer function is introduced [Fra+02]. For the system de-
picted in Figure 1.1, the open-loop transfer function OLG(w, n) at discrete frequency
w and time instance n is defined as:
OLG(w, n) = K(w, n)H(w, n)
(1.5)
K(w, n) and H(w, n) represent the frequency responses of the forward and feedback
paths at time index n, respectively. The function of K(w, n) is to amplify the input
signals, while H(w, n) describes the process of feedback signal formation. A criterion
for determining system instability, known as the Nyquist criterion, was proposed by
Swedish-American electrical engineer Harry Nyquist [Nyq32]. The Nyquist criterion
is expressed as follows:
|OLG(w, n)| ≥1
(1.6)
̸ OLG(w, n) = 2nπ, n ∈Z
(1.7)
Equation 1.6 states that the magnitude of the signal traveling in the loop does
not decrease for each round, while Equation 1.7 specifies that the phase shift after
each round is an integer multiple of 2π radians. The system becomes unstable if a
closed-loop system’s open-loop gain transfer function satisfies both conditions.
The acoustic feedback problem has attracted significant attention from researchers
over the past few decades, resulting in the proposal of various solutions. The following
section will introduce some state-of-the-art approaches in acoustic feedback control.
1.2
Related Work
Since introducing the acoustic feedback problem, numerous researchers have entered
this field, and many methods have been developed and improved in the last few
decades to minimize or eliminate its effects.
While certain approaches, such as changes in loudspeakers’ positions and micro-
phones, reducing vent diameters, and ensuring ear closure, can mitigate or prevent
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
acoustic feedback problems, they often face limitations due to the specific design con-
straints of hearing aids where the loudspeaker and microphone cannot be set too far
apart. As a result, alternative methods must be explored to address acoustic feedback
issues effectively.
Among all kinds of solutions to acoustic feedback problems, signal processing is
one of the most effective ways.
Several techniques have been developed in signal
processing solutions, including feedforward suppression and acoustic feedback can-
cellation. Feedback suppression employs gain attenuation to attenuate the frequency
components of the feedback signal. Acoustic feedback cancellation, on the other hand,
works by estimating the impulse response of the acoustic feedback path and subtract-
ing it from the microphone signal. Both techniques require careful design and tuning
to ensure they do not degrade the sound quality or introduce other artifacts into the
signal.
1.2.1
Feedforward Suppression
Feedforward suppression is a highly effective technique for preventing feedback in au-
dio systems. Unlike reactive approaches that respond to feedback after it has already
started, feedforward suppression processes the input signal in the forward path to
prevent feedback from occurring in the first place.
In hearing aids, feedforward suppression can be achieved using two sub-categories:
gain reduction and phase modulation.
1.2.1.1
Gain Reduction Methods
Gain reduction methods involve reducing the amplification of the input signal to pre-
vent feedback or distortion resulting from the thunderous output.
One technique for preventing feedback is to employ a gain (or volume) control
system that selectively reduces the gain of frequencies where acoustic feedback com-
monly occurs. Various methods have been proposed in this category. For example,
automatic gain control (AGC) methods, as described in [Pat78a] and [Pat78b], apply
a full-band gain reduction to the input signals. However, this approach may only
sometimes be necessary and can lead to sound quality degradation, as mentioned
in [MZ95]. To mitigate sound quality degradation, alternative methods have been
proposed, such as automatic equalization (AEQ) in critical sub-bands of the entire
frequency range, where the open-loop gain of the sub-band is close to unity [Nag+98].
Additionally, notch-filter-based howling suppression (NHS) techniques have been in-
troduced to prevent howling components from causing feedback [MZ95; PM99].
While gain reduction methods effectively prevent feedback, they may produce
lower amplification than desired, especially if the open-loop gain OLG(w, n) is con-
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Related Work
5
siderable.
Applying gain reduction indiscriminately across stable frequencies may
also lead to unnecessary attenuation.
1.2.1.2
Phase-Modulation Methods
Phase modulation is another approach to achieve feedforward suppression. It involves
modifying the forward path frequency response K(w, n) by applying an exponential
function ejϕ(w,n). This modification alters the transfer function of the hearing aid
signal processing system, resulting in the modified transfer function Km(w, n) given
by Equation 1.8:
Km(w, n) = K(w, n)ejϕ(w,n)
(1.8)
Depending on the specific phase function of ejΦ(w,n), phase modulation can be catego-
rized into two methods: frequency shifting [Sch62] and sinusoidal phase modulation.
Frequency shifting and sinusoidal phase modulation employ linear and sinusoidal
phase functions, respectively. The system becomes time-varying by introducing the
exponential phase function, rendering the Nyquist stability criterion unsuitable for
stability analysis. These methods disrupt the feedback loop by shifting the micro-
phone signal to another frequency, smoothing the open-loop magnitude response
|OLG(w, n)|.
However, the feedforward suppression effect of phase modulation is
small.
Moreover, it is essential to note that these phase modulation methods may not
preserve the harmonic components of speech or music signals. Consequently, sound
quality distortion may occur in the loudspeaker signal u(n).
1.2.2
Feedback Cancellation
Compared to methods that modify the forward path, feedback cancellation systems
estimate the real feedback path coeﬀicients h(n) and generate an estimated feedback
signal ˆv(n). By subtracting the estimated feedback signal from the received micro-
phone signal y(n), a filtered (error) signal e(n) is obtained. Ideally, the estimated
feedback path coeﬀicients ˆh(n) and estimated feedback signal ˆv(n) should be identical
to the feedback signal v(n), resulting in the filtered signal e(n) = x(n). Figure 1.2
depicts the feedback cancellation system, where ˆh(n) is the filter used to estimate the
feedback path coeﬀicients.
1.2.2.1
Adaptive Filter:
Adaptive filters are used in feedback cancellation systems to estimate the feedback
path. Adaptive filters can adjust their filter coeﬀicients in real-time to track changes
in the feedback signal, leading to more effective cancellation.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: Acoustic Feedback Cancellation system
However, adaptive filters also have some disadvantages. Adaptive filters may lead
to instability if the adaptation algorithm is not well-designed.
One popular algorithm used in adaptive filters is the Wiener filter, which is based
on minimizing the mean squared error (MSE) cost function JMSE(n):
JMSE(n) = E[e2(n)]
(1.9)
Here, e(n) = y(n) −ˆh
T (n)u(n) and u(n) = [u(n), u(n −1), ..., u(n −L + 1)]T is the
loudspeaker signal vector. E[·] denotes the expectation operator.
By applying the derivative of the cost function, the update rule for the estimated
filter coeﬀicients ˆh(n) can be obtained as follows:
ˆh(n + 1) = ˆh(n) + µE[u(n)e(n)]
(1.10)
Approximating E[u(n)e(n)] with u(n)e(n) leads to the Least Mean Squares (LMS)
algorithm, first proposed in the field of telecommunications [WH60]. The update rule
for the estimated filter coeﬀicients in the LMS algorithm is thus given by:
ˆh(n + 1) = ˆh(n) + µu(n)e(n)
(1.11)
However, the performance of the basic LMS algorithm can be influenced by the magni-
tude of the loudspeaker signal u(n), which can lead to issues such as slow convergence
or instability. This is because the step-size parameter remains fixed regardless of the
signal magnitude. To mitigate this problem, a robust algorithm called the Normal-
ized LMS (NLMS) algorithm has been proposed.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Related Work
7
The NLMS algorithm addresses the impact of input signal magnitude by normaliz-
ing the step size with respect to the energy estimate of the loudspeaker signal, denoted
as uT (n)u(n)+δ. Here, δ is a regularization parameter that prevents division by zero.
The update rule for the estimated filter coeﬀicients in the NLMS algorithm is given
by Equation 1.12:
ˆh(n + 1) = ˆh(n) + µ
u(n)e(n)
uT (n)u(n) + δ
(1.12)
where ˆh(n) represents the estimated filter coeﬀicients, µ is the step-size parameter,
u(n) is the input signal vector, and e(n) is the most recent error signal.
By incorporating the normalization factor, NLMS adapts the step size according
to the magnitude of the input signal. This allows for more consistent and controlled
adaptation, improving convergence speed and stability compared to the basic LMS
algorithm. The use of the energy estimate of the loudspeaker signal in the NLMS
update rule helps to reduce the influence of signal size, making the algorithm more
robust in scenarios with varying input signal magnitudes.
Another algorithm used in adaptive filters is the Least Squares (LS) algorithm.
Unlike the previous algorithms, LS minimizes the cost function JLS(n), given by:
JLS(n) =
n
X
i=0
e2(i)
(1.13)
The basic LS approach requires matrix inversion, which can be computationally com-
plex. Researchers developed the Recursive LS (RLS) algorithm to improve computa-
tional eﬀiciency, which leverages the matrix inversion lemma to avoid explicit matrix
inversion [Hay02]. This makes the RLS algorithm computationally eﬀicient.
These are some of the algorithms commonly used in adaptive filters for feedback
cancellation. Each algorithm has its advantages and disadvantages. For example, the
LMS algorithm has a simple update rule but may converge slower than others. On
the other hand, the NLMS algorithm is less sensitive to variations in the loudspeaker
signal. The choice of algorithm depends on the specific requirements of the feedback
cancellation system and the trade-offs between convergence speed, computational
complexity, and robustness.
1.2.2.2
Machine Learning Approaches
In addition to the traditional Least Mean Squares (LMS) algorithm, researchers have
explored machine-learning approaches to enhance the performance of adaptive filters.
One such method is the Auto-DSP algorithm, proposed in the study by Casebeer
[CBS21]. The Auto-DSP method incorporates a neural network to learn the adaptive
filter update rule dynamically.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
Based on the LMS algorithm in Equation 1.11, the Auto-DSP method’s update
rule is modified to incorporate a neural network gϕ that generates the step-size pa-
rameter µ automatically. The update rule is given by:
ˆh(n + 1) = ˆh(n) + gϕ · u(n)e(n)
(1.14)
Here, gϕ represents the neural network’s output, a function of some parameters
ϕ learned during the training phase. The neural network takes the input vector u(n)
and the error signal e(n) as inputs and generates the step-size µ dynamically for
each iteration. The neural network can be trained using various machine learning
techniques, such as supervised learning or reinforcement learning, to optimize the
step-size generation process.
By introducing the neural network into the update rule, the Auto-DSP method
allows the adaptive filter to adapt its step size dynamically based on the input signal
and error signal characteristics. This adaptive step-size selection can improve the
adaptive filter’s convergence speed and tracking ability, especially in scenarios where
the input signal and the system dynamics vary over time.
By incorporating a neural network to generate the step-size parameter dynam-
ically, the Auto-DSP algorithm offers the potential to enhance the performance of
adaptive filters in real-world scenarios. The neural network’s ability to adapt the
step size based on the input and error signals can lead to improved convergence and
better adaptation to changing system dynamics.
1.2.3
Evaluation Methods
The presence of a feedback signal v(n) can lead to issues in hearing aid systems, such
as system instability and degradation of sound quality. Evaluating the performance of
an Acoustic Feedback Cancellation (AFC) system requires considering various aspects,
including feedback cancellation system performance, output signal sound quality, and
computational complexity.
1.2.3.1
Feedback cancellation system performance
Objective evaluation methods are crucial for assessing the eﬀiciency of feedback can-
cellation methods, as they allow for the evaluation of complex test scenarios with
different conditions and parameter settings. Two main types of objective evaluation
methods are commonly used.
The first method is the traditional approach, which involves computing the mean
squared error (MSE) of the output signal e(n) in the feedback cancellation system:
MSEe(n) = E[e2(n)]
(1.15)
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Related Work
9
The curve of E[e2(n)] provides information about convergence and steady-state val-
ues.
Another method involves calculating the distance between the real feedback path
and the estimated feedback path:
MSE(n) = E||h(n) −ˆh(n)||2
(1.16)
However, this method requires prior knowledge of the real feedback path, which may
limit its practical application. Nonetheless, it is useful in experiments and computer
simulations. The advantage of MSE is that the h(n) −ˆh(n) part of the evaluation
method is directly related to the open-loop transfer function, which can impact sys-
tem stability.
However, MSE only calculates the mean of the squared errors between the esti-
mated and true values without considering the scale of the true values. Therefore, it is
unsuitable for comparing the performance of estimators across datasets with different
variances [AC92]. In such cases, Normalized Mean Squared Errors (NMSE) provide
an improved method:
NMSE(n) = E
 
||h(n) −ˆh(n)||2
||h(n)||2
!
(1.17)
NMSE normalizes the error by the variance of the true values, making it a more
robust and interpretable measure of estimator performance. By normalizing the er-
ror, NMSE enables comparing the relative performance of different estimators across
datasets with different variances, making it a more useful metric in practical applica-
tions. Additionally, NMSE has a range between 0 and 1, making it easier to interpret
the estimator’s performance than MSE, which has no upper bound. A lower NMSE
indicates better estimator performance in matching the true values.
1.2.3.2
Sound Quality
Sound quality evaluation of feedback cancellation systems can be performed using sub-
jective metrics such as listening tests [Guo13] or objective metrics. However, listening
tests are often time-consuming and complex. Therefore, robust objective predictions
of sound quality are valuable.
Objective sound quality evaluation typically involves comparing the filtered signals
to a reference signal without distortion. Several commonly used objective metrics for
sound quality evaluation include:
• Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR): SNR measures the ratio of the desired audio signal to the back-
ground noise in a given audio signal. It is expressed in decibels (dB). A higher SNR indicates
a higher proportion of the desired signal than noise, resulting in better sound quality.
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
• Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ):PESQ is a widely used objective method
for measuring the quality of speech signals[GJJ13][Rix+01]. It uses a reference and a de-
graded signal to generate a MOS-LQO (Mean Opinion Score Listening Quality Objective)
score between 1 and 4.5, where 4.5 represents excellent quality, and 1 represents poor
quality. PESQ considers the human perception of speech quality, including effects such
as noise, distortion, and delay. Higher PESQ scores indicate better speech quality.
• Perceptual Evaluation of Audio Quality (PEAQ):PEAQ is a standard method for objective
measurement of audio quality [GJJ13]. It uses a reference and a degraded signal to cal-
culate an objective quality score (ODG), which ranges from -4.5 to 0. ODG values closer
to 0 indicate better quality, while negative values indicate lower quality. PEAQ considers
human perception of audio quality, including effects such as noise, distortion, and delay.
• Hearing Aid Speech Quality Index Version 2 (HASQI v2):ASQI v2 is a method specifically de-
signed for measuring the speech quality of hearing aids [KA14]. It is based on a reference
and a degraded signal and considers hearing aid settings and user preferences. HASQI v2
generates a score between 0 and 1, where higher scores represent better speech quality.
It considers factors such as speech intelligibility, loudness, and listening effort.
1.2.3.3
Computational Complexity
In addition to the sound AFC system performance and sound quality, Computa-
tional complexity is also important in all the digital signal processing algorithms
because hearing aids are small devices that operate on limited power and processing
resources[Kat08]. The computational complexity of the algorithms used in hearing
aids determines the processing power and memory needed to execute the algorithms
in real time. If the algorithms are simple enough, they may require more power than
the hearing aid can provide, leading to reduced battery life or overheating of the
device.
In order to compute the computational complexity, the input size of the algorithms
used in the hearing aid system should be determined first. This could include the
number of channels, sampling rate, and the length of the signal buffer. Then count
the number of operations each algorithm performs for a given input size. This can
be done by analyzing the code or creating a model of the algorithm. Determine the
class of complexity of the hearing aid system (e.g., polynomial, exponential, and so
on) based on the total computational complexity obtained in the hearing aid. So it
can be compared with known complexity classes to determine the system’s eﬀiciency.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Remaining Problems
11
1.3
Remaining Problems
1.3.1
Biased Estimation
One of the main challenges in implementing AFC is biased estimation, which occurs
when the cross-correlation between the input signal x(n) and the loudspeaker signal
u(n) is relatively large. This can lead to the cancellation of both signals, resulting in
poor sound quality and instability in the system. A biased Wiener-Hopf solution is
expressed as:
ho(n) = Ruu
−1(n)ruy(n)
= E[u(n)uT (n)]−1E[u(n)y(n)]
= E[u(n)uT (n)]−1E[u(n)(uT (n)h(n) + x(n))]
= E[u(n)uT (n)]−1(E[u(n)uT (n)h(n)] + E[u(n)x(n)])
= h(n) + E[u(n)uT (n)]−1E[u(n)x(n)]
= h(n) + E[u(n)x(n)]
(1.18)
Here, h(n) represents the desired feedback path coeﬀicients, and E[u(n)x(n)] rep-
resents the bias. To address this issue, the bias should satisfy E[u(n)x(n)] = 0. The
fundamental concept to minimize the effects of biased estimation is to decorrelate
the input signal x(n) and the loudspeaker signals u(n). Various methods have been
proposed to obtain unbiased estimation, including:
• Delay: Delay is one of the easiest decorrelation methods since some signals only are au-
tocorrelated up to small lags. Delay can be used to decorrelate for speech signal but
doesn’t work for tonal siganl.
• Phase Modulation: In subsubsection 1.2.1.2, Phase-Modulation Methods are introduced for
feedforward suppression. Besides that, they can also be used to decorrelate the input
signal x(n), and the loudspeaker signal u(n) [GK16]
1.3.2
System Running Time
Another challenge in AFC implementation is the system running time. AFC algo-
rithms require significant computational resources to estimate and cancel feedback
signals in real-time, which can be challenging in hearing aids with limited battery life
and computational power [Kat08]. Real-time processing is essential for immediate
feedback cancellation and ensuring a seamless listening experience for hearing aid
users.
Researchers are exploring various approaches to address the challenge of system
running time. One approach is optimizing the AFC algorithms to reduce their compu-
tational complexity while maintaining adequate performance. This involves design-
ing eﬀicient algorithms that require fewer operations or implementing algorithmic
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
optimizations to reduce the computational load.
Another approach is to leverage
hardware advancements to enhance the computational capabilities of hearing aids.
As technology advances, hearing aids are becoming more powerful in processing ca-
pabilities, allowing more complex algorithms to be executed in real time. Research
in hardware design and system integration aims to leverage these advancements and
develop hearing aid platforms that can eﬀiciently handle the computational demands
of AFC algorithms. Furthermore, eﬀicient implementation techniques such as parallel
processing, algorithmic approximations, and adaptive sampling rates can be employed
to optimize system running time. These techniques ensure that the AFC algorithms
can be executed within the computational limitations of the hearing aid device, thus
maintaining a balance between performance and resource utilization.
1.3.3
Expense
The cost of implementing AFC in hearing aids is also a significant challenge. Includ-
ing AFC functionality requires additional hardware and software components, which
can increase the manufacturing cost of hearing aids. Moreover, developing and test-
ing new AFC algorithms can be resource-intensive and expensive.
Researchers are exploring alternative approaches and innovative solutions to ad-
dress the expense challenge. One such approach is the utilization of machine learning
algorithms. Machine learning techniques like neural networks can leverage existing
data to develop more accurate and eﬀicient AFC algorithms. By training models on
large datasets, the performance of AFC can be improved without significant increases
in hardware complexity. Additionally, advancements in integrated circuit design and
miniaturization can reduce the cost of implementing AFC. As technology progresses,
smaller and more eﬀicient hardware components become available at lower costs. This
trend enables the integration of AFC functionality into hearing aids without signifi-
cantly impacting the overall price.
1.4
Goals of the Thesis
Although various existing solutions to the acoustic feedback problem already exist,
they still have some minor issues. The main objective of this thesis is to optimize
some existing solutions. To achieve this, the thesis aims to investigate three main
questions:
1. Can a simple learning algorithm ”on top” of a baseline NLMS model improve
the NMSE of the system compared to the baseline model in acoustical static
conditions with different types of background signals (Noise, speech, music)?
==PAGE:23==
1.5 Structure of the Thesis
13
2. Can a simple learning algorithm ”on top” of a baseline NLMS model improve
the NMSE of the system compared to the baseline model in acoustical dynamic
conditions with different types of background signals (Noise, speech, music)?
3. Does the performance of the optimized learning algorithm model using an MSE
cost function show consistency when we use different metrics (such as open loop
gain, STOI, HASQI) to evaluate it?
1.5
Structure of the Thesis
This thesis contains following parts:
• Chapter 1: Introduction - This chapter introduces the background of the thesis
topic, discusses related works, highlights the problems of existing solutions, and
outlines the research problems and goals of this thesis.
• Chapter 2: Methods and Theory - This chapter describes the baseline model, the
proposed algorithm, and the evaluation methods used in this project.
• Chapter 3: Experiments, Results, and Analysis - This chapter presents the experiments
conducted to determine the baseline model’s optimal step size and compare the
baseline model’s performance with the model using a trained neural network.
It also includes an analysis of the results.
• Chapter 4: Conclusion - The final chapter of this thesis provides a comprehensive
conclusion of the entire study.
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Methods and Theory
In this chapter, the focus shifts from the exploration of the background of Acoustic
Feedback problem and relative works to the investigation of the methods employed
and the theories underlying this study.
The primary objective of this chapter is
to provide a comprehensive understanding of theoretical frameworks adopted in the
method and the methods utilized in order to address the research question.
2.1
Baseline Model
This section focuses on the development of a Baseline model for an Acoustic Feedback
Cancellation (AFC) system, which aims to mitigate the detrimental effects of feedback
and improve overall audio quality. In order to fulfill these standards, a baseline model
is built as seen Figure 2.1. This baseline model consist of three main part: forward-
Figure 2.1: Baseline Model
path system k(n), real feedback path h(n), and adaptive filer ˆh(n).
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methods and Theory
2.1.1
Forward-path System
The first main part in the baseline model is forward-path system k(n). The forward-
path system k(n) consists of three parts: a linear-phase FIR filter, a frequency shifter,
and a simple compressor. The structure of forward-path system has been depicted in
the red dotted frame in Figure 2.1.
• Linear-Phase high-pass FIR filter The forward-path system incorporates a linear-phase high-
pass Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filter with a length of 180 taps as the initial digital signal
processing method for attenuating background noise in the signal. The implementation of
a linear-phase FIR filter offers several advantages. Firstly, these filters possess a symmetrical
impulse response, resulting in a constant delay of the filter’s output for all frequencies. In the
Baseline model, this delay is set at 9ms. The use of a delay is advantageous as it minimizes
the impact of biased estimation, as discussed in subsection 1.3.1. Consequently, the FIR
filter also serves as one of the decorrelation techniques employed in the model. Moreover,
linear-phase FIR filters can be designed to exhibit a sharp cutoff at the desired frequency,
enabling the Baseline model to selectively attenuate undesired background noise while
preserving the integrity of the desired signal.
• Frequency Shifter To enhance the decorrelation between the input signal x(n) and the
loudspeaker signal u(n), as mentioned in section subsection 1.3.1, the Baseline model in-
corporates a frequency shifter implemented using a 64-tap Hilbert transformer in the for-
ward system. The frequency shifter acts on the input signal x(n) and performs a phase
modulation to achieve decorrelation. By applying the Hilbert Transformer (HT), the input
signal x(n), represented as cos(wt + ϕ), is transformed into a complex analytic signal,
ej(wt+ϕ) = cos(wt + ϕ) + jsin(wt + ϕ). In the frequency shifter, the input signal is mul-
tiplied by ejθ, where θ represents the desired phase shift. In this baseline model, θ is set as
2πdt, where d is the frequency shift in Hz, in the frequency shifter, introducing a frequency
deviation of d Hz over time. The resulting output signal is expressed as ej(wt+ϕ+θ) =
cos(wt+ϕ+θ)+jsin(wt+ϕ+θ). The real part, cos(wt+ϕ+θ), represents the desired
output of the frequency shifter. When considering the Hilbert complex output as I + jQ,
the output of the frequency shifter can be calculated as Output = Icosθ −Qsinθ.
Figure 2.2 illustrates the block diagram of the applied frequency shifter. The coeﬀicients b1
and b2 represent the Hilbert transformer (HT) coeﬀicients, and the delay with the center
tap of the HT is denoted as b2. The frequency shift value is d. In this project, the signal
u1(n) is shifted by 3 Hz using the frequency shifter.
• Compressor The compressor plays a crucial role in controlling the dynamic range of the
audio signal, reducing the likelihood of harmful or uncomfortable sound levels. By ap-
plying appropriate compression settings, the Baseline model aims to mitigate the risk of
auditory discomfort or damage caused by sudden and excessive sound output. To ad-
dress the potential occurrence of the howling effect and prioritize user safety, the Baseline
model incorporates a compressor as the last component in the forward-path system. In the
forward-path system of Baseline model, a simple compressor with a compression range of
[−10dB, 10dB] is employed. Thus, we can gain no more than 10 dB. This compressor en-
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Baseline Model
17
Figure 2.2: Frequency Shifter
sures that the audio signal remains within acceptable limits and provides an added layer
of protection to customers’ ears.
2.1.2
Adaptive Filter
The adaptive filter ˆh(n) constitutes another crucial component of the Baseline model.
In this implementation, an adaptive filter utilizing the Normalized Least Mean Squares
(NLMS) algorithm is employed. The NLMS algorithm offers improved convergence
characteristics compared to the Least Mean Squares (LMS) algorithm, primarily due
to its utilization of variable step-size parameters.
The NLMS algorithm employs a step-size parameter that combines a fixed step-
size value with a scaling factor based on the energy estimate of the input signal [QB96],
as depicted in Equation 1.12. This characteristic makes the NLMS algorithm robust
against variations in the input signal’s amplitude and frequency response, which is
particularly important when estimating and removing the feedback signal.
To enhance the sensitivity of the NLMS algorithm to system changes, the power of
the error signal e(n) is included in the normalization process. Consequently, the gradi-
ent information considered for adaptive filter updates incorporates [u(n), e(n), u(n), e(n)],
where u(n) and e(n) represent vectors comprising the most recent lf elements of the
loudspeaker signal u(n) and the error signal e(n), respectively. lf is the length of the
feedback path.
The update rules for the adaptive filter in the Baseline model can be expressed
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methods and Theory
as:
ˆh(n + 1) = ˆh(n) + 2µ
u(n)e(n)
uT (n)u(n) + eT (n)e(n) · M + δ
(2.1)
Here, µ represents the step-size parameter, δ is a small constant 10−24 used for regu-
larization, and M is a constant that depends on the forward open-loop gain.
To ensure stability of the closed-loop system, it is necessary for the open-loop
magnitude transfer function to be less than 1 (0 dB), as described in subsection 1.1.2.
According to the Nyquist criterion and Equation 1.6, the maximum value of the
open-loop gain should not exceed -10 dB. Therefore, constant value M is calculated
as follows:
M = 10
−max|H(n)|−10
20
(2.2)
Here, M and H(n) represent the maximum value of the forward system coeﬀicients
k(n) and the transfer functions of feedback path h(n).
2.2
Proposed Algorithm
To enhance the performance of the baseline model presented earlier, a novel algorithm
is proposed in this study, which builds upon the foundation of the baseline model as
depicted in Figure 2.3. The objective is to overcome the manual parameter setting
in the NLMS algorithm by introducing a neural network, denoted as gϕ, that learns
the appropriate step-size for the adaptive filter update rules from a carefully curated
dataset. By leveraging the learned neural network, denoted by the weights ϕ, the
proposed algorithm ensures automatic and adaptive selection of a suitable step-size
for each incoming feedback signal.
The neural network, parameterized by ϕ, is trained using a loss function L(·),
which guides the optimization process to find the optimal step-size values.
This
data-driven approach enables the neural network to learn the underlying patterns
and relationships between input signal characteristics, system parameters, and their
corresponding optimal step-size values. Consequently, the proposed algorithm em-
powers the adaptive filter to dynamically adjust its behavior based on the specific
characteristics of the feedback signal, leading to improved performance and enhanced
adaptation capabilities.
By integrating the neural network into the baseline model, real-time step-size
adaptation is achieved, offering a significant advantage over the manual fixed step-
size approach. This adaptive mechanism allows the AFC system to continually opti-
mize its performance, even in the presence of changing signal conditions and system
dynamics. As a result, the desired signal quality is further enhanced, and the sup-
pression of acoustic feedback is maximized.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Proposed Algorithm
19
In the following sections, the architecture of the proposed neural network and the
methodology for training and optimizing the network’s parameters with the baseline
model will be comprehensively elucidated. This comprehensive exploration aims to
thoroughly understand the proposed approach, highlighting its potential to signifi-
cantly improve the effectiveness and performance of acoustic feedback cancellation
systems.
Figure 2.3: Proposed Algorithm
2.2.1
Neural Network Architecture & Loss
1) Architecture:
The proposed neural network architecture, denoted as gϕ, is inspired by the Auto-
DSP method [CBS21] and is designed to optimize the adaptive filter in the acoustic
feedback cancellation (AFC) model. Unlike the Auto-DSP method, which employs a
recursive neural network, our approach utilizes a feedforward neural network to learn
the step-size parameter for the NLMS algorithm.
This choice was made to address the challenges posed by the feedback loop in
closed-loop systems like AFC. Recursive neural networks, while capable of capturing
temporal dependencies, can introduce instability and undesired feedback loops when
used in conjunction with the NLMS algorithm, which already incorporates a recursive
element through the use of past filter coeﬀicients. By adopting a feedforward archi-
tecture, our method avoids reusing gradient information from previous iterations and
ensures that each input sample is processed independently, thereby mitigating the
risk of instability and allowing the neural network to learn the optimal step-size pa-
rameter without being influenced by past iterations. The feedforward architecture
also facilitates eﬀicient processing of the complete gradient information at each time
index, promoting convergence and improving the adaptability of the AFC model.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Methods and Theory
In this architecture, the neural network gϕ takes advantage of the complete gradi-
ent information Grad across the time index n as inputs (Equation 2.3). By incorpo-
rating the entire gradient information, the neural network ensures convergence and
improves the adaptability of the AFC model.
0
Grad(n) =
2u(n)e(n)
uT (n)u(n) + eT (n)e(n) · M + δ
(2.3)
To provide further details on the neural network architecture, the specific dimensions
of the proposed architecture are as follows: the input layer has 70 neurons, followed
by two hidden layers, first hidden layer with 32 neurons and second hidden layer with
8 neurons. The activation function used for the hidden layers is the Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU), which introduces non-linearity and enables the capture of complex pat-
terns. The output layer consists of a single unit with a Softplus activation function,
chosen to ensure positive outputs. To determine the optimal configuration of the neu-
ral network, a hyperparameter tuning process using grid search was conducted. Grid
search involves systematically exploring a predefined set of hyperparameter values
to find the combination that yields the best performance. In this process, various
hyperparameters, such as the number of hidden layers, the number of units in each
layer, and the choice of activation functions, were evaluated. The specific dimensions
of the neural network, as mentioned earlier, were determined through this grid search
process, considering their impact on the performance and computational eﬀiciency.
The output of the neural network gϕ is a learned time-dependent step-size pa-
rameter, denoted as µ(n) (Equation 2.4). This temporal aspect allows the neural
network to capture the time-varying nature of the gradient information and adapt
the step-size accordingly.
µ(n) = gϕ(Grad(n))
(2.4)
The learned step-size parameter µ(n) is then utilized to update the estimated filter
coeﬀicients bh(n) using Equation 2.5. This adaptive update of the filter coeﬀicients
incorporates the learned step-size parameter along with the gradient information
Grad(n).
bh(n) = c + gϕ(Grad(n))Grad(n)
(2.5)
Here c is a fixed reference filer coeﬀicients. By employing this feedforward neural
network architecture, our method enables the AFC model to dynamically adapt the
step-size parameter of the NLMS algorithm based on the time-varying gradient infor-
mation. This adaptive mechanism enhances the performance and adaptability of the
baseline model, enabling effective acoustic feedback cancellation in real-time scenar-
ios.
2) Loss:
The loss function L(·) is used to learn the neural network parameters ϕ in an end-to-
end manner. The loss function is designed to measure the difference between the real
feedback path filter coeﬀicients hna and the estimated feedback path filter coeﬀicients
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Proposed Algorithm
21
bh(n).
First, inspired by [CBS22], a time-domain independent loss function is defined as:
L(·) = 10 log10
 
1
L
nr+L
X
n=nr
||hna −ˆh(n)||2
||hna||2
!
(2.6)
Here, nr is randomly drawn from the set {1, · · · , ls} + L, where ls is the length of the
input signal and L represents the length of each signal segment. The loss function is
computed over L frames, and the squared difference between the real and estimated
feedback path filter coeﬀicients is normalized by the squared norm of the real feed-
back path filter coeﬀicients. Taking the logarithm of this normalized value reduces
the dynamic range of the loss, which can enhance the learning process of the neural
network [CBS22].
Additionally, a time-domain frame-accumulated loss is defined as:
Ln(·) = 10 log10
 
||hna −ˆh(n)||2
||hna||2
!
(2.7)
Here, hna and ˆh(n) represent the real feedback path filter coeﬀicients and the time-
domain estimated feedback path filter coeﬀicients, respectively. This loss is calculated
for each frame individually, allowing for a fine-grained assessment of the model’s per-
formance.
To compute the loss for a given optimizer gϕ, the AFC system is run for a time
horizon of L frames, during which the time-varying gradient information ∇(n) is
computed and used to update the estimated filter coeﬀicients using the proposed up-
date rules (Equation Equation 2.5). The time-domain normalized mean squared error
(NMSE) loss is then calculated for each frame and subsequently logarithmically scaled.
By incorporating these loss functions into the training process, the neural network
is optimized to minimize the dissimilarity between the estimated and real feedback
path filter coeﬀicients. This enables the neural network to learn the optimal step-size
parameter for the NLMS algorithm and improve the overall performance of the AFC
system.
2.2.2
Learning the neural network
To learn the feedforward neural network gϕ, certain signals such as the input signal
x(n), loudspeaker signal u(n), and microphone signal y(n) are preprocessed prior
to training. This preprocessing step helps reduce the training time and algorithmic
complexity. The training procedure for the neural network is outlined in Algorithm
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Methods and Theory
1. Before commencing the training process, the weights of the neural network are
randomly initialized to allow for exploration of different paths during training. The
error signal e(n) is set as an array of zeros with the same length as the input sig-
nal x(n).
Additionally, the reference filter coeﬀicients c are set within the range
of [−3hna, −2hna] and [4hna, 5hna], where hna represents the real feedback path co-
eﬀicients. These ranges are selected through grid search tuning and provide prior
knowledge about the correct direction for neural network training.
Once all the necessary initialization steps are completed, the training of the neural
network begins. Algorithm 1 illustrates the different loops involved in the training
process. The outer loop no represents an epoch, determining the number of times
the entire dataset is iterated during the training. The first inner loop na iterates
through the real feedback path dataset H, selecting one feedback path at a time until
all feedback paths have been processed. The selected real feedback path is then used
in the subsequent loops.
The second inner loop ni iterates through the loudspeaker signal dataset U and
the microphone signal dataset Y corresponding to the previously selected real feed-
back path.
These datasets are precalculated.
Within this loop, the loss function
L(·) is initialized to 0. Additionally, a signal is retrieved from the datasets at each
iteration, and a segment of length L is extracted from the signal. The starting time
index of the segment, denoted as nr, is randomly chosen.
The final inner loop k processes the segment in the time domain. It calculates
the error signal at time index k and uses it to compute the filter gradients ∇(k) at
the same time index. The neural network takes the filter gradients as input and gen-
erates a step-size parameter to update the estimated feedback path filter coeﬀicients.
The loss between the real and estimated feedback path coeﬀicients is computed and
accumulated until loop k completes. Moreover, the loss for the current segment is
obtained by averaging the accumulated loss and then taking the logarithm of it. This
loss value is subsequently used to update the weights of the neural network within
the inner loop ni.
For optimization, the Adam optimizer, a variant of stochastic gradient descent, is
employed to update the neural network weights. Adam uses adaptive learning rates
and momentum to iteratively adjust the weights based on the computed loss dur-
ing each inner loop ni. The learning rate for Adam is set to 0.0005. By updating
the weights in this manner, the neural network progressively learns the relationships
between the filter gradients and the step-size parameter, enhancing the adaptive ca-
pabilities of the AFC system.
By following this training algorithm and utilizing the Adam optimizer, the feed-
forward neural network can effectively learn the optimal step-size parameter for the
NLMS algorithm and improve the performance of the acoustic feedback cancellation
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Proposed Algorithm
23
system.
Algorithm 1 Training Neural Network for Baseline Model
1: Input: Dataset(X, H, U, Y ), Number of epochs No, Number of feedback path
samples Na, Number of signal segments Ni, length of signal segment K, learning
rate η
2: Initialize feedforward neural network with weights ϕ, error signal e(n), and fixed
reference filter coeﬀicients c
3: for no ←0 to No do
▷Loop over epochs
4:
for na ←0 to Na do
▷Loop over feedback path data samples
5:
for ni ←0 to Ni do
▷Loop over segments
6:
L = 0
7:
for k ←nr to nr + L do
▷Loop over audio samples(time domain)
8:
e(k) = ynani(k) −cT unani(k)
▷Compute error signal
9:
Gradnani(k) =
2u(n)e(n)
uT (n)u(n)+eT (n)e(n)·M+δ
▷Filter gradient
10:
bh(k) = c + gϕ(Gradnani(k))Gradnani(k) ▷Update estimated filter
coeﬀicients
11:
end for
12:
Ln = 10 log10

1
L
Pnr+L
nr
||hna−ˆh(n)||2
||hna||2

13:
ϕni+1 ←ϕni −η
∂L(ϕni)
∂ϕni
▷Update weights
14:
end for
15:
end for
16: end for
17: Output: Trained neural network with weights ϕNo
2.2.3
Neural Network Training
The next step is to train the neural network. The goal of AFC is to remove the feed-
back signal v(n) from microphone signal y(n) by mimicking a time-varing transfer
function in Figure 2.1. The feedback signal refers to the signal fed back from loud-
speaker into microphone. Microphone signal y(n) is a mixed signal of input signal
x(n) and feedback signal v(n). AFC system models the unknown transfer function
h(n) between loudspeaker and microphone, measures the noisy microphone signal
y(n) and loudspeaker signal u(n), and adapts the filter weights ϕ using learned neu-
ral network gϕ. The loss function is the Normalized Mean-Squared errors between
estimated feedback coeﬀicients and real feedback coeﬀicients.
The neural network is trained on the dataset using the backpropagation method
with the Adam optimizer, a stochastic gradient descent algorithm.
The training
algorithm, explained in detail in subsection 2.2.2, employs a time-domain frame ac-
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Methods and Theory
cumulated loss function and utilizes a batch size of one.
In real-world applications, Adaptive Feedback Cancellation (AFC) operates as
a closed-loop system, as depicted in Figure 2.3. However, for the purpose of sim-
plification and to mitigate uncertainties during training, an open-loop structure is
utilized in the training neural network. Furthermore, when training in the open-loop
configuration, it is assumed that the AFC system remains stable when it operates
in a closed-loop. By assuming stability, the training process can be simplified and
the neural network can be trained to estimate the feedback coeﬀicients effectively.
Under this assumption, the path from the microphone to the forward system is dis-
connected, and the noisy microphone signal, denoted as y(n) = x(n)+v(n), is directly
fed into the forward system. As a result, the adaptation of the adaptive filter does
not impact the outputs of the forward system, represented by the loudspeaker signal
u(n) = kT (n)y(n). In this case, the feedback signal v(n) can also be calculated in
advance: v(n) = h(n)T u(n).
The training process is visualized in Figure 2.4. Prior to training, the input signal
dataset X, the loudspeaker signal dataset U, the noisy microphone signal dataset Y ,
and the real feedback path dataset H are prepared. Following the steps outlined in
Algorithm 1, the Adam optimizer facilitates weight updates of the neural network at
each segment, utilizing a learning rate of 0.0005. The neural network architecture
consists of an input layer with 70 neurons, two hidden layers (one with 32 neurons
and another with 9 neurons), and an output layer with one neuron. The selection
of the optimizer type, learning rate, and the size of each layer within the neural
network is determined through grid search hyperparameter tuning, resulting in the
configuration that exhibits the best performance among all tested combinations. The
training process is performed for a total of 50 epochs.
Figure 2.4: Training in the Open-loop system
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Evaluation
25
2.3
Evaluation
In order to assess the performance and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm and
to make a meaningful comparison with the baseline model, a comprehensive evalua-
tion framework is established. This section provides an overview of the evaluation
process, highlighting the key aspects and metrics used to measure the performance
of the algorithms.
The evaluation plays a critical role in determining the eﬀicacy of the algorithms in
real-world scenarios. It aims to validate the ability of the algorithms to accurately es-
timate and cancel the feedback path, as well as to preserve the desired audio content.
The evaluation framework consists of various components, including data import, test
bench procedures, and performance metrics analysis.
Within the evaluation framework, several metrics are employed to quantify the
performance of the baseline model and the proposed algorithm. The choice of metrics
is essential in providing objective measures that reflect the quality of the feedback
cancellation system. The two primary metrics utilized in this study are the Normal-
ized Mean-Squared Error (NMSE) and the Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality
(PESQ).
• Normalized Mean-Squared Error (NMSE): NMSE calculates the difference between real
feedback path coeﬀicients and estimated feedback path coeﬀicients. In the context of
an acoustic feedback cancellation system, NMSE can provide insights into the accuracy of
the cancellation algorithm in terms of minimizing the residual error between the estimated
feedback and the actual feedback. A lower MSE value indicates a closer match between
the canceled signal and the original signal, implying better cancellation performance.
• Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ): For the hearing aid, speech signal is more
important for the users than other signal types. Therefore, PESQ is chosen as the sound
quality metrics in the project. The PESQ algorithm compares a reference (original or clean)
input signal with a degraded (processed or transmitted) version of the same speech signal,
which is loudspeaker signal u(n) in this project. It measures the perceptual difference
between the two signals by simulating the behavior of human listeners. The algorithm is
based on the concept of the auditory perception model, which takes into account the
characteristics of human hearing. In the context of an acoustic feedback cancellation
system, PESQ can provide a measure of how well the cancellation algorithm preserves
the quality and intelligibility of the speech signal. A higher PESQ score indicates better-
perceived speech quality, implying that the cancellation algorithm effectively mitigates
the negative effects of feedback.
By considering both NMSE and PESQ, a comprehensive understanding of the
acoustic feedback cancellation system’s performance can be gained. A low NMSE
indicates good cancellation accuracy in terms of reducing residual error, while a high
PESQ score reflects improved speech quality preservation. It’s important to strike a
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Methods and Theory
balance between these metrics, aiming for both low MSE and high PESQ scores to
achieve effective cancellation while maintaining perceptual speech quality.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Experiments, Results,
and Analysis
This chapter presents an experimental evaluation of the proposed algorithm, exam-
ining whether it can enhance the performance of baseline models in both static and
dynamic environments. The real feedback path coeﬀicients provided by Oticon A/S
ensure the authenticity of the experimental setup.
Meanwhile, the signal dataset
from MUSAN [SCP15] provides multiple recordings of music, speech, and noise for
evaluation. These experiments aim to evaluate the algorithm’s ability to effectively
cancel acoustic feedback and adapt to different environmental conditions, providing
valuable insights into its practical application. Through a detailed analysis of the
experimental results, this chapter aims to examine whether the proposed algorithm
is superior or has potential advantages over the baseline model.
The experimental setup incorporates both static and dynamic environments to
ensure a comprehensive assessment. The static environment establishes a baseline
for performance evaluation under stable acoustic conditions, while the dynamic envi-
ronment introduces varying acoustic dynamics and scenarios that simulate real-world
conditions.
The evaluation is conducted using various performance metrics as described in
section 2.3, including the normalized mean square error (NMSE) and the perceptual
evaluation of speech quality (PESQ). These metrics provide quantitative measures to
compare the proposed algorithm’s performance against the baseline model and assess
its effectiveness in real-world scenarios.
3.1
Dataset Description
3.1.1
Input Signal Dataset: MUSAN Dataset [SCP15]
The choice of the experiment dataset is crucial for training the neural network and
evaluating the models in this project. The MUSAN dataset has been selected as the
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
input signal dataset to ensure comprehensive analysis.
The MUSAN dataset, short for ”Music, Speech, and Noise,” is widely used in
speech and audio processing. It offers a diverse collection of audio recordings con-
sisting of music, speech, and various types of noise. The dataset is structured into
three main folders, each representing a different signal type: music, speech, and noise.
These folders further contain subfolders with the actual audio files, allowing for ex-
tensive experimentation and analysis within each category.
The music folder comprises various music recordings, including diverse genres,
styles, and instruments.
It includes four subfolders: ’fma’ (Free Music Archive),
’fma-western-art’ (Western Art Music), ’hd-classical’ (High-Definition Classical), and
’jamendo’. The ’fma’ folder contains 127 music audios from the Free Music Archive,
featuring music from diverse genres such as rock, pop, electronic, jazz, classical, and
more. The ’fma-western-art’ folder focuses on Western classical music and contains
92 music audios featuring classical compositions from different periods.
The ’hd-
classical’ folder comprises high-quality recordings of classical music performances by
notable orchestras, chamber ensembles, and soloists. The ’jamendo’ folder includes
74 music audios sourced from the Jamendo platform, encompassing a wide variety of
music genres from independent artists worldwide.
The speech folder contains recordings of various spoken content, such as conversa-
tions, speeches, and monologues. It offers many audio files covering diverse linguistic
characteristics, accents, and speaking styles. The ’speech’ folder has two subfolders:
’librivox’ and ’us-gov’. The ’librivox’ folder contains 172 recordings sourced from Lib-
riVox, offering speeches derived from literary works in the public domain, including
novels, short stories, and poetry. The ’us-gov’ folder includes 252 speech audios from
various United States government sources, featuring speeches by political figures, gov-
ernment oﬀicials, public service announcements, press conferences, and other oﬀicial
statements.
The noise folder comprises a collection of environmental sounds and other forms
of noise. It includes two subfolders: ’free-sound’ and ’sound-bible’. The ’free-sound’
subfolder contains 842 noise samples sourced from the FreeSound platform, offering
a wide range of sounds such as traﬀic noise, animal sounds, machinery sounds, and
nature sounds. The ’sound-bible’ subfolder comprises 86 noise samples obtained from
the SoundBible website, providing various sound effects such as explosions, footsteps,
crowd noise, sirens, alarms, and other distinctive sounds.
In summary, the MUSAN dataset provides a comprehensive and diverse collection
of audio recordings, with each signal type containing a substantial number of files.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Test Bench
29
3.1.2
Feedback Path Dataset: Oticon A/S Dataset
After carefully selecting the input signal dataset, choosing an appropriate feedback
path dataset is equally important. For this project, the feedback path dataset H is
provided by Oticon A/S company.
The feedback path dataset consists of 55 distinct feedback coeﬀicients recorded
during feedback experiments conducted with various testers. These coeﬀicients di-
rectly reflect the acoustic conditions and characteristics of the feedback path, as they
were obtained from real individuals. As a result, they provide a precise and realistic
representation of the feedback encountered in real-world scenarios.
3.2
Test Bench
Test Bench plays a role in evaluating the model’s performance. In this section, the
processing of building a test bench is described.
3.2.1
Dataset selection
An appropriate dataset is crucial to ensure unbiased results during the evaluation pro-
cess. In our approach, we construct the test bench dataset using two main sources:
the MUSAN dataset and the real feedback path dataset provided by Oticon. How-
ever, these two datasets will be used to train the neural network before constructing
the test bench dataset, so it is essential to avoid biased results by not reusing the
same data used for training the neural network. To address this concern, the test
bench dataset is selected from the MUSAN and Oticon’s real feedback path dataset,
excluding the signals and feedback paths used in the training dataset.
After excluding the data used for neural network training, the test bench selects
data carefully from the remaining signals and feedback paths. In order to evaluate
the model’s performance in different situations, the signal dataset for the test bench
consists of three different signal types: noise, music signals, and speech signals. To
ensure precise results and mitigate the impact of outliers, the test bench dataset in-
cludes ten feedback paths and ten signals for each signal type. One or two signals
from the music and speech sub-datasets may overlap with the training set due to
limitations in the total number of audio samples in the MUSAN dataset.
3.2.2
Test Bench set-up
In order to thoroughly evaluate the performance of the baseline model and the pro-
posed algorithm, a comprehensive test bench is developed. The test bench encom-
passes various functions and procedures to import signals, load feedback paths, run
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
the baseline model and the model with the proposed algorithm in static and dynamic
environments, and generate plots for analysis. This section provides an overview of
the test bench simulations and their key components.
It should be noted that the simulation is conducted in both static and dynamic
environments. The static environments represent scenarios where the feedback path
coeﬀicients remain constant all the time. However, in real-life scenarios, dynamic
environments are more prevalent due to factors such as changing positions, varying
acoustic conditions, and fluctuations in room acoustics.
To address this, the test
bench incorporates a function that simulates changes in the applied feedback path
coeﬀicients every 2.5 seconds, mimicking real-life dynamic conditions. This enables a
comprehensive evaluation of the algorithm’s performance under various environmen-
tal conditions.
The test bench is designed to stimulate a realistic evaluation environment, taking
into consideration different input signal types and varying acoustic conditions. The
following steps outline the workflow of the test bench:
1. Data Import: The test bench begins by loading the necessary data from the
MUSAN dataset and Oticon A/S dataset. Specifically, three different functions
are defined to load and preprocess the three signal types (noise, music, and
speech), and one function is defined to load the feedback path data. Loading
signal functions ensure the signals are resampled to a uniform sampling rate
of 20 kHz and extract a random signal segment with a 10-second duration for
each signal to form the signal dataset. So the input signal has 200k samples
in total.
Additionally, a function is implemented to load the real feedback
paths, providing the real scenarios for performance evaluation. In the static
environment, the feedback path is static during the simulation. However, in
order to stimulate the real scenarios, the feedback path will be changed to
a new one every 2.5 seconds after processing the input signal dataset, which
is every 50k samples. In the end, there will 4 different feedback paths while
processing the input signal. A special feedback path dataset loader function is
built to construct 10 lists with 4 different feedback paths each. The feedback
path will be dynamic during the simulation and the model needs to re-estimate
a new feedback coeﬀicient every 2.5 seconds.
2. Evaluation Loop: Two loops are constructed to iterate over the input and real
feedback paths, creating various combinations of input and real feedback paths.
Allowing for the computation of time-domain normalized mean-squared errors
(NMSE) between the real and estimated feedback paths and the assessment of
sound quality for the degraded signals. The test bench considers a total of ten
input signals and corresponding real feedback paths, resulting in a total of 100
combinations for evaluation.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Experiments with Baseline model
31
3. Plotting Figures: After processing all the data, the test bench generates several
informative plots to analyze the performance of the baseline model and the
proposed algorithm. The following plots are produced:
• Overall NMSE Boxplot: This plot presents the general distribution of NMSE values for
all the evaluated combinations. By visualizing the boxplot, valuable insights can be
gained regarding the range of NMSE values, the maximum and minimum values, and
the mean NMSE value. This allows for a comprehensive assessment of the algorithm’s
performance across signal and feedback path combinations.
• Convergence Rate: This plot illustrates the convergence behavior of the NMSE val-
ues over time. It provides valuable information about the speed and stability of the
adaptation process. By analyzing the convergence rate, insights can be obtained re-
garding the algorithm’s ability to estimate the changing feedback path coeﬀicients
accurately.
• Mean of Standard Deviation of NMSE Boxplot: This plot displays the mean value of the
standard deviation of NMSE for each combination of an input signal and a feedback
path. Plotting the mean of the standard deviation represents the variability or disper-
sion of the NMSE values around the mean. It quantifies how much the NMSE values
deviate from the average value. In the context of feedback cancellation systems, a
higher standard deviation indicates greater variability in the estimation performance,
suggesting that the algorithm may struggle to adapt to changing feedback path co-
eﬀicients or environmental conditions.
• Steady-State Level for NMSE: This plot calculates the steady-state level of NMSE by
computing the mean values of the NMSE vector over the last 5000 samples. It as-
sumes that the NMSE curves will converge in the end. An understanding of the algo-
rithm’s performance in maintaining a stable estimation of the feedback path coeﬀi-
cients can be gained by analyzing the steady-state level.
• PESQ Boxplot: This plot presents the distribution of PESQ scores for the evaluated com-
binations. PESQ is a perceptual audio quality metric that assesses the perceived
quality of degraded signals. By visualizing the boxplot of PESQ scores, the algorithm’s
impact on sound quality can be analyzed, providing insights into its ability to preserve
audio quality while canceling feedback.
3.3
Experiments with Baseline model
To compare the performance of the proposed algorithm with the baseline model, an
experiment was conducted to determine one or two optimal step sizes for the baseline
model. The experiment assessed the convergence rate, steady-state level, and vari-
ance of the loss function as key metrics for selecting optimal step size. The baseline
model was evaluated using three different signal types: white noise, music signals, and
speech signals. The following sections describe the details of the experiment setup.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
3.3.1
Experiment set-up
The experiment setup to find the optimal step size value for the baseline model con-
sisted of several stages, including dataset selection and preprocessing, baseline model
configuration, and step-size evaluation.
The following section provides a detailed
overview of each stage.
The first stage of the experiment is the dataset selection and preprocessing. Ten
different feedback paths were chosen from Oticon A/S Dataset to simulate the real
situation. The feedback paths are fixed during the experiment, so the experiment will
only be conducted in a static environment. Additionally, the baseline model with op-
timal step size and the model with the trained neural network will be evaluated in
the test bench under three different signal types, so the experiment for finding the
baseline model’s optimal step size should also have three different input signal types.
Ten different input signals were prepared for each signal type, providing diverse input
signal variations. The selected signals are chosen from the MUSAN dataset, exclud-
ing those used for the test bench. To build an evaluation dataset for the baseline
model, the selected signals are all re-sampled to 20k Hz, and a random 10-second
audio segment is extracted from each signal.
The second stage of the experiment is the baseline model configuration and step-
size evaluation. The baseline model utilized the NLMS algorithm for adaptive filtering.
The model’s parameters were configured in section 2.1. A range of step size values
[2−10, 2−9, 2−8, 2−7] were evaluated to identify the optimal step sizes for the baseline
model.
The next stage is step-size evaluation. The evaluation process was performed it-
eratively for each combination of step size, feedback path, and input signal. The
baseline model was reset to its initial configuration before running with a new com-
bination. The model was trained using the specific input signal and feedback path
associated with the current iteration. NMSE values and performance metrics, such as
convergence rate, steady-state level, and variance of the loss function, were computed
and recorded.
The final stage of the experiment is to analyze the results of the experiment. The
collected NMSE values and performance metrics were analyzed to compare the per-
formance of the baseline model across different step sizes, feedback paths, and input
signals. Visualizations, such as general NMSE boxplots, mean of the standard devi-
ation boxplots, steady-state level, and convergence rate, were generated to identify
the baseline model’s most suitable step size(s).
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Experiments with Baseline model
33
3.3.2
Results
In this section, the results of the baseline model with different step sizes under differ-
ent scenarios are plotted and analyzed.
3.3.3
White Noise
For the white noise input, the test bench results are presented in Figure 3.1. The
first three subfigures consist of boxplots, where each column represents a different
step size applied to the baseline model. The black line within each box represents the
median value of the results.
In the upper left subfigure of Figure 3.1, the normalized mean squared errors
(NMSE) are depicted over time and iterations when the input signal is white noise.
It is evident that smaller step sizes yield lower median NMSE values obtained by the
baseline model. The box size indicates the range of NMSE, with narrower ranges
observed for smaller step sizes. This observation can be attributed to the fact that
the baseline model with a smaller step size requires more time to converge, resulting
in a wider range of NMSE values over time.
In the upper right subfigure of Figure 3.1, the mean values of the standard de-
viations of NMSE are illustrated. The black line represents the mean value of the
standard deviation of NMSE. The figure shows that larger step sizes lead to smaller
standard deviations. While a smaller standard deviation is generally desirable, it is
important to consider the implications for AFC systems. A larger standard deviation
can indicate either a longer adaptation time for the algorithm, suggesting ineﬀiciency
in convergence, or system instability, resulting in oscillations or irregular patterns in
NMSE values. Taking both factors into account, a step size of µ = 2−7 exhibits stable
performance with less susceptibility to fluctuations.
The lower-left subfigure in Figure 3.1 demonstrates that larger step sizes corre-
spond to higher steady-state levels achieved by the model. If we focus solely on the
final steady-state level of the loss function, the model performs best when the step
size is µ = 2−10. The lower-right subfigure also provides an example from the 100
combinations, confirming the earlier observations. It shows that the model exhibits
higher steady-state levels and faster convergence as the step size increases.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
Figure 3.1: Test bench result for ten white noise segments and ten feedback paths in
a stationary environment. The upper left figure is General Normalized Mean Squared
Errors for white noise. The upper right figure is the mean of the standard deviation
for white noise. The lower left figure is the steady-state level for white noise. The
lower right figure is an example of the test bench combination.
Considering all these factors, step sizes of µ = 2−8 and µ = 2−9 are chosen as
the optimal values for white noise input. At these step sizes, the model is stable,
converges relatively well, and achieves an acceptable steady-state level.
3.3.3.1
Speech Signal
The second input signal type is speech signal, and the test bench results for this input
are illustrated in Figure 3.2. One notable distinction between white noise and speech
signals is the complexity of information. Speech signals exhibit greater variability
over time, resulting in a longer convergence time for the baseline model. This char-
acteristic is clearly demonstrated in the example shown in the lower-right subfigure.
In comparison to the example from Figure 3.1, it is evident that the loss function
curves converge at a slower rate for all step sizes when speech signals are used as in-
put. The loss function curve for µ = 2−10 fails to converge due to its extremely slow
convergence rate. This observation is further supported by the upper-left subfigure
in Figure 3.2, where the range of NMSE values for µ = 2−10 is narrower than that
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Experiments with Baseline model
35
for µ = 2−9.
Figure 3.2: Test bench result for ten speech signal segments and ten feedback paths
in a stationary environment.
The upper left figure is General Normalized Mean
Squared Errors for speech signal. The upper right figure is the mean of the standard
deviation for speech signal. The lower left figure is the steady-state level for speech
signals. The lower right figure is an example of the test bench combination.
Contrary to the findings in the mean of the standard deviation of NMSE plot in
Figure 3.1, the mean value of the standard deviation in the upper-right subfigure of
Figure 3.2 increases with larger step sizes for the speech signal input. This behavior
can be attributed to the more complex power spectral content of speech signals com-
pared to white noise. While the power spectral density of white noise is uniformly
distributed across all frequencies, enabling the baseline model to evenly explore the
frequency spectrum and converge quickly, speech signals exhibit a non-uniform power
distribution across frequencies. This complexity introduces challenges in accurately
estimating the feedback path coeﬀicients, resulting in larger standard deviations.
Furthermore, white noise and speech signals differ significantly in terms of signal
correlation. White noise is uncorrelated, lacking inherent relationships or structures
between successive samples. This lack of correlation allows the NLMS algorithm in
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
the baseline model to update the filter coeﬀicients independently for each sample,
leading to faster convergence. In contrast, speech signals exhibit high temporal and
spectral correlation, where neighboring samples and frequency components are often
interrelated. This correlation necessitates the NLMS algorithm to rely on previous
estimates and adapt more slowly to capture the varying characteristics of the input
signal. These differences are further supported by the computation of ”steady-state”
levels based on a ten-second audio segment. It’s important to note that these levels
do not indicate full convergence of the NMSE curve but rather the point at which the
segment ends. Thus, it’s possible for the NMSE curve of the AFC system to still be
decreasing, resulting in a higher ”steady-state” level for the NMSE curve when the
step size is µ = 2−10 compared to µ = 2−9.
Considering all these factors, the optimal step sizes for the speech signal input are
chosen as µ = 2−9 and µ = 2−10.
3.3.3.2
Music Signal
The final signal type considered is the music signal. Like the speech signal, music
signals possess more complex spectral content than white noise, requiring additional
time for the baseline model to accurately estimate the feedback path coeﬀicients. This
observation is reflected in the similarity between the mean of standard deviation plots
for music and speech signals. However, compared to speech signals, estimating the
feedback path becomes even more challenging when music signals are used as input.
Music signals can exhibit a wider frequency range, with energy distributed across
various frequency bands, while speech signals typically have a narrower bandwidth
with most energy concentrated in lower frequencies.
In addition to the differences in spectral content, speech and music signals also
differ in their temporal dynamics. Speech signals often exhibit rapid changes and vari-
ations in pitch, intensity, and phonetic content due to the nature of human speech
production. On the other hand, music signals, depending on the genre and instru-
ments involved, can possess more complex and structured temporal patterns. Conse-
quently, the convergence rate of the NLMS algorithm when music signals are used as
input is slower than for speech signals.
These factors contribute to the higher overall NMSE in the upper-left subfigure
and ”steady-state level” in the lower-left subfigure in Figure 3.3 observed for music
signals compared to speech signals. Accurately estimating the feedback path for mu-
sic signals becomes a more challenging task for the baseline model.
Determining the optimal step-size value for music signals poses a challenge due to
the overall performance of the baseline model. Considering the factors of convergence
rate, standard deviation, and steady-state value, a step-size value of µ = 2−9 emerges
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Experiments with Baseline model
37
Figure 3.3: Test bench result for ten music signal segments and ten feedback paths
in a stationary environment. The upper left figure is Normalized Mean Squared Errors
for music signal. The upper right figure is the mean of the standard deviation for the
music signal. The lower left figure is the steady-state level for the music signal. The
lower right figure is an example of the test bench combination.
as the most favorable option. When the step-size value is µ = 2−9, the baseline model
exhibits similar NMSE distribution and steady-state levels to other matters but with
faster convergence than µ = 2−10. Consequently, µ = 2−9 represents the best choice
among the four evaluated step sizes for music signals.
3.3.4
Experiment Conclusion
In this experiment, the performance of the baseline model was evaluated for different
step sizes when applied to white noise, speech, and music signals. The goal was to
determine the optimal step size for each input signal type.
For white noise input, the baseline model demonstrated relatively good perfor-
mance with step sizes of 2−8 and 2−9. These step sizes resulted in lower normalized
mean squared errors (NMSE) and narrower ranges of NMSE values over time, indi-
cating better convergence and stability.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
In the case of speech signals, the baseline model faced challenges and did not per-
form as well as with white noise. However, among the range of step sizes tested, the
model with step sizes 2−9 and 2−10 exhibited better performance compared to the
other step sizes. Although the convergence rate was slower for speech signals, these
step sizes achieved lower NMSE values and showed narrower ranges of NMSE values,
suggesting more stable behavior.
On the other hand, when music signals were used as input, the baseline model
encountered more diﬀiculties due to the complex spectral content and temporal dy-
namics of music.
However, among the step sizes evaluated, 2−9 emerged as the
optimal choice. The baseline model with a step size of 2−9 demonstrated the best
performance in terms of NMSE distribution, steady-state levels, and convergence rate
compared to the other step sizes.
In summary, the experiment revealed that the performance of the baseline model
varied depending on the input signal type and the chosen step size. For white noise,
step sizes of 2−8 and 2−9 were found to be optimal. In the case of speech signals, step
sizes of 2−9 and 2−10 yielded better results. Finally, for music signals, a step size of
2−9 was determined to be the most favorable option.
3.4
Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline
model
This section describes the training process of the neural network and presents exper-
iments that compare the model with the neural network to the baseline model. The
experimental results are then plotted and analyzed.
3.4.1
Neural network training
3.4.1.1
Dataset
Constructing an appropriate training dataset is crucial before commencing the neu-
ral network training process. As explained in subsection 2.2.3, the training dataset
consists of three signal datasets (input signal dataset X, loudspeaker signal dataset
U, and noisy microphone signal dataset Y ) and one real feedback path dataset H.
To effectively train the neural network to handle diverse signal types encountered
in practical scenarios, the input signal dataset is extracted from the MUSAN dataset
[SCP15]. The MUSAN dataset offers three distinct signal types: noise, music, and
speech, each providing a wide range of acoustic characteristics that comprehensively
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
39
cover various scenarios.
The training dataset only comprises a total of 1000 signals due to the device limi-
tation. Approximately 20% of the dataset is randomly generated, while 40% consists
of music signals obtained from the ”Music” folder in the MUSAN dataset. From the
subfolders of the music files, 100, 92, 74, and 134 signals are extracted in the order
”fma,” ”fma-western-art,” ”hd-classical,” and ”jamendo,” respectively. The remain-
ing 40% of the dataset contains speech signals, with two folders dedicated to reading
stories and public speaking.
To facilitate training, random segments of 10 seconds are extracted from each sig-
nal within the training dataset, resulting in segments with a duration of 10 seconds
and a sampling rate of 20 kHz, corresponding to 200,000 samples per segment.
3.4.1.2
Training
After constructing the training dataset, the hyperparameters are initialized according
to the description in subsection 2.2.3. The training process begins after completing all
the necessary preparations. The training involves looping over all the signal datasets
and feedback path datasets to create various combinations. After processing each com-
bination of the signal and feedback path, the optimizer (Adam) updates the weights
of the neural network.
This learning process continues until all the combinations
have been iterated for 10 epochs.
Following the completion of neural network training, a comprehensive evaluation
is essential to compare the performance of the baseline model and the model with the
proposed algorithm in real-world scenarios. Unlike the open-loop setup used during
training, the comparison is conducted in a closed-loop configuration to closely mimic
real-life conditions. This approach allows for a more accurate assessment of the sys-
tem’s performance.
3.4.2
Experiment set-up
The experiment is designed to compare the performance of the baseline model with
a fixed step size to the model with the trained neural network.
To ensure a comprehensive evaluation, the comparison is carried out in two dis-
tinct environments: static and dynamic. The static environment assumes constant
feedback path coeﬀicients over time, while the dynamic environment reflects real-life
scenarios where feedback path coeﬀicients can vary due to factors such as changes in
position, acoustic conditions, and room acoustics. By evaluating the models in both
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
static and dynamic environments, we can assess their effectiveness and robustness
across different scenarios.
The detailed experiment setup has been described in subsection 3.2.2 previously.
Through this comparative analysis, we aim to assess the performance improve-
ments achieved by the model with the proposed algorithm in real-world settings,
providing valuable insights into its potential for enhancing acoustic feedback cancel-
lation systems.
3.4.3
Result
In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of the experimental results and compare
the performance of the baseline model with the proposed method. The evaluation
is based on two key metrics: Normalized Mean Square Error (NMSE) for measuring
the accuracy of estimated feedback path coeﬀicients, and Perceptual Evaluation of
Speech Quality (PESQ) for assessing the sound quality of the filtered signal.
3.4.3.1
Static Environment
The first experiment was conducted in a static environment, where the feedback path
remained fixed throughout the evaluation.
For the noise signal input type, the proposed algorithm showed slightly worse over-
all NMSE and NMSE steady-state levels compared to the baseline model. However,
it demonstrated better system stability performance, as indicated by the lower mean
of the standard deviation for the proposed signal. This suggests that the proposed
algorithm is more consistent and reliable in varying noise conditions. On the other
hand, the baseline model with two different optimal step-size values showed that the
overall NMSE and NMSE steady-state levels were lower when using a step size of
2−9 compared to 2−8. Interestingly, the example plot indicated that the proposed
algorithm had a faster convergence rate but a higher steady-state level. This might be
due to the trained neural network producing slightly larger outputs than the optimal
size 2−8. The slower convergence rate of the baseline model with a step size of 2−9
suggests that it may prioritize minimizing NMSE without adequately considering per-
ceptual features that contribute to speech quality, such as intelligibility, naturalness,
and clarity.
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
41
Figure 3.4: Test Bench Results for Noise Signal in a static environment. The left
subfigure in the first line is the NMSE boxplot. The right figure in the first line is the
mean of the standard deviation for the noise signal. The left figure in the second line
shows the models’ steady-state level. The right figure in the second line is the sound
quality for the models. The bottom figure is an example of all the combinations of
signals and feedback paths.
Regarding sound quality scores, both the proposed algorithm and baseline models
achieved relatively high scores around 4.13, indicating good speech quality. However,
the minimal difference of approximately 0.002 in PESQ scores between the proposed
algorithm and the baseline model is unlikely to be perceptible to most individuals,
including hearing aid users. This small discrepancy falls within the range of measure-
ment variability or statistical noise. Similarly, the difference of 0.001 in PESQ scores
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
between the baseline model with step size 2−8 and 2−9 is also negligible. These find-
ings suggest that, in practical terms, the proposed algorithm performs comparably to
the baseline models in terms of speech quality. However, it is worth noting that the
baseline model with a step size of 2−9 achieves a significantly lower steady-state level
and overall NMSE compared to the step size of 2−8. This raises questions about the
advantages of having a lower steady-state level, as the slower convergence rate of the
baseline model with a smaller step size might compromise perceptual features.
Figure 3.5: Neural Network Outputs for Noise Signal in a static environment.
The neural network output for noise signal is plotted in Figure 3.5. In the box-
plot, to visualize the spread of the data, it is crucial to compute the interquartile
range (IQR), which is defined as the difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles
of the data, also called the difference between the upper quartile and lower quartile
of the box. It can be seen that the IQR for neural network outputs is very small,
indicating that the neural network outputs for noise signals in a static environment
are a constant value.
The test bench results for the speech signal in a static environment are presented
in Figure 3.6. The upper left sub-figure displays the Normalized Mean Square Er-
ror (NMSE) distribution for the models. The proposed algorithm and the baseline
model with two different fixed step sizes exhibit similar NMSE distributions. In the
sub-figure on the left in the second line, representing the NMSE steady-state level,
two baseline models reach a lower NMSE steady-state level than the system with
the proposed algorithm. Among the two baseline models with two different step sizes,
the baseline model with a step size of 2−9 achieves the slighter lower steady-state level.
Analyzing the subplot in the upper right corner, it is evident that the median
value of the mean standard deviation for the proposed algorithm is higher than that
of the two baseline models, which suggests that the NMSE of the system with the
proposed algorithm exhibits more variability than the other systems. Comparatively,
the baseline model has a more extensive interquartile range (IQR), indicating that
the mean standard deviation values are more spread out. In contrast, most of the
proposed algorithm’s mean standard deviation values are concentrated within a nar-
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
43
rower range. Typically, a model with a smaller range of mean standard deviation
values between the lower quartile (Q1) and upper quartile (Q3) signifies more stable
and consistent performance. However, the example plot reveals fluctuations in the
NMSE curve of the system with the proposed algorithm, indicating that its perfor-
mance varies across different time points or input conditions.
Figure 3.6: Test Bench Results for Speech Signal in a static environment. The left
subfigure in the first line is the NMSE boxplot. The right figure in the first line is the
mean of the standard deviation for the speech signal. The left figure in the second line
shows the models’ steady-state level. The right figure in the second line is the sound
quality for the models. The bottom figure is an example of all the combinations of
signals and feedback paths.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
There are several potential reasons for this behavior. Firstly, the trained neural
network might be overly sensitive to variations or changes in the input conditions,
leading to significant fluctuations in its performance even with minor changes in the
input signals or parameters. Secondly, the neural network may have yet to capture
the complexities of speech signals during training effectively. This could be attributed
to insuﬀicient diversity in the speech signal training dataset or limitations in the neu-
ral network’s structure, hindering its ability to capture speech-specific features. The
neural network outputs are plotted in Figure 3.7 to investigate the underlying rea-
sons. The example plot on the left demonstrates that the neural network attempts to
output different step values based on the varying gradient information of the speech
signal over time. The distribution of the neural network outputs in the right box
plot further supports this observation. However, the small IQR indicates that most
neural network outputs are around a narrow range of values. Hence, it is evident that
the neural network may encounter diﬀiculties capturing the complexities of speech
signals during training.
Regarding sound quality, the Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ)
score demonstrates the system’s consistency with the proposed algorithm’s feedback
cancellation performance. However, it is worth noting that the PESQ score of the
baseline model with a step size of 2−10 is higher than that of 2−9, despite the system
with a baseline model with step size 2−9 exhibiting better cancellation performance.
This discrepancy could be attributed to a trade-off between cancellation performance
and perceived speech quality. The smaller step size in the baseline model may lead
to a higher PESQ score due to better preservation of speech quality, albeit at the ex-
pense of some cancellation performance, as indicated by the worse steady-state level
of NMSE.
Figure 3.7: Neural Network Outputs for speech signal in a static environment. The
left figure is an example of one signal and one feedback path. The right figure is a
boxplot for all the neural network outputs.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
45
Figure 3.8: Test Bench Results for Music Signal in a static environment. The left
subfigure in the first line is the NMSE boxplot. The right figure in the first line is the
mean of the standard deviation for the music signal. The left figure in the second line
shows the models’ steady-state level. The right figure in the second line is the sound
quality for the models. The bottom figure is an example of all the combinations of
signals and feedback paths.
Figure 3.8 depicts the test bench results for the music signal in a static environ-
ment. The upper left figure illustrates that the NMSE values of the system with the
proposed algorithm are similar to the systems with two baseline models. It can be ob-
served that the NMSE of the proposed algorithm system exhibits a similar spread of
values within the middle 50%, comparable to the baseline models. Furthermore, the
system with the proposed algorithm exhibits more outliers than those with the two
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
baseline models. These findings indicate that the NMSE of the proposed algorithm
system follows the converging direction of the NMSE of the two baseline models but
with some fluctuations.
Analyzing the plot of the mean of the standard deviation of NMSE, it becomes
apparent that the system with the proposed algorithm has a higher median value
of standard deviation and a smaller Interquartile Range (IQR). The higher median
standard deviation value suggests a broader range of variation in the NMSE of the
system with the proposed algorithm. Meanwhile, the smaller IQR indicates that 50%
of the NMSE values of the system with the proposed algorithm have relatively higher
standard deviations. At the same time, the remaining groups exhibit relatively lower
standard deviations.
The subfigure on the left in the second line shows that the steady-state level of
NMSE for the system with the proposed algorithm is higher than that of the two base-
line models, indicating a poorer performance in mitigating feedback signals. However,
the right subfigure in the second line demonstrates a high mean value of sound qual-
ity, which is inconsistent with the system’s performance if using NMSE as a standard
metric. This discrepancy suggests that the filtered signal retained the music-specific
features despite sacrificing the system’s cancellation performance, resulting in im-
proved sound quality.
The neural network outputs for the music signal are visualized in Figure 3.9 . An-
alyzing the example in the left figure, it becomes apparent that the neural network
produces varying step-size values over time. The distribution of the neural network
output demonstrates a wide range of values, suggesting that the neural network also
struggles to capture the complexities of the music signal. This results in large fluctu-
ations of the NMSE of the system with the proposed algorithm in the example figure
inFigure 3.8
Figure 3.9: Neural Network Outputs for music signal in a static environment. The
left figure is an example of one signal and one feedback path. The right figure is a
boxplot for all the neural network outputs.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
47
3.4.3.2
Dynamic Environment
Following the comparison of the proposed algorithm and the baseline model in a static
environment, it is crucial to evaluate their performance in dynamic environments.
As described in subsection 3.2.2, the experiment involves a 10-second signal seg-
ment with a sampling rate of 20 kHz taken from the signals in the MUSAN dataset.
The feedback path dataset consists of 10 lists, each containing four different feedback
paths. The feedback paths are randomly drawn from Oticon A/S Dataset directly.
The subsequent part presents the test bench results obtained from these experiments.
We begin by examining the performance of the first input signal type, noise. The
test bench results are depicted in Figure 3.10. In contrast to the static environment
results shown in Figure 3.4, the NMSE curves in the dynamic environment exhibit a
cyclic pattern. Approximately every 2.5 seconds (50000 samples), the NMSE values
for each system experience an increase and then decrease because of the changes of
feedback path, indicating that the models rapidly adapt to the dynamic nature of the
environment.
Analyzing the upper left figure representing the NMSE for the systems with each
model, we observe that the mean NMSE values are comparable. However, the system
with proposed algorithm displays a smaller Interquartile Range (IQR), implying that
NMSE values are more concentrated and exhibit lower variation. This is further sup-
ported by the lower median value of the standard deviation of NMSE for the system
with the proposed algorithm.
In the NMSE steady-state level figure, the baseline model with a step size of
2−8 achieves a lower steady-state level than the system with the proposed algorithm
and the system with the baseline model with step size 2−9. Despite the significant
fluctuations in NMSE values due to the dynamic changes, all models exhibit high
sound quality scores, only slightly lower than those observed in the static environ-
ment.
This suggests that the sound quality remains fine throughout, despite the
variations in NMSE values.
Furthermore, upon closer examination of the example figure between time index
0 and 100000, we observe that the NMSE curve for the proposed algorithm converges
faster than that of the baseline model while reaching a similar NMSE level when the
feedback path changes. This highlights one of the potential benefits of employing the
proposed algorithm in dynamic environments.
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
Figure 3.10: Test Bench Results for Noise Signal in a dynamic environment. The
upper left subfigure is the NMSE boxplot. The upper right figure is the mean of the
standard deviation of NMSE of each model. The left figure in the second line shows
the models’ NMSE steady-state level. The right figure in the second line is the sound
quality for the models. The bottom figure is an example of all the combinations of
signals and feedback paths.
Figure 3.11 plots the neural network outputs for noise signals in a dynamic en-
vironment. Unlike the outputs for noise signals in a static environment, the neural
network outputs in a dynamic environment fluctuate more. The neural network out-
puts are higher than the step size values used for the baseline models.
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
49
Figure 3.11: Neural Network Outputs for Noise Signal in a dynamic environment.
The left figure is an example of one signal and one feedback path. The right figure is
a boxplot for all the neural network outputs.
The next signal type considered is speech signal. Compared to the noise signal,
the speech signal possesses a broader range of frequencies, making it more challeng-
ing for all models to cancel the feedback effects effectively.
The upper left figure
in Figure 3.12 illustrates the NMSE values for all systems with each model’s per-
formance. The mean NMSE values for these three models are approximately 0 dB,
indicating that the estimated feedback path coeﬀicients ˆh(n) are close to 0 based on
Equation 1.17. The NMSE steady-state level for each system is relatively high com-
pared to the NMSE steady level in the static environment. This can be attributed
to the complexities of the speech signal, which require the models to take more time
to estimate and cancel the feedback path accurately. These systems have time to
estimate slowly in a static environment, resulting in a lower NMSE steady-state level.
Nevertheless, in dynamic environments, precise estimation of the feedback path be-
comes challenging because the feedback path changes over time, resulting in higher
NMSE values, steady-state levels, and lower standard deviation values of NMSE.
Comparing the NMSE for speech signal in the static environment plotted in Fig-
ure 3.6, we observe that the systems with the proposed algorithm and the baseline
model with two different step sizes perform significantly worse in NMSE in dynamic
environments due to their slower convergence rate. However, despite the high NMSE
values in dynamic environments, the sound quality scores for the proposed algorithm
system and the baseline models with different step sizes remain acceptable. They
are even slightly higher compared to the scores in a static environment. This indi-
cates that the models can still preserve the perceptual features of the speech signal
to some extent, even in the presence of high NMSE values. The performance of the
models evaluated using an NMSE cost function exhibits inconsistency when using
PESQ (Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality), a metric for sound quality. When
the model achieves low NMSE values, it can cancel some feedback effects effectively.
However, it may also inadvertently cancel certain perceptual features of the speech
signal, resulting in lower sound quality. On the other hand, when the model achieves
slightly higher NMSE values, around or below 0 dB, the feedback signal can still
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
degrade sound quality, but it preserves more of the essential speech signal features.
This represents a trade-off between NMSE and sound quality.
Figure 3.12: Test Bench Results for Speech Signal in a dynamic environment. The
upper left subfigure is the NMSE boxplot. The upper right figure is the mean of the
standard deviation of NMSE of each model. The left figure in the second line shows
the models’ NMSE steady-state level. The right figure in the second line is the sound
quality for the models. The bottom figure is an example of all the combinations of
signals and feedback paths.
Examining the neural network outputs in Figure 3.13, we observe that the neu-
ral network attempts to adjust its outputs based on the input gradient information.
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
51
However, it struggles to effectively capture the speech signal’s intricate features effec-
tively, as evidenced by the fluctuations and lack of precision in the neural network
outputs. Also, the neural network outputs are much higher than the two step size
values used for the baseline model.
Figure 3.13: Neural Network Outputs for speech signal in a dynamic environment.
The left figure is an example of one signal and one feedback path. The right figure is
a boxplot for all the neural network outputs.
The final signal type considered is music signal, and the corresponding test bench
results are presented in Figure 3.14. In the upper left figure, the median NMSE val-
ues for the systems with all three models are very close, indicating that these three
systems have similar abilities to estimate feedback paths. However, the system with
the proposed algorithm exhibits a broader range of NMSE values compared to the
other two systems, as indicated by its higher mean value of the standard deviation
of NMSE. This means the NMSE values of the system with the proposed algorithm
fluctuate. From the left figure in the second line, it can be observed that the system
with the proposed algorithm achieves a lower steady-state level, suggesting better
feedback cancellation performance. However, the interquartile range (IQR) of the
steady-state level of NMSE is more extensive for the proposed algorithm system, in-
dicating significant fluctuations in its NMSE values. These fluctuations could be the
reason for the lower sound quality scores observed for the proposed algorithm system
compared to the other systems.
==PAGE:62==
52
3 Experiments, Results, and Analysis
Figure 3.14: Test Bench Results for Music Signal in a dynamic environment. The
upper left subfigure is the NMSE boxplot. The upper right figure is the mean of the
standard deviation of NMSE of each model. The left figure in the second line shows
the models’ NMSE steady-state level. The right figure in the second line is the sound
quality for the models. The bottom figure is an example of all the combinations of
signals and feedback paths.
The example figure in Figure 3.14 demonstrates that the system with the proposed
algorithm exhibits a faster convergence rate, enabling it to achieve relatively lower
NMSE values than the other two systems. However, the neural network outputs de-
picted in Figure 3.15 reflect a similar situation as the speech signal, where the neural
network struggles to effectively generate the step size due to diﬀiculties in capturing
the gradient information.
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Experiments with Neural Network and the baseline model
53
Figure 3.15: Neural Network Outputs for Music signal in a dynamic environment.
The left figure is an example of one signal and one feedback path. The right figure is
a boxplot for all the neural network outputs.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
This project aimed to optimize existing solutions for the acoustic feedback problem by
introducing a simple learning algorithmic model on top of a baseline NLMS algorithm.
The goal was to investigate the improvement in system performance, specifically in
terms of Normalized Mean Squared Errors (NMSE), compared to the baseline model
in static and dynamic acoustical conditions with various background signals such as
noise, speech, and music.
Additionally, the consistency of the optimized learning
algorithm model’s performance was evaluated using metrics such as Perceptual Eval-
uation of Speech Quality (PESQ) and NMSE.
The experiments were conducted in static and dynamic environments using three
input signal types: noise, speech, and music. The system’s performance was evaluated
based on the NMSE curve, NMSE steady-state level, mean values of the standard de-
viation of NMSE, and sound quality scores.
Regarding the goals stated in section 1.4, the system with the proposed algorithm
did not improve the NMSE of the baseline model in a static environment when the
input signal was noise, music, or speech. Specifically, when the input signal was noise,
the system with the proposed algorithm did not significantly improve the performance
of the baseline model, except for achieving a faster convergence rate, as shown in Fig-
ure 3.4. However, for speech and music signals, the NMSE curve of the system with
the proposed algorithm exhibited high fluctuations and poor NMSE values compared
to the baseline model, as illustrated in Figure 3.6 and Figure 3.8.
In the dynamic environment, the system with the proposed algorithm also did
not improve the NMSE of the baseline model for noise, music, or speech signals.
When the input signal was noise, the system with the proposed algorithm showed a
faster convergence rate and lower mean NMSE values but a higher steady-state level.
Even though the proposed algorithm didn’t improve the NMSE of the baseline model,
the system performed adequately for noise signals. However, for speech signals, the
NMSE values of the system with the proposed algorithm exhibited much higher vari-
ation, leading to system instability. When the input signal was a music signal, the
system with the proposed algorithm improved the NMSE values and steady-state
level compared to the baseline model but resulted in higher fluctuations.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Conclusion
Furthermore, the system’s performance showed inconsistency when different met-
rics were used to evaluate the model with the proposed algorithm. For instance, in
the case of speech signals, higher sound quality scores were achieved when the NMSE
of the system was higher. This inconsistency may be attributed to the fact that feed-
back cancellation can sometimes affect the perceptual features of the speech signal,
leading to lower sound quality. Therefore, it is crucial to consider feedback cancella-
tion performance and sound quality when evaluating the system’s performance.
Overall, this project sheds light on the possibilities and challenges of improving
the performance of feedback cancellation systems by integrating learning algorithms.
Further research and refinement of the proposed algorithm could yield more substan-
tial enhancements in system performance and address the limitations observed in this
study.
4.1
Future Work
The performance of the system with the proposed algorithm fell short of expectations.
Due to the limited time available for training and optimizing neural network settings,
there are several areas for future work:
1. Neural Network Structure:
The results show that the simple feedforward neural network cannot capture the com-
plexities of music and speech signals. This may be because of the auto-correlation
properties of the speech and music signal. The feedforward neural network accepts
the gradient information, then feeds directly to the outputs via a series of weights,
which can not obtain any auto-correlation properties during this process. A more
advanced neural network architecture, such as a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
or a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), may be more suitable for learning the
auto-correlation properties from the input gradient information. For example, Recur-
rent Neural Networks have a recurrent connection that allows information to persist
from previous time steps, making them capable of learning and representing auto-
correlation properties in the input signals.
2. Dataset:
Another reason the neural network could not perform better in speech and music
signals could be that the dataset is too small to cover enough signal types, so the
neural network needs to learn more from training. Datasets with larger sizes and
more signal types might help improve the performance of neural networks, but this is
not the main reason for the bad performance of the neural networks in this project.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[AC92]
J Scott Armstrong and Fred Collopy. “Error measures for generalizing
about forecasting methods: Empirical comparisons.” In: International jour-
nal of forecasting 8.1 (1992), pages 69–80.
[AMP12]
Hashir Aazh, Brian CJ Moore, and Deepak Prasher. “The accuracy of
matching target insertion gains with open-fit hearing aids.” In: (2012).
[CBS21]
Jonah Casebeer, Nicholas J Bryan, and Paris Smaragdis. “Auto-DSP:
Learning to optimize acoustic echo cancellers.” In: 2021 IEEE Workshop
on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA).
IEEE. 2021, pages 291–295.
[CBS22]
Jonah Casebeer, Nicholas J Bryan, and Paris Smaragdis. “Meta-AF: Meta-
learning for adaptive filters.” In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing 31 (2022), pages 355–370.
[Fra+02]
Gene F Franklin et al. Feedback control of dynamic systems. Volume 4.
Prentice hall Upper Saddle River, 2002.
[GJJ13]
Meng Guo, Søren Holdt Jensen, and Jesper Jensen. “Evaluation of state-
of-the-art acoustic feedback cancellation systems for hearing aids.” In:
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 61.3 (2013), pages 125–137.
[GK16]
Meng Guo and Bernhard Kuenzle. “On the periodically time-varying bias
in adaptive feedback cancellation systems with frequency shifting.” In:
2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). IEEE. 2016, pages 539–543.
[Guo13]
Meng Guo. Analysis, Design, and Evaluation of Acoustic Feedback Cancel-
lation Systems for Hearing Aids:-A Novel Approach to Unbiased Feedback
Cancellation. 2013.
[Hay02]
Simon S Haykin. Adaptive filter theory. Pearson Education India, 2002.
[KA14]
James M Kates and Kathryn H Arehart. “The hearing-aid speech quality
index (HASQI) version 2.” In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society
62.3 (2014), pages 99–117.
[Kat08]
James M Kates. Digital hearing aids. Plural publishing, 2008.
==PAGE:68==
58
Bibliography
[Lar11]
A Larsen. “Ein akustischer Wechselstromerzeuger mit regulierbarer Pe-
riodenzahl für schwache Ströme.” In: Elektrotech. Z., ETZ 32 (1911),
pages 284–285.
[Lev07]
Harry Levitt. “A historical perspective on digital hearing aids: how digital
technology has changed modern hearing aids.” In: Trends in amplification
11.1 (2007), pages 7–24.
[MZ95]
Joseph Arlen Maxwell and Patrick M Zurek. “Reducing acoustic feedback
in hearing aids.” In: IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing
3.4 (1995), pages 304–313.
[Nag+98]
Yuichi Nagata et al. Howling remover having cascade connected equalizers
suppressing multiple noise peaks. US Patent 5,710,823. January 1998.
[Nyq32]
Harry Nyquist. “Regeneration theory.” In: Bell system technical journal
11.1 (1932), pages 126–147.
[Pat78a]
Eugene T Patronis Jr. Acoustic feedback detector and automatic gain con-
trol. US Patent 4,079,199. March 1978.
[Pat78b]
Eugene T Patronis Jr. “Electronic detection of acoustic feedback and au-
tomatic sound system gain control.” In: Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society 26.5 (1978), pages 323–326.
[PM99]
Rajiv Porayath and Daniel J Mapes-Riordan. Acoustic feedback elimina-
tion using adaptive notch filter algorithm. US Patent 5,999,631. December
1999.
[QB96]
Ling Qin and Maurice G Bellanger. “Convergence analysis of a variable
step-size normalized lms adaptive filter algorithm.” In: 1996 8th European
Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO 1996). IEEE. 1996, pages 1–4.
[Rix+01]
A.W. Rix et al. “Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ)-a new
method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs.”
In: 2001 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing. Proceedings (Cat. No.01CH37221). Volume 2. 2001, 749–752
vol.2. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2001.941023.
[Sch62]
Manfred R Schroeder. “Improvement of feedback stability of public ad-
dress systems by frequency shifting.” In: Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society 10.2 (1962), pages 108–109.
[SCP15]
David Snyder, Guoguo Chen, and Daniel Povey. MUSAN: A Music, Speech,
and Noise Corpus. arXiv:1510.08484v1. 2015. eprint: 1510.08484.
[Spr+08]
Ann Spriet et al. “Feedback control in hearing aids.” In: Springer Handbook
of Speech Processing (2008), pages 979–1000.
[VM10]
Toon Van Waterschoot and Marc Moonen. “Fifty years of acoustic feed-
back control: State of the art and future challenges.” In: Proceedings of
the IEEE 99.2 (2010), pages 288–327.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
59
[WH60]
Bernard Widrow and Marcian E Hoff. Adaptive switching circuits. Tech-
nical report. Stanford Univ Ca Stanford Electronics Labs, 1960.
==PAGE:70==
