==PAGE:1==
Engineering Acoustics
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
M.Sc.Thesis
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception
while Using In-ear Headsets
Miho Takeuchi
miho.takeuchi@outlook.com
s213258
July 2023
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis is composed of two parts: a conference-style Academic Journal, and a documentation-
style Technical Report.
The Academic Journal is a research paper formatted as a submission to a scientific conference.
The content of the project is condensed.
The Technical Report is a detailed documentation of all progress and procedures done in the
5-month thesis. It provides additional information to what is written in the Academic Journal.
Acknowledgements
To start off, I would like to thank my four supervisors – Jeremy Marozeau, Kostantinos Gkanos,
Randy Frans Fela, and Sidsel Marie Nørholm – for their support and expertise.
I would also like to thank everyone at GN Audio fostering a welcoming work environment, partic-
ipating in my numerous experiments, as well as telling me their anecdotes of their DTU days.
I would like to thank my parents and little sister back in Tokyo in giving me the courage I need to
finish my studies. I would also like to thank Krys Wong, my s/o back in New York, for their comfort
and accompaniment through the thick and thin of this journey.
Lastly, I want to thank the random strangers and pets of Copenhagen I’ve drawn during the
weekends that helped take my mind out of loopholes.
ii
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Part I
Academic Journal
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Results Results & Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Part II
Technical Report
9
1
Introduction
10
1.1
Project Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.3
Research Questions & Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Key Acoustical Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Methodology
13
2.1
Audio System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Objective Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
Subjective Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Results & Discussions
22
3.1
Pilot Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
Main Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Conclusions
29
4.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Bibliography
30
A Appendix I: Data Explorations for Subjective Test
31
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
iii
==PAGE:4==
Part I
Academic Journal
==PAGE:5==
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
Miho Takeuchi
DTU Electro, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
miho.takeuchi@outlook.com
Abstract: Recreating a natural communication experience with in-ear headsets is a complex task, taking
into account occlusion effects in a person, as well as limitations of an in-ear headset’s hardware. It is unclear
how each of these components affects how one perceives their own voice. This study investigates the fac-
tors detriment to the perceptual quality of one’s own voice when using in-ear headsets, and how each factor
influences one’s perception of self-voice. Prior literature reviews lead to occlusion, sidetone filters, latency,
and distortion to be the main factors. Subjective tests were conducted amongst 23 assessors, followed by
an assessor screening procedure applied in data analysis. The study found that occlusion and distortion are
the influential factors for the changes in self-voice perception, whereas latency is in determinant. Sidetone
filtering becomes a significant factor when occlusion effects are minimized.
1. Introduction
As people use compact form factors such as in-ear
headsets for day-to-day communication, it is com-
mon to take calls using these devices [1].
Since
headsets partially block out the airborne acoustic
path from the mouth to the ear, the self-voice trans-
mitted externally through the air is attenuated, while
self-voice propagating internally through one’s body
builds up. The self-voice is altered and is now per-
ceived as muffled and unnatural [2]. However, as
depicted in Figure 1, the issue can be mitigated by
picking up one’s own voice through the headset’s mi-
crophones, and playing back some of the self-voice
through the headset, accounting for the losses in the
acoustic path. This feature is called sidetone, and
helps reproduce the open-ear experience of one’s
self voice as much as possible.
Figure 1: Acoustical paths for self-voice when using in-ear
headsets with sidetone function.
In-ear headsets attenuate higher frequency com-
ponents in the acoustic path, while the occlusion
effect increases the lower frequency content pre-
dominantly between 70 - 1000 Hz [3]. Therefore, the
sidetone is filtered to counteract the changes in fre-
quency content, and active noise cancellation (ANC)
is introduced to remove parts of the occlusion effect
[4]. The combination of the sidetone filter and the
ANC should aim towards an open-ear experience
represented by a 0 dB insertion gain (IG), a ratio
comparing the sound pressure level at the ear canal
between the ear blocked by a headset and the open
ear [5].
However, limitations of the in-ear headset’s drivers
will introduce byproducts such as distortion, and the
headset’s signal processing will add latency into the
system. With these active components in an in-ear
headset, it is not a simple task to determine how
these different factors influence the perceptual qual-
ity of one’s voice.
A predecessor to sidetone on in-ear headsets are
sidetone on handheld telephones, which was inves-
tigated by Appel & Beerends [6]. The main factors
influencing the perceptual quality of one’s self-voice
when using handheld telephones are sidetone la-
tency, sidetone playback level, sidetone distortion,
and background noise. Latency increase, distortion
increase, and more background noise causes a dete-
rioration in the mean opinion score (MOS), whereas
the playback level shows the best MOS when set at
a moderate level.
On the other hand, the occlusion effect, an is-
sue specific to contemporary headsets, if removed,
demonstrate a significant improvement in how natu-
ral a user perceives their own voice, as previously in-
vestigated by Liebich & Vary [7]. An implementation
of occlusion effect cancellation in hearing devices to
supplement a headset’s ANC algorithm, commonly
known as Feedback ANC (FB ANC), showed an im-
provement on how a user perceives the naturalness
2
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:6==
of their own voice.
Not much investigation is conducted on the fac-
tors that affect one’s perception of self-voice when
using in-ear headsets settings for users with normal
hearing [8]. Therefore, this study aims to answer the
following research questions:
• What factors influence the perceptual quality
of one’s self-voice when using an in-ear head-
set?
• How does the perceptual quality improve or de-
teriorate as these factors are adjusted?
• Which factor(s) are the most detrimental in de-
termining the perceptual quality of one’s self-
voice?
Based on preceding literature and study reviews,
it can be hypothesized that the amount of occlusion,
side-tone filtering, latency, and distortion might influ-
ence the perception of self-voice when using an in-
ear headset for users with normal hearing. Within the
given time-frame of the project, factors such as back-
ground noise and sidetone volume are temporarily
left out. Combinations of these four factors will re-
sult in different settings on an in-ear headset, hence
creating variations on the quality rating of one’s self
voice when a user evaluates these scenarios.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 ex-
plains the audio apparatus used for the study (Sec-
tion 2.1) and the procedure of the subjective test
(Section 2.2). The results of the subjective test are
presented and discussed in Section 3, including the
application of the assessor screening procedure and
its implication on the presented study. Lastly, Sec-
tion 4 concludes the study with suggestions for future
work.
2. Methodology
2.1 Apparatus
The apparatus for this study was an in-ear headset
mock-up similar to the Jabra Elite 85t. The device’s
signal processing was done on Jabra’s external de-
velopment platform which adjusts ANC and sidetone,
under a sampling rate of 48 kHz. The four identified
factors – occlusion, side-tone filtering, latency, and
distortion – equate to four audio settings: FB ANC,
sidetone filters, latency, and total harmonic distortion
(THD). The ANC and sidetone filters are developed
in conjunction by the author and Jabra.
Figure 2 illustrates the process of varying the four
influencing factors to produce different self-voice ex-
periences. It is important to note that if the sidetone
is off, there will be no latency, distortion, or filtering
effects added onto the audio being fed-back to the
headsets. However, it will still be possible to have
FB ANC on even though the sidetone is off.
The
setting levels available for each factor are shown in
Table 1, with description of their technical and per-
ceptual changes. The setting levels are derived from
objective measurements and fine tuned with a pilot
test.
Figure 2: A schematic of how sidetone & ANC settings of
the in-ear headset are controlled.
Table 1: Description of levels of each audio setting and
their relations to the identified factors
Setting
Level
Description
FB ANC
Max
Maximum occlusion removal
Min
Minimal occlusion removal
Sidetone
On
Optimized to 0dB IG with max ANC
Off
Sidetone is off
Latency
0ms
No latency
10ms
10ms latency added to system
THD
Min
No distortion
Max
High amount of distortion of 15%THD
2.2 Subjective Test Procedure
The subjective test employed a full-factorial de-
sign of experiments [9], consisting of 10 conditions
derived from combinations of FB ANC (2 levels), La-
tency (2 Levels), and THD (2 Levels) with sidetone
on, as well as FB ANC (2 Levels) when sidetone is
off (Table 2). Each condition was repeated twice, re-
sulting in 20 trials per assessor. The study involved
a total of 23 assessors.
Table 2: All 10 conditions used in the subjective test.
Sidetone
FB ANC
Latency
THD
On
Max
0ms
Min
On
Max
0ms
Max
On
Max
10ms
Min
On
Max
10ms
Max
On
Min
0ms
Min
On
Min
0ms
Max
On
Min
10ms
Min
On
Min
10ms
Max
Off
Max
N/a
N/a
Off
Min
N/a
N/a
The proctor would first set up a random condition.
The participant then read a set of Harvard Standard-
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
3
==PAGE:7==
ized Sentences [10] at their normal speaking volume,
while listening to their own voice. The participant was
allowed to remove the headsets to compare with
the open-ear experience. Therefore, the participant
evaluated the overall quality of their own voice on a
continuous scale from 1 to 5 (Bad to Excellent), on
a corresponding slider on the rating interface shown
in Figure 3. The participant was given the option to
justify their ratings and state their observations in the
comment section.
Figure 3: Rating interface for the subjective test: The 20
sliders for 20 trials are divided into 4 pages for ease of ac-
cessibility.
The collected data from the experiment was ana-
lyzed using various statistical techniques, including
mean and 95% confidence interval calculations [11],
analysis of variance (ANOVA) [11], assessment of
assessor reliability and discrimination ability [12][13],
as well as word frequency analysis of the comments.
The relative significance between F-values of each
factor, as well as their corresponding p-values, from
the ANOVA analysis was examined in detail to eval-
uate the significance of each factor when perceiving
one’s voice [11].
3. Results & Discussion
3.1 Results
The mean of the ratings for each condition are
presented in Figure 4, with error bars representing
each rating’s 95% confidence interval (CI). An in-
crease in FB ANC improves one’s quality rating of
their self-voice, whereas an increase in THD lev-
els can significantly decrease one’s quality rating of
their self-voice. Though there are indications that a
higher latency correlate to a lower self-voice quality
rating, it does not seem obvious. Finally, the effects
of sidetone’s presence are more significant under
the context of a strong FB ANC – As sidetone is
turned on, one’s self-voice quality rating improves.
However, the presence of sidetones appears to be
unnoticeable when FB ANC is minimized.
The ANOVA analysis of the factors and their in-
teractions are shown in Table 3. Due to the special
nature of the sidetone on/off setting, The sample
sizes are different when comparing Sidetone On and
Sidetone Off, which may skew the ANOVA test’s re-
sults. Therefore, ANOVA is computed on the other
3 factors:
FB ANC, latency, and THD. From the
ANOVA analysis, the low F-values and p-values that
exceed the α = 0.05 from the interactions suggest
a lack in significance between each other. Both FB
ANC levels and THD levels indicate a statistically sig-
nificant difference between each respective factor’s
two setting levels.
Finally, To support the quantitative relations de-
duced between one’s self-voice quality rating and the
factors of interest in this section, a word cloud and a
word-frequency histogram was generated from the
comments collected from the participants, shown in
Figure 5.
Table 3: ANOVA analysis on FB ANC, latency, THD, and
their respective interactions. The interactions of all 3 fac-
tors are negligible.
Factors
F-Value
p-value
Individual
FB ANC
33.88
< 0.0001
Latency
2.8
0.0951
THD
127.59
< 0.0001
Interactions
FB ANC & Latency
0.34
0.5596
FB ANC & THD
2.71
0.1004
Latency & THD
1.19
0.2758
3.2 Discussions
Based on the data analysis and visualization, it
can be deduced that an increase in FB ANC and a
reduction in THD result in a better self-voice quality
rating. The effects of sidetone on one’s perception
of self-voice is dependent on the FB ANC, but the
remaining three factors (FB ANC, Latency, and THD)
are independent of one another. The effects of la-
tency are indeterminate.
The significance of FB ANC on the influence of
one’s self-voice is likely due to the form-factor of
in-ear headsets giving an underlying impression of
occlusion issues.
This allows participants to pay
closer attention to such issues during their evaluation
process, suggested by how ”occlusion” is the most
mentioned word amongst participant comments in
Figure 5b. On the other hand, how THD levels in-
fluence one’s perception of self-voice is likely due
4
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:8==
(a) FB ANC Trends
(b) Latency Trends
(c) THD Trends
Figure 4: Mean and CI of self-voice quality ratings for each condition.
to the alienation of one’s distorted voice, as partic-
ipants described with negative words such as ”dis-
torted”, ”fluctuation”, ”strange”, and ”weird” for the
cases where THD is maximized.
Sidetone’s dependency on FB ANC levels might
be explained by performing ANOVA analysis on an
isolated group of data points, removing data points
corresponding to conditions with 10 ms latency or
maximum THD (Table 2). Table 4 shows the ANOVA
results of the isolated analysis between FB ANC
and sidetone, where both factors have significant
F-value, as well as minuscule p-values. Moreover,
the interactions between FB ANC and Sidetone also
have a fairly significant F-value accompanied by a
p-value below the threshold. Therefore, the ANOVA
analysis suggests that both FB ANC and Sidetone
have significant influence on the perception of one’s
voice, but also indicate that their interaction with one
another have influence on perception as well. This
is also suggested by feedback received by partici-
pants specifically noting that they feel neutral about
a completely passive headset with no sidetone only
thinking that their voice is slightly muffled (see Fig-
ure 5).
Switching on sidetone only increases the
volume of their own voice slightly, while having oc-
clusion effects remain.
Table 4: ANOVA analysis between FB ANC and sidetone
and their interaction.
Factors
F-Value
p-value
FB ANC
16.32
0.0001
Sidetone
9.03
0.003
FB ANC & Sidetone Interaction
7.72
0.006
Even though the effect of latency appearing to
be indeterminate, there were a few participants that
mention words and phrases such as ”delay”, ”echo”,
and ”light early reflection”, indicating that they were
able to perceive the latency changes with critical lis-
tening. This suggests a listening skill gap between
the 23 participants, where some are casual and un-
trained listeners and some were critical listeners.
Assessor screening is therefore instigated.
Partic-
ipant’s performance metrics were evaluated using
eGauge, a set of screening methods recommended
by ITU-R [12][14][15].
Two thresholds were used – the first to weed out
unreliable and non-discriminating participants, the
second to distinguish the listening skills amongst the
reliable participants. The first critical threshold of 1
was applied to both the discrimination and reliability
metrics to separate the participants into two groups
– a reliable and discriminating participant versus an
unreliable or not-discriminating participant (see Fig-
ure 7a). As Subjects 1, 3, 4, 9, and 20 are unreliable
or have poor discrimination skills, their ratings are re-
moved to generate a new mean and CI for the 10 set-
ting’s quality ratings, as shown in Figure 7b. There is
a slight improvement in discriminating the quality for
sidetone on/off settings and latency settings, but the
CI on these settings cloud the significance of these
trends due to the smaller data set.
Observing the general trend of reliability and dis-
crimination metrics in Figure 6, the critical threshold
is brought up further with a discrimination threshold
of 5 and reliability threshold of 2 for optimal separabil-
ity between critical listeners and moderately skilled
listeners. All reliable participants are distributed as
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
5
==PAGE:9==
(a) Word cloud from comments.
(b) Top 15 frequently used words.
Figure 5: Visualization of unique word usage of participant comments during the subjective test.
Figure 6: Reliability and Discrimination metrics for all participants.
seen in Figure 8a.
The two groups then undergo
a new set of mean and CI calculations, resulting in
Figure 8b.
FB ANC and THD show the same trends, but the
critical listeners were able to better discriminate la-
tency changes when THD is minimized. The same
cannot be said for latency changes under maximum
THD – as THD effects are significantly overpower-
ing latency effects as shown by a significant F-value
from the ANOVA analysis.
Despite being able to clean up the raw data with
assessor screenings, a familiarization procedure
should have been conducted before the beginning
of each test to provide a better rating framework
for all participants. Participants should be allowed
to experience 2-3 settings that range from good to
bad quality, so that their discrimination abilities can
be standardized; therefore, having a data set with
clear distinction between the different audio settings.
Regardless, as the general trends of how the investi-
gated factors influence self-voice remain similar, the
experiment is still showing reliable results despite
the gaps in listening skills.
4. Conclusions
The present study investigated how several acous-
tical factors including sidetone settings, latency lev-
els, feedback ANC levels, and total harmonic dis-
tortion influence the perception of one’s own-voice
when wearing in-ear headsets.
Instrumental mea-
surements were conducted to define the level set-
tings as well as design the experiment. A subjec-
tive listening test was conducted using 5-scale of
continuous quality rating to assess own voice per-
6
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:10==
(a) Participant categorization
(b) Ratings with only reliable participants.
Figure 7: Categorization of reliable to unreliable participants.
(a) Categorization of reliable participants with a higher critical threshold.
(b) Comparison of ratings between groups.
Figure 8: Further categorization of reliable participants. Group 1 - critical listener; Group 2 - lesser skilled listener.
ception. Twenty-three assessors participated in the
study. The procedure aims to assess whether or not
and how the acoustical factors are influencing the
quality of own voice perception.
Referring back to the research questions posed in
Section 1, the study suggests that occlusion levels,
sidetone, and distortion levels influence the percep-
tion of self-voice the most when using an in-ear head-
set, and that the interactions between sidetone and
occlusion levels are influential to one’s self-voice per-
ception as well. As occlusion is reduced by increas-
ing the strength of FB ANC, how one perceives their
self-voice improves; As distortion increases, one’s
perception of their self-voice deteriorates. When less
occlusion is experienced by a person, the existence
of sidetone becomes more and more detrimental to
the quality of self-voice. Out of the four factors inves-
tigated, the effects of latency are the most uncertain.
Limited options for a sidetone filter may have hin-
dered the representation of the effects of sidetone.
The limitations in this study is that the sidetone filter
is being optimized to 0dB IG under maximum FB
ANC settings. However, if ANC is turned off and no
longer aids in reducing low-frequency components
of occlusion, it requires a new sidetone filter as us-
ing the old filter will result in a non-zero IG. The filter
needs to counter both the occlusion issues as well
as assisting the high-frequency components in the
acoustic path to achieve 0 dB IG. This may help with
bigger findings on how sidetone filtering affects the
perception of one’s self-voice. An investigation on
a variety of simple filter shapes, such as low-pass
or high-pass filters, might also be a benefactor for
further investigation.
4.1 Future Work
There were some dismissed factors that are also
worthy of investigation. Similar to telephony sidetone
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
7
==PAGE:11==
[6], sidetone volume is part of the research as listen-
ing to one’s own voice at an altered level can cause
an altered perception in one’s own voice similar to
Lombard Effects – a quieter sidetone volume may
force one to talk louder, and a louder sidetone vol-
ume might cause one to start whispering, despite in-
structing a subject to speak at a normal effort [16][17].
As participants have commented about level quite a
few times (Figure 5b), further investigation on this
factor should be considered.
A broader range of latency values should be in-
vestigated, due to the insignificant effects seen with
the latency levels in this study.
The disruption of
comb filtering effects might give some insight on
how users respond to self-voice latency [18]. As this
study investigates the in-ear headset form factor, an
expanded study on a range of form factors, such as
on-ear and over-ear headsets, can be considered
to fully encompass the sidetone performances of all
types of contemporary headsets.
The procedure of the subjective test can be fur-
ther improved with the addition of a familiarization
stage, allowing all the participants have a standard-
ized rating range, providing better quality data sets
for analysis.
Lastly, the study can lead to the development of
an objective perceptual self-voice quality measure
for head-set sidetone levels based on the factors in-
vestigated, which can aid in predicting the quality of
one’s self-voice for an unknown headset completed
with objective acoustical measurements.
References
[1]
Alicea (Allie) Lieberman, Juliana Schroeder, and
On Amir. “A Voice Inside My Head: The Psychologi-
cal and Behavioral Consequences of Auditory Tech-
nologies”. In: Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 170 (May 2022), p. 104133.
DOI: 10.1016/j.obhdp.2022.104133.
[2]
Sabine Reinfeldt et al. “Hearing One’s Own Voice
During Phoneme Vocalization—Transmission by
Air and Bone Conduction”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 128 (Aug. 2010),
pp. 751–62. DOI: 10.1121/1.3458855.
[3]
Christoph Pörschmann. “Influences of Bone Con-
duction and Air Conduction on the Sound of One’s
Own Voice”. In: Acustica 86 (Nov. 2000), pp. 1038–
1045.
[4]
Shan Hu, R. Rajamani, and Xinghuo Yu. “Active
Noise Control for Selective Cancellation of External
Disturbances”. In: Aug. 2011, pp. 4737–4742. DOI:
10.1109/ACC.2011.5991142.
[5]
A. Baumfield, Louise Hickson, and Bradley McPher-
son. “Performance of Assistive Listening Devices
using Insertion Gain Measures.” In: 22.1 (Jan.
1993). DOI: 10.3109/01050399309046017.
[6]
R. Appel and John Beerends. “On The Quality of
Hearing One’s Own Voice”. In: AES: Journal of the
Audio Engineering Society 50 (Apr. 2002), pp. 237–
248.
[7]
Stefan Liebich and Peter Vary. “Occlusion Ef-
fect Cancellation in Headphones and Hearing
Devices—The Sister of Active Noise Cancellation”.
In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing 30 (2022), pp. 35–48. DOI:
10.1109/TASLP.2021.3130966.
[8]
Johanna Hengen, Inger L. Hammarström, and
Stefan Stenfelt. “Perception of One’s Own Voice
After Hearing-Aid Fitting for Naive Hearing-Aid
Users and Hearing-Aid Refitting for Experienced
Hearing-Aid Users”. In: Trends in Hearing 24
(2020), p. 2331216520932467. DOI: 10 . 1177 /
2331216520932467.
[9]
Gary W. Oehlert. A First Course in Design and Anal-
ysis of Experiments. Freeman, 2000.
[10]
“IEEE Recommended Practice for Speech Quality
Measurements”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio
and Electroacoustics 17 (1969), pp. 225–246.
[11]
Ronald E. Walpole. Introduction to Statistics. Pren-
tice Hall International, 1997.
[12]
ITU-R. “Methods for Assessor Screening”. In: ITU-
R BS.2300-0 (Apr. 2014).
[13]
Pascal Schlich. “GRAPES: A method and a SAS®
program for Graphical Representations of Asses-
sor Performances”. In: Journal of Sensory Studies
9 (May 2007), pp. 157–169. DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-
459X.1994.tb00238.x.
[14]
Søren Bech and Nick Zacharov. Perceptual Audio
Evaluation: Theory, Method and Application. Wiley,
2006.
[15]
Gaëtan
Lorho,
Guillaume
Le
Ray,
and
Nick
Zacharov. “eGauge — A Measure of Assessor Ex-
pertise in Audio Quality Evaluations”. In: Audio En-
gineering Society Conference: 38th International
Conference: Sound Quality Evaluation. Audio En-
gineering Society. 2010.
[16]
Harlan Lane and Bernard Tranel. “The Lombard
Sign and the Role of Hearing in Speech”. In: 14.4
(Dec. 1971). DOI: 10.1044/JSHR.1404.677.
[17]
Hyun Ju Chong, Jin Hee Choi, and Soeun Sarah
Lee. “Does the Perception of Own Voice Affect Our
Behavior?” In: Journal of Voice (2022). ISSN: 0892-
1997. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jvoice .
2022.02.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0892199722000376.
[18]
Ute Jekosch and Sebastian Möller. “Speech qual-
ity and the E￿model”. In: 105.2 (Jan. 1999). DOI:
10.1121/1.425325.
[19]
GRAS 43AC Ear Simulator Kit According to IEC
60318-4. URL: https://www.grasacoustics.com/
products/ear-simulator-kit/product/240-43ac.
[20]
High-Frequency Head and Torso Simulator | Type
5128 | B&K. URL: https : / / www . bksv . com / en /
transducers/simulators/head-and-torso/hats-type-
5128.
[21]
GRAS 46BL-1 1/4” CCP Pressure Standard Mi-
crophone Set, High Sensitivity. URL: https : / /
www . grasacoustics . com / products / measurement -
microphone - sets / constant - current - power - ccp /
product/855-46bl-1.
8
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:12==
Part II
Technical Report
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Project Background
As people use compact form factors such as in-ear headsets for day-to-day communication, it is common
to take calls using these devices [1]. Since headsets block out the airborne acoustic path from the mouth
to the ear, the self-voice transmitted externally through the air is attenuated, while self-voice propagating
internally through one’s body builds up. The self-voice is altered and is now perceived as muffled and
unnatural [2]. However, as depicted in Figure 1.1, the issue can be mitigated by picking up one’s own
voice through the headset’s microphones, and playing back some of the self-voice through the headset,
accounting for the losses in the acoustic path. This feature is called sidetone, and helps reproduce the
open-ear experience of one’s self voice as much as possible.
Figure 1.1: Acoustical paths for self-voice when using in-ear headsets with sidetone function.
In-ear headsets attenuate higher frequency components in the acoustic path and occlusion effect increase
lower frequency content predominantly between 70 - 1000 Hz [3]. Therefore, the sidetone is filtered to coun-
teract the changes in frequency content, and active noise cancellation (ANC) is introduced to remove parts
of the occlusion effect [4]. The combination of the sidetone filter and the ANC should aim towards an open-
ear experience represented by a 0 dB insertion gain (IG), a ratio comparing the sound pressure level at the
ear canal between the closed ear with a headset and the open ear [5].
However, limitations of the in-ear headset’s drivers will introduce byproducts such as distortion, and the
headset’s signal processing will add latency into the system. With these active components in an in-ear
headset, it is not a simple task to determine how these different factors influence the perceptual quality of
one’s voice.
1.2
Literature Review
A predecessor to sidetone on in-ear headsets are sidetone on handheld telephones, which was investi-
gated by Appel & Beerends [6]. The main factors influencing the perceptual quality of one’s self-voice when
using handheld telephones are sidetone latency, sidetone playback level, sidetone distortion, and back-
ground noise. Latency increase, distortion increase, and more background noise causes a deterioration in
the mean opinion score (MOS), whereas the playback level shows the best MOS when set at a moderate
level.
On the other hand, the occlusion effect, an issue specific to contemporary headsets, if removed, demon-
10
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:14==
strate a significant improvement in how natural a user perceives their own voice, as previously investigated
by Liebich & Vary [7]. An implementation of occlusion effect cancellation in hearing devices to supplement a
headset’s ANC algorithm, commonly known as Feedback ANC (FB ANC), showed an improvement on how
a user perceives the naturalness of their own voice.
1.3
Research Questions & Hypothesis
This study aims to answer the following research questions:
• What factors influence the perceptual quality of one’s self-voice when using an in-ear headset?
• How does the perceptual quality improve or deteriorate as these factors are adjusted?
• Which factor(s) are the most detrimental in determining the perceptual quality of one’s self-voice?
Based on preceding literature and study reviews, it can be hypothesized that the amount of occlusion,
side-tone filtering, latency, and distortion might influence the perception of self-voice when using an in-ear
headset for users with normal hearing. Within the given time-frame of the project, factors such as back-
ground noise and sidetone volume are temporarily left out. As shown in Figure 1.2 Combinations of these
four factors will result in different settings on an in-ear headset, hence creating variations on the quality
rating of one’s self voice when a user evaluates these scenarios.
Figure 1.2: The factors that can describe the quality of self-voice perceived.
1.4
Key Acoustical Concepts
The following concepts are included in the workings of the project.
1.4.1
Self-voice
Self-voice is the condition when a person perceives their own voice whilst talking. It consists of the
acoustical air-conduction path and the occlusion path via body conduction. When using headsets, recorded
self-voice from the mouth is being played-back to the user concurrently to recreate the acoustic path.
1.4.2
Active Noise Canceling (ANC)
Active Noise Cancelling aids in reducing unwanted background noise when wearing headsets. Micro-
phones on headsets will pick up undesired noise signals, and the headset will generate an anti-noise signal
that is almost the same as the original noise signal, but is 180 degrees out of phase. Generating this anti-
noise signal can cancel out the original noise once they interact [4].
There are three types of ANC: Feed-forward, feedback, and hybrid. As shown in Figure 1.3, Feed-forward
(FF) ANC has a microphone placed on the outer housing of a headset, picking up external noises to cancel.
Feedback (FB) ANC has a microphone placed in the housing of the headset near the driver of the headset,
cancelling residual noises internally, such as occlusion. Finally, Hybrid ANC combines both feed-forward
and feed-back ANC, resulting in one interior microphone and external microphone picking up both internal
and external noise, with the driver playing the inverse noises to initiate cancellation. Hybrid ANC is the most
commonly used ANC method in contemporary headsets.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
11
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.3: The different ANC pathways.
1.4.3
Sidetone (ST)
Sidetone is a process where one’s voice is picked up from a telephone or headset and partially fed back
to the speaker driver of the same device. This is closely related to self-voice, as it is essentially a recreation
of the self-voice that is being played back in a headset.
1.4.4
Occlusion Effect
The occlusion effect is the boomy effect one perceives when talking with ear canals blocked by headsets,
as it amplifies sounds at low frequencies (prominently between 70-1000Hz), and attenuate sounds at high
frequencies. This is a prevalent issue when using an in-ear headset. Occlusion can be reduced by the
amount of FB ANC implemented in the headset.
1.4.5
Insertion Gain (IG)
Insertion gain is originally a hearing-aid metric that compares the sound pressure level at the ear canal
between the unaided ear and the aided ear. In the case of consumer audio, it is the sound pressure level
ratio between the open-ear experience and the closed ear when wearing a headset. To mimic the open-ear
experience, it is ideal to have the IG achieve 0 dB.
1.4.6
Total Harmonic Distortion (THD)
Total harmonic distortion is a metric that displays how much harmonic distortion is present in a signal. It
is calculated by the ratio of the sum of the power of harmonics introduced by distortion, to the power of the
fundamental frequency at which the distortion is investigated, as shown in Equation 1.1, and is represented
as a percentage.
THD(f0) =
√∑
n>1 |Vrms(nf0)|2
Vrms(f0)
(1.1)
where f0 is the fundamental frequency (or frequency of interest), n represents the nth harmonic of f0, and
Vrms is the RMS voltage at a given frequency.
12
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:16==
2
Methodology
In order to investigate the relation between the four perceptual factors – Occlusion, Filtering, Delay, and
Distortion – to a perceptual score on the quality of self-voice, the project follows the following process
(Figure 2.1).
• Setting up an audio system that allows adjustable audio settings.
• Instrumental measurements that quantify the acoustical performances of the setting levels designated
for each perceptual factor.
• A pilot test examining the subjective rating range of the setting levels chosen for each perceptual
factor.
• A main subjective test with a set of finalized setting levels for each perceptual factor.
• Exploratory statistical analysis on the effects of each perceptual factor on the perception of self-voice.
Figure 2.1: The Procedures of the Project
2.1
Audio System
The apparatus for this study was an in-ear headset mockup similar to the Jabra Elite 85t. The device’s
signal processing was done on Jabra’s external development platform which adjusts ANC and sidetone,
under a sampling rate of 48kHz. The four identified factors – occlusion, side-tone filtering, latency, and
distortion – equate to four audio settings: FB ANC, sidetone filters, latency, and total harmonic distortion
(THD). Figure 2.2 illustrates the process of varying the four influencing factors to produce different self-voice
experiences. It is important to note that if the sidetone is off, there will be no latency, distortion, or filtering
effects added onto the audio being fed-back to the headsets. However, it will still be possible to have FB
ANC on even though the sidetone is off.
Figure 2.2: A schematic of how sidetone & ANC settings of the in-ear headset are controlled.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
13
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Objective Measurements
In this project, factors chosen for investigation needed to be mapped to an objective measure to validate
their performance, as shown in Figure 2.3. Occlusion Level was controlled by the feedback (FB) ANC level
setting, in which the amount of occlusion can be quantified by measuring its occlusion level curve, as well
as the insertion gain of the headset. Sidetone filtering was registered as different filtering profile settings,
in which the variations can be quantified by the insertion gain. The self-voice latency was registered as the
amount of latency added in the settings, which is quantified by the total latency throughout the hardware.
Finally, distortion can be achieved by different distortion level settings, in which its performance can be
quantified by a measured percentage of the total harmonic distortion.
Figure 2.3: Quantifying the identified factors affecting self-voice perception
2.2.1
Occlusion Levels
A FB ANC filter was deduced to remove as much of occlusion effect possible – hence the maximum
ANC level setting – and was set as a baseline. The filter was reduced by -6 dB for the moderate level and
turned off for the minimum level. The occlusion levels of the three settings were measured on a GRAS Type
RA0045 IEC 60711 Ear Simulator [19], shown in Figure 2.4. The coupler mimics an ear canal as a metal
tube, where a small speaker is located in the tube to mimic occlusion effects.
Figure 2.4: GRAS Type RA0045 IEC 60711 Ear Simulator
A logarithmic sine sweep was generated at the small speaker. The signal was recorded at the end of
the coupler, mimicking the ear drum. An open-ear reference measurement was first made, followed by
measurements where the headset is plugged into the ear-simulator, configured with different ANC levels.
14
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:18==
The ratio between the closed-ear measurement and the open-ear measurement deduced the occlusion level
of the ANC setting, in which the open-ear measurement should be 0dB occlusion. As shown in Figure 2.5, the
three levels of FB ANC result in the following variation in occlusion level, where 0dB indicates no occlusion
effects. The ANC filter was then used to generate an optimized sidetone filter that ensures 0dB IG.
Figure 2.5: Occlusion Level Variation based on FB ANC Levels
2.2.2
Insertion Gain effects from FB ANC and Sidetone Filters
As mentioned in section 1.1, both FB ANC levels and sidetone filter profiles adjust the insertion gain of
the headset. Insertion gain was measured using a Brüel& Kjær Type 5128 HATS [20] and a GRAS 46BL-1
1/4” CCP Pressure Standard Microphone [21]. A logarithmic sine sweep was played from the HATS mouth
approximately at a person’s regular speaking volume of 60 dB SPL. The signal was recorded at the mouth
reference point (MRP) 25 mm away from the mouth opening, and at the drum reference point (DRP) at the
HATS’ ear simulator. The transfer function between the MRP and DRP was then calculated. A control open
ear case was measured and its MRP-DRP transfer function was denoted as Hopen. Then, the headset was
inserted in the HATS ear configured with a combination of FB ANC levels and sidetone filter profiles, which
was measured and denoted as Hclosed,i, where i represents the different settings that will be set on the
in-ear headset in this measurement. Finally, the insertion gain of the headset under a particular setting was
denoted in Equation 2.1
IGi = Hclosed,i
Hopen
(2.1)
Figure 2.6: Measurement Apparatus for Insertion Gain: Left - Open Ear, Right- Closed Ear with Headset.
The headset undergoes 3 different FB ANC levels (maximum, minimum, and moderate), as well as 4
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
15
==PAGE:19==
sidetone filtering profiles (Optimized, Off, Generic High-pass and Generic Low-pass), resulting in 12 combi-
nations.
Figure 2.7: The Insertion Gain Variation based on Sidetone Filters and FB ANC Levels.
As seen in Figure 2.7, FB ANC levels mainly influence the insertion gain below 1000 Hz, whereas the
sidetone filters influence the insertion gain above 1000 Hz. However, the types of sidetone filters have very
minimal influence on the variation of insertion gain, unless sidetone was completely turned off. Therefore,
the number of settings for sidetone filters were reduced to two: An optimized sidetone filter, versus turning
off sidetone. Moreover, it is safe to infer that FB ANC levels and sidetone filters are independent, as they
influence different frequency ranges.
2.2.3
Latency
Due to the processing power of the hardware used, there is an inherent latency caused by factors such
as the addition of filters and inherent latency (known as round-trip latency: the time it takes for signals to be
processed throughout the hardware), as shown in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Types of latency induced by hardware limitations.
Limitations
ms
Round-trip Latency
1.1
Filtering Latency
0.021
Total Device Latency
1.121
Therefore, it is near impossible to achieve a ”true zero” latency. However, Table 2.2 shows the actual
latency values that will be perceived from the headsets. These latency values are what a participant will be
experiencing when using the headsets.
Table 2.2: Actual latency values that will be used in the test.
Manual Latency Added (ms)
0
0.1
1
10
Total Latency (ms)
1.21
1.29
2.21
11.21
2.2.4
Total Harmonic Distortion
The distortion levels were altered by adjusting a limiter’s threshold on the audio system. The total har-
monic distortion was measured at the opening of the ear canal of the Brüel& Kjær Type 5128 HATS, where
the limiter’s threshold setting ranges from 0dB to -60 dB. The 0dB threshold means 0 dBFS, meaning the
maximum available peak level on the headset’s microphone, which is 112 dB SPL. The -60 dB setting means
-60 dBFs, corresponding to 52 dB SPL, which is below the regular speaking volume. Similar to the insertion
16
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:20==
gain measurement, a logarithmic sweep is played from the HATS mouth at 60dB SPL, and the signal was
recorded by the HATS’ ear canal.
Table 2.3: Average THD percentages for different threshold Settings.
Threshold
Average THD
Setting on Hardware
0 dB
6.25%
Minimum
-25 dB
6.26%
-30 dB
9.49%
Moderate
-40 dB
9.56%
-50 dB
12.44%
Maximum
-60 dB
18.09%
As seen in Table 2.3, the average THD percentage steadily increases by the change in threshold, albeit
no difference is seen between 0 dB and -25 dB. Therefore, the 0dB threshold is chosen to be the minimum
distortion setting, -30 dB as the moderate setting, and -50 dB as the maximum distortion setting.
2.3
Subjective Tests
A pilot test and a main subjective test were conducted in this project. The pilot test was conducted to
validate the levels of each factor and reduce the levels needed to be examined per factor of interest. The
main test was to fully investigate the factors’ influences on the perceptual ratings with a larger participant
pool.
2.3.1
Pilot Test
The pilot test followed a full-factorial design of experiments [9], resulted in a total of 30 unique combina-
tions. When sidetone was on, there were 27 combinations comprising 3 FB ANC Levels × 3 Latency Levels
× 3 THD Levels, while when sidetone was off, there were 3 combinations comprising 3 FB ANC Levels. The
30 combinations were presented without repetition, and the test involved 5 subjects.
Figure 2.8: Preliminary Setting levels for each identified factor in the Pilot Test.
During the test, a random hear-through setting combination was initially configured by the proctor. The
participant was then instructed to read a set of Harvard Standardized Sentences at their normal speaking
volume, paying attention to their own voice. The participant was allowed to remove the in-ear headsets for
comparisons with the open ear perception. After plenty observation, the participant evaluated the natural-
ness of their self-voice from a scale of 1 to 5 (very unnatural to very natural) on a rating interface shown in
Figure 2.9. This was repeated until all 30 setting combinations were completed.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.9: Rating GUI for the Pilot Test
The data collected from the pilot test was analyzed and visualized with ANOVA, mean opinion scores,
and confidence intervals. Based on the significance each factor displays in the ANOVA tests, the number
of levels tested per factor was reduced to two (minimum and maximum) in the following main test, which
ensures a concise experiment for a bigger participant pool.
2.3.2
Main Test
Based on observations drawn from the data collected in the pilot test, the main subjective test preserved
only the maximum and minimum settings of each factor, as shown in Figure 2.10. The main test also followed
a full-factorial design of experiments. When sidetone was on, there were 8 combinations comprising 2 FB
ANC Levels × 2 Latency Levels × 2 THD Levels, while when sidetone was off, there were 2 combinations
comprising 2 FB ANC Levels. Two repetitions were applied to the 10 combinations, resulted in 20 trials for
each participant. A total of 23 participants were examined.
Figure 2.10: Simplified Setting levels for each identified factor in the Main Test.
Similar to the pilot test, the participant was tasked to read a set of Harvard Standardized Sentences [10]
per setting while simultaneously observing their own voice, and followed by evaluating the quality of their
own voice on a continuous scale of 1 to 5 (Bad to Excellent), on the GUI shown in Figure 2.11. The participant
was given the option to justify their ratings and state their observations in the comment section.
18
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.11: Rating GUI for the Main Test
Finally, the collected data was visualized, analyzed, and interpreted via mean opinion score, confidence
intervals, ANOVA, as well as individual assessor screening. The comments collected will be supplementary
data to justify the quantitative results via a word cloud and word frequency histogram.
2.4
Statistical Analysis
2.4.1
Data Exploration
When approaching the data, the following plot styles are used to visualize data (see Appendix A):
• Box plot: Shows the median, 1st, and 3rd quartile of the data set, inferring the symmetry of the data
as well as its spread. Outliers are always labeled on the plot (Figure A.1).
• Violin plot: Shows the distribution of data, inferring the density probability function across the rating
scale used in the subjective test (Figure A.2).
Not only are the ratings for each setting combination visualized with these plots, but a per-subject visual-
ization was also made. This gives insight into how wide the range each participant uses for rating each
scenario, and later helps measure each participant’s discrimination abilities. As there are text-based data
from the comment section of the main test, a word cloud is used to visualize the commonly used descriptors
for the settings.
2.4.2
Mean & Confidence Interval (CI)
From the previous data exploration, the mean and 95% confidence interval is calculated for each setting
combination. The mean is the average of all data points in a data set. The 95% confidence interval is an
estimated range of ratings for the particular setting that can contain 95% of the data population, assuming
the data set follows a normal distribution [11]. In this paper, all subsequent mentions of CI mean 95%
confidence interval.
2.4.3
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
ANOVA is a statistical test that can determine the statistical significance of multiple factors investigated
in an experiment. ANOVA revolves around either proving or disproving the null hypothesis H0 – There is
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
19
==PAGE:23==
no difference between the means of the different groups in a given factor, nor is there interactions between
the different factors – in conjunction with the alternative hypothesis HA – At least one of the groups’ means
differ with the others in a given factor, or there are interactions between factors.
The main assumptions for ANOVA are that factors are independent, follow a normal distribution, and have
samples with equal variance. The key statistics being derived and evaluated are the F-statistic – the ratio
of the variance between factor groups to the variance within a factor group – as well as the p-value, which
is weighed against the threshold α = 0.05. If the p-value is less than the threshold, the factor in question
is implied to have statistical significance in the outcome – in this project’s case, influence on the perceptual
rating. The following is an ANOVA table for the key statistical values needed in the calculation:
Table 2.4: ANOVA calculation table [11], where k represents the number of levels in the given factor, N represents the
total number of observations, and i represents the ith observation in the kth level.
Source of Variation
Sum of Squares (SS)
Degrees of Freedom
Mean squares (MS)
F-value
Between Factors
SSB = ∑
k nk(¯yk −¯y)2
k −1
MSB = SSB
k−1
F = MSB
MSE
Error
SSE = ∑
i,k(¯yi,k −¯yk)2
N −k
MSE = SSE
N−k
Total
SST = SSB + SSE
N −1
In this project, n-way ANOVA was used as there are 4 factors in question. However, due to the special na-
ture of the sidetone on/off setting, the sample sizes are different when comparing Sidetone On and Sidetone
Off, which may skew the ANOVA test’s results. Therefore, ANOVA was computed on the other 3 factors:
FB ANC Level, Latency Added, and Distortion Level. The null hypotheses for this project are:
• There is no difference in the means of the FB ANC Levels.
• There is no difference in the means for the changes in Latency Added.
• There is no difference in the means of the Distortion Levels.
• There are no interactions between FB ANC Levels and Latency Added.
• There are no interactions between FB ANC Levels and Distortion Levels.
• There are no interactions between Distortion Level and Latency Added.
• There are no interactions between all three factors.
2.4.4
Assessor Screening
As the main subjective test includes 23 participants resulting in 460 data points, it is necessary to evaluate
the reliability, discrimination ability, and agreement of each participant [13]. One-way ANOVA was used
(Table 2.4) for each participant in comparison with the mean ratings or each setting combination, resulting
in these values:
Table 2.5: ANOVA Calculation Table for Assessor Screening, where I is the number of settings, J is the participant
count, and K is the repetition count. ’.’ indicates an average over the subscript’s factor.[14]
Source
Sum of Squares
Degrees of Freedom
ANOVA on
Assessor j
Product
SSPj = K ∑
i(yij. −y.j.)2
I −1
Session
SSSj = I ∑
k(y.jk −y.j.)2
K −1
Residual
SSRj = ∑
i,k(yijk −yij. −y.jk + y.j.)2
(I −1)(K −1)
ANOVA of
All Assessors
(Panel)
Assessor
SSA = IK ∑
j(y.j. −y...)2
J −1
Session(Assessor)
SSS = ∑
j SSSj
J(K −1)
Product
SSPP = JK ∑
i(yi.. −y...)2
I −1
Product * Assessor
SSPA = K ∑
i,k(yij. −yi.. −y.j. + y...)2
(I −1)(J −1)
Residual
SSR = ∑
j SSRj
J(I −1)(K −1)
Based on these ANOVA calculations, there are 6 performance metrics that can characterize a participant
j [14]:
20
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:24==
Table 2.6: Performance Metrics for A Paricipant j, where suffixes MS- and RMS- represent the means square and root
mean square of the type of sum of squares in Table 2.5. [13][12]
Metric
Meaning
Locationj = x.j.
Mean Score
Spanj =
1
K
∑
k[∑
i(yijk −y.jk)2/(I −1)]1/2
Mean Standard Deviation
Reliabilityj =
Spanj
RMSRj
Reliability of Participant
DriftMoodj =
RMSSj
Spanj
How much deviation has happened between repetitions
Discriminationj =
MSPj
MSPj = Fj
F-Value, How well can a participant discriminate scenarios
Disagreementj = MSP A
MSR
Contribution to the Discrimination
Agreementj =
Spanj
Disagreementj
Reliability, discrimination, and agreement values were then plotted on a histogram comparing all partici-
pants. A critical threshold was set for the reliability and discrimination, which will then separate the partici-
pants into reliable versus unreliable participants.
With the new group of reliable participants, the mean and CI for each setting combinations were re-
calculated, and further observations on how the factors’ levels influence the ratings of one’s own voice
were discussed.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
21
==PAGE:25==
3
Results & Discussions
3.1
Pilot Test
The mean and CI of the ratings for each setting combination are shown in Figure 3.1. Inference on how the
increase in FB ANC levels suggest and improvement in one’s perception of naturalness of their self-voice.
However, the existence of sidetone does not deviate regardless if it is on or off, implying that sidetone does
not seem to affect the perception of self-voice. The effects in latency and THD levels are a slightly harder
to observe. Despite the mean values show that a change in factors and setting levels result with a change
in the subjective rating of one’s own voice’s naturalness, the large confidence interval cannot fully draw
conclusions of the trends seen with the mean.
Figure 3.1: The Mean and CI of ratings of all setting combinations tested in the Pilot.
Each factor is further isolated in order to examine the trend of ratings. An average rating is found between
the minimum and maximum setting for each factor, and compared to the rating associated with the moder-
ate setting. Figure 3.2 presents that the similarities between the averaged rating and the moderate setting’s
ratings can infer that the factor levels have a somewhat linear relation with the rating of one’s self-voice.
Latency might be deviating – added latency of 0 ms versus 1 ms does not yield significant change in the
perceptual rating of one’s self-voice. Perhaps the added latency emulates early reflections in a room, and
the length of latency depends on the individual’s preference on how wet or dry they like their self-voice to
sound like [6]. When compared to an added latency of 10ms, a slight drop in the quality rating my imply that
the comb filtering is stronger than the shorter latency settings, resulting in the lower rating on the self-voice
perception [18].
Regardless, due to the large confidence interval for latency changes and THD levels, it is still doubtful to
draw any conclusions about the relations between factor level and the subjective rating.
22
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:26==
(a) FB ANC Level Changes
(b) Latency Changes
(c) THD Changes
Figure 3.2: Mean-CI plots for each corresponding factors as an average of other factors.
In order to observe the significance of each factors and their interactions better, ANOVA was conducted,
shown in Table 3.1. It can be inferred from the extremely low interaction F-values that the null hypothesis
regarding interactions can be confirmed. In other words, these factors do not show major interactions yet.
Table 3.1: ANOVA analysis on factors based on the pilot test. Only FB ANC is significant in this model.
Factors
F-Value
p-value
Individual
FB ANC
6.52
0.0021
Latency
1.78
0.1724
THD
0.22
0.8035
Interactions
FB ANC & Latency
0.42
0.7947
FB ANC & THD
0.28
0.8883
Latency & THD
0.24
0.9173
According to Table 3.1, FB ANC shows the largest F-value, indicating that there is a significant difference
between the 3 factor levels. This disproves the null hypothesis regarding the single factor of FB ANC levels.
On the other hand, latency shows the second-largest F-value, but a p-value that is too large compared to
the α = 0.05 threshold, which in part becomes dubious whether or not the null hypothesis is proven. Finally,
the THD levels do not show a significant difference between the factor levels with the minuscule F value.
Therefore, the only rejected null-hypothesis is There is no difference in the means of the FB ANC Levels..
Since the two other factors, latency and THD, are still undetermined due to the spread of the confidence
interval, there is a possibility of improvement if more participants are involved.
Thus, the levels per factor were reduced to only the maximum and the minimum as mentioned in sec-
tion 2.3. The maximum distortion level was increased to anticipate a bigger difference in the listening ex-
perience for participants. Since the reduction results with only 10 different settings, these settings undergo
one repetition during the next test in order to improve the statistical power.
3.2
Main Test
The mean-CI of the ratings for each setting combination in the main test is shown in Figure 3.3. To support
the quantitative relations deduced between one’s self-voice quality rating and the factors of interest in this
section, a word cloud and word frequecy histogram was generated from the comments collected from the
participants, shown in Figure 3.4.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
23
==PAGE:27==
(a) FB ANC Trends
(b) Latency Trends
(c) THD Trends
Figure 3.3: The mean and CI of self-voice quality ratings for each setting combinations conducted in the main test.
(a) Word cloud from comments.
(b) Top 15 frequently used words.
Figure 3.4: Visualization of unique word usage of participant comments during the subjective test.
Compared to the pilot test, the CI is significantly smaller, indicating a bigger certainty for the calculated
mean ratings for each setting. A broader question on the overall quality of self-voice, instead of asking
for the naturalness of self-voice, might have helped people observe their own voice more holistically and
answer a slightly less acoustically technical question. From the trends of ratings, it can be implied that an
increase in FB ANC levels can improve one’s quality rating of their self-voice, whereas an increase in THD
levels can significantly hinder one’s quality rating of their self-voice. Though there are some indications that
a higher latency correlates to a lower self-voice quality rating, it does not seem obvious. Finally, the effects
of sidetone’s presence is more significant under the context of a strong FB ANC level – As sidetone is turned
on, one’s self-voice quality rating improves. However, the presence of sidetone seems to be unnoticeable
when FB ANC is minimized. This may be suggested by some feedback received by participants specifically
24
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:28==
noting that they feel neutral about a completely passive headset with no sidetone only thinking that their
voice is slightly muffled (see Figure 3.4). Switching on sidetone only increases the volume of their own
voice slightly, while having occlusion effects remain.
The ANOVA analysis for the main test is shown in Table 3.2. Similar to the pilot test, the low F-values and
p-values that exceed the α = 0.05 from the interactions suggest that the null hypothesis can be confirmed.
Therefore, there are no interactions between the three factors. An improvement on the pilot test is seen
where both FB ANC Levels and THD levels indicate a significant difference between each respective factors’
two setting levels. This disproved the null-hypothesis in regards the FB ANC level and the THD level.
Table 3.2: ANOVA analysis on factors based on the main test. The interactions of all 3 factors are negligible.
Factors
F-Value
p-value
Individual
FB ANC
33.88
< 0.0001
Latency
2.8
0.0951
THD
127.59
< 0.0001
Interactions
FB ANC & Latency
0.34
0.5596
FB ANC & THD
2.71
0.1004
Latency & THD
1.19
0.2758
Moreover, the larger F-value from the THD level indicates that changes in THD levels propose a bigger
perceptual difference compared to changes in FB ANC levels. However, this does not suggest that THD is
a more important factor than FB ANC. As the maximum THD level have been deliberately increased due to
its minuscule performance during the pilot test, this might have resulted a more prominent effect of distorting
a participant’s self-voice, therefore showing a significant rating drop between no THD and maximum THD.
Based on data analysis and visualization, it can be deduced that an increase in FB ANC levels and a
reduction in THD levels result in a better self-voice quality rating. The effects of sidetone on one’s percep-
tion of self-voice is dependent on the FB ANC level, but the remaining three factors (FB ANC, Latency, and
THD) are independent with one another. The effects of latency are still indeterminate. The significance
of FB ANC on the influence of one’s self-voice is likely due to the form-factor of in-ear headsets giving an
underlying impression of occlusion issues. This allows participants to pay closer attention to such issues
during their evaluation process, suggested by how ”occlusion” is the most mentioned word amongst partici-
pant comments in Figure 3.4b. On the other hand, how THD levels influence one’s perception of self-voice
is likely due to the alienation of one’s distorted voice, as participants described with negative words such as
”distorted”, ”fluctuation”, ”strange”, and ”weird” for the cases where THD is maximized.
Sidetone’s dependency on FB ANC levels might be explained by performing ANOVA analysis on an iso-
lated group of data points, removing data points corresponding to conditions with 10 ms latency or maximum
THD (Table 2). Table 3.3 shows the ANOVA results of the isolated analysis between FB ANC and sidetone,
where both factors have significant F-value, as well as minuscule p-values. Moreover, the interactions be-
tween FB ANC and Sidetone also have a fairly significant F-value accompanied by a p-value below the
threshold. Therefore, the ANOVA analysis suggests that both FB ANC and Sidetone have significant influ-
ence on the perception of one’s voice, but also indicate that their interaction with one another have influence
on perception as well. This is also suggested by feedback received by participants specifically noting that
they feel neutral about a completely passive headset with no sidetone only thinking that their voice is slightly
muffled (see Figure 3.4). Switching on sidetone only increases the volume of their own voice slightly, while
having occlusion effects remain.
Table 3.3: ANOVA analysis between FB ANC and sidetone and their interaction.
Factors
F-Value
p-value
FB ANC
16.32
0.0001
Sidetone
9.03
0.003
FB ANC Sidetone
7.72
0.006
Even though the effect of latency appearing to be indeterminate, there were a few participants that mention
words and phrases such as ”delay”, ”echo”, and ”light early reflection”, indicating that they were able to
perceive the latency changes with critical listening. This suggests a listening skill gap between the 23
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
25
==PAGE:29==
participants, where some are casual and untrained listeners and some were critical listeners. Therefore, an
investigation on individual participants using assessor screening is instigated.
3.2.1
Assessor Screening
Despite the previous results leading to some conclusions, the spread each individuals had when rating the
10 setting combinations were varied across 23 participants, indicating that each participant had a different
sense of rating and have different levels of critical listening skills. First, each subject’s 20 ratings were
plotted using box plots, distinguishing the repeated settings from their first listen, shown in Figure 3.5. It can
be seen that some participants have an extremely narrow rating range, such as subject 4 and subject 20,
indicating a difficulty in discriminating different audio settings. Some participants show a drastic difference
between the repetitions, such as subject 9, suggesting some level of unreliability in their critical listening
skills.
Figure 3.5: Distribution of Ratings done by each Subject.
In order to further quantify the performance of each participant, the performance metrics shown in Ta-
ble 2.6 are calculated and plotted on histograms, shown in Figure 3.6. Two thresholds were applied on the
reliability and discrimination metrics respectively – the first to weed out unreliable and non-discriminating
participants, the second to distinguish the listening skills amongst the reliable participants. A critical thresh-
old of 1 is applied to both the discrimination and reliability metrics to separate the participants into two groups
– a reliable and discriminating participant versus an unreliable or not-discriminating participant – shown in
Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.6: Reliability, Discrimination, and Agreement Metrics for each participant.
26
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.7: Categorization of participants.
As Subjects 1, 3, 4, 9, and 20 are unreliable or have poor discrimination skills, their ratings are removed
to generate a new mean and CI for the 10 setting’s quality ratings, as shown in Figure 3.8. There is a slight
improvement in discriminating the quality for sidetone on/off settings and latency settings. However, the CI
on these settings in question still shows insignificant trends.
Figure 3.8: The mean and CI of self-voice quality ratings for each setting combinations conducted in the main test, with
only reliable participants.
Observing the general trend of reliability and discrimination metrics in Figure 3.6, the critical threshold is
brought up further with a discrimination threshold of 5 and reliability threshold of 2 for optimal separability
between critical listeners and moderately skilled listeners. This then categorizes the reliable participants into
2 smaller groups: Group 1 being critical listeners and Group 2 being a lesser skilled listeners, as shown in
Figure 3.9. The two groups then undergo a new set of mean and CI calculations, resulting with Figure 3.10.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
27
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.9: Categorization of reliable participants with a higher critical threshold.
Figure 3.10: The mean and CI of self-voice quality ratings from reliable participants for each setting combinations
conducted, splitting them into 2 Groups. Group 1 - critical listener; Group 2 - lesser skilled listener.
FB ANC levels and THD show the same trends, but the critical listeners were able to better discriminate
latency changes when THD is minimized. Despite the attempt to further make sense of the data with asses-
sor screenings, a familiarization procedure should have been conducted before the beginning of each test
to provide a better rating framework for all participants. Participants should be allowed to experience 2-3
settings that range from good to bad quality, so that their discrimination abilities can be standardized, there-
fore having a data set with clear distinction between the different audio settings. Regardless, as the general
trends of how the investigated factors influence self-voice remain similar, the experiment is still showing
reliable results despite the gaps in listening skills.
28
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:32==
4
Conclusions
The present study investigated how several acoustical factors – sidetone settings, latency levels, feedback
ANC levels, and distortion – influence the perception of one’s own-voice when wearing the in-ear headset.
Instrumental measurements were conducted to define the level settings as well as design the experiment.
Subjective listening tests were conducted using 5-scale of continuous quality rating to assess own voice
perception. Twenty-three assessors participated in the study. The procedure aims to assess whether or not
and how the acoustical factors are influencing the quality of own voice perception.
Returning to the research questions and hypothesis (section 1.3), the present study suggests that occlu-
sion levels, sidetone, and distortion levels influence the perception of self-voice the most when using an
in-ear headset, and that the interactions between sidetone and occlusion levels are influential to one’s self-
voice perception as well. As occlusion is reduced by increasing the strength of FB ANC, how one perceives
their self-voice improves; As distortion increases, one’s perception of their self-voice deteriorates. When
less occlusion is experienced by a person, the existence of sidetone becomes more and more detrimental
to the quality of self-voice. Out of the four factors investigated, the effects of latency are the most uncertain.
Limited options for a sidetone filter may have hindered the representation of the effects of sidetone. The
limitations in this study is that the sidetone filter is being optimized to 0dB IG under maximum FB ANC set-
tings. However, if ANC is turned off and no longer aids in reducing low-frequency components of occlusion,
it requires a new sidetone filter as using the old filter will result in a non-zero IG. The filter needs to counter
both the occlusion issues as well as assisting the high-frequency components in the acoustic path to achieve
0dB IG. This may help with bigger findings on how sidetone filtering affects the perception of one’s self-voice.
An investigation on a variety of simple filter shapes, such as low-pass or high-pass filters, might also be a
benefactor for further investigation.
4.1
Future Work
There were some dismissed factors, due to resource limitations, that are also worthy of investigation.
Similar to telephony sidetone [6], sidetone volume is part of the research as listening to one’s own voice at
an altered level can cause an altered perception in one’s own voice similar to Lombard Effects – a quieter
sidetone volume may force one to talk louder, and a louder sidetone volume might cause one to start whis-
pering, despite instructing a subject to speak at a normal effort [16][17]. As participants have commented
about level quite a few times (Figure 5b), further investigation on this factor should be considered.
A broader range of latency values should be investigated, due to the insignificant effects seen with the
latency levels in this study. As this study investigates the in-ear headset form factor, an expanded study on
a range of form factors, such as on-ear and over-ear headsets, can be considered to fully encompass the
sidetone performances of all types of contemporary headsets.
The procedure of the subjective test can be further improved with the addition of a familiarization stage,
allowing all the participants have a standardized rating range, providing better quality data sets for analysis.
Lastly, the project can further develop an objective perceptual self-voice quality measure for head-set
sidetone levels based on the factors investigated, which can aid in predicting the quality of one’s self-voice
for an unknown headset completed with objective acoustical measurements.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
29
==PAGE:33==
Bibliography
[1]
Alicea (Allie) Lieberman, Juliana Schroeder, and On Amir. “A Voice Inside My Head: The Psychologi-
cal and Behavioral Consequences of Auditory Technologies”. In: Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 170 (May 2022), p. 104133. DOI: 10.1016/j.obhdp.2022.104133.
[2]
Sabine Reinfeldt et al. “Hearing One’s Own Voice During Phoneme Vocalization—Transmission by
Air and Bone Conduction”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 128 (Aug. 2010),
pp. 751–62. DOI: 10.1121/1.3458855.
[3]
Christoph Pörschmann. “Influences of Bone Conduction and Air Conduction on the Sound of One’s
Own Voice”. In: Acustica 86 (Nov. 2000), pp. 1038–1045.
[4]
Shan Hu, R. Rajamani, and Xinghuo Yu. “Active Noise Control for Selective Cancellation of External
Disturbances”. In: Aug. 2011, pp. 4737–4742. DOI: 10.1109/ACC.2011.5991142.
[5]
A. Baumfield, Louise Hickson, and Bradley McPherson. “Performance of Assistive Listening Devices
using Insertion Gain Measures.” In: 22.1 (Jan. 1993). DOI: 10.3109/01050399309046017.
[6]
R. Appel and John Beerends. “On The Quality of Hearing One’s Own Voice”. In: AES: Journal of the
Audio Engineering Society 50 (Apr. 2002), pp. 237–248.
[7]
Stefan Liebich and Peter Vary. “Occlusion Effect Cancellation in Headphones and Hearing Devices—
The Sister of Active Noise Cancellation”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Lan-
guage Processing 30 (2022), pp. 35–48. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2021.3130966.
[8]
Johanna Hengen, Inger L. Hammarström, and Stefan Stenfelt. “Perception of One’s Own Voice After
Hearing-Aid Fitting for Naive Hearing-Aid Users and Hearing-Aid Refitting for Experienced Hearing-
Aid Users”. In: Trends in Hearing 24 (2020), p. 2331216520932467. DOI: 10.1177/2331216520932467.
[9]
Gary W. Oehlert. A First Course in Design and Analysis of Experiments. Freeman, 2000.
[10]
“IEEE Recommended Practice for Speech Quality Measurements”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio
and Electroacoustics 17 (1969), pp. 225–246.
[11]
Ronald E. Walpole. Introduction to Statistics. Prentice Hall International, 1997.
[12]
ITU-R. “Methods for Assessor Screening”. In: ITU-R BS.2300-0 (Apr. 2014).
[13]
Pascal Schlich. “GRAPES: A method and a SAS® program for Graphical Representations of Asses-
sor Performances”. In: Journal of Sensory Studies 9 (May 2007), pp. 157–169. DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-
459X.1994.tb00238.x.
[14]
Søren Bech and Nick Zacharov. Perceptual Audio Evaluation: Theory, Method and Application. Wiley,
2006.
[15]
Gaëtan Lorho, Guillaume Le Ray, and Nick Zacharov. “eGauge — A Measure of Assessor Expertise in
Audio Quality Evaluations”. In: Audio Engineering Society Conference: 38th International Conference:
Sound Quality Evaluation. Audio Engineering Society. 2010.
[16]
Harlan Lane and Bernard Tranel. “The Lombard Sign and the Role of Hearing in Speech”. In: 14.4
(Dec. 1971). DOI: 10.1044/JSHR.1404.677.
[17]
Hyun Ju Chong, Jin Hee Choi, and Soeun Sarah Lee. “Does the Perception of Own Voice Affect Our
Behavior?” In: Journal of Voice (2022). ISSN: 0892-1997. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvoice.2022.
02.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0892199722000376.
[18]
Ute Jekosch and Sebastian Möller. “Speech quality and the E￿model”. In: 105.2 (Jan. 1999). DOI:
10.1121/1.425325.
[19]
GRAS 43AC Ear Simulator Kit According to IEC 60318-4. URL: https://www.grasacoustics.com/
products/ear-simulator-kit/product/240-43ac.
[20]
High-Frequency Head and Torso Simulator | Type 5128 | B&K. URL: https://www.bksv.com/en/
transducers/simulators/head-and-torso/hats-type-5128.
[21]
GRAS 46BL-1 1/4” CCP Pressure Standard Microphone Set, High Sensitivity. URL: https://www.
grasacoustics.com/products/measurement-microphone-sets/constant-current-power-ccp/product/855-
46bl-1.
30
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
==PAGE:34==
A
Appendix I: Data Explorations for
Subjective Test
Figure A.1: Box Plot Distribution of Ratings for Each Setting Combination.
Figure A.2: Violin Plot Distribution of Ratings for Each Setting Combination.
Evaluation of Own Voice Perception while Using In-ear Headsets
31
==PAGE:35==
Technical University of Denmark
Engineering Acoustics
DTU Electro, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://electro.dtu.dk/
