==PAGE:1==
Machine
learning
methods
for
detecting
schizophrenia in resting-state electroence-
falography
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state elec-
troencefalography
Master Thesis
July 30th, 2023
By
Ane Cathrine Holst Merrild, s174304@student.dtu.dk
Supervisor
Tobias Andersen, toban@dtu.dk
Karen Marie Sandø Ambrosen, karen.marie.sandoe.ambrosen@regionh.dk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ECTS:
30
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
July 30th 2023
ii
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:5==
Summary
Schizophrenia is complex and severe mental illness shown to have a strong genetic com-
ponent. Several studies are dedicated to research in biomarkers related to the disease
to increase the insight in the neurological underpinnings and aid the current diagnostics
process. The data for this MSc project is obtained from a twin study, enabling further
analysis of the genetic component.
EEG data reflect activity in the brain and allows for a variety of features to be extracted
from the signals. Features related to the power in the frequency bands as well as functional
connectivity are among the most analysed features and have been successful in differenti-
ating healthy individuals from patients with schizophrenia. However there is some variety
in the direction of difference and which features that are highlighted as relevant for char-
acterising the groups. Within recent years, an increasing number of studies apply machine
learning algorithms to EEG-based features with the aim of solving the classification prob-
lem. Overall, comparable studies result in high classification rates, but are often based on
relatively small samples and report the validation error.
This project analysed a data set consisting of EEG recordings from 197 individuals,
grouped into proband pairs where at least one twin is diagnosed with schizophrenia and
healthy control pairs.
After preprocessing the data, the Fitting-Oscillations-and-One-
over-F (FOOOF) algorithm was fitted to the spectrum of each channel resulting in a
parameterisation of the broad and narrow frequency bands. In addition, source localisa-
tion was performed before computing the weighted-phase-lag-index (wPLI) as an estimate
of functional connectivity between regions in the default mode network. The features was
compared between the healthy individuals and both the sick and healthy twin from the
proband pair, as well as a paired analysis between the sick and healthy twin from the
proband pair. Permutation tests and cluster based permutation tests were used for these
comparisons, and in addition traditional machine learning algorithms with nested cross
validation was fitted to the data with the aim of classifying the groups.
For the first problem of separating healthy individuals from patients with schizophrenia
the classification model resulted in an AUC test error of 0.68 based on variables identi-
fied by computing the PCA loadings from both spectral and connectivity features. For
classification of the sick and healthy co-twin within a proband pair, the AUC test score
was 0.59, based on PCA of the spectral features. For classification of healthy individuals
with a sick co-twin against healhty individuals without a sick co-twin, the AUC test score
was 0.64 based on connectivity features identified by the statistical tests. Overall this
suggest that perhaps other feature types are more useful when distinguishing between pa-
tients with SZ and healthy individuals, and that the classification problem becomes harder
when comparing individuals with similar genetics.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Schizophrenia and results from the VIP study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Classification of SZ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
EEG-based features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
The resting state paradigm and regions of interest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
9
2.1
EEG-data and preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Statistical tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Classification models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Evaluation metric: ROC AUC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methods
19
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Power spectral density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
FOOOF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Functional Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.8
Statistical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.9
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results
41
4.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Model fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Problem 1: HC vs PR1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Problem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Problem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Discussion
58
5.1
Discussion of the results for each problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Preprocessing and source localisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
62
iv
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Schizophrenia (SZ) is a severe mental disorder with high heterogenity in the symptoms.
This imposes a great challenge of diagnosing the disorder, which is based on surveys
and evaluations from a psychiatrist, encouraging the search for some objective measure
to assist the process. In recent years, machine learning (ML) models have shown good
results for classification of healthy individuals against patients with an SZ diagnose, [1],
[2]. Additionally, there is broad consensus about SZ having a strong genetic component
and high heritability, with twin based studies having contributed to valuable insight in the
relative contributions of genetics and environmental factors in the disease, [3]. This thesis
aims to contribute to the understanding of the genetic component in SZ by applying an
ML approach to a data set from a clinical twin study. An analysis based on data from
twins, is of particular interest, as it enables the opportunity of comparing measures for
patients to healthy individuals with and without shared genetic background. This has
the potential to underscore individual differences including environmental factors as well
as quantifying individuals at risk. The features used as input for the model is extracted
from EEG-recordings obtained in the resting state paradigm, related to the spectrum of
the signal as well as the connectivity between brain regions.
This chapter provides brief background information on SZ and the search for biomarkers
which is a complex field using various combinations of data modalities, features, paradigms
and types of subjects. I attempt to structure it in the following way: The purpose of the
first section 1.1 is to provide some background information on schizophrenia and based on
previous results from the VIP study explore analysis designs for a twin-based study. The
second section 1.2 examines the success of various ML approaches for classifying patients
with SZ compared to HC. The third section 1.3 introduces EEG-based features and the
fourth section describes the RS-network and highlight particular brain regions relevant to
SZ 1.4. All has the purpose of motivating the specific study design and aims specified in
Section Finally I present the aim of the thesis together with a outline.
1.0.1
Outline of the project
The project consists of six chapters. Chapter 1 is a description of the fundamental con-
cepts that the analysis rests upon, including schizophrenia, EEG data, the RS network
and value from using a twin study. The purpose is to describe the findings and designs
from previous studies that inspired the pipeline of this project. Chapter 2 describes the
theoretical framework, including the preprocessing, feature estimation, hypothesis testing
and the classification models. Chapter 3 describes the data subsets for the three problems
and elaborates on the choice of methods and implementation. Chapter 4 presents the
results obtained from preprocessing, feature estimation, hypothesis testing and classifica-
tion. Chapter 5 is a discussion of the key findings, and Chapter 6 is a conclusion of the
study.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Schizophrenia and results from the VIP study
The schizophrenic spectrum comprises severe mental disorders, often associated with psy-
chosis, which fundamentally affect an individual’s perception of reality (ICD-10, 27 sub-
types) [4]. These disorders exhibit highly heterogeneous symptomatology, typically cat-
egorised as cognitive impairments, positive symptoms (e.g., hallucinations), or negative
symptoms (e.g., apathy, social withdrawal). It is well established that schizophrenic spec-
trum disorders (SZ) have a substantial genetic component, as evidenced by increased onset
risk for siblings in affected families compared to unaffected families [3]. Approximately 80-
85% of the risk for developing SZ is attributed to genetic factors, with heritability defined
as the percentage of genetic variance in the total observed variance [5]. In addition [3]
showed that the risk of developing SZ in the second twin is estimated as 4.7 times higher if
the first twin has an onset of schizophrenia before the age of 22. Twin studies reveal that
the risk varies between monozygotic (MZ) twins (almost identical genetic background) and
dizygotic (DZ) twins (on average, 50% genetic similarity). If a twin from an MZ pair is
affected, the unaffected twin has a 40-50% risk, whereas the unaffected twin of an affected
DZ twin has a 10-15% risk of developing schizophrenia [6].
Twin studies provide evidence for the influence of both genetic and environmental risk
factors in SZ development [7]. In EEG analysis, twin studies allow insights into individual
differences in electrophysiological measures, facilitating comparisons among individuals
with shared genetic backgrounds and aiding understanding of the disorder’s clinical het-
erogeneity [5]. This section briefly presents previous findings from the VIP study, high-
lighting the analysis approaches applied to the EEG data and the context of the results.
The VIP study collected multiple data modalities, including EEG, blood tests, MR scans,
and interviews. While other publications from this study are based on these data types,
this project is the first to analyse the EEG data. Overall findings indicate a high heri-
tability of schizophrenia and the contribution of certain environmental factors to increased
risk. Additionally, cognitive impairments commonly associated with schizophrenia exhibit
varying degrees of heritability, indicating shared genetic influences between the disorder
and cognitive abilities. They studied biomarkers such as brain region size, glutamate lev-
els, as well as blood flow in specific brain areas and showed that these are heritable and
related to schizophrenia. I will use these studies to get an idea about relevant brain areas
and identify analysis designs.
In [8], cerebral glutamate levels were analysed as a potential biomarker, revealing signif-
icant heritability in the left thalamus and anterior cingulate cortex. For cerebral bloods
flow, significant correlations to schizophrenia were found in the left thalamus, left puta-
men, and right putamen. Regarding analysis design, [3] demonstrated the importance of
analysing MZ and DZ twins separately to emphasise the stronger genetic component in
MZ pairs, as well as comparing broad and narrow definitions of schizophrenia based on
ICD-10 subtypes, with F20x defining the narrow group. Meanwhile, [9] and [10] focused
on describing the increased risk for unaffected co-twins in PR pairs, with the former high-
lighting a genetic vulnerability impacting social factors compared to healthy controls, and
the latter revealing an augmented signal in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex associated
with disturbances in reward processing.
Based on these previous studies, frontal areas and the thalamus are identified as relevant
regions for schizophrenia, underscoring the value of distinguishing twins by zygosity and
considering broad versus narrow definitions of the disorder. Additionally, investigating
the heightened risk for twins with a diagnosed co-twin is of interest.
2
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Classification of SZ
The section presents previous results from using machine learning to distinguish SZ from
HC to motivate my study design. The focus is on the overall problem at hand and in
which settings the classifiers have been successful, whereas the later sections concentrate
on the feature types and relevant brain areas.
Including machine learning in schizophrenia speaks in to three domains, namely detec-
tion, prognosis and biomarker identification. Consistent findings suggest that the time
between onset of symptoms and diagnosis is one of the best predictors of later prognosis
[1] motivating the research in methods for early diagnosis.
Several studies have employed computational methods to classify schizophrenia using var-
ious data. The literature related to biomarker identification in schizophrenia is a jungle.
In addition to EEG, a range of data such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), genomic
information, electronic health records, audio records etc. has been explored, with the far
majority of studies using fMIR data [11]. EEG-based analysis can further be divided into
the RS paradigm and task-based paradigm, with studies from the task paradigms generally
report higher classification [12]. The techniques to analyse this data with the aim of sep-
arating patients from healthy controls includes statistical models [3], neural networks and
traditional machine learning algorithms. Deep learning (DL) approaches are increasingly
popular and studies report classification rates around +90% with complex model struc-
tures [11]. However it is suggested that explainability of the clinical implications in DL
models remains a challenge and that simpler ML models, if successful in the classification
task, should be used if possible with the gain of interpretable features, [13].
I scope my search to studies based on EEGdata obtained from the RS paradigm for com-
parability. For the literature search I used connectedpapers.com, that generates a graph
where the papers are described as nodes, size indicating citations, and the links represent
the similarity in topics. To initialise the graph, I use the key words ’schizophrenia, ma-
chine learning, eeg, resting state’. I detect surprisingly few papers with this combination.
Skimming through abstracts, I get the impression that fMIR data and task-based studies
dominate the field. The table 1.1 gives an overview of some comparable study designs and
results obtained after 2010.
Overall this seems like a well-solved problem with consistently high classification rates. It
is noted that the sample sizes including both HC and patients with SZ are relatively small,
and that [15],[16],[13] use the same publicly available EEG-database where SZ consists of
patients with F20.x Paranoid schizophrenia.
The authors aim to account for the low
number of subjects by segmenting the data into chunks of some seconds length, thereby
obtaining multiple samples per subject. In addition most of these report the validation
error, and there’s a drop in reported accuracy when using a nested cross-validation ap-
proach. The low accuracy score in [17] is likely due to the cohort being anti-psychotic
naïve.
In summary, this motivates multiple steps for improving generalisability, including trans-
parent feature selection and a nested cross validation approach.
1.3
EEG-based features
EEG records electrical activity of the brain, which is hypothesised to differ between healthy
individuals and patients with and SZ disorder. EEG based studies can be grouped ac-
cording to the computed features and the paradigm under which the data is obtained.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
3
==PAGE:10==
Ref.
Problem
Samples
Model
Evaluation
Feature
selection
Feature
domain
Metric
Result
[14]
HC-SZ
22
HOPD
-
-
Freq
(power)
ACC
90%
[15]
HC-SZ
28
RF
7-fold CV
LPO
-
Freq
(Conn.)
ACC
87%
[16]
HZ-SZ
28
RF
10-fold CV
-
Freq
(power)
ACC
96%
[1]
HC-SZ
31
LR, DT, RF,
SVM, KNN
LOO
t-test,PCA
Freq,time
AUC
68-89%
[13]
HC-SZ
28
SVM, RF
Nested CV
Restrict no.
feat in RF
Freq
ACC
70-75%
[17]
HC-SZ
168
RF
-
Restrict no.
feat in RF
Freq
ACC
50.2%
[2]
HC-SZ
168
RF
-
Restrict no.
feat in RF
Freq
ACC
50.2%
Table 1.1: Previous studies using an ML approach to distinguish HC from SZ. ’LPO’:
Leave-P-out, ’LOO’: Leave-one-out, - : Not reported, ACC: Accuracy, ’Freq’: Frequency
domain, ’Conn.’: Connectivity.
To explore potential features relevant for my project, I focus on findings from the RS
paradigm.
EEG is expected to vary across individuals and is in addition affected by factors such
as medication and age. EEG is well employed for analysis of epilepsy where seizures are
clearly detectable [18], but a complex disorder such as SZ, can make it challenging to iden-
tify consistent and robust features that can reliably distinguish between healthy controls
and patients with SZ. To identify relevant features for ML analysis, several studies has the
approach of including a large portfolio of features from different domains and testing the
classifier’s performance [1]. These are typically statistical and complexity features [19] in
the time domain, or spectral features in the frequency domain. Additionally, microstate
analysis and functional connectivity features have gained interest due to exploiting the
high temporal resolution of EEG and measuring brain network activity, respectively. To
search for previous results when comparing HC to patients with SZ, I include studies from
2010 with EEG obtained in the RS paradigm.
When browsing through literature, there’s variety in the reported relevant features, brain
areas, direction of difference, and there is consensus about the inconsistency in previous
findings [1]. This diversity is usually explained by variations in the subjects across stud-
ies, various number of electrodes. In addition, EEG is affected by other factors such as
medication and age, making it challenging to compare results directly across studies, [17].
Oscillatory dysfunction has been implicated in several major psychiatric disorders [20],
and spectral features are among the most commonly applied features for analysing EEG
data, typically analysed in terms of frequency bands. Computing the power within each
frequency band is still in recent literature one of the simplest, most common features and
one of the features associated with the most consistent findings. Multiple findings suggest
reduced α power for patients with SZ and increased power in δ and θ. There are however
indications of increased power in the α-band [21] or studies unable to replicate the increase
in the lower frequency bands, [22]. In addition, several studies aim to characterise SZ in
4
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:11==
Ref
Feature type
Freq band
Channels / Area
Result
[18]
Power
θ,
δ,
α2
Frontal-Center
SZ >HC
SZ >HC
SZ <HC
[13]
Avg. phase & amp.
θ, α, γ
P4, T8, P3
-
[17]
Power
α
-
SZ <HC
[1]
Power
δ
FC6, F8
SZ <HC
[25]
Power
α
-
SZ <HC
[22]
Power
α
Temporal
SZ <HC
[21]
Power
θ
α
γ
-
SZ >HC
SZ >HC
SZ <HC
[26]
Power
γ
SZ >HC
[2]
Conn.
α
Parital-Occipital-Right
HSZ <LSZ
[27]
Conn.
δ
-
SZ >HC
[24]
Conn.
δ, θ
α, β, γ
-
SZ <HC
SZ >HC
[28]
Power
Conn.
δP ,αP
βC, γC
(F7,F8,Fz),(Fp1,Fp2)
Frontal, Scalp
SZ >HC,SZ <HC
SZ <HC, SZ <HC
[29]
Power
Conn.
α
Frontal-Right
LSZ < HSZ
Table 1.2: Reported differences in Power and Connectivity features. It is noted that [2]
does not compare SZ vs HC but patients with SZ displaying symptoms of either high or
low severity.
terms of the connectivity between certain brain regions, also distinguished in terms of
frequency bands. The so-called dysconnectivity hypotheses of SZ states that the disorder
relates to abnormalities in neural connectivity [23]. Compared to the power features, the
results here seem more consistent in reporting a significant difference, but more disagree-
ing in the direction of difference for each frequency band. This difference in direction has
been related to the choice of brain areas as well as the chosen metric for computing FC,
[24]. The recent popular choice of metric include information about the phase of the signal
opposed to simply coherence, but this is further elaborated in Section 3.6.
Recently, the analysis of the power spectrum in EEG research has been expanded to
include the parameterisation of the background noise, specifically the 1/f component.
The term 1/f noise refers to the slope of the EEG power spectrum, some subtract it from
the spectrum to model oscillations in the flattened spectrum [29], but it is considered to
be a meaningful signal in itself, [30], and potentially related to a range of cognitive states
[31]. [32] recommends the exponent for further investigation as a biomarker, potentially
predictive of deficits in the cognitive processing in patients with SZ. Findings, mostly from
the task-based paradigm, are displayed in Table 1.3. Most results point to an increased
slope for patients with SZ.
In summary, based on previous findings I chose to examine some spectral features and
functional connectivity features. For functional connectivity there has been some devel-
opment towards including information about the phase of the signal. For the spectral
connectivity features, particularly power and amplitude are very common and have shown
good results.
A more elaborate parameterisation of the spectrum including the
1
f be-
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
5
==PAGE:12==
Ref
Result Slope
Paradigm
Channels / Area
[21]
SZ >HC
T
-
[32]
SZ >HC
RS
Midline, Xz
[26]
SZ <HC
T
-
[33]
SZ >HC
T
C3, C4, Cz, FCz, Fz,
O1, O2, P3, P4, Pz
Table 1.3: Findings related to the 1/f exponent in relation to SZ. Most findings suggests
that patients with SZ has steeper slope.
haviour and are further suggested to be of relevance for SZ research [34].
1.4
The resting state paradigm and regions of interest
This section will describe the resting state (RS) paradigm, the subset Default Mode Net-
work (DMN) and the regions of interest (ROI) I include in my analysis.
RS refers to the condition of the brain when it is not performing any explicit task or re-
ceiving any sensory inputs. So the EEG records the ongoing neural activities during this
state. The last decade, studies adopting the resting state paradigm has increased notably
[35]. At rest, neural communication consumes 60%–80% of the brain’s energy, while dur-
ing task conditions it accounts for only 0.5%–1%, indicating that the activity during rest
together with stimulus-oriented activity relevant for understanding the functional charac-
teristics of the brain [36]. Networks in the brain are areas that demonstrate synchronous
activity, and several RS networks have been identified, including the vision network, audi-
tory network and the DMN [37]. The DMN is the largest of these networks and relates to
the brain’s intrinsic functionality when it is at “rest” but this mode also continues during
the performance of many tasks, why analysis of DMN has been performed both in the
RS and task-based paradigm. The DMN, together with the other RS networks, contain a
number of regions and the interaction of the activity in these regions, has gained attention
as a biomarker. Additionally it is estimated that the heritability for connections within
the DMN is ≈40%, thus supporting the use of DMN characteristics as endophenotypes
of neuropsychiatric disorders, [38], [36] Particularly within SZ research the DMN is well
studied and the brain regions of the DMN have widely been found to be abnormal but
overall lacks consensus of the direction and various subregions are reported. All results
presented are from the RS paradigm, but based on fMRI data. I include them however,
as the purpose of this literature search was to narrow down relevant regions of interest.
Overall, some findings indicate that the alterations are characterised by reduced segre-
gation between the DMN and executive control networks in the prefrontal cortex and
temporal lobe, as well as reduced connectivity in the dorsal attention and executive con-
trol networks [23]. In [39] the compare connectivity within the DMN for patients with
SZ and compare to both healthy controls and unaffected siblings of the patients. They
were able to show increased connectivity in SZ compared to both healthy controls and the
healthy family member. Another study [40] also compared SZ patients to HC individuals
as well as individuals with atrisk mental state (ARMS) although not biologically related
to the SZ patients, also showing a significant increase in connectivity.
In summary, for analysis with in the resting state paradigm the Default Mode Network is
shown to be relevant for detecting biomarkers for schizophrenia, why I chose to focus on
ROIs within this network, the regions Lateral posterior coretx (LP), posterior cingulate
6
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:13==
cortex (PCC), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) are commonly highlighted.
Ref
Highlighted regions
Result
[39]
MPFC, PCC
SZ >HC, FBC
[40]
LP, MPFC, PCC
SZ >ARMS
[23]
PCC
SZ >HC
[41]
MPFC
SZ <HC
Table 1.4: Findings for the default mode network
1.5
Aims
The data used in this MSc thesis is obtained from a clinical study described in Section
1.1. It contains resting state EEG data from two groups of twins. The first group is
healthy control pairs (HC) and the second group is proband pairs (PR) where at least
one of the individuals have a diagnosis from the schizophrenic spectrum. I denote the
healthy co-twin from as PR pair as PR0, and the sick co-twins from a PR pair as PR1.
The subjects with SZ, are receiving medication which is expected to influence the EEG
recordings [2]. The zygosity, if the subjects are from a monozygotic (MZ) pair (identical
twins) or dizygotic (DZ) (fraternal twins), is known, as well as the exact ICD10 diagnosis.
All this information, allows for multiple interesting analysis.
• Problem 1: An unpaired comparison between individuals with SZ and healthy in-
dividuals. That is PR1 vs. HC.
• Problem 2: A paired comparison between the co-twins in a PR pair. That is PR0
vs PR1.
• Problem 3: An unpaired comparison between the healthy co-twin from a PR pair
and healthy individuals. That is PR0 vs. HC.
The first problem is well-studied in literature, and significant differences in spectral fea-
tures as well as connectivity features are reported. Our hypothesis is thus that differences
in one of more frequency bands should be detected for these features. In addition, as this
problem does not account for the genetic similarity within the twin pairs, I expect this to
be the problem with the highest classification rate.
The second problem aims to isolate the effect of an SZ disorder, by making a paired analysis
of the PR0 twins against the PR1 twins, and examine how potential feature differences
changes when accounting for similar genetics. I hypothesise that there still is a detectable
difference, but expect that it may be smaller compared to Problem 1. In addition, the
specification of zygosity further allows for a increased ’isolation’ of the effect of SZ, as MZ
twins have higher genetic similarity than DZ twins.
The third problem aims to model if the increased risk of developing SZ is detectable in
individuals with a sick co-twin compared to individuals with a healthy co-twin. Because of
the strong genetic component in SZ, I hypothesise that it is possible to observe a difference
between these groups.
Overall, I develop three classification models. For Problem 1 and Problem 2 the aim is
to predict if an unseen subject has SZ. For Problem 3, the aim is to predict if a subject
has increased risk of developing SZ.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
7
==PAGE:14==
Abbreviation
Term
SZ
Schizophrenia spectrum disorders
EEG
Electroencephalography
PR
Proband pair (at least one twin is diagnosed with SZ)
HC
Healthy matched Control
P
Power (feature)
BW
Band width (feature)
CF
Center frequency
ML
Machine Learning
CV
Cross validation
LOO
Leave-one-out
LPO
Leave-P-out (a number, P, observations are left out)
RF
Random Forest
SVC
Support Vector Classifier
GB
GradientBoosting
FC
Functional connectivity
AR
Autoreject
Table 1.5: Overview of common abbreviations in the project.
8
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:15==
2
Theory
This chapter outlines the theory underlying the applied methods. The first part describes
the raw EEG data and the preprocessing steps involved, including cleaning and source
localisation. The second part presents the feature extraction methods, specifically the
FOOOF algorithm for computing spectral features as well as PLI and wPLI for estimating
FC. The third part covers various hypothesis testing techniques used for comparing fea-
tures between subjects. Lastly, the fourth part introduces the classification models and
metrics used for performance evaluation.
2.1
EEG-data and preprocessing
EEG is a non-invasive technique used to record electrical activity from the brain, measured
through electrodes placed on the scalp. Each electrode captures voltage fluctuations over
time, representing changes in electrical potential. Thus, for each time point, a sample
consists of the difference between a given electrode and a reference point. EEG offers
high temporal resolution, with common sampling rates ranging from 256Hz to 2048Hz in
clinical studies [42]. Consequently, raw EEG signals for each subject are continuous and
represented as a two-dimensional matrix of size kelectrodes × ntimepoints.
The biological origin of EEG imposes certain implications that necessitate preprocessing.
Scalp-recorded activity reflects changes in electrical potential resulting from synchronised
neuron activity, observable under specific conditions. To avoid cancelling each other out, a
large group of neurons must be activated and have similar orientations. The so-called pyra-
midal neurons meet these requirements. Their electric fields sum together, pass through
the brain volume and scalp, and are detected by the EEG electrodes [43]. It is estimated
that each scalp electrode captures approximately 6, cm2 of synchronous cortical activity
[44]. Consequently, EEG has limited spatial resolution and also captures electrical activ-
ity originating from, for example, muscle movements. Raw EEG data is thus a mixture
of neuronal activity, physiological artefacts, and non-physiological noise. Preprocessing is
essential to improve the signal-to-noise ratio before computing features for the analysis.
Additionally, it is recommended to apply source localisation for more accurate analysis of
the activity in specific locations in the brain.
2.1.1
Preprocessing
Preprocessing is a fundamental part of the analysis, as noise and artifacts are likely to
affect the downstream results. However, this process lacks consensus and standardisation
in literature [45]. Despite disagreements regarding the specific order and details of indi-
vidual steps, a common framework involving three main parts is widely applied, namely
filtering, referencing, and artefact removal [43], [30], [42]. I describe Independent Com-
ponent Analysis (ICA) and ICLabel for artefact removal as well as the Autoreject (AR)
algorithm as these are the largest steps involved when cleaning the signal. I will not go
into the theory behind filtering, interpolation and referencing as the the reader is assumed
to be familiar with standard signal processing methods.
Independent Component Analysis and ICLabel
As described in Section 1.3 each electrode records signals consisting of a mixture of neural
activity and various noise. To address this issue, ICA is used to decompose the signals
by aiming to maximise the statistical independence in the data and hereby ’unmix’ the
noise and neural activity. In the context of EEG-analysis, each independent component
is a linear combination of the electrode signals. The problem is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: The ICA problem involves solving for the original independent components,
denoted as S, given the mixed signals recorded from the sensors, represented by matrix
X, and a weight matrix W that describes each component’s contribution to the observed
signal.
Figure 2.2: The matrix of independent components, denoted as S, is obtained by multi-
plying the inverse of the weight matrix, denoted as W −1, with the observed mixed signals.
Various algorithms are available to estimate the weight matrix W.
When the matrix with components, S, is obtained, each component is analysed using the
pretrained classifier ICLabel [46]. Those components representing neural activity are used
to reconstruct the signal using equation 2.1 with the components representing artefacts
excluded from the columns in W and rows in S.
Autoreject
AR is used to discard bad data segments in the signal. The bad segments are identified
according to a peak-to-peak threshold, which is estimated for each channel using cross-
validation.
The peak-to-peak metric is widely used for noise reduction.
The data is
considered bad, when the signal amplitude exceeds some threshold. The idea behind AR
is that this threshold is channel specific, as the amplitude range can vary depending on the
location on the scalp. For further details of the workings of the algorithm please consult
[45].
2.1.2
Source Localisation
As described in section 2.1 the EEG signal is not a direct reflection of the neural activity
directly beneath the electrode but rather a mixture of the activity from multiple points
of origin (sources). This limits its ability to identify the exact source of a particular brain
signal and distinguish between adjacent brain areas in space. This is mainly due to signal
smearing as it propagates from neurons to electrodes. The purpose of source localisation is
to overcome this limitation by mapping the signals from sensor space to source space. This
allows for a more accurate analysis of connectivity between brain regions and improved
physical interpretation.
To obtain signals from the sources, four elements are required:
1. EEG signals from the sensors.
2. The sensor positions.
3. A head model that describes the geometrical and conductive properties of the head.
10
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:17==
4. A source model that specifies the initial location of the sources.
The process involves two main steps: forward modelling and inverse modelling.
The
forward model estimates the EEG potential on the scalp for known sources. The inverse
model uses the forward model to estimate the most likely source configuration given the
observable signals.
The Forward model
The forward model serves as the mapping between the brain sources and the electrodes
on the scalp [29]. It is formulated as a linear matrix problem, as shown in Equation 2.1:
X = AY
(2.1)
Here, X represents the signals in sensor space with dimensions kchannels × ttimepoints, and
Y represents the signals in source space with dimensions nsources × ttimepoints. The matrix
A is specified differently depending on the choice of the inverse model, but it is constructed
using the lead field matrix, L, which is the essential outcome of the forward model. L
contains the specific representation of, how the electromagnetic fields generated by neural
activity propagate from the brain to the sources. It has dimensions kchannels × nsources,
where the entry xi,j denotes the sensitivity of sensori to the activity at sourcej. The
estimation of L requires the sensor positions (2), initial source locations (4), and a chosen
head model (3).
The Inverse model
The inverse model aims to estimate the neural sources that best explain the observed
signals. It is the solution to the inverse problem, given in equation 2.2
Y = A−1X
(2.2)
This is ill-posed and non-unique, as there are multiple possible source combinations that
could explain the measurement in the electrode [42]. There are several ways to formu-
late the solution to this problem, I use the approach minimum norm estimate [47]. For
minimum norm estimation A is given by
A = RLT (LRLT + λΓ)−1
(2.3)
A has dimensions kchannels × nsources. R is the source covariance matrix obtained from
L, with dimensions nsources × nsources. Γ is the noise covariance matrix obtained from
the EEG signals, with dimensions kchannels × kchannels. Finally, λ is the regularisation
parameter. The specification of these parameters are given in Section 3.2.1.
2.2
Feature extraction
This section will present the features extracted from the EEG data. The primary objective
of feature extraction is to represent the information in the original signal as numerical
features that will serve as inputs for the classifier. The selected features are specifically
related to the spectrum of the signal and the connectivity between different brain regions,
as motivated in Section 1.3. The chapter provides a mathematical description of these
features, accompanied by figures to aid intuitive understanding.
All features requires
transforming the signal from the time domain to the frequency domain which I describe
first.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
11
==PAGE:18==
2.2.1
Estimation of the power spectrum
I use Welch’s method to compute the power spectrum for each signal. The signal is divided
into overlapping segments of equal length, and a Hamming window is used to mitigate
spectral leakage. Each segment is then transformed to the frequency domain using the Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT), and the periodogram is calculated by squaring the magnitude
of the resulting FFT coeﬀicients. For each window, the periodogram of the mth block is
computed as:
Pxm(ωk) = 1
M |FFTN,k(xm)|2
where M is the number of data points in each segment, N is the length of the FFT, xm
represents the mth segment of the signal, ωk is the kth frequency bin, and FFTN,k(xm)
denotes the FFT coeﬀicient at frequency bin k for segment xm. To obtain the PSD, the
periodograms are averaged across time, resulting in:
Sx(ωk) = 1
K
K−1
∑
m=0
Pxm,M(ωk)
where K is the total number of segments. The choice of the length of the FFT determines
the frequency resolution, while the size of the overlap of the windows controls the smooth-
ing of the spectrum. Detailed specifications for these parameters are provided in Section
3.5.
2.2.2
Fitting Oscillations & One-Over F
The input to the algorithm is the power spectrum for each channel, which is then parame-
terised by the FOOOF model. Disruptions in specific frequency bands are often attributed
to changes in periodic activity independent of changes in other bands [33]. However, these
disruptions might also be influenced by alterations in the background electrophysiological
noise. The algorithm assumes that the spectrum can be represented as a combination of
periodic and aperiodic oscillations, and that the total power at a given frequency is likely
to have contributions from both these components. The primary objective of the FOOOF
model is to estimate these components separately.
The periodic components, often referred to as neural oscillations, appear as ’peaks’ in the
power spectrum, indicating frequency specific power. These peaks can be modelled using
Gaussian functions, where each Gaussian represents a single oscillation, [20]:
G(F) = P · exp(−(F −CF)2
2 · BW 2
)
(2.4)
In Equation 2.4, the parameters are defined as follows: - Center Frequency (CF): Rep-
resents the central frequency of the peak, measured in units of frequency. - Band Width
(BW): Denotes the bandwidth of the peak, measured in units of frequency. - Power (P):
Represents the power of the peak, measured in units of power.
- F: Is the array of
frequencies in linear space.
The primary objective is to accurately describe these peaks while ensuring that the pa-
rameter estimates are not influenced by co-occurring aperiodic activity.
The aperiodic component refers to activity with no characteristic frequency, and can be
thought of as a trend across all frequencies. In the power spectrum, this behaviour is
12
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:19==
typically observed as a 1
f -like pattern, which in linear space corresponds to the spectral
power decreasing as S(f) ∼1/F χ. The parameter χ represents the rate of decay or the
slope of the spectrum and represents the neural marker.
To fit the aperiodic component, a Lorentzian function is employed:
L(F) = b −log(F χ)
The fitting process is performed in semi-log space, where F is given in linear space, b
represents the broadband offset given in log10 power values, and the exponent χ is unit
less.
The complete model to be fitted is a combination of the aperiodic component and periodic
components:
L(F) + G(F) = b −log(F χ) + P · exp
(−(F −CF)2
2 · BW 2
)
The fitting procedure iteratively estimates the periodic and aperiodic components until
convergence. The algorithm computes an initial fit of the aperiodic slope and subtracts it
from the power spectrum. In this ”flattened” spectrum, the narrow-band power appears as
peaks and can be described with the Gaussian functions. Next, these peaks are subtracted
from the original power spectrum. The resulting power spectrum, without the periodic
components, is then used to fit the aperiodic slope.
The algorithm continues to iterate this process until convergence is reached, which occurs
when no more peaks are detected according to a specific threshold or when the maximum
number of peaks set by the user has been found. The fit of the algorithm is evaluated
using the R2 value, which assesses the goodness of fit [30].
2.2.3
Functional connectivity
Connectivity between brain regions is usually grouped into either anatomical connectivity,
functional connectivity (FC), or effective connectivity. Anatomical connectivity is defined
as the network of physical connections between brain structures. Functional connectivity
refers only to statistical dependencies between these structures, while effective connectivity
provides information about the causal interactions [24]. I study the FC which in this case
specifically refers to the synchronisation between source space times series analysed from
each of ROIs. The aim is to examine if it is possible to separate the relevant individuals
based on the strength of the FC. Here, I apply an undirected feature, Weighted Phase Lag
Index (wPLI), obtained from the frequency domain. Here it is described mathematically
and the Section 3.3 will elaborate more on this choice and discuss it properties compared
to alternative features.
wPLI is obtained from Phase Lag Index (PLI) which measures the consistency of the
phase differences between the signals as a metric for synchronisation. Synchronisation
between two signals can be described in terms of the differences in amplitude and phase.
PLI only consider the phase differences. The formula is given in equation 2.5
PLI = 1
N |
N
∑
i=1
sign[sin(∆ϕi)]|
(2.5)
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
13
==PAGE:20==
(a) Step 1:
The fitting procedure of the
FOOOF algorithm. The first step is to make
an initial estimate of the aperiodic compo-
nent, marked by the blue dashed line. This
reflects the lope of the spectrum.
(b) Step 2: The second step is to subtract
the slope from the spectrum, and the fit the
peaks. A peak is identified if the power ex-
ceeds the threshold of 2 standard deviations
from the mean.
(c) Step 3: When all peaks are identified ac-
cording to the threshold, the final fit of the
peaks is subtracted from the spectrum. The
final aperiodic component is then fitted to
the residual spectrum.
Figure 2.3: The Fitting procedure for the FOOOF-algorithm
14
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:21==
where ∆ϕi is the phase difference in radians between two signals at time point i with
N being the total number of time points. As described in Section 1.3 the signals propa-
gate through the brain volume, leading to the spread of electrical current from the neural
activity. This concept is refered to as volume conduction. Despite performing source local-
isation this challenge remains relevant and requires careful selection of features accounting
for this. Volume conduction can lead to an overestimation of functional connectivity be-
tween brain regions that are not truly interacting. This is because of an increased risk of
consistent zero-phase differences, which PLI accounts for by focusing on the consistency in
which a signal either leads or lags behind the other. wPLI expands on this by also focusing
on the strength of the phase differences, by weighting each phase by the extend of the lag,
thus giving higher importance to the stronger differences. Finally wPLI is normalised by
dividing the sum of the sin of the phase differences to obtain a feature in the range 0-1,
with a higher value representing stronger connectivity.
wPLI =
1
N | ∑N
i=1 sin(∆ϕi) · sign[sin(∆ϕi)]|
1
N | ∑N
i=1 sin(∆ϕi)|
(2.6)
2.3
Statistical tests
In this paragraph, I will describe the theory behind the statistical tests applied for each
comparison. Cluster-based permutation tests are used to compare the spectral features
between groups, whereas permutation tests are used for the comparison of the FC features.
In all of these tests, the p-value is adjusted to account for the multiple comparison problem.
I will highlight differences between the paired and unpaired versions.
2.3.1
Paired and unpaired permutation test
The permutation test is a non-parametric statistical method used to assess the signifi-
cance of a test statistic without assuming independence of the observations or a specific
underlying probability distribution. Essentially, this method creates a null distribution by
repeatedly shuffling the labels and computing a test statistic for each permutation. The
p-value is adjusted according to [48] as follows:
p(t ≥t0) =
1
(n + m)!
(n+m)!
∑
j=1
I(tj ≥t0)
(2.7)
Here, n and m represent the number of samples in each group, and I() denotes the
indicator function. The equation expresses that, in each round, the observed test statistic
is compared to the distribution of permuted test statistics. After all permutations, we can
determine the likelihood of obtaining the observed result by chance alone, and compute the
adjusted p-value as the share of permuted test statistics that are larger than the observed
one. This p-value is compared against the 0.05 threshold. For paired observations, the
shuffling of labels is constrained by maintaining the paired structure. In other words, the
null distribution is created by flipping the signs for a randomly drawn pair, as described
in [49].
2.3.2
Paired and unpaired cluster-based permutation test
Since we do not expect the estimated features to be independent across channels, we create
clusters of adjacent electrodes to test if the cluster, rather than individual electrodes,
shows a significant effect.
The null hypothesis in this case is that the distribution of
spatial clusters in the two groups is drawn from the same probability distribution.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
15
==PAGE:22==
The procedure involves computing the test statistic for each sensor. Sensors whose test
statistics exceed a certain threshold are then grouped into clusters based on their prede-
fined adjacency. The cluster level statistic is determined by summing the test statistics
within the cluster, and the largest test statistic is saved to build the null distribution. To
evaluate significance, the p-values for each cluster in the observed data are adjusted in
a similar fashion as in Equation 2.7. Specifically, the observed test statistic is compared
to the null distribution and the p-value is the proportion of test statistics larger than the
observed [50].
2.4
Classification models
This section introduces the classifiers used for addressing the problem. Specifically, three
classifiers are examined: Support Vector Classifier (SVC), a parallel ensemble model,
Random Forest (RF), and a sequential ensemble model, GradientBoosting (GB). Addi-
tionally, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is employed to reduce the dimensionality
of the feature sets. It is assumed that the reader is already familiar with these traditional
algorithms. I will provide a brief description of their objective functions to refresh the
understanding of the effect of hyperparameters. The decisions made regarding the tuning
of these are described in Section 3.9
2.4.1
Support Vector Classifier
The Support Vector Classifier (SVC) aims to find the hyperplane that maximally separates
the classes, essentially serving as the decision boundary. The optimal hyperplane is the
one with the largest distance (margin) to the nearest training data point, [51]. To achieve
this, SVC solves a quadratic minimisation problem:
min
w,b,ζ
1
2wT w + C
n
∑
i=1
ζi
(2.8)
subject to the constraints:
yi(wT ϕ(xi) + b) ≥1 −ζi,
ζi ≥0,
i = 1, ..., n
(2.9)
Here, the hyperparameter C acts as a regularisation parameter, controlling the penalty
for misclassification. Formulating the dual problem can provide insights into solutions for
cases where the classes are not linearly separable in the original feature space. The dual
problem is represented as:
min
α
1
2αT Qα −eT α
(2.10)
subject to the constraints:
yT α = 0,
0 ≤αi ≤C,
i = 1, ..., n
(2.11)
16
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:23==
In the dual formulation, Q is an n by n matrix, where Qij = yiyjK(xi, xj). The kernel
function K(xi, xj) = ϕ(xi)T ϕ(xj) maps the data to a higher dimensional space where
it might be linearly separable. Along with the regularisation parameter C, the kernel
function needs to be decided.
2.4.2
Random Forest
RF is an ensemble method that trains multiple decision trees in parallel and make pre-
dictions based on their combined votes. Each decision tree is trained by recursively parti-
tioning the feature space aiming for samples with the same labels being grouped together
in the resulting nodes, [52]. The evaluation of a candidate split is based on how effectively
the groups are distinguished. This is formulated as minimising an impurity measure:
θ∗= argminθG(Qm, θ)
θ denotes the split, Qm denotes the group of samples at node m and G describes the
function used to evaluate the purity ie. the similarity of labels in the nodes. To implement
the RF algorithm, I need to decide on G, the number of trees in the forest, and the
maximum depth allowed for the individual trees.
2.4.3
Gradient Boosting
GB is an ensemble method that trains shallow decision trees sequentially. In each iteration,
a new tree is constructed to minimise the objective function, given the results of the
previous model thus aiming to correct their errors, [51]. The development of the ensemble
can be formulated as:
Fm(x) = Fm−1(x) + ϵhm(x)
where Fm represents the ensemble of m decision trees, and hm is the mth estimator.
Here, ϵ denotes the learning rate, which scales the contribution of each weak learner,
corresponding to the step length in gradient descent procedures. The newest tree hm is
fitted to minimise the sum of losses:
hm = arg min
n
∑
i=1
l(yi, Fm−1(xi) + h(xi))
(2.12)
where l is the loss function that needs to be specified, in addition to the learning rate ϵ.
2.5
Evaluation metric: ROC AUC
The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC AUC) is a widely used
evaluation metric, accounting for a varying threshold in classification problems. The ROC
curve is obtained by computing the true positive rate (TPR) and the false positive rate
(FPR) given by
TPR =
True positives
True positives + False Negatives
(2.13)
FPR =
False positives
False positives + True Negatives
(2.14)
for moving threshold values in the range 0 to 1. The AUC is the area under this curve,
with a value of o.5 corresponding to chance level, [52].
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
17
==PAGE:24==
2.5.1
Principal Component Analysis
PCA is a technique to reduce the dimensionality while maximising the variance in the
original data [52]. After scaling the data to have 0 mean, ˜X, singular value decomposition
is applied:
˜X = UΣV T Here, the matrix V contains the principal components, which
are weighted linear combinations of the original data. These components are ordered in
descending order based on their explained variance. The loadings, representing the weights
to construct the components, can be obtained as L = ˜XVn. These loadings provide the
coordinates of each observation when projected onto the subspace spanned by the first n
components. This helps us understand the contribution of each original variable to each
principal component and gain insight into the dominant features in the data.
18
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:25==
3
Methods
The complete pipeline for this MSc project consists of several parts, displayed in figure 3.1.
Each part marked with a colour contains multiple steps, which are be elaborated in the
corresponding sections. The first part of the pipeline focuses on data acquisition and the
creation of subsets for various analyses. The second part covers the preprocessing pipeline
and the source localisation procedure. The third describes the computation of EEG fea-
tures. The fourth part explains the permutation tests applied for initial comparison of the
features between groups. Lastly, the fifth part contains the classification framework and
the chosen classifiers.
3.1
Data
This section briefly describes the data acquisition and outlines the subsets created for the
analyses.
3.1.1
The VIP Study and Data acquisition
The data used in this study is from the (VIP) described in Section 1.1, which combines
register-based and clinical neuropsychiatric data. The group of potential subjects for the
study was identified by linkage of two Danish nationwide registers: The Danish Twin
Register and the Danish Psychiatric Central Research Register. This sample consists of
twin pairs born in Denmark between the years 1951 and 2000, among who 474 individuals
diagnosed with SZ as a main or secondary lifetime diagnosis. The VIP study is based on
a subsample of this group, meeting the following inclusion criteria:
1. The age range of 18-60 years.
2. Both twins are alive.
3. Both twins reside in Denmark
This subset is referred to as the ’PR pairs’ where at least one of the co-twins is diagnosed
with an SZ spectrum disorder. In addition, the full data set contains healthy controls
(HC). These subjects are matched at cohort level based on age, gender and zygosity. I
underscore that the PR pairs and HC pairs are not matched pairwise, which prevents
paired analysis between the groups. Further details about the study is found in [7].
The EEG data was recorded using BioSemi hardware, employing an electrode cap with 64
electrodes labelled according to the international 10-20 system. This configuration yields
64 signals for each subject. Figure 3.2 depicts the locations of these sensors on the scalp.
Previous studies in SZ have reported significant findings in multiple brain regions such as
the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital areas. Among these regions, the frontal area
seems to be the most frequently mentioned. [8].
3.1.2
Description of data subsets
The full data set comprises 199 bdf-files, each containing EEG measurements from a
participant in the study. The filename includes information about zygosity, a group ID
for the PR pair and the HC pairs, as well as a unique id for each individual, which is
left out. A separate file contains information on the diagnosis status and possibly ICD-
10 code for each individual. To organise this data effectively, I use regular expressions to
create a unique ’ShortID’ for each individual and combine the data. This provides a better
overview of the information for each twin and enables easy selection of relevant subjects
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.1: Overview of the pipeline employed in this MSc thesis
for each analysis. Table 3.1 illustrates an example of this twin data frame, highlighting
the potential for various analyses of interest within this specific data set. I remind the
reader that despite sharing a common Group ID, the PR and HC subjects are not matched
pairwise.
Table 3.1 demonstrates that this data set offers multiple options for analysing relevant
groups. Overall, there are three major comparisons of interest:
20
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: The labels assigned to each electrode indicate the brain area located below
it.F refers to the frontal lobe, T to the temporal lobe, C to the central lobe, P to the
parietal lobe, and O to the occipital lobe. The even/odd numbers denote the right/left
hemisphere. The lower the value, the closer to the midline.
• Analysis 1: Comparison of HC and PR1: This analysis is a common problem found
in the literature, involving the distinction between patients with SZ and healthy
individuals.
• Analysis 2: A paired comparison of the PR twins: This analysis isolates the effect
of the diagnosis for individuals with similar genetics within a twin pair.
• Analysis 3: Comparison of HC and PR0: This analysis explores the predisposition
to SZ in healthy PR twins compared to healthy individuals without a diagnosed
co-twin.
Furthermore, the data set allows for further specifications of subgroups among the twins.
Thus, we can analyse MZ and DZ twins separately for the paired analysis, as well as the
effect of a broad and narrow definition of SZ according to the ICD-10 code. Table 3.2
presents the number of samples for each of these subsets. Note that I did not further
distinguish between zygosity for the broad and narrow definitions of SZ to avoid making
the sample sizes too small.
Table 3.2 highlights that the unpaired problems (Analysis 1 and Analysis 3) are imbal-
anced. The unpaired structure enables the full data set to be utilised. The individuals
discarded from the paired analysis (Analysis 2) are still valid to include in Analysis 1 and
Analysis 3. In these cases, they contribute as either sick or healthy individuals without
the relevance of their co-twins’ information.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
21
==PAGE:28==
Filename
Sz
Dgx
Zyg
Group
Type
Co-twinID
Short ID
42MZBHCxxRS.bdf
0
NaN
MZ
42
HC
B
42MZBHC
42MZAHCxxRS.bdf
0
NaN
MZ
42
HC
A
42MZAHC
42MZAPRxxRS.bdf
0
NaN
MZ
42
PR0
A
42MZAPR
42MZBPRxxRS.bdf
1
F20
MZ
42
PR1
B
42MZBPR
42DZAHCxxRS.bdf
0
NaN
DZ
42
HC
A
42DZAHC
42DZBHCxxRS.bdf
0
NaN
DZ
42
HC
B
42DZBHC
42DZAPRxxRS.bdf
1
F21
DZ
42
PR1
A
42DZAPR
42DZBPRxxRS.bdf
0
NaN
DZ
42
PR0
B
42DZBPR
Table 3.1: The eight rows in Table 3.1 are examples of participants within the same
GroupID. Sz is one for subjects with SZ and 0 otherwise. Dgx gives the ICD-diagnosis
code. Zyg denotes if the subject belongs to an MZ or a DZ pair.Type states if the subject
is part of a PR pair or HC pair. Here PR0 denotes the healthy co-twin and PR1 denotes the
co-twin with SZ.Co-twin ID distinguishes individuals within the twin pair, while ShortID
serves as a unique identification key for each participant
Data set
Subanalysis
No. of PR0
No. of PR1
No of HC
Full Data set
51
53
95
A: HC vs. PR1
SZ spectrum
52
95
SZ F20
-
30
95
B: PR1 vs. PR0
SZ spectrum
44
44
-
SZ F20
25
25
-
DZ
22
22
-
MZ
22
22
-
C: HC vs. PR0
Full SZ spectrum
51
-
95
Table 3.2: The data subsets are summarised as follows: Set A is a comparison of HC and
PR1 individuals, note that one PR1 patient is excluded from Set A due to misdiagnosis.
Set B is the paired comparison of the PR twins, note that four PR1 individuals are excluded
from Set B as two pairs consists of two individuals with SZ. The remaining difference in
the number of samples between Set A and Set B is because EEG data is not obtained for
both twins in some pairs.
22
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Preprocessing
In this section, I will describe the implementation of the preprocessing steps and the
computation of source localisation. The aim of preprocessing is to increase the signal-to-
noise ratio. Figure 3.3 shows the overall process and the aim of each step.
Figure 3.3: Overview of the preprocessing pipeline, with the purpose of each step stated in
the right column. The biggest parts of the process is the artefact removal and validation.
The preprocessing pipeline is carried out in Python version 3.11.3 using the libraries mne,
mne_iclabel and autoreject.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
23
==PAGE:30==
Resampling
The data is resampled from 2048 to 256 Hz to allow faster computation.
The new sampling rate of 256 Hz fulfills the Nyquist criterion, given by fnew > 2 · fmax,
which ensures that information from the original signal is preserved. Here, the new sam-
pling rate (fnew) is 256 and the desired maximum frequency (fmax) is 100 Hz.
Band-pass filtering and notch filtering
In the context of EEG analysis, filtering
aims to preserve the brain activity in the signal while eliminating unwanted elements such
as drifts, power-line noise, and other types of interference from each channel. I apply a
finite impulse response filter to band-pass the data between 1 and 100 Hz. The upper limit
of 100 Hz is widely used in EEG processing, while the lower limit of 1 Hz is recommended
for ICA [33]. Additionally, a 50 Hz notch filter is used to suppress power line interference
[43]. Filtering is generally successful in suppressing many low-frequency artefacts, but
shows insuﬀicient results for broadband artefacts [45], why several more steps are included
to reduce noise.
Initial identification of bad channels and interpolation
For various reasons, some
electrodes might return bad data that is highly disturbed with minimal or no perceptible
signal. Before further preprocessing, I detect them manually and apply interpolation. I
identify them by visual inspection of the power spectrum computed as described in 2.2.1
and manually mark them as ’bad’ in the raw object. Channels that deviate notably from
the expected characteristic 1/f behaviour, with lower power in higher frequencies and a
peak around 10 Hz, are manually marked as ’bad’ in the raw data object. By examining
all channels for each subject, outliers are identified as illustrated in figure 3.4. The bad
channels are interpolated using spherical spline interpolation, [53], implemented with the
function interpolate-bads without adjustment to the default parameters. Hereafter, the
bad channels are no longer labelled as problematic in the data object and don’t disturb
subsequent steps such as referencing and ICA.
Average reference
As briefly mentioned in section 1.3, the recorded signal from each
electrode in EEG represents the voltage difference between that electrode and a reference
electrode. The reference electrode serves as a fixed point to which all electrode signals
are compared, thus influencing the output signal, [42]. The ideal reference would capture
only the common noise, thus isolating the neural activity when subtracted from a given
electrode.
I employ average referencing (AR) which is computed offline and requires
only the objects containing the signals for each subject. It computes the average of all
electrodes per time point and subtract it from the individual electrodes enforcing the
positive and negative potentials, x, across the scalp to sum to zero for each of the k
subjects: ∑Nchannels
i=1
xi,k = 0 [54].
The assumption being, that the integral of all the
recorded potentials across a perfect sphere (the head form) is zero, hereby obtaining an
electrically neutral reference. Obviously this assumption has some valid critique points,
but AR remains one of the most used references [54] and I use it for its simplicity.
ICA and ICLabel
ICA takes the filtered continuous signal as input, as it is noise
sensitive and can be unstable if extreme amplitudes are present [46]. I apply ICA to the
continuous signal rather than segmented intervals, as artefacts are not necessarily limited
to specific time intervals. When ICA is applied, it is common to fit the same number of
components as there are EEG sensors, [55]. The reference and number of interpolated
channels changes this to 64 −1 −n [56], n is the number of interpolated channels. The
mixing matrix, W is estimated using the Infomax algorithm, as recommended for ICLabel.
ICLabel is implemented with default settings [46]. After finding W, the challenge at hand
24
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:31==
(a) The yellow channel in the bottom is a
typical pattern detected across multiple sub-
jects, indicating lost connection.
(b) The atypical noise-pattern in the top
blue line is also interpolated, as ICLabel
wasn’t suﬀicient to correct it.
(c) The channel in the bottom is a typical
pattern detected across multiple subjects, in-
dicating lost connection.
(d) The atypical noisy behaviour from the
top pink line is also interpolated, as ICLabel
wasn’t suﬀicient to correct it.
Figure 3.4: PSD plots for subjects with bad channels. Only channels with distinct be-
haviour are chosen for interpolation, as the artefact removal manages to smoothen the
’normal’ noise in channels.
is to determine which components represents neural activity and which should be discarded
as artefacts. Each component is analysed with ICLabel that provides consistent labelling of
the components into seven potential categories: brain, muscle, eye, heart, line noise,
channel noise, and other [46]. Only the brain components are selected for the signal
reconstruction in equation 2.1. It not advisable to solely rely on software-based labels, as
the label might be associated with high uncertainty, [57]. However, due to the extensity
of this process, I limit it to consult the labelled brain components by visual inspection of
the scalp topography, power spectra and raw activity as is standard [1].
A note on data segmentation
Previous studies segment the EEG signal into epochs
of some seconds length, usually from 2 −25 seconds [13]. This is particularly relevant for
task-based studies, where changes in the signal over time is of interest or it is a popular
approach to increase the sample sizes in small data sets, see section 1.2. The average over
all epochs for some feature value is then used for comparison between subjects. However,
the EEG signal is a non-stationary signal, making it questionable that the whole signal is
well-represented by an average value over all epochs. Moreover, epoching the signal does
not allow for paired analysis, unless the average value is used. The literature on paired
analysis in a machine learning framework has been scarce, with suggestions about using
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
25
==PAGE:32==
leave-pair-out cross-validation (LPO CV) as the best approach. As I aim to enable paired
analysis and avoid potential overfitting associated with LPO, I choose not to epoch the
data but instead compute the features based on the entire continuous signal.
Autoreject
Autoreject (AR) is used iteratively to guide the visual inspection of bad
channels, as opposed to being directly implemented, as AR tends to discard too many
good data points. This approach follows from [56]. Data chunks are considered bad when
outside of the range of + −100µV threshold + / −5σ. The threshold is explored using
CV in the range 0,1 with 11 steps as suggested in [56]. By inspecting the reject_log and
comparing it with the raw times series it is quite clear which channels should have been
interpolated, or which segments should be annotated. Examples are shown in figure 3.5.
These channels are then selected for interpolation in step 2, and I go back to apply the
ICA once again. The preprocessing is concluded when AR no longer identifies channels
with a large majority of bad parts.
(a) AR suggests that three channels should
be interpolated, as indicated by the blue hor-
izontal lines.
(b) AR suggests that three data segments
should be annotated indicated by the red
vertical lines.
(c) AR suggests that three data segments
should be annotated indicated by the blue
horizontal line.
(d) AR suggests interpolation of one channel
and discardment of multiple segments.
Figure 3.5: Examples of Autoreject aiding in identifying channels that should be inter-
polated or segments of data that should be annotated. Because of the time involved in
this process, I only consider the dominating tendencies across a whole channel or time
segment.
Validation
Visual inspection aided by the AR algorithm is used to validate the output
from the preprocessing pipeline. I inspect the times series, PSD and the rejection log.
Some examples are shown in the Results chapter.
3.2.1
Source Localisation
The source localisation is computed in Python using the MNE package and the open
source toolbox FreeSurfer. FreeSurfer provides the model and MNE has functions for the
whole procedure described in Section 2.1.2. I mainly use the default parameter settings
26
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:33==
following [56].
The forward model
To compute the Lead-field matrix L, a head model is required as well as initial coordi-
nates for the sources, as described in Section 2.1.2. The initial source locations are given by
FreeSurfer’s average head model, fsaverage, and the Boundary Element Model (BEM) is
applied to solve the forward problem. Per default the BEM model divides the head in three
main compartments, the scalp, the skull and the brain, each reflecting distinct electrical
conductivity, and has a default distance of 5mm as minimum distance between the sources
and the surface of the inner skull, and maps the 64 signals to 20484 source locations. It
is used with the setting ’Free Orientation’ of the dipoles. The dipoles, that is the neural
source of the activity, is characterised by it’s location described by x,y,z coordinates, it’s
magnitude and it’s orientation. Using ’Free orientation’ allows for each estimate to vary
independently and provides more flexibility. However it is necessary to account for the
possibility of diverse directions of sources within the same region, described in paragraph
3.2.1. Separate forward models are constructed depending on the interpolated channels.
The output L for each subject has dimensions kgood-channels×20484∗3 with 3 incorporating
that each dipole is described by three consecutive columns containing its x,y,z coordinates.
This corresponds to a surface with 10242 vertices for each hemisphere.
The inverse model
As described in equation 2.3, the solution is given by A = RLT (LRLT + λΓ)−1. R is
the source-covariance obtained from L, Γ is obtained by computing the noise covariance
for each subject, and the regularisation parameter is set to 0.9. Inserting in equation 2.2
Y = A−1X we get a high dimensional matrix with size nsources · 3 × ttimepoints. These
sources are then grouped together according to predefined regions of interest (ROI).
Regions of interest
A necessary condition for analysing the connectivity between the regions is the creation
of brain parcellations. That is grouping of vertices that describe the functionally related
areas within the brain. These parcellations provide a reference map of regions to explore
the brain’s connectivity, and in addition serve as dimensionality reduction technique [35].
In this case, I map the signals in sensor space to 6 signals in source space. Commonly
the regions are identified either using ICA [41] or predefined coordinates. Here I choose
three predefined regions for each hemisphere within the DMN, shown to be relevant for
SZ research as described in section 1.4. The the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), the
medial prefrontal cortex (PCC) and the lateral parietal cortex (LP). There coordinates
are shown in table 3.3. This atlas is made by and obtained from Glostrup Hospital. The
areas a illustrated in Figure 3.6.
Region
x
y
z
MPFC
1
55
3
PCC
1
-61
38
LP (left)
-39
-77
33
LP (right)
47
-67
29
Table 3.3: ROI center coordinates in MNI space
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.6: Overview of the regions of interest within the DMN, [58]. The left and right
part of the MPFC and PCC are located right next to each other.
The output of the minimum norm estimation is source times series at 20484 vertices. The
aim is to collect these, such that the neural activity in each ROI is represented by a single
times series. This is done by applying PCA to define the dominant direction of all the
vector orientations within each ROI. The signal at each vertex is three dimensional, and
to obtain a one dimensional representation it is projected onto the dominant direction.
The next step is to apply sign-flip to vertices that are more than 180 degrees different
from the dominant direction, to avoid the signals cancelling each other out. Finally, the
one dimensional series within each ROI are averaged, to get a single signal for each ROI.
3.3
Feature extraction
This paragraph describes how the EEG features are extracted. Firstly, the power spectrum
is computed as it provides the frequency domain representation of the signal, which is
essential for both spectral and connectivity features. The frequency bands used in this
study are defined as shown in Table 3.4, following the definitions from [56].
The frequency bands used in this study are defined as shown in Table 3.4, following [56].
Frequency band
Range (Hz)
δ
1.25-4
θ
4-8
α
8-13
β
13-30
γ
30-49
Table 3.4: Frequency bands
3.4
Power spectral density
The Power Spectral Density (PSD) of the signal describes the distribution of power in the
frequency components of the signal, serving multiple purposes in this project, including
feature extraction and aiding data preprocessing.The power spectrum is computed using
the Welch’s method, limiting the frequency range from 1Hz to 49Hz. I chose the upper
bound to be 49Hz to avoid any effect from the notch filter applied in the preprocessing step.
The lower bound is 1 because the applied high-pass filter is 1Hz. To achieve a frequency
resolution of 0.5Hz, I specify the window length to be 2 seconds and the number of samples
28
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:35==
Setting
Value
Frequency range
1Hz −49Hz
Max no. of peaks
inf
Minimum band width
1 −8 Hz
Minimum power
2σ
’Knee’ parameter
False
Table 3.5: FOOOF settings
to equal the sampling rate of 256. This adjustment results in a total of 97 bins in the power
spectrum. FOOOF requires the spectrum to be smooth, and the authors recommend that
the minimum bandwidth should be twice the frequency resolution to avoid fitting single
points as peaks [20].
(a) PSD with the default frequency resolution. The spectra become very noise and not fitting for
the FOOOF algorithm.
(b)
Figure 3.7: PSD with the for the for the default frequency resolution of 0.25 Hz. The
spectra become very noise and not fitting for the FOOOF algorithm.
3.5
FOOOF
To implement the FOOOF algorithm I use the FOOOF package. I choose to compute The
FOOOF algorithm is applied to each power spectrum of the cleaned signals. That is 64
per subject. It is implemented using the FOOOFGroup setting which fits the same channel
for all subjects at a time. The final applied settings are given in table 3.5.
The parameters are extracted from the 1Hz −49Hz frequency range in each power spec-
trum.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
29
==PAGE:36==
The authors recommend fitting the parameters over a broad range opposed to one fre-
quency band at a time. I search for peaks in all frequency bands, with no upper limit
on the maximum number of peaks. I attempted various settings, and visual inspection
revealed a tendency to the algorithm missing peaks in the higher frequency bands for that
’gain’ of fitting smaller disturbances in the lower frequency bands. Not restricting this
parameter does indeed cause overfitting as seen in figure 3.8, however, by deciding to only
continue with the peak with highest power within the frequency band, this is accounted
for, and we achieve a better fit of the chosen peak. This also helps to ensure compatibility
in feature estimates across subjects. The total number of parameters from the FOOOF
is thus 64 · 3 · 5 + 64 = 1024 features per subject: Power, BW, and CF for each frequency
band, and χ for each channel.
Despite, there is still a problem with compatibility across subjects, as it is not guaranteed
that a peak will be detected in each frequency band. For simplicity I only continue with
those peaks that are estimated for all subjects. A total of 576 features are then dropped
from the original 1024. The classifiers and PCA does not handle missing values and it
does not make sense to impute them, as a NaN value means, that no peak was estimated
for that channel and that frequency band. I do not want to discard subjects so I discard
the features.
With a frequency resolution of 0.5 I allow the minimum BW to be 1Hz. This parameter is
underrepresented in literature, and considering that the range of the low frequency bands
are ≈3 −5 Hz, this seems reasonable for the algorithm to be able to detect peaks. The
(a) Plot of fit with the restriction of detect-
ing maximum three peaks. The peak in the
γ band is not detected by the algorithm, but
instead the disturbances at 15 Hz.
(b) Plot of fit without any restriction on the
number of detected peaks. It is hard to see
visually, but the algorithm detects a total of
five peaks as revealed by the report output.
(c) Report output for restricted fit
(d) Report output for unrestricted fit
Figure 3.8: Effect of restricting number of detected peaks
30
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.9: Distribution of nan values for features containing nan values. These are all
discarded. These are particularly peaks in the γ, θandδ band.
’fixed’ setting was used, opposed to the ’knee’ setting, a feature sometimes observable
in frequency ranges 77Hz + −14Hz, meaning that the slope drastically changes across
the spectrum. Visual inspection after the parametrisation of the spectrum validated this
setting. In addition I return the r
2 value for each individual spectrum to evaluate the fit.
3.6
Functional Connectivity
This small section will motivate the choice of wPLI and provide some figures to aid the
understanding. The difference between wPLI and the more commonly applied feature PLI
is how the phase relationships are weighted.
For example, PLI will be 1 if one signal
is always leading or lagging behind the other signal. But it is insensitive to changes in
relative phase, as long as it is the same signal that leads.
If however two signals are
almost in phase, they might shift between lead/lag due to small fluctuations from noise,
see Figure 3.10. The wPLI tries to correct for this by weighting the PLI with the magnitude
of the lag, and weighting phase differences close to 0 lower. As explained in section 2.2.3
phase differences of 0 (or multiples of π are associated with anti-synchronisation and thus
low connectivity between signals. This avoids a discontinuity at the transition between
positive and negative phase, as the impact of small values close to 0 is reduced, where
as forPLI they are not and hereby risking to overestimate small fluctuations from volume
conduction as connectivity. In [27] the effect of various connectivity measures was tested,
concluding that wPLI expands on the ability of PLI to be robust against effects from
volume conduction, and superior in detecting phase under such conditions. They were
unable to replicate previous findings obtained with other metrics, indicating that PLI is
more sophisticated and requires the connectivity to be more pronounced.
The connectivity analysis is done in python using the mne library. The wPLI feature was
computed for the times series for each ROI returned by the source localisation. For each
subject, wPLI is computed between each pair of ROIs for each frequency band resulting in
a square matrix of dimension (nfreqbandsxnrois)x(nfreqbandsxnrois) with ones through the
diagonal. For computational eﬀiciency, I vectorise and save the upper half of the matrix,
resulting in 75 features per subject.
3.7
Feature selection
In this section, I describe the approach to reduce the number of features for the classi-
fier. Several studies use hypothesis testing as a feature selection method, selecting only
the significant features for the classifier. The motivation for using ML is to potentially
detect more complex patterns specific to the groups of interest that might not be easily
detectable through statistical tests, why my feature selection approach expands on the
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.10: Computation of wPLI and PLI for simulated sinus-curves with added gaussian
noise. The noise results in an inflated PLI estimate of the connectivity due to fluctuations
causing the signals to change between leading and lagging after each over.
features highlighted with the various permutation tests.
Even with just two groups of features, obtained from FOOOF and wPLI, there are 1100
features in total per subject, which imposes a risk for the classifier to overfit the data. As
seen in figure 3.11 I take two overall approaches to create smaller feature sets.
Figure 3.11: Overview of the approaches taken to select features and hereby lower the
dimensionality of the feature space.
3.7.1
Literature findings
Frequency bands
As seen in multiple previous studies presented in Section 1.3 it is
common to split the features in to the different frequency bands and analyse them sepa-
rately. This has shown that both oscillations and connectivity in specific frequency bands
are potential biomarkers for SZ. Therefore, I also examine the effect of each feature band
individually and isolate that effect. The applied frequency bands are given in Table 3.4
following [56].
Table 3.6 shows the resulting number of features. Note that this division does not cover
the 1
f as it is identified for the broad band. For the spectral features I include the full
parameterisation of the spectrum. It is noted that the δ, θ, γ bands are excluded as FOOOF
didn’t find peaks for a suﬀicient amount of subjects as described in Section 3.5.
3.7.2
Data-driven approach
The data-driven approach aims to estimate relevant features based on my specific data
set. I do this in three ways:
32
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:39==
Feature sets divided
into frequency bands
No. of features
wPLIδ
15
wPLIθ
15
wPLIα
15
wPLIβ
15
wPLIγ
15
Fooofα
192
Fooofβ
192
Table 3.6: The size of the feature sets when split into frequency bands
• Use the results from the statistical tests as aid for the feature selection. These fea-
tures have already proved valuable in distinguishing the groups, and is the common
approach taken in literature, [59]. The downside however, is the potential lack in
consistency and coherence between the features, also seen in previous studies with
overall rather sporadic results. For the spectral features this means using the iden-
tified clusters as input, and for wPLI it means using the significant connections as
input.
• Apply PCA and use the components explaining the most variance as input. This
approach is also seen in literature and is useful for reducing the number of features. In
[1] they chose components explaining 60% of the variance equivalent to the first two
components. They observed a similar decrease in explained variance for components
as me, seen in Figure ??, making it meaningful to chose a number of components
based on the location of the drop, opposed to the number explaining a certain
amount of variance, as the last components only contain very little information.
The downside is the reduced explainability as each component is a combination of
multiple features.
• Compute the loadings from PCA to detect the features dominating the direction
of the components, and use these features as input. This allows for detecting the
features accounting for a large part of the variance within the data, while main-
taining an element of explainability as the feature itself, is used as an input. The
downside is a potential loss of information, as all the compressed information from
the components is not exploited.
PCA
Before computing the SVD decomposition as explained in Section 2.5.1, the features need
to be standardised so that they are comparable with each other. I center the data to
have mean 0 by subtracting the mean value of the feature across subjects from each value.
In addition I scale the data, by dividing each observation with the standard deviation
of the entire feature set. Scaling enables comparison between feature types of different
units. Often, the observations are scaled by dividing with the standard deviation for each
feature. This way, variance across subjects within each feature set remains intact, thereby
preserving the difference in variance between channels, (or ROIs). The overall distribution
of the explained variance across the components is similar for the various subjects of the
data, see Figure ??.
This pattern of the first few components capturing much of the
variance is also depicted in [1]. For each of the feature sets, the distribution is shown in
figure ??. We see that particularly for the spectral features from the FOOOF algorithm,
the first few components capture the majority of the variance. For wPLI, the distribution
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
33
==PAGE:40==
is less skewed. The number of chosen components as input for each subproblem is defined
in the relevant sections.
(a) The explained variance across compo-
nents for the feature Power. Across the prob-
lems, the majority of the variance is usually
captured in the first 2 or 3 components.
(b) The explained variance across compo-
nents for the feature Center Frequency.
Across the problems, the majority of the
variance is usually captured in the first 2 or
3 components.
(c) The explained variance across compo-
nents for the feature Band Width.
Com-
pared to the other spectral features, it re-
quires a higher number of components to
represent the variance in the feature set.
Across the problems, the majority of the
variance is usually captured in the first 5 or
7 components.
(d) The explained variance across compo-
nents for the Aperiodic component χ. For
this spectral feature, the PCA manages to
capture up to 80% of the variance in the
first component. Across the problems, usu-
ally only 1 or 2 components are used as input
for the classifier.
Figure 3.12: Distribution of explained variance in the components for each of the spectral
feature sets. Usually the majority of the variance is described in the first few components,
It is noted that particularly a few components for the χ exponent contains much of the
variance in the feature set, where as for the feature set with BW it requires more components
to explain about 60% of the variance.
34
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:41==
I apply PCA to each individual feature set, hereby aiming to capture the variance across
channels and frequency-bands. The selected components provide insights into the most
informative features, as the features are computed for each channel (only spectral features)
and frequency band this captures the variance across these dimensions. I compute the
PCA so 99% of the variance is explained by the components, this is simply to ensure that
I get a full view of how the explained variance is distributed across components. The
components for each of the spectral feature follows a similar behaviour, namely that the
far majority of the variance is captured within the first few components as seen in Figure
??. Similarly, I choose the number of components, that are meaningful according to ’the
drop’ in explained variance.
Another attempt of a data-driven feature selection method is to compute the loadings
for the selected components. The idea is to find the original variables dominating the
direction of the variance explained by the components. Those features will then create a
new feature set, that will be input to the classifier. I did not find support for this procedure
in previous studies, therefore the following choices are based on what I found meaningful:
For each original feature set, I find the 10% most dominating variables in each loading,
based on the largest absolute value, and count how many times, each variable is a part of
this set. I then choose the 5 variables with highest occurrence from the spectral feature
sets, and 2 variables with the highest occurrence from the wPLI set. I want to choose
more components than in the earlier procedure, to check that the dominating variable
have consistency in being dominant, across more components. If no features are dominant
across multiple components, this will result in an empty set. Figure ?? shows an example
of channels that are consistently dominant in determining the direction of the component
in multiple components.
3.8
Statistical Tests
As stated in 1 multiple comparisons are interesting for this specific twin data set, and
different tests are necessary depending on the features and the comparison problem. To
analyse the problems and search for distinguished characteristics between the groups, I
first apply permutation test for the connectivity measure and cluster based permutation
tests for the spectral features. An overview is presented in table ?? and shows that four
different tests are necessary, all accounting for the multiple comparison problem. The
multiple comparison problem in relation to EEG-analysis arises because the features are
estimated across several electrodes / sources and frequency bands, thus increasing the
likelihood of obtaining significant effects by chance.
I apply permutations tests to examine if the functional connectivity features are signifi-
cantly different between groups.
The statistical tests are used to compare the features between the groups, and gives an
initial idea about how separable the groups are from each other, and for which parame-
ters. In several other studies using a machine learning approach to classify schizophrenia,
hypothesis testing is used as a feature selection method. The classification is often based
on those features that are statistically different when often resulting in rather high classifi-
cation rates [1]. This section describes the chosen settings for implementing the statistical
tests. Several elements are common for the cluster-based tests, and are described together.
Differences between the paired and unpaired versions are made clear.
3.8.1
Cluster permutation test for spectral features
Both cluster level permutation tests require defining the adjacency of the electrodes as
well as setting a p-value.
As the electrodes are placed according to the standard 10-
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
35
==PAGE:42==
20 system, the adjacency matrix can be loaded directly from the mne library using
mne.channels.find-ch-adjacency and inputting the system biosemi64. As I use all
the electrodes to search for significant clusters, no further specification is needed. This
returns a scipy sparse adjacency matrix. Figure ?? shows the output of the adjacency
matrix, and it can be compared to the scalp map. Secondly, the test statistic threshold
for forming the clusters needs to be defined. It is noted that a t-value corresponding to
the standard p = 0.05 is usually good, and I find this t-statistic using scipy’s percent point
function as suggested in MNE. The degrees of freedom are the number of observations
minus one. To get the t-value from the right side, I input 1 −0.05/2 to the scipy function.
I divide by two as the test is two-sided; the tests are two-sided as previous findings did
not motivate a clear hypothesis for the direction of difference. For a two-sided test, it is
the absolute value of the test statistic that should exceed some threshold.
For the paired test, the input is a three dimensional array with of size (no of twin-pairs
x no of channels x no of features). For each pair, the subarray is a 2D matrix with the
channels stored in the rows and the features in the columns, and the elements are the
difference in values between the individuals in the pair. For the unpaired test, the input is
a list containing an array for each group with dimensions (no of channels x no of features)
and the elements being the feature values.
3.8.2
Permutation test for connectivity features
Permutation tests have shown to be a decent alternative to the bonferroni test when
such a large number of tests are conducted. However, where bonferroni might be too
conservative, the permutation test might be too little conservative, and keeping a large
portion of the features REFERENCE. It is also noted that the permutation tests not
directly incorporates the correlation structure for the data, which in particular is relevant
for the areas MPFC and PCC where the left and right side are located directly next to
each other. Therefore conclusions are made with care, and the tests is mainly applied as an
indicator of what could be of relevance for the classifier. In addition the ’aproxximation’
setting is used over the ’exact’ setting.
3.9
Classification
This section will first describe the overall framework and the measures taken to reduce
the risk of overfitting, following the settings for the classification models.
3.9.1
Classification framework
As mentioned in 3.1 three different comparisons are interesting:
• An unpaired comparison between individuals with SZ and healthy individuals. That
is PR1 vs. HC.
• A paired comparison between the co-twins in a PR pair. That is PR0 vs PR1.
• An unpaired comparison between the healthy co-twin from a PR pair and healthy
individuals. That is PR1 vs. HC.
The training of the models and the feature selection procedure is carried out for each of the
three problems individually. I do not use the same model, as it is three different inputs.
I do not train new models for subanalyses within each problem, that is the zygosity for
Problem 2 and the narrow definition of SZ for problem 1 and 3, but apply the selected
model to these specific subsets of the data.
The features are selected as described in section 3.7. The data is divided into 10% hold-
out set. The remaining 90% is used for training and validation. I apply a 5-fold cross
36
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:43==
validation strategy for the model selection. The data for model selection consists of 90%
of the full data. The remaining 10% is only used for evaluation once the best model has
been identified. I apply 5-fold cross validation strategy to the training set. As described in
Section 1.2 some previous studies use leaveoneout cross validation because of the relatively
small sample sizes, and a few applying a nested cross validation strategy use 10-folds in
the inner layer for set down to 28 samples. In an attempt to avoid overfitting I use 5-folds
in the inner layer, judging it is a valid trade-off between sample size and robustness. [2]
mix of features, spectral and connectivity in the alpha band.
Other studies usually report the effect of multiple ML algorithms on either the validation
set or test set, however, I use the validation score to choose a final model, and evaluate
it’s robustness on the test set. After selecting the hyperparameters for the final model,
the model is refit on the training and validation data, and then tested on the hold-out
set. This procedure is repeated 100 times, with different hold-out sets, to evaluate the
robustness [13].
3.9.2
Models
The three models are selected as they should be a good fit for relatively small, imbalanced
data set with non-linear decision boundaries.
SVC and RF are commonly applied models in machine learning approaches to classify
patients with schizophrenia. GB has in achieved remarkable success in various machine
learning competitions, and is interesting to explore due to its sequential learning process.
Gradient Boosting is also an ensemble method that combines multiple weak learners to
create a strong predictive model. It builds the model iteratively by sequentially adding
new models that focus on the errors made by previous models. Gradient Boosting can
handle complex interactions and has SVM provides a clear decision boundary and may
be preferred when dealing with smaller data sets. Random Forest offers robustness and
feature importance estimates, and Gradient Boosting has shown great predictive accuracy.
SVC
SVC is chosen as a potential classifier with the Radial Basis Function as the kernel, as
this combination is one of the most commonly applied for detecting SZ and has shown
good results. The kernel function is given by exp(−γ∥x −x′∥2) and allows for non-linear
decision boundaries as well as regularisation to prevent overfitting. The hyperparameter
to be tuned is C as described in 2.4 that trades off misclassification of training examples
against simplicity of the decision surface, thus a high value of C aims to correctly classify
all training examples. γ has the same interpretation why I only choose to tune C, in the
range [0.01, 0.1, 1].
RF
Random Forest is a popular algorithm due to its robustness to overfitting, ability to
handle noisy features data and provides estimates of feature importance, allowing for
interpretability. The purity is chosen to be the default Gini, and the number of estimators
are set to be 100, as they are trained in parallel and a large number of trees might result
in robust estimates. In addition, for each feature set the maximum number of considered
features is √n, introducing a stochastic approach as each tree will tune different features
and hopefully provide better generalisability. I tune the depth of the trees thereby limiting
the number of splits to prevent overfitting, the depth of the trees is set to [5, 10, 25].
The data set is unbalanced which all the chosen models are able to account for. This means
that the positive samples are weighted higher in the training process. When splitting the
data into the train, validation and test sets are used the stratify setting, ensuring that
the distribution of positive and negative samples are the same in all sets. In addition, all
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
37
==PAGE:44==
scaling and pca analysis is done within the folds to reduce bias.
38
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:45==
(a) The distribution of explained variance
for wPLIδ. The first component usually de-
scribe 35-40% of the variance. Usually 4-5
components are selected.
(b) The distribution of explained variance
for wPLIθ. The first component usually de-
scribe 55-60% of the variance. Usually 4-5
components are selected.
(c) The distribution of explained variance for
wPLIα.
The first component usually de-
scribe 55-60% of the variance. Usually 4-5
components are selected.
(d) The distribution of explained variance
for wPLIβ. The first component usually de-
scribe 35-40% of the variance. Usually 4-5
components are selected.
(e) The distribution of explained variance for
wPLIγ.
The first component usually de-
scribe 35-40% of the variance. Usually 4-5
components are selected.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.14: Overview statistical tests for the comparison problems
40
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:47==
4
Results
This chapter will go through the found results. It is divided into three overall parts. The
first part goes through the effect of the steps in the preprocessing pipeline. Some attention
is given to the preprocessing, as the this EEG data hasn’t been a part of any previous
analysis. Afterwards results from each problem is presented en separate sections. Each
section firstly presents the results from the statistical tests, following the results from the
classifications.
4.1
Preprocessing
The section presents the results from following the steps in the pipeline described in section
2.1.1.
Identification of bad channels
The iterative procedure aided by the AR algorithm
resulted in a number of channels being interpolated before applying ICA, together with a
number of data segments being annotated and not included in subsequent analysis. Figure
4.1 shows for how many subjects a channel was selected as bad, and the right plot shows
the distribution of number of annotated segments.
(a) The number of subjects who have 1-6 bad
channels. Most subjects only have one or two
bad channels that are interpolated.
(b) The percentage of annotated bad data.
These data segments are marked to not be in-
cluded in subsequent analysis such as ICA or
PSD computations, beacuse of excessive noise.
Figure 4.1: Overview of bad data.
Final output
The preprocessing is validated through visual inspection. The Figure 4.2
shows the times series for four different subjects before and after the preprocessing. The
figures are constructed in the same scaling and I take the data as suﬀiciently clean to
continue the analysis.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
41
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 4.2: The EEG recordings before and after preprocessing the data. The data is
suﬀiciently clean for subsequent analysis.
42
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:49==
4.2
Model fit
In total 64×198 (number of channels and number of subjects) are fitted. with the FOOOF
algorithm. The fits of a small sample of various channels are depicted in figures 4.3a-4.3c.
The R2 values quantifies how well the model’s predictions match the actual data, with
values ranging from 0 to 1. A value close to 1 indicates that the model provides a good fit,
explaining a high percentage of the variance in the observed data. These figures together
illustrate the FOOOF algorithm’s ability to represent the PSD of the recorded signals.
The high R2 values show that FOOOF effectively identifies and characterises the spectral
peaks as well as the slope, hereby providing representative features for the subsequent
classification models. The high R2 values could indicate overfitting but I aim to account
for this by only extracting the max power peaks in each band.
(a) Example fit 1: FOOOF detects two peaks
and smoothens the fluctuations. There seem to
be a small lag for the second peak, but overall
a good fit.
(b) Example fit 2: FOOOF detects two peaks
and smoothens the fluctuations.
(c) Example fit 3: FOOOF detects three peaks.
Peak 1 is not kept for subsequent analysis, as
Peak 2 in the α band contains more power. For
Peak 3, the estimated power is a little lower
than the observed power, but overall a fine fit.
Figure 4.3: FOOOF example fits
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
43
==PAGE:50==
(a) The distribution of all the R2 values
across channels. The figure shows that the
fair majority of channels are very well fitted.
(b) By plotting the mean of R2 across all
channels, I ensure that there isn’t a system-
atically bad fit for some channel that should
be investigated further or discarded from the
analysis.
4.3
Problem 1: HC vs PR1
This section presents the results for Problem 1 including the statistical tests, the pca
analysis, the features identified by computing the loadings as well as the model selection
and performance evaluation.
4.3.1
Statistical tests
The results presented in Table ?? show the results of the permutation test and cluster
based permutation test, applied to analyse if significant connections between brain regions
or clusters for the spectral features are present, when comparing HC and PR1. For the
spectral features, the identified clusters for the spectral features are presented, even if not
significant in order to get an idea about where there might be some activity of interest.
For wPLI only the significant connections are presented.
In the analysis of spectral features, no significant clusters were observed for neither HC0
vs PR1 nor HC0 vs PR20. However, for wPLI, problem HC0 vs PR1 returned several
connections with significant differences in the δ, θ, and γ frequency bands. Overall, when
comparing the connections between the broad and narrow definition of the problem, we
observe fewer connections for the narrow problem. There are many connections with a
p-value below 0.05, in an attempt to break it down, I highlight the dominating frequency
bands as well as connections occurring multiple times.
In the context of spectral features, we observed that the χ parameter identified a cluster
for problem HC vs PR1, involving 18 electrodes primarily located in the right fronto-
central side. The χ parameter also reoccurred in the comparison between HC and PR1-
F20, detecting a difference at electrode FC4, also located in the right front-central area.
In addition it is noted that for both problems only the β frequency is included in the
detected clusters. For the SZ group, this involves the BW in the central right side, while
for the SZ20 group, it indicates differences in the CF and P parameters in the right central
parietal electrodes.
For the connectivity feature several connections return small p −values below 0.01, high-
lighted in the table. Noteworthy is that the θ band returns several significant connections
followed by the δ band for the HC vs PR1 problem. The connection MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
occur in both bands, as well as in the δ band for the narrow HC vs PR1F0 problem.
MPFC(r)-PCC(r) is also reoccurring in both bands for the broad problem. MPFC(l)-
LP(l) and MPFC(r)-LP(l) occur in the θ band for both the broad and narrow problem.
44
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:51==
Problem
Feature
Cluster /
Connection
P-value
βbw
(C4)
0.64
χ
(F1,F2,Fz,F4
FCz,FC2,FC4,FC5,
C1,C4,C3,C5,
CPz,CP2,CP4,Cz,
AF4,T7)
0.18
χ
(P9)
0.74
wpliδ
PCC(l)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
PCC(r)-MPFC(r)
0.04
0.006
0.02
wpliθ
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
PCC(l)-MPFC(l)
LP(r)-LP(l)
LP(r)-MPFC(l)
LP(r)-PCC(l)
MPFC(r)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
PCC(r)-MPFC(l)
PCC(r)-PCC(l)
PCC(r)-MPFC(r)
0.002
0.04
0.04
0.007
0.01
0.001
0.008
0.03
0.001
0.05
wpliβ
PCC(r)-LP(l)
0.04
wpliγ
PCC(r)-PCC(l)
0.002
HC vs PR1
PCC(r)-LP(r)
0.02
BWβ
(C6)
0.87
CFβ
(CP2)
0.87
Pβ
(C4)
0.74
χ
(FC4)
0.82
wpliδ
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
0.005
wpliθ
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
0.001
0.02
0.02
HC0 vs PR1_F20
wpliγ
PCC(r)-PCC(l)
0.006
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
45
==PAGE:52==
In addition PCC(r)-PCC(l) occur in the γ band for both the broad and narrow definition.
Even though the clusters for the spectral features are not significant, it suggests some
interest in the front-central-right area, the β band as well as some potential value in
parameterising the spectrum by more parameters than just using Power. For wPLI par-
ticularly the δ and θ bands are of interest for Problem 1. In addition, both sides of the
MPFC region are involved in multiple significant connections.
4.3.2
PCA
The table presents the selected components for the feature sets in Problem HC vs PR1.
For each feature set, the number of components and the explained variance within the
feature set are shown. The number of components is chosen based on the type of figures
displayed previously 3.13 and 3.12. The feature sets include each of the spectral features
χ, BW, CF, P, and the wPLI for the different frequency bands, δ, θ, α, β, and γ.
Feature set
Number of components
Explained variance
χ
2
0.85
BW
7
0.61
CF
3
0.71
P
3
0.76
wPLIδ
5
0.75
wPLIθ
5
0.76
wPLIα
5
0.74
wPLIβ
5
0.73
wPLIγ
5
0.78
Table 4.1: Selected components for the PCA feature sets in Problem 1 and their share of
explained variance within the feature set.
The same number of components are chosen for the wPLI features for simplicity in the
implementation, as the variance in their distribution does not vary as greatly as the
spectral features. We see that 5 components describe over 70% of the variance within
each frequency band. For the spectral features sets, 61% (BW) to 85% of the variance is
included.
4.3.3
Loadings
Table 4.2 presents the most dominant variables across components in Problem 1, iden-
tified from the loadings of the components from the PCA. The variables are thus those
contributing the most to the direction of the components, hereby also hoping that they
will be effective in separating the two groups.
It is noted that the features computed in the β frequency band are reoccurring for the
FOOOF parameters. For the Chi feature, dominant channels are observed in frontal left
electrodes (FC3, FT7, F5) and the back right side of the scalp (O2, P10). In the case
of BW, the dominating electrodes are placed in the center-left, (CP1, C5) and frontal left
(FT7-F5). The dominating direction of variance in CF is more sporadic with channels
with the righ back, (TP8), left center (FC5) and center-center (FCz, Cz). The same goes
for P whose direction of variance is dominated by the occipital right, as well as right and
left periphery (FT8 and FT7). As for the wPLI, reoccurring connections over multiple
frequency bands are: MPFC(r)-LP(l), present in δ and θ bands, PCC(r)-LP(l), present in
δ and γ features, PCC(r)-PCC(l), present in δ and β bands, PCC(r)-LP(r), present in θ
46
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:53==
Problem
Feature
Channels / Connections
HC0 vs PR1
χ
FC3, FT7, F5,
O2,P10
BW
Beta: CP1, C5
FT7, FC5, FC4
CF
beta: TP8, FC5, FCz,
Cz, FC1
P
beta:
O2, Oz, FT8, FT7, T8
wPLIδ
MPFC(r)-LP(l)
PCC(r)-LP(l)
PCC(r)-PCC(l)
wPLIθ
MPFC(r)-LP(l)
LP(r)-LP(l)
PCC(r)-MPFC(r)
wPLIα
MPFC(r)-LP(l)
LP(r)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
wPLIβ
PCC(r)-LP(r)
LP(r)-PCC(l)
PCC(r)-PCC(l)
wPLIγ
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
PCC(r)-LP(l)
PCC(r)-LP(r)
Table 4.2: The most common dominant variables across components for Problem 1
and γ bands. These common connections across suggest a consistency in containing a lot
of variance potentially relevant for separating HC and PR1.
4.3.4
Classification
The section is divided in two parts, model selection and model evaluation. The model
selection presents the validation performance across classifiers and feature sets. The model
evaluation evaluates the chosen model as described in Section 3.9.
Model selection
These feature sets are input to three different classifiers. The table 4.3 provides an overview
of different feature sets and their corresponding performance in terms of the AUC on the
validation set and the AUC on the training set. I provide both, to get an idea about the
risk of overfitting which influences the model selection.
Looking at the performance across feature sets, it is observed that the ”PCA Comb.” fea-
ture set achieves the highest AUC Val of 0.75, whereas the ”Peaks” feature set shows the
lowest AUC Val of 0.57. Looking at the performance of the classifiers, GB appears as the
best classifier for the majority of the feature sets, and consistently for the connectivity
sets. The difference between AUC Val and AUC Train can provide insights into model
generalisation. For example, the ”PCA Comb.” feature set with GB classifier has a differ-
ence of 0.09 (0.75 - 0.84), indicating a relatively large gap between training and validation
performance, which suggests bad generalisation. In contrary, all the loadings feature sets
only have a couple of percentage points difference when comparing the training score to
the validation score. Leading to the choice of SVC applied to the wPLI feature set.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
47
==PAGE:54==
Feature Set
Best clf
HP
AUC Val
AUC Train
PCA FOOOF
SVC
C = 0.1
0.65
0.69
PCA wPLI
SVC
C = 0.01
0.68
0.73
PCA Comb.
SVC
C = 0.01
0.75
0.84
Loadings FOOOF
GB
lr: 0.1, sub = 0.75
0.66
0.7
Loadings wPLI
SVC
C = 0.1
0.72
0.75
Loadings Comb.
SVC
C = 0.1
0.67
0.07
Stat. FOOOF
SVC
C = 0.1
0.68
0.8
Stat. wPLI
SVC
C = 0.1
0.68
0.74
Stat. Comb.
C = 0.1
0.69
0.7
Peaks
RF
max-depth = 25
0.57
0.64
α
SVC
C = 1
0.7
0.76
β
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.5
0.56
0.62
f
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.75
0.62
0.65
bw
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.5
0.64
0.77
p
GB
lr = 0.1, sub = 0.75
0.59
0.62
cf
RF
max-depth = 10
0.56
0.62
All
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.75
0.68
0.73
δ
GB
lr = 0.1, sub = 0.75
0.63
0.69
θ
GB
lr = 0.1, sub = 0.75
0.65
0.7
α
GB
lr = 1, sub = 0.75
0.52
0.62
β
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.75
0.62
0.65
γ
GB
lr = 1, sub = 1
0.51
0.57
Table 4.3: Summary of Feature Sets and Models for Problem 1
Model Evaluation
The figure 4.5 shows the performance of the model when applied to the broad and narrow
problem respectively, with mean AUC test scores of 0.68 and 0.69 respectively, thus a
small decrease from the validation error.
4.4
Problem 2
This section presents the results for Problem 2 including the statistical tests, the pca
analysis, the features identified by computing the loadings as well as the model selection
and performance evaluation.
4.4.1
Statistical tests
The results presented in Table ?? show the results of the paired permutation test and
paired cluster based permutation test, applied to analyse if significant connections be-
tween brain regions or clusters for the spectral features are present, when comparing P0O
and PR1. For the spectral features, the identified clusters for the spectral features are
presented, even if not significant in order to get an idea about where there might be some
activity of interest. For wPLI only the significant connections are presented.
In the analysis of spectral features, no significant clusters were observed for neither PR0
vs PR1 nor when separating the problem to only testing between MZ twins and DZ twins.
However, for wPLI, problem PR0 vs PR1 returned multiple connections with significant
differences in the δ and γ frequency bands when looking at MZ and DZ twins separately. I
highlight the dominating frequency bands as well as connections occurring multiple times.
48
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:55==
In the context of spectral features, we observed that the BW parameter identified a cluster
for problem PR0 vs PR1, involving 3 electrodes primarily located in the left parietal area,
and CF for a single electrode in the same area. Both reoccurred in the narrow problem. For
CF the cluster expanded to include electrodes in the center. Where BW instead highlighted
electrodes in the fronto-center area. Again, the features from the β band are dominating.
When looking at the narrow problem, clusters are detected for all three peak parameters
at electrodes spread across the scalp. There were no significant connections detected for
wPLI before separating the twins into MZ and DZ pairs. Most of the connections are not
strongly significant. PCC(r)-MPFC(l) in the δ band for MZ twins and PCC(r)-LP(l) in
the γ band for MZ twins have the lowest p-values of 0.004 and 0.003. Within each twin
type there are no reoccurring connections.
Even though the clusters for the spectral features are not significant, it suggests some
interest in mainly the parietal and center electrodes. The β band seem to be most relevant
for the spectral features, and suggests some potential value in parameterising the spectrum
by more parameters than just using Power. For wPLI particularly the δ and γ bands are
of interest for MZ and DZ twins respectively.
4.4.2
PCA
The table presents the selected components for the feature sets in Problem 2 PR0 vs
PR1. For each feature set, the number of components and the explained variance within
the feature set are shown. The number of components is chosen based on the type of
figures displayed previously 3.13 and 3.12. The feature sets include each of the spectral
features χ, BW, CF, P, and the wPLI for the different frequency bands, δ, θ, α, β, and γ.
The same number of components are chosen for the wPLI features for simplicity in the
implementation, as the variance in their distribution does not vary as greatly as the
spectral features. We see that 4 components describe over 70% of the variance within
each frequency band. For the spectral features sets, 55% (BW) to 82% of the variance is
(a) HC vs PR1
(b) HC vs PR1 F20
Figure 4.5: The distribution of the AUC score when evaluated on 10% hold out set for
100 iterations. The middle line corresponds to the median, with the lower and upper edge
of the box corresponding to the 0.25 and 0.75 percentile. The medians for both problems
are above chance level with an average AUC score of 0.68 and 0.69 respectively, thus not
notably higher for the narrow problem. It is also seen that the variance is higher for the
narrow problem.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
49
==PAGE:56==
Problem
Feature
Cluster /
Connection
P-value
PR1 vs PR0
BWβ
(P1,P3,PO3)
0.17
PR1 vs PR0
MZ
CFβ
(POz)
0.91
Pβ
(P1,P3)
0.57
Pβ
(AFz, Fz)
0.58
BWβ
(F8)
0.67
wpliδ
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-LP(l)
PCC(r)-LP(r)
0.03
0.03
0.04
wpliθ
PCC(r)-MPFC(l)
0.004
wpliα
LP(r)-LP(l)
0.02
PR1 vs PR0
DZ
BWβ
(PO3),
(F2),
(C4)
0.54
0.6
0.46
CFα
(AF4)
0.41
wpliβ
PCC(r)-LP(l)
0.003
wpliγ
PCC(l)-MPFC(l)
LP(r)-MPFC(l)
PCC(r)-MPFC(l)
PCC(r)-LP(r)
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.04
PR1 vs PR0
F20
BWβ
(FC1, C3)
(FC2)
0.6
0.67
CFβ
(FP1, AF7, F5)
(C3, C2, CP5,
CP3, CP1, CP2,
P1, Pz, P2, Oz,
PO3)
(FP2)
0.38
0.13
0.81
Pβ
(FC2, C2)
0.6
-
-
-
Table 4.4: Statistical test for Problem 2
included.
4.4.3
Loadings
Table ?? presents the most dominant variables across components in Problem 2, iden-
tified from the loadings of the components from the PCA. The variables are thus those
contributing the most to the direction of the components, hereby also hoping that they
will be effective in separating the two groups.
It is noted that the features computed in the β frequency band are reoccurring for the
FOOOF parameters. For the χ parameter, dominant channels are observed mainly right
central electrodes (FT7, T7, C5) and the others are spread on the scalp. In the case of BW,
the dominating electrodes are placed in various locations across the scalp. The dominating
direction of variance in CF is more sporadic with channels around the center (Fz, Cz, C2)
and otherwise sporadic. The same goes for P whose direction of variance is dominated by
the front, and single electrodes in the right and left periphery (FT8 and T7). As for the
50
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:57==
Feature set
Number of components
Explained variance within the feature set
Chi
2
0.82
BW
5
0.55
CF
2
0.74
P
2
0.73
wPLIδ
4
0.73
wPLIθ
4
0.75
wPLIα
4
0.72
wPLIβ
4
0.72
wPLIγ
4
0.75
Table 4.5: Selected components for the PCA feature sets in Problem PR1 vs PR0
Problem
Feature
Channels / Connections
PR1 vs PR0
χ
Iz,FT7,T7,C5,T8
BW
β C5, F3, C4, T8, FC5
CF
β Cz, C2, F8, F5, Fz
P
βFT8,F5,F8,O2
α T7
wPLIδ
PCC(l)-LP(l)
PCC(r)-PCC(l)
MPFC(r)-LP(r)
wPLIθ
PCC(l)-MPFC(l)
LP(r)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-LP(r)
wPLIα
PCC(r)-LP(r)
PCC(l)-MPFC(r)
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
wPLIβ
PCC(l)-LP(l)
PCC(l)-MPFC(l)
LP(r)-LP(l)
wPLIγ
LP(r)-LP(l)
PCC(l)-LP(l)
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
Table 4.6: The most common dominant variables across components for Problem 2
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
51
==PAGE:58==
Feature set
Best clf
HP
AUC val
AUC train
PCA FOOOF
RF
max-depth = 25
0.64
0.69
PCA wPLI
GB
lr = 1, sub = 0.5
0.59
0.65
PCA Combined
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.75
0.62
0.68
Loadings FOOOF
GB
lr = 0.01, sub=0.75
0.51
0.61
Loadings wPLI
GB
lr = 0.01, sub=1
0.55
0.59
Loadings Combined
GB
lr = 0.01, sub=0.5
0.58
0.62
Stat FOOOF
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 1
0.55
0.59
Stat wPLI
RF
max-depth = 25
0.51
0.62
Stat Combined
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.5
0.58
0.64
Peaks
RF
max-depth = 25
0.55
0.58
χ
SVC
C =0.01
0.55
0.59
P
SVC
C =0.01
0.49
0.55
BW
SVC
C =0.01
0.57
0.62
CF
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.5
0.56
0.61
α
GB
lr = 0.01, sub = 0.75
0.58
0.63
β
SVC
C =0.01
0.57
0.61
All
GB
lr = 1, sub = 0.5
0.53
0.6
δ
SVC
C = 10
0.62
0.66
θ
SVC
C = 10
0.48
0.65
α
GB
lr=1, sub = 0.5
0.61
0.65
β
RF
max depth = 10
0.55
0.6
γ
GB
lr=1, sub = 0.75
0.57
0.61
Table 4.7: Results for Problem 2
wPLI, reoccurring connections over multiple frequency bands are: PCC(l)-LP(l) - present
in wPLIδ and wPLIβ, PCC(l)-MPFC(l) - present in wPLIθ and wPLIβ, LP(r)-LP(l) -
presnet in wPLIθ and wPLIγ, MPFC(l)-LP(l) - present in wPLIθ and wPLIγ.
4.4.4
Classification
The section is divided in two parts, model selection and model evaluation. The model
selection presents the validation performance across classifiers and feature sets. The model
evaluation evaluates the chosen model as described in Section 3.9.
Model selection
These feature sets are input to three different classifiers. The table 4.7 provides an overview
of different feature sets and their corresponding performance in terms of the AUC on the
validation set and the AUC on the training set. I provide both, to get an idea about the
risk of overfitting which influences the model selection. Five main categories of feature sets
were used: PCA-derived features, loadings-based features, statistical features, the spectral
features from FOOOF and the connectivity in each frequency band given by wPLI.
The table 4.7 presents the results for different feature sets and classifiers.
The ”PCA
FOOOF” feature set with 11 components achieved the highest AUC validation score of
0.64. The difference to the other reduced feature sets is remarkable with AUC val scores
of 0.51 and 0.55 for FOOOF Loadings and FOOOF Stat. The (GB) model is seen to
be the best model across the most feature sets, however for the best validation score the
best model is RF. In addition the difference between the training and validation score is
5%-points, which seems alright to choose as the final model.
52
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.6
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
53
==PAGE:60==
Problem
Feature
Cluster /
Connection
P-value
χ
(Fz, FCz, Cz)
0.46
wpliδ
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
PCC(l)-LP(l)
LP(r)-LP(l)
0.049
0.01
0.03
wpliθ
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
PCC(l)-LP(l)
LP(r)-MPFC(l)
LP(r)-PCC(l)
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
MPFC(r)-LP(r)
PCC(r)-PCC(l)
PCC(r)-MPFC(r)
0.005
0.02
0.007
0.004
0.006
0.05
0.009
0.04
wpliα
PCC(r)-LP(r)
0.04
Table 4.8: Problem 3: HC vs PR0
Model Evaluation
The figure 4.6 shows the performance of the model when applied to the broad and narrow
problem respectively, as well as when applied to sets only consisting of either MZ twins
or DZ twins. The model for the broad problem achieved a mean AUC score of 0.59, and
0.61 for the narrow problem. Testing the model on MZ and DZ twins separately, resulted
in a larger variance of scores with means 0.55 and 0.56.
4.5
Problem 3
This section presents the results for Problem 3 including the statistical tests, the pca
analysis, the features identified by computing the loadings as well as the model selection
and performance evaluation.
4.5.1
Statistical tests
The results presented in Table ?? show the results of the paired permutation test and
paired cluster based permutation test, applied to analyse if significant connections be-
tween brain regions or clusters for the spectral features are present, when comparing PR0
and PR1. For the spectral features, the identified clusters for the spectral features are
presented, even if not significant in order to get an idea about where there might be some
activity of interest. For wPLI only the significant connections are presented.
In the analysis of spectral features, no significant clusters were observed for the problem
HC vs PR0. However, we observe that the χ parameter identified a cluster involving 3
electrodes located in central area. Several significant connection was identified, partic-
ularly for the θ-band, followed by the δ band. The connections MPFC(r)-PCC(l) and
PCC(l)-LP(l) occur in both bands.
Even though the clusters for the spectral features are not significant, it suggests some
interest in the center electrodes for the χ parameter. For wPLI particularly the θ is of
interest.
4.5.2
PCA
The table illustrates the selected components for the PCA feature sets in Problem HC vs
PR0. It shows the number of components and the explained variance within each feature
54
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:61==
Feature set
Number of components
Explained variance within the feature set
Chi
2
0.84
BW
7
0.55
CF
4
0.75
P
2
0.71
wPLIδ
4
0.68
wPLIθ
4
0.72
wPLIα
4
0.7
wPLIβ
4
0.67
wPLIγ
4
0.78
Table 4.9: Selected components for the PCA feature sets in Problem HC vs PR0
set. The feature sets comprise Chi, BW, CF, P, and the (wPLI) for different frequency
bands.
The same number of components are chosen for the wPLI features for simplicity in the
implementation, as the variance in their distribution does not vary as greatly as the
spectral features. We see that 4 components describe about 70% of the variance within
each frequency band. For the spectral features sets, 55% (BW) to 84% (χ) of the variance
is included.
4.5.3
Loadings
Table 4.10 presents the most dominant variables across components in Problem 3, iden-
tified from the loadings of the components from the PCA. The variables are thus those
contributing the most to the direction of the components, hereby also hoping that they
will be effective in separating the two groups.
It is noted that the features computed in the β frequency band are reoccurring for the
FOOOF parameters. For the χ and BW parameter, dominant channels are observed mainly
in right central electrodes (FT7, T7, F5, C5). The dominating direction of variance in CF is
mainly placed in the center (FC1, FCz, FC2, Cz), withr P being more sporadic including
single electrodes in the right and left periphery (FT8 and FT7/T7). As for the wPLI,
reoccurring connections over multiple frequency bands are: PCC(r)-LP(r) in wPLIδ and
wPLIγ, MPFC(r)-PCC(l) in wPLIδ and wPLIθ, PCC(l)-LP(l) in wPLIδ, wPLIα, and
wPLIγ.
4.5.4
Classification
Model selection
These feature sets are input to three different classifiers.
The table 4.11 provides an
overview of different feature sets and their corresponding performance in terms of the
AUC on the validation set and the AUC on the training set. I provide both, to get an idea
about the risk of overfitting which influences the model selection. Five main categories of
feature sets were used: PCA-derived features, loadings-based features, statistical features,
the spectral features from FOOOF and the connectivity in each frequency band given by
wPLI.
The table 4.11 presents the results for different feature sets and classifiers. The highest
validation score is achieved with Stat Combined. The SVC model is seen to be the best
model across the most feature sets, also in combination with Stat Combined. In addition
the difference between the training and validation score is 4%-points, which seems alright
to choose as the final model.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
55
==PAGE:62==
Problem
Feature
Channels / Connections
HC0 vs PR0
χ
T7, F5, F7, FT7, C5
BW
β: FT7, F5, FC5, F3, CP1
CF
β: FC1,FCz,FC2,Cz, P10
P
β: FT7, FT8, P10, F7
α F5
wPLIδ
PCC(r)-LP(r)
MPFC(r)-PCC(l)
MPFC(r)-LP(l)
wPLIθ
LP(r)-LP(l)
MPFC(r)-MPFC(l)
LP(r)-PCC(l)
wPLIα
PCC(r)-MPFC(l)
PCC(r)-MPFC(r)
LP(l)-LP(r)
wPLIβ
MPFC(r)-LP(r)
PCC(l)-LP(l)
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
wPLIγ
MPFC(l)-LP(l)
PCC(l)-LP(l)
PCC(r)-LP(r)
Table 4.10: The most common dominant variables across components for Problem 3
Model evaluation
The figure 4.6 shows the performance of the model when applied to Problem 3 and at-
tempting to classify healthy individuals with a co-twin with SZ to healthy individuals with
a healthy co-twin. The classifier shows rather poor performance, with an AUC test score
of 0.63.
56
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:63==
Feature set
Best clf
HP
AUC val
AUC train
PCA FOOOF
GB
lr = 0.1, subsample = 0.75
0.65
0.7
PCA wPLI
GB
lr = 0.01, subsample = 0.75
0.58
0.64
PCA Combined
GB
lr = 0.1, subsample = 0.75
0.58
0.66
Loadings FOOOF
GB
lr = 0.01, subsample = 0.75
0.59
0.6
Loadings wPLI
SVC
C = 0.1
0.57
0.62
Loadings Combined
RF
max-depth = 25
0.49
0.52
Stat FOOOF
SVC
C = 0.01
0.55
0.58
Stat wPLI
RF
max-depth = 10
0.65
0.69
Stat Combined
GB
lr = 0.1, subsample = 0.7
0.68
0.72
Peaks
SVC
C = 0.1
0.62
0.68
α
SVC
C = 0.01
0.63
0.67
β
RF
max-depth = 25
0.58
0.69
f
SVC
C = 0.1
0.52
0.6
bw
GB
lr = 0.01, subsample = 0.5
0.67
0.71
P
SVC
C = 1
0.59
0.63
cf
GB
lr = 0.1, subsample = 0.75
0.63
0.68
All
SVC
C = 0.01
0.62
0.64
δ
SVC
C = 0.01
0.52
0.57
θ
SVC
C = 0.01
0.65
0.69
α
RF
max depth = 10
0.38
0.48
β
SVC
C = 10
0.46
0.54
γ
SVC
C = 10
0.58
0.62
Table 4.11: Summary of results for Problem 3
Figure 4.7
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
57
==PAGE:64==
5
Discussion
As presented in Section 1.5 the aim of this study was to build classification models for
three different kinds of problems, based on the hypothesis that it is possible to detect
differences in connectivity and spectral features between patients with an SZ disorder and
and healthy individuals. Problem 1 was the classification of unrelated healthy individuals
and patients with SZ. This problem is well-studied in literature with a growing interest
for machine learning approaches, thus motivating an increased focus on mitigating the
risk of overfitting. The final model resulted in an AUC test score of 0.68. Problem 2 is
the comparison of twins where one individual has SZ and the other is healthy. Because
of the genetic similarity of the twins, this highlights the effect of the disorder compared
to Problem 1. The final model resulted in an AUC test score of 0.59. Problem 3 is the
comparison of healthy individuals against healthy individuals that has a co-twin with an
SZ disorder. This problem aims to model the PR0 twin’s genetic predisposition to the
disorder, compared to an individual with an unaffected twin. The final model resulted in
a AUC test score of 0.63.
The discussion chapter is structured as follows: Firstly I discuss the results for each
problem and their respective subproblems as well as an overall perspective. Secondly I
discuss specific parts of the project and their effect on the results.
This includes the
preprocessing and the classification framework with the measures to reduce the effect of
overfitting.
5.1
Discussion of the results for each problem
5.1.1
Problem 1
Problem 1 was the classification of HC vs PR1. For the spectral features from the FOOOF
algorithm, the cluster based permutation test did not results in any significant differences.
However for the χ a large cluster was suggested in the fronto-center electrodes. The PCA
analysis further showed that the variance across particularly the χ feature was described
by only a few components, with the loadings pointing to the frontal-left electrodes as
dominating for the direction of variance. The loadings further highlighted, that spectral
features from the β-band were dominant in the components. This however, was not clearly
reflected in the classification models based on these feature sets. The feature set consisting
only of χ features, had a validation score of 0.62, the set consisting of all spectral features
from the β-band had a validation score of 0.56, and the Loadings set based on the FOOOF
parameters, resulted in a validation score of 0.66. For the connectivity feature wPLI, the
statistical tests resulted in multiple significant connections, particularly from the θ band,
as well as reoccurring connections related to the MPFC area across frequency bands.
These connections were also highlighted when computing the loadings from the PCA. The
classification based on a feature set only containing θ connections resulted in a validation
error of 0.65, which was better than any other individual frequency band, but lower than
using all frequency bands together. This was comparable to using the Stat feature set,
that also resulted in a validation error of 0.68. The feature set with Loadings from wPli
was chosen as the final model, with a validation error of 0.72, and suggestions of low
possibility of overfitting as the training error was 0.75.
Overall, the connectivity features with connections involving the MPFC region, was most
successful when classifying patients with SZ from healthy individuals.
58
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:65==
5.1.2
Problem 2
Problem 2 was the classification of PR0 vs PR1.
For the spectral features from the
FOOOF algorithm, the cluster based permutation test did not results in any significant
differences. However, clusters were detected for the BW and CF parameters in the parietal
electrodes. The PCA analysis further showed that the variance across particularly the CF,
P and χ feature was described by only a few components. The loadings overall pointing to
the frontal-left and frontal-center electrodes as dominating for the direction of variance.
The loadings further highlighted, that spectral features from the β-band were dominant in
the components. This however, was not clearly reflected in the classification models based
on these feature sets. The selected model was the PCA components for these spectral
features, with a validation score of 0.64. The specific channels and frequency combination
identified and used in the loadings and stat feature set respectively, returned validation
scores of 0.55, and 0.51. Thus indicating that the variance relevant for classifying the
individuals in the PR pairs, can not be isolated to a subset of channels but is a broader
combination. For the connectivity feature wPLI, the statistical tests did not result in any
significant connection, however then looking separately at MZ twins and DZ twins, there
were multiple connections in the δ and θ bands respectively. Using the δ connections as
input in the classifier, resulted in a AUC validation score of 0.62, just below the selected
model, whereas the stat features, the loadings and PCA obtained from wPLI was in the
range 0.51-0.59.
Overall, decomposing the spectral features from the FOOOF algorithm by using PCA
resulted in the best model.
5.1.3
Problem 3
Problem 3 was the classification of HC vs PR0. For the spectral features from the FOOOF
algorithm, the cluster based permutation test did not results in any significant differences.
However for the χ a cluster was suggested in the mid-line electrodes. The PCA analysis
further showed that the variance across particularly the χ feature was described by only
a few components, with the loadings pointing to the frontal-left electrodes as dominating
for the direction of variance. The loadings further highlighted, that spectral features from
the β-band were dominant in the components. The loadings for BW and CF also highlighted
the frontal center left electrodes. The the loadings, pca and stat tests for FOOOF does
not perform well, but the feature set only consisting of BW is almost as good as the final
selected model with a val score of 0.67. For the connectivity feature wPLI, the statistical
tests resulted in multiple significant connections, particularly from the θ band, as well as
multiple reoccurring involving all three regions. The θ band alone resulted in an AUC val
score of 0.65, which stood out from the second best γ resulting in 0.58. Neither of the
individual frequency band (of all of them together) did very well for the validation sets,
AUC val scores ranging from 0.38 The best model was based on these statistical features
from the wPLI connections, resulting in an AUC val score of 0.68.
Overall, Problem 3 was best solved based on a subset of the connections between regions,
identified through the statistical tests.
5.1.4
Results across problems
Taking the helicopter perspective, none of the classification models did a remarkably good
job. Neither was there improvements to be found when restricting the subjects with a
diagnose to only include subjects with an F20 diagnose, nor when separating the twin
types. As expected, the best results came from Problem 1, but surprisingly Problem 3
had a higher AUC test score than Problem 2. I would expect that despite the genetic
similarity, it would be easier to distinguish between individuals with and without SZ.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
59
==PAGE:66==
A possible explanation could be the choice of evaluation metric. Both Problem 1 and
Problem 3 are rather unbalanced with 95 HCs and 51/52 PRs, and despite attempting
to account for this in the training procedure, AUC is still in risk of being inflated by a
larger number of true negatives, thus potentially explaining the better results for Problem
3. Each of the problems had a separate classification model, SVC for Problem 1, RF for
Problem 2 and GB for Problem 3. For SVC, C was chosen to be 0.01, meaning increased
regularisation compared to the default value of 1. This seems like a good choice, as the
best model PCA Combined, still included 40 features for 95+52 = 147 subjects. The best
model for Problem 2 was the Random Forest classifier with a max depth of 25, this seems
rather high and allowing for quite much flexibility, but seems to be accounted for, by the
high number of estimators, as the test error doesn’t drop dramatically. For Problem 3, the
best model was the GB with a learning rate of 0.1, and the feature subsample parameter of
50%, hereby introducing a stochastic element to the model which seemed to work alright
for generalisability.
5.2
Preprocessing and source localisation
The preprocessing pipeline described in 3.2 was inspired by [56], and contained multiple
parts that was overall automated. The method for validating the steps was the plots of
the times series and the PSD of the signals. I choose to reflect on the preprocessing, as
the classifiers showed consistently bad results almost independent of the applied feature
set. Not even the full set of features with the risk of overfitting, resulted in high training
or validation errors. This could potentially indicate that the signal-to-noise-ratio was too
low. The first impression is that the amount of bad data is rather high, but I did not
find this transparency in prior studies for comparison. However, a rule of thumb indicates
that no more than 10% should be interpolated, to keep the data valid, which the my
preprocessing fulfills. Secondly, there is a large group of components labelled as ’others’.
I got the impression that the standard in literature is to discard these [46], but perhaps
it would be of value to inspect them further and potentially gain a stronger signal in case
some components containing neural activity was misclassified.
By using source localisation the dimension of the data was reduced from 64 signals per
subject to 6 signals per subject. The choice of using only 6 ROIs is rather little compared
to what else is seen in the literature, where the Broadmann area atlas is one the more
popular choices resulting in 14 ROI per hemisphere. However as explained in Section 3.2.1
this choice was made as the effect of SZ in the DMN are well-established, and that the
classification model would be less prone to overfitting. However for future studies a finer
graded atlas would allow for increased interpretation and clinical value.
60
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:67==
6
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was a three fold analysis based on resting state EEG data. Firstly,
healthy controls was compared to patients with schizophrenia. Secondly, twins with a
schizophrenia disorder was was compared to their healthy co-twin. Thirdly, the healthy
individuals with a diagnosed co-twin were compared to healthy individuals with healthy
co-twins. The analyses was conducted based on a parameterisation of the spectra for each
signal obtained by the FOOOF algorithm as well as functional connectivity given by the
feature weighted phase lag index.
The first step was to preprocess the data which was overall automatised. The FOOOF
algorithm was implemented in sensor space and returned 4 parameters per signal, three
peak parameters characterising the neural oscillations and the aperiodic component char-
acterising the slope or background noise of the spectrum. The data from sensor space was
then source localised to enable the analysis of functional connectivity between regions.
The regions of interest were three regions in each hemisphere within the Default Mode
Network, namely the medial prefrontal cortex, the medial prefrontal cortex and the lateral
parietal cortex. The functional connectivity was estimated using the weighted phase lag
index which accounts for volume conduction and has shown improved robustness to noise.
The features where then compared between the groups within each of the problems. A
permutation test was applied to the connectivity feature, and a cluster based permutation
test accounting for the correlation of the signals for nearby electrodes, was applied to
the spectral features. Some clusters were detected across problems but none significant.
Multiple connections estimated by wPLI were significant, particularly in the θ and δ bands.
The statistical tests were one attempt to reduce the feature space, which originally con-
sisted of 1100 features per subject. In addition principal component analysis was applied,
and a reduced feature set consisting of selected components for each of the features was
created. The loadings from the PCA was further used to determine the most influential
variables for the direction of variance, and these variables were used to construct a feature
set.
Three classification models were trained on each of the feature sets for each of the problems.
Support Vector Classifier, Random Forest and GradientBoosting. The best performing
model for each problem was selected based on the AUC validation score. The model was
then refit to the training and validation data, and evaluated on a 10% hold-out set. The
procedure was repeated 100 times. The hypothesis was for Problem 1 and Problem 2
that individuals with a diagnosed could be classified from healthy individuals without a
diagnose, and for Problem 3 that it would be possible to distinguish healthy individuals
without a sick co-twin from healthy individuals with a sick co-twin due to the strong genetic
component in the disease. Neither of the three models resulted in much better scores than
chance level. For Problem 1 the AUC test score was 0.68 based on variables identified by
computing the PCA loadings from both spectral and connectivity features. For Problem
2 the AUC test score was 0.59, based on PCA of the spectral features. For Problem 3
the AUC test score was 0.64 based on connectivity features identified by statistical tests.
Overall this suggest that perhaps other feature types are more useful when distinguishing
between patients with SZ and healthy individuals, and that the classification problem
becomes harder when comparing individuals with similar genetics.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
61
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1]
J Ruiz de Miras et al. “Schizophrenia classification using machine learning on resting
state EEG signal”. In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 79 (2023), p. 104233.
[2]
Jelena Trajkovic et al. “Resting state alpha oscillatory activity is a valid and reliable
marker of schizotypy”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (2021), p. 10379.
[3]
Rikke Hilker et al. “Is an early age at illness onset in schizophrenia associated with
increased genetic susceptibility? Analysis of data from the Nationwide Danish Twin
Register”. In: EBioMedicine 18 (2017), pp. 320–326.
[4]
World Health Organization. ICD-10 Version 2010. 2010. url: https://icd.who.int/
browse10/2010/en#/F20-F29.
[5]
CEM Van Beijsterveldt and GCM Van Baal. “Twin and family studies of the human
electroencephalogram: a review and a meta-analysis”. In: Biological psychology 61.1-2
(2002), pp. 111–138.
[6]
Sune Straszek et al. Lægehåndbog - Skizofreni. 2019. url: https://www.sundhed.
dk / sundhedsfaglig / laegehaandbogen / psykiatri / tilstande - og - sygdomme / psykoser /
skizofreni/.
[7]
Rikke Hilker. “The heritability of schizophrenia spectrum disorders - a Danish twin
register study”. PhD thesis. University of Copenhagen, 2015.
[8]
Christian S Legind et al. “Heritability of cerebral blood flow and the correlation to
schizophrenia spectrum disorders: A pseudo-continuous arterial spin labeling twin
study”. In: Schizophrenia bulletin 45.6 (2019), pp. 1231–1241.
[9]
Helle Schaebel et al. “F125. QUALITY OF LIFE IN DISCORDANT TWIN-PAIRS
WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA SPECTRUM DISORDER–RESULTS FROM THE VIP-
STUDY”. In: Schizophrenia Bulletin 45.Supplement_2 (2019), S301–S301.
[10]
Mette Ødegaard Nielsen et al. “Reward processing as an indicator of vulnerability
or compensatory resilience in psychoses? Results from a twin study”. In: Biological
psychiatry global open science 3.1 (2023), pp. 47–55.
[11]
Jose A Cortes-Briones et al. “Going deep into schizophrenia with artificial intelli-
gence”. In: Schizophrenia Research 245 (2022), pp. 122–140.
[12]
Carla Barros, Carlos A Silva, and Ana P Pinheiro. “Advanced EEG-based learning
approaches to predict schizophrenia: Promises and pitfalls”. In: Artificial intelligence
in medicine 114 (2021), p. 102039.
[13]
Charles A Ellis et al. “Examining Reproducibility of EEG Schizophrenia Biomarkers
Across Explainable Machine Learning Models”. In: 2022 IEEE 22nd International
Conference on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering (BIBE). IEEE. 2022, pp. 305–308.
[14]
Sheng Zhang, Qiao Shini, and Wei Wang. “Classification of schizophrenia’s EEG
based on high order pattern discovery”. In: 2010 IEEE Fifth International Confer-
ence on Bio-Inspired Computing: Theories and Applications (BIC-TA). IEEE. 2010,
pp. 1147–1149.
[15]
Manuel A Vázquez, Arash Maghsoudi, and Inés P Mariño. “An interpretable machine
learning method for the detection of schizophrenia using EEG signals”. In: Frontiers
in Systems Neuroscience 15 (2021), p. 652662.
[16]
Ricardo Buettner et al. “Development of a machine learning based algorithm to
accurately detect schizophrenia based on one-minute EEG recordings”. In: (2020).
[17]
LS Dominicus et al. “Macroscale EEG characteristics in antipsychotic-naı̈ve patients
with first-episode psychosis and healthy controls”. In: Schizophrenia 9.1 (2023), p. 5.
62
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:69==
[18]
Jun Won Kim et al. “Diagnostic utility of quantitative EEG in un-medicated schizophre-
nia”. In: Neuroscience letters 589 (2015), pp. 126–131.
[19]
Siuly Siuly et al. “A computerized method for automatic detection of schizophrenia
using EEG signals”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering 28.11 (2020), pp. 2390–2400.
[20]
Thomas Donoghue et al. “Parameterizing neural power spectra into periodic and
aperiodic components”. In: Nature neuroscience 23.12 (2020), pp. 1655–1665.
[21]
Juan L Molina et al. “Memantine effects on electroencephalographic measures of
putative excitatory/inhibitory balance in schizophrenia”. In: Biological Psychiatry:
Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging 5.6 (2020), pp. 562–568.
[22]
Julia WY Kam et al. “Resting state EEG power and coherence abnormalities in
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia”. In: Journal of psychiatric research 47.12 (2013),
pp. 1893–1901.
[23]
Neil D Woodward, Baxter Rogers, and Stephan Heckers. “Functional resting-state
networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia”. In: Schizophrenia research
130.1-3 (2011), pp. 86–93.
[24]
Elzbieta Olejarczyk and Wojciech Jernajczyk. “Graph-based analysis of brain con-
nectivity in schizophrenia”. In: PloS one 12.11 (2017), e0188629.
[25]
Petra Rupert and Anna Watters. “51. Occipital Alpha Power During Resting-State
EEG in Clinical Risk for Psychosis and Schizophrenia”. In: Schizophrenia Bulletin
43.suppl_1 (2017), S27–S27.
[26]
Kevin M Spencer et al. “The contribution of gamma bursting to spontaneous gamma
activity in schizophrenia”. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 17 (2023), p. 1130897.
[27]
Frigyes Samuel Racz et al. “Multifractal and entropy-based analysis of delta band
neural activity reveals altered functional connectivity dynamics in schizophrenia”.
In: Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 14 (2020), p. 49.
[28]
Tetsuya Takahashi et al. “Abnormal functional connectivity of high-frequency rhythms
in drug-naı̈ve schizophrenia”. In: Clinical Neurophysiology 129.1 (2018), pp. 222–231.
[29]
Mengsen Zhang et al. “Alpha transcranial alternating current stimulation reduces
depressive symptoms in people with schizophrenia and auditory hallucinations: a
double-blind, randomized pilot clinical trial”. In: Schizophrenia 8.1 (2022), p. 114.
[30]
Anupriya Pathania et al. “Exploring the reliability and sensitivity of the EEG power
spectrum as a biomarker”. In: International Journal of Psychophysiology 160 (2021),
pp. 18–27.
[31]
Brendan D Ostlund et al. “Behavioral and cognitive correlates of the aperiodic (1/f-
like) exponent of the EEG power spectrum in adolescents with and without ADHD”.
In: Developmental cognitive neuroscience 48 (2021), p. 100931.
[32]
Ian Ramsay et al. “Disturbances in aperiodic neural activity during resting state in
patients with schizophrenia”. In: Biological psychiatry 89.9 (2021), S254–S255.
[33]
Erik J Peterson et al. “Aperiodic neural activity is a better predictor of schizophrenia
than neural oscillations”. In: BioRxiv (2017), p. 113449.
[34]
Lauren V Moran and L Elliot Hong. “High vs low frequency neural oscillations in
schizophrenia”. In: Schizophrenia bulletin 37.4 (2011), pp. 659–663.
[35]
Meenakshi Khosla et al. “Machine learning in resting-state fMRI analysis”. In: Mag-
netic resonance imaging 64 (2019), pp. 101–121.
[36]
Mao-Lin Hu et al. “A review of the functional and anatomical default mode network
in schizophrenia”. In: Neuroscience bulletin 33 (2017), pp. 73–84.
[37]
Benjamin A Seitzman et al. “The state of resting state networks”. In: Topics in
magnetic resonance imaging: TMRI 28.4 (2019), p. 189.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
63
==PAGE:70==
[38]
Jonas Richiardi et al. “Correlated gene expression supports synchronous activity in
brain networks”. In: Science 348.6240 (2015), pp. 1241–1244.
[39]
Wenbin Guo et al. “Hyperactivity of the default-mode network in first-episode, drug-
naive schizophrenia at rest revealed by family-based case–control and traditional
case–control designs”. In: Medicine 96.13 (2017).
[40]
Daiki Sasabayashi et al. “Resting state hyperconnectivity of the default mode net-
work in schizophrenia and clinical high-risk state for psychosis”. In: Cerebral Cortex
(2023), bhad131.
[41]
Dost Öngür et al. “Default mode network abnormalities in bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia”. In: Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 183.1 (2010), pp. 59–68.
[42]
Andrea Biasiucci, Benedetta Franceschiello, and Micah M Murray. “Electroencephalog-
raphy”. In: Current Biology 29.3 (2019), R80–R85.
[43]
Zhenjiang Li et al. “Demystifying signal processing techniques to extract resting-
state EEG features for psychologists”. In: Brain Science Advances 6.3 (2020), pp. 189–
209.
[44]
Jeffrey W Britton et al. “Electroencephalography (EEG): An introductory text and
atlas of normal and abnormal findings in adults, children, and infants”. In: (2016).
[45]
Mainak Jas et al. “Autoreject: Automated artifact rejection for MEG and EEG
data”. In: NeuroImage 159 (2017), pp. 417–429.
[46]
Luca Pion-Tonachini, Ken Kreutz-Delgado, and Scott Makeig. “ICLabel: An auto-
mated electroencephalographic independent component classifier, dataset, and web-
site”. In: NeuroImage 198 (2019), pp. 181–197.
[47]
Yu Zhang et al. “Identification of psychiatric disorder subtypes from functional con-
nectivity patterns in resting-state electroencephalography”. In: Nature biomedical
engineering 5.4 (2021), pp. 309–323.
[48]
José Unpingco. “Statistics”. In: Python for Probability, Statistics, and Machine
Learning. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 101–196. isbn: 978-3-
319-30717-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-30717-6_3. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-30717-6_3.
[49]
MNE-Python Developers. MNE-Python: Background Statistical Concepts in Sensor
Space. Online tutorial. Year of Access. url: https://mne.tools/stable/auto_tutorials/
stats-sensor-space/10_background_stats.html.
[50]
Eric Maris and Robert Oostenveld. “Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG-and
MEG-data”. In: Journal of neuroscience methods 164.1 (2007), pp. 177–190.
[51]
Trevor Hastie et al. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and
prediction. Vol. 2. Springer, 2009.
[52]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. “Introduction to machine learn-
ing and data mining”. In: Lecture notes of the course of the same name given at
DTU (Technical University of Denmark) (2016).
[53]
François Perrin et al. “Spherical splines for scalp potential and current density map-
ping”. In: Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology 72.2 (1989), pp. 184–
187.
[54]
Dezhong Yao et al. “Which reference should we use for EEG and ERP practice?”
In: Brain topography 32 (2019), pp. 530–549.
[55]
David M Groppe, Scott Makeig, and Marta Kutas. “Identifying reliable independent
components via split-half comparisons”. In: Neuroimage 45.4 (2009), pp. 1199–1211.
[56]
Qianliang Li. “A machine learning framework for analysis of resting-state EEG in
patients”. In: (2022).
64
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:71==
[57]
Maximilien Chaumon, Dorothy VM Bishop, and Niko A Busch. “A practical guide
to the selection of independent components of the electroencephalogram for artifact
correction”. In: Journal of neuroscience methods 250 (2015), pp. 47–63.
[58]
Klaus-Martin Krönke et al. “Functional connectivity in a triple-network saliency
model is associated with real-life self-control”. In: Neuropsychologia 149 (2020),
p. 107667.
[59]
V Jahmunah et al. “Automated detection of schizophrenia using nonlinear signal
processing methods”. In: Artificial intelligence in medicine 100 (2019), p. 101698.
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
65
==PAGE:72==
66
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
==PAGE:73==
Machine learning methods for detecting schizophrenia in resting-state electroencefalography
67
==PAGE:74==
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
