==PAGE:1==
Parkinson Warrior
A mHealth Application for Assessment of Parkin-
son’s Disease Symptoms
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Parkinson Warrior
A mHealth Application for Assessment of Parkinson’s Disease Symptoms
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Mathias Hansen
Rasmus Kromman Hjorth
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Health Technology,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Mathias Hansen
s175112
Signature
Date
Rasmus Kromman Hjorth
s175120
Signature
Date
ii
Parkinson Warrior
30-07-2023
3 0 - 0 7 - 2 0 2 3
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis presents Parkinson Warrior, a mobile application developed as a symp-
tom assessment tool for people with Parkinson’s Disease. The application incorporates
cognitive games, surveys, and user health data obtained through their phones to calcu-
late a Parkinson Index, assisting users in monitoring their disease progression over time.
This thesis explores the state-of-the-art research in Parkinson’s Disease and analyzes
gamification elements to encourage long-term user engagement in mobile applications.
The User Centered Design method is employed to design the mobile application, and a
study is conducted to assess the usability and calculation of the Parkinson Index.
The study resulted in a System Usability Scale indicating overall satisfaction with the ap-
plication’s usability. The study also demonstrated a reasonable alignment between the
calculated Parkinson Index and participants’ self-assessment of symptoms, indicating its
potential as a valuable evaluation tool. However, improvements are needed, such as ad-
dressing the language barrier, expanding the integration of medication management, and
increasing the transparency of the Parkinson Index.
Parkinson Warrior showcases the potential design of a mHealth application for the as-
sessment of Parkinson’s Disease symptoms targeting continued engagement from the
users.
Parkinson Warrior
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Throughout this project, we have received help and supervision from various individuals
to whom we extend our thanks. First and foremost, we express our gratitude to our su-
pervisor, Jakob E. Bardram, whose guidance and expertise have been instrumental in
enhancing the quality of our thesis. His feedback and support played a significant role in
its improvement.
We would also like to acknowledge the contributions of our clinical supervisor Martin Bal-
legaard, who provided valuable assistance with the medical aspects of our work and con-
nected us with key contacts in the field of Parkinson’s Disease.
Additionally, we would like to express our gratitude to Henrik Hjorth. His availability for
interviews, willingness to assist, and facilitation of communication with the Danish Parkin-
son Association have been of incredible help in completing the project. Thank you for
your support and commitment throughout the process.
Finally, we extend our appreciation to the participants of our study, whose involvement
made this study possible. We also thank the Danish Parkinson Association for inviting us
to feature our work in their newspaper. To all those who have contributed to this academic
endeavor, we thank you all for your support and encouragement.
iv
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background and Related Work
5
2.1
Parkinson’s Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Self care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Long-term engagement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Similar applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Design Methods
10
3.1
User-Centered Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Design Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Design Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Implementation
17
4.1
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Business Logic Component (BLoC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Notifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
Parkinson Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
Data structures and Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.6
Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.7
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Study
32
5.1
Recruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Discussion
38
6.1
Usability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.2
Parkinson Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.3
Overall Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
44
A Acronyms
49
B Distribution
50
Parkinson Warrior
v
==PAGE:8==
C Links
51
D Wireframes
52
E
Prototype
53
F
Updated Prototype
54
G Survey (Introduction meeting)
55
H Survey (Debriefing meeting)
57
I
Full list of written and verbal feedback
60
J
Validation Study Results - Data
64
K Excel implementation of Parkinson Index
71
vi
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a chronic and progressive neurodegenerative disorder affect-
ing millions worldwide. The disease is caused by a degeneration in dopamine production
in a specific part of the brain called Substantia Nigra [1]. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter
used to control movement. The lack of dopamine causes the characteristic motor symp-
toms of PD, such as tremors, muscle stiffness, slowed movement, and impaired balance
and coordination. PD can also cause non-motor symptoms such as depression, anxi-
ety, cognitive changes, autonomic dysfunction, and sleep disorders. There is currently
no disease-modifying treatment for PD, but symptoms can be slowed and alleviated with
symptom-reducing medication, surgical operations, and therapy [2].
Around 10 million people are estimated to have the condition worldwide [1]. The inci-
dence of PD increases with age, and as people tend to live longer, it is expected that the
prevalence is set to rise in the coming years, according to The Global Burden of Disease
Study from 2015 [3].
Diagnosing and monitoring of PD in Denmark is currently challenging due to a shortage
of neurologists, with only around 482 specialists and a limited number specialized in PD.
A 2018 report highlighted a lack of approximately 100 neurologists in Denmark [4]. This
shortage significantly impacts patients’ waiting times, varying wildly depending on their
location. In public healthcare, the waiting period to see a neurologist can range from two
to eighty weeks, while in private hospitals, it can be between six and forty-two weeks [4].
One contributing factor to the long waiting times is the increasing prevalence of diseases
such as PD, Alzheimer’s, multiple sclerosis, and epilepsy.
The number of PD cases
has risen from 60,000 in 2005 to over 90,000 in 2017, creating pressure on available
resources [4].
After the patient receives a diagnosis, the treatment phase begins, offering various options
for relieving symptoms, such as medications and surgical interventions. Among the com-
monly prescribed medicines is Levodopa, which effectively increases dopamine levels in
the brain. It also impacts other brain chemicals, such as neurotransmitters, facilitating
information transfer between brain cells and helping manage non-movement symptoms.
Over time, the effectiveness of these medications diminishes. In such cases, deep brain
stimulation surgery can be considered an alternative solution if the medication proves
ineffective or its effects decrease significantly [5].
Patients typically only have a few consultations with neurologists, which may cause chal-
lenges in effectively tracking their progress and providing insightful feedback regarding
their diseases [6]. Additionally, when patients visit a neurologist, describing how they feel
and the declining effectiveness of their medication can prove challenging. In such cases,
neurologists must depend on questionnaires and the patient’s subjective perception of
their symptoms to assess the need for medication adjustments. Unfortunately, this sub-
jective approach can make it difficult for patients to accurately communicate their progress
or changes in symptoms compared to previous months, which may result in an inaccurate
and brief snapshot of the disease’s progression [7].
The definition of self-care combines well with the concepts of Mobile Health (mHealth).
Self-care is defined as ”the practice of activities that individuals initiate and perform on
their own behalf in maintaining life, health and well-being” [8] whereas mHealth, is a term
for using mobile phones and wireless technology in medical care.
Parkinson Warrior
1
==PAGE:10==
Self-care is the practice of prioritizing one’s physical, mental, and emotional well-being
through various activities and practices. It involves taking time to nurture and care for
oneself in order to maintain a healthy life.
While the primary use of mHealth involves educating users about preventive healthcare
services, it finds use in diverse areas, such as disease surveillance, treatment support,
and managing chronic diseases [9].
A potential solution to the inaccurate, brief, and subjective snapshots of the disease’s
progression is to develop an mHealth application to aid people with PD in assessing and
monitoring the disease regularly and continuously. For this solution to be effective, users
must actively engage with the application on a regular basis. Ensuring long-term user
engagement presents a significant challenge. Research suggests that gamification ele-
ments like points, badges, and leaderboards commonly found in the gaming industry can
motivate users to remain consistently engaged on a regular basis. This approach enables
an interactive and rewarding experience, encouraging users to participate proactively in
their health monitoring journey [10].
1.1
Research Question
The traditional methods for assessing PD symptoms may only capture a brief snapshot
of the progress, and it is a challenge to create a useful tool for long-term assessment of
the disease. With an expected rise in prevalence, there is an increasing need for new
approaches to address this issue.
This leads to the following problem statement:
[PS] What is the design of a mHealth application for the assessment of symptoms and
complications of Parkinson’s Disease targeting continued engagement from the patient?
To assist the development of such, the ensuing subquestions will be addressed.
[SQ1] What are the key challenges for self-care and long-term assessment of PD symp-
toms?
[SQ2] How can PD symptoms be assessed and monitored over a long period while keep-
ing the patient engaged?
[SQ3] What practical consideration should be taken into account when developing an
assessment application of PD symptoms?
1.2
Methods
This section will present the methods that will be used in the development and evalua-
tion of Parkinson Warrior. The design and development process will begin with a review
of state-of-the-art research on PD to gain an understanding of the disease. The User
Centered Design (UCD) approach will be applied as a method throughout the design and
development process to ensure that the final application caters to the needs and prefer-
ences of its users throughout the development process.
Wireframing and prototyping will be used to test and validate ideas and concepts with
users rapidly, increasing the fidelity for each iteration. The wireframes and the first itera-
tions of the prototype will be developed using Figma. The application will be developed
using the Flutter framework because of its ability to build apps that can run on Android and
iOS platforms, providing a wider reach to potential users. Additionally, using the Flutter
framework will allow us to use the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET)
software packages.
2
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:11==
The semi-structured interview method will be used to obtain insights from relevant stake-
holders, helping us refine the app’s features and functionalities. To ensure the app’s
design resonates with the intended audience, we will develop personas representing the
targeted users. These personas will guide us during the design and development process,
allowing us to focus on the users’ needs and preferences.
The main feature of the application will be the Parkinson Index, which will visualize the
assessment of users’ symptoms and complications. To provide users with insights, health
data such as physical activity and sleep will be collected, visualized, and incorporated into
the Parkinson Index.
User testing of the application will involve explorative and unmoderated in-person tests,
where participants will interact with the application while providing valuable feedback on
the application’s usability and functionality. Additionally, thinking-aloud tests will be con-
ducted, allowing users to express their thoughts and impressions while using the app,
providing valuable insights into the user experience.
To validate the usability of the application and the accuracy of the Parkinson Index calcu-
lation, a validation study will be conducted. This study will include physical introductory
and debriefing meetings to introduce the application to test participants and gather col-
laborative feedback and improvement suggestions. The usability of the applications will
be assessed quantitatively by applying the System Usability Scale (SUS). The accuracy
of the Parkinson Index calculation will be done through a comparative analysis between
the calculation and test participants’ perception and assessment of their symptoms.
By utilizing these methods, we aim to create an application for long-term assessment that
is user-friendly, informative, and engaging for individuals with PD
1.3
Thesis Overview
The following chapters describe the processes of designing, implementing, and validating
a mHealth application for assessing PD symptoms.
Chapter 2
Background and Related Work provides an overview of PD, focusing on the symptoms,
stages, and processes. Additionally, it introduces the concept of self-care and long-term
engagement and its relevance in managing the condition. The chapter also reviews mo-
bile applications that share the same ideas or concepts.
Chapter 3
Design Methods presents a UCD approach, placing the user’s needs and preferences
at the center of the development process. It includes background research, creation of
personas, prototyping, design evaluation, and addressing potential limitations.
Chapter 4
Implementation describes the implementation of the final prototype, which is a Flutter
application. The primary focus areas include the development of the user interface, the
implementation of the business logic, and the utilization of data structures and storage
frameworks.
Chapter 5
Study presents the evaluation study conducted to validate the usability of the developed
application and the accuracy of the Parkinson Index. The chapters focus on the recruit-
ment of test participants, the methods used to conduct the study, and a presentation of
the results obtained.
Parkinson Warrior
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 6
Discussion analyzes the results obtained from the validation study. It will also reflect on
the challenges faced during the development process and consider their potential impact
on the overall results. The chapter also reflects on potential future work on the application.
Chapter 7
Conclusion reflects on the research questions by concluding on the discussion and the
outcome of the project. Additionally, it highlights potential areas for future improvements
and additions to enhance the application’s usability.
4
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:13==
2
Background and Related Work
This chapter elaborates on work related to a PD symptoms assessment tool, focusing on
the disease in general, the current processes of diagnosing, monitoring, and assessing,
and similar applications to what this project strives to achieve.
2.1
Parkinson’s Disease
PD is characterized by a wide range of symptoms and complications that can vary sig-
nificantly from patient to patient. The diversity of symptoms poses a challenge in under-
standing and managing the disease. Symptoms related to PD are divided into two main
categories, i.e., motor and non-motor symptoms. In contrast, the motor symptoms are
visible, and the non-motor symptoms are invisible. Common motor symptoms include
tremors, bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural instability, and non-motor symptoms include
cognitive impairments, sleep disturbances, mood changes, autonomic dysfunction, and
sensory abnormalities. The severity of symptoms usually differs from patient to patient.
Understanding the symptoms and their impact on the patients’ lives is essential when
diagnosing, monitoring, and assessing the progression of PD [4].
In 1967, Hoehn and Yahr defined the five stages of PD. The early stages include stages
1 and 2, stages 2 and 3 represent the mid-stage, and the late stages consist of stages 4
and 5. Hoehn and Yahr’s definition was modified in 1983, adding stages 1.5 and 2.5 to
the scale.
In the initial and early stages of PD, the person has mild unilateral symptoms that generally
do not interfere with daily activities. In the mid-stages, symptoms become more severe
and bilateral, affecting both sides of the body. The disease begins to restrict the person
in everyday activities. In the advanced or late stages of PD, symptoms and complications
are severely disabling. Eventually, it becomes impossible to stand and walk, making the
person bound to a wheelchair or bedridden if not aided [11].
Diagnosing patients with PD can be difficult due to its diverse presenting symptoms, and
there is no straightforward way to do so. Doctors may use technologies, such as Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound, to measure brain and nerve movements to de-
termine the likely presence of PD by ruling out other conditions with similar symptoms [12].
Alternatively, a neurologist may comprehensively assess patients’ medical records and
ascertain their signs and symptoms by administering questionnaires and tests. The ques-
tionnaires are designed to obtain information about the patient’s social life, tremors, and
sleep patterns, among other factors. At the same time, the tests may include physical
evaluations such as the distance a patient can walk in 10 minutes or the patient’s gait.
Ultimately, these questionnaires and tests are used to assign a score reflecting the pa-
tient’s level of progression. The gold standard for clinical surveys as an assessment
tool for PD is the Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale
(MDS-UPDRS) [13]. MDS-UPDRS is a revision of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating
Scale (UPDRS) that was developed by neurologists as the gold standard for monitoring
medications and symptoms of PD in 1987 [14].
The publication, Whitepaper on Parkinson (Danish: ”Hvidbog om Parkinson”), is created
by the Parkinson’s Alliance (Danish: Parkinsonalliancen), a collaboration between key
stakeholders in PD. The Parkinson’s Alliance consists of 13 organizations recognizing
a significant need for increased focus on PD. The organizations include neurologists,
Parkinson Warrior
5
==PAGE:14==
nurses, occupational therapists, physiotherapists, dietitians, speech therapists, psychol-
ogists, and caregivers, among others [15].
According to the white paper, having at least two consultations per year is recommended,
where at least one is with a neurologist [4]. This is done to ensure the best treatment
and to keep track of the progression of the disease. During a consultation, the status and
progression are assessed using a variety of rating scales such as the MDS-UPDRS and
Hoehn and Yarh Schale (HY Scale) [11].
Guidelines have been established to increase and ensure the quality of the consultations.
The guidelines are developed by Nationale Neurologisk Behandlingsvejledning (nNBV),
describing the instructions for diagnosticating, treatment, and post-ambulatory follow-ups.
Each guideline describes the steps needed to examine a patient thoroughly [16].
The Danish healthcare system lacks thorough and detailed knowledge regarding the qual-
ity of treating PD. Due to this, the Regional Clinical Quality Development Program (RKKP)
has decided to establish a clinical database specifically for PD to provide valuable insights
into the treatment quality. It enables informed decision-making by relevant management
and healthcare authorities to improve quality standards. Additionally, this initiative holds
the potential to bolster the Danish Parkinson’s Association’s advocacy efforts in the po-
litical arena. The process to establish the database is expected to begin during autumn
2023. Ultimately, the database’s scope is intended to contain comprehensive information
about the entire treatment journey, traversing medical care in public and private practices,
rehabilitative interventions, and patient-reported data [17].
2.2
Self care
According to Hans Henrik Knoop, an integrated impulse drives people to be active. In-
stinctively we want to learn and understand as much as possible, as quickly and easily
as possible. All of this is in an attempt to control our situation and destiny. Hans Henrik
Knoop states that activity is life-affirming, and passivity is the opposite [18].
The fact that people, in general, want to be active instead of passive aligns very well with
the concept of self-care, as it refers to someone’s actions and practices to promote their
physical, mental, and emotional well-being [19]. It involves taking responsibility for one’s
health and actively participating in activities that maintain overall wellness.
Self-care is crucial in managing and maintaining the quality of life for people with PD. It
includes various activities to maintain physical, mental, and emotional well-being to better
cope with their symptoms. Physical exercises, such as boxing, dance, and yoga, are a
key element of self-care for individuals with PD, as it decreases motor function degen-
eration and improves sleep, mood, and cognitive abilities [20]. Self-care also includes
managing medication. Proper medication management and adherence are essential to
optimize symptom control and prevent unnecessary fluctuations [21].
By incorporating self-care practices into their daily routines, individuals with PD can proac-
tively contribute to their well-being and improve their quality of life.
There are some concerns regarding self-care of PD. One concern is that self-care of PD
can be highly individualized and complex as the disease affects every patient differently.
Another concern regarding self-care of PD is that people in the later stages might not be
capable of performing self-care without support and assistance [22].
According to an analysis performed in a Ph.D. Thesis on self-care technologies and ev-
eryday life with PD, the existing self-care tools for PD and other chronic conditions can
6
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:15==
be divided into seven non-exclusive categories: 1) Tracking of health-related data; 2)
Medication reminders; 3) Support of therapeutic activities; 4) Suggestions for self-care
activities; 5) Provision of PD-related information; 6) Interaction between caregivers and
patients; 7) Remote interaction with carers [23].
In a thesis by Elina Kuosmanen, she investigates and explores the possibility of using
technical support to perform self-care of PD [24]. The thesis includes a total of four articles
that contributes to the three research questions. The first article presents STOP, a mobile
application for self-assessment and time tracking of medication intake. STOP is used
to investigate which aspects to consider for self-care in relation to PD and to test if PD
patients are willing and able to use mobile technology to monitor the disease in daily life.
The second article uses digitized drawing tasks to test and compare PD patients with a
healthy control group. The drawing tasks test and validate the technical capabilities of PD
patients using a smartphone. The third article uses accelerometer data collected during
the STOP trials from the first article to evaluate tremors and detect medication effects. The
fourth and final article focuses on collecting and sharing knowledge regarding self-care
for PD.
2.3
Long-term engagement
Long-term engagement regarding mobile applications refers to the sustained and contin-
ued usage of an app over an extended period by its users. Achieving long-term engage-
ment is important as it indicates that users find the app valuable, relevant, and enjoyable
enough to use regularly over time [25]. An application designed to monitor and manage
PD symptoms consistently over a long term allows users to track their progress accord-
ingly.
Various factors, including the app’s design, content, and usability, can influence long-term
engagement. Another way to boost long-term engagement is to apply gamification ele-
ments to encourage regular and continued use [26].
Gamification involves integrating game design principles and mechanics, such as point-
scoring, leaderboards, and rewards, into non-game activities to increase user engage-
ment and motivation. Gamification aims to make these activities more enjoyable and
stimulating, enhancing learning, behavior change, and satisfaction. This strategy is widely
used in various domains, including education, healthcare, marketing, and productivity, to
encourage participation and positive outcomes [27].
According to a study from 2020, eight archetypes of gamified health-related applications
exist [28]. The study uses a taxonomy of gamification concepts for health applications
to evaluate the applications, and it is based on the top 143 free gamified mHealth appli-
cations from Google Play Store and Apple App Store. The twelve dimensions defined in
the taxonomy are (1) gamification concept-to-user communication, (2) user identity, (3) re-
wards, (4) competition, (5) target group, (6) collaboration, (7) goal setting, (8) narrative, (9)
reinforcement, (10) level of integration, (11) persuasive intent(12) user advancement [29].
The sixth archetype mentioned in the article is particularly interesting, as it targets chronic
disease management and medication adherence by focusing on a continuous narrative.
According to an article on healthcare professionals’ perspective on self-management, mo-
tivation can be low in people with PD [22], as low motivation is a symptom of PD. Addition-
ally, low motivation can come from the fact that PD is a degenerative condition which might
make it difficult to maintain an interest in long-term assessment as the progression is likely
to have a negative gradient. This adds a challenge regarding long-term engagement in
using an assessment tool like Parkinson Warrior. Interestingly, the article mentions that a
Parkinson Warrior
7
==PAGE:16==
key motivator for PD patients is to do something because it is enjoyable or important and
not for external rewards [22].
2.4
Similar applications
This section reviews similar applications to what this project aims to develop. By re-
searching similar projects, we can identify features, functionalities, feedback, and areas
of improvement. The analysis contributes to a better understanding of the state-of-the-
art applications related to PD and long-term engagement, providing valuable insights for
developing and improving our project.
2.4.1
mHealth applications related to PD
The American Parkinson’s Disease Association (APDA) is one of the largest organiza-
tions in the world, with over 1 million patients involved in the organization [30]. APDA has
developed an application, APDA Symptom Tracker. The application contains two types
of trackers, one for the patient’s symptoms and one for their medication. The symptom
tracker solely tracks the symptoms through manual surveys regarding the patient’s condi-
tion. The results are illustrated in a graph that shows how the patient feels in ten specific
areas on a scale from zero to five. Additionally, the application offers a page with useful
links to literature about the disease and a page containing potential questions for medical
staff. One of the main benefits of the application is that it allows patients to take on a more
active role in disease management [31].
A reviewed application that caters to the needs of individuals with PD is the Parkinson’s
Lifekit. This application presents various features, including a daily scoreboard that shows
physical, emotional, cognitive, tremor, memory, and voice scores based on surveys, tests,
and accelerometer data from the user’s phone. Besides offering various tasks, this appli-
cation has an increased focus on data visualization, exhibiting more graphs and informa-
tion directly to the user [32].
Another application related to tracking and assessing PD symptoms is the PRO-PD -
Parkinson Symptom Tracking app. The application provides excessive insights through
graphs and tables based on data collected through quantitative surveys in the app [33].
Parkinson’s Disease Manager is an application that exclusively relies on questionnaires
to evaluate the user’s well-being. It prompts users to reveal their daily overall mood,
which is then computed to generate a score that can be presented in the overall health
view. Parkinson’s Disease Manager further possesses a news page that allows patients
to examine PD-related material [34].
Besides the ability to monitor symptoms, a commonality for many mHealth applications is
a feature allowing patients to track their medication. Both APDA Symptom Tracker App,
Parkinson’s Lifekit, and Parkinson’s Disease Manager offer this feature in addition to the
tracking of symptoms. The applications mentioned above are a selected few, and several
other applications regarding PD exist on both Apple App Store and Google Play Store.
Many existing applications share the same concepts and ideas for tracking PD symptoms,
including cognitive tasks and surveys.
2.4.2
Applications using long-term engagement
An example of a mHealth application that uses gamification to assist PD patients in ad-
dressing and monitoring their symptoms at home is Beats Medical Parkinson’s App [35].
It is an award-winning therapy app that addresses the mobility, speech, and dexterity
symptoms of PD. The application uses game mechanics such as interactive exercises,
achievements, and daily goals to motivate the user. The tasks and activities are tailored
8
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:17==
to match patients’ needs through artificial intelligence and machine learning [36]. Accord-
ing to their users, the two key features are the gait assessment and real-time feedback
on speech exercises, as these constitute an immense challenge for PD patients in their
daily life [35].
Additionally, Altoida has developed a mobile application that uses game mechanics as
a part of their cognitive assessment activities to measure brain health. They are using
Augmented Reality (AR) to implement game-like activities, such as hide-and-seek and
fire evacuation drills, that, along with user and sensor input, can be used to generate a
Digital Neuro Signature [37]. Altoida mainly focuses on general brain health analysis and
early Alzheimer’s diagnosis. However, they have recently received investments to expand
their platform and include other neurological diseases like PD and Schizophrenia [38].
Gamification is applied to a variety of different areas within the health domain. The list
below shows some existing mHealth applications that use gamification to motivate users
and ensure long-term engagement.
1. mySugr - A gamified diabetes management application [39].
2. SuperBetter - Uses game mechanics to improve mental health and social-emotional
learning [40].
3. Strava - Applies social networks, competitions, and other features to motivate users
to exercise [41].
4. Lumosity - A cognitive training app that offers a wide range of brain games designed
to improve and track various cognitive abilities over time [42].
5. MangoHealth - Aims to tackle medication adherence using in-game currency and
a leveling system [43].
Even though the applications listed above are not related to PD, they can still provide
valuable insights on how long-term engagement can be ensured in health-related appli-
cations.
An example of a successful application that has applied gamification is Duolingo, a lan-
guage learning platform. By incorporating gamification features into its language lessons,
Duolingo has effectively motivated its users to learn new languages. With more than 500
million users, Duolingo is the most popular way to learn languages online [44].
Another example of how gamification can assist in engaging and motivating users to per-
form tasks and achieve goals is Habitica, an application that gamifies habits and daily
goals. Habitica uses in-game rewards and punishments to motivate the user to perform
personalized tasks and goals [45].
Analyzing similar applications can be beneficial as it helps to identify potential strengths
and weaknesses. The similar applications serve as inspiration for designing an mHealth
application for long-term PD symptom assessment.
Parkinson Warrior
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Design Methods
The design process is a crucial part of developing any product, as it includes various
methods and frameworks to guide the process. This chapter elaborates on the design
process employed throughout the project, namely User Centered Design (UCD).
3.1
User-Centered Design
UCD is an iterative process that focuses on the needs, preferences, and experiences of
end-users. The user is involved in every phase of the design process to ensure that the
project’s goals align with the users’ needs and limitations. UCD can be divided into three
main phases, i.e., 1) Design Research, 2) Design, and 3) Design Evaluation [46].
The purpose of the first phase is to analyze and assess who they are and their needs and
limitations. This is done through various research methods, such as desktop research
and literature review, interviews with relevant stakeholders, and creating personas. The
second phase, Design, involves sketching, conceptualization, and prototyping based on
the knowledge gained from the first phase. During the third and last phase, the concept,
design, and prototype are evaluated through usability testing and general feedback from
clinicians, patients, and a User Experience Designer.
The methods used in each phase will be elaborated in the following sections.
3.2
Design Research
3.2.1
Background Research
The conducted background research was a key factor in gaining a comprehensive under-
standing of PD. This research involved a literature review exploring current assessment
methods and available mobile applications related to PD. We examined various assess-
ment techniques, including clinical evaluations, rating scales, and digital tools. By analyz-
ing existing literature, we aimed to identify gaps, trends, and advancements in assessing
PD.
Search Strategies
The background research was initiated using a predefined set of search strings to dis-
cover and gather relevant literature. The search strings from Table 3.1 were combined
in different ways executed in lex.dk, MedlinePlus, DTU Findit, WebOfScience, and Sci-
enceDirect. All of the performed searches were limited to Danish and English.
10
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:19==
Phrase
Description
Search string
Parkinson’s
Dis-
ease (PD)
The overall topic that the entire search and
project revolve around is Parkinson’s Dis-
ease (PD). Depending on the language,
an apostrophe is sometimes used between
”Parkinson” and ”s”. To accommodate this, a
wildcard is used to include both variations.
(Parkinson?s
OR” Parkinson?s
Disease”
OR
”PD”)
Symptom
We would like to investigate the symptoms
of Parkinson’s disease, including ”indicator”
and ”complication” as synonyms to encom-
pass a broader scope.
(Symptom OR in-
dicator OR com-
plication)
Assessment
We would like to learn more about assessing
possible symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.
Here, ”evaluation” is a synonym to broaden
the search. Stemming ensures that various
variations of the two words are included in
the search.
(Assess*
OR
Evaluat*)
Diagnose
To assess symptoms, it is also important that
we can recognize them. Therefore, ”diagno-
sis” is important in the search. Stemming is
used to include multiple versions of the word.
(Diagnos*)
Treatment
To investigate current treatment methods,
we include ”treatment” in the search. Here,
stemming is used to include various versions
of the word.
(Treat*)
mHealth
mHealth
is
an
abbreviation
for
”Mobile
health,” a concept that describes mobile de-
vices in medicine and healthcare.
In the
search, ”Mobile health” is also included.
(mHealth
OR”
Mobile Health”)
Table 3.1: Search strategy table
The search strategy primarily helped to find literature to investigate and understand PD in
greater detail. The retrieved literature assisted in gaining insights into key aspects of PD,
such as how to evaluate, assess and recognize its symptoms and the available treatment
options.
Current Methods of Assessing PD
The background research examined the current methods used for assessing PD, including
traditional approaches employed by healthcare professionals, such as clinical evaluations
and rating scales like the MDS-UPDRS.
Existing Mobile Applications
As part of the background research, we analyzed the existing mobile applications de-
signed for individuals with PD. We identified and evaluated various applications available
on popular mobile platforms. These applications covered multiple functionalities, including
symptom tracking, medication reminders, exercise programs, speech therapy, dexterity
exercises, and cognitive training. We examined the features and usability of these appli-
cations to determine the existing landscape and identify areas where this project could
provide unique value.
Parkinson Warrior
11
==PAGE:20==
By conducting thorough background research, including a literature review and an anal-
ysis of current assessment methods and existing mobile applications, we established a
solid foundation of knowledge concerning PD. The research provided valuable and use-
ful insights into the design and development of the prototype and mobile application. It
helped to ensure that the application addresses the needs and challenges that individuals
with PD encounter.
3.2.2
Interviews and Discussions
Throughout the project, we have had recurring meetings with the clinical supervisor. He
guided us and helped us to understand the extent of PD and the challenges that it resides.
During the meetings with our clinical supervisor, we discussed design ideas, challenges,
potential features, and how to calculate the Parkinson Index.
In the early stages of the project, we interviewed a person with PD to gain a better under-
standing of PD and the challenges that follow. The person matched the description of the
targeted end-users, as he was a relatively young PD patient and could easily manage a
smartphone. The interview was conducted using a semi-structured interview method, as
we had prepared questions to keep the conversation going. We strived for an authentic
conversation by focusing on the experiences and challenges of the patient.
A part of this project is to make the application customizable and adjustable for the spe-
cific user. To do so, the symptoms and complications were categorized to make it pos-
sible for the user to select particular areas to focus on. The categorization was done in
collaboration with a Neurologist, who helped us divide the majority of PD symptoms and
complications into twelve overall focus areas.
To get to know the target end-users, we attended this year’s Unity Walk, an event hosted
by the Danish Parkinson’s Association (in Danish: Parkinsonforeningen) to raise aware-
ness of the disease. Besides getting a chance to talk to people living with PD and under-
stand their challenges and needs better, we also used the opportunity to look for potential
test users for the validation study. The recruitment of test users will be elaborated in chap-
ter 5.
Additionally, we visited The Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR)
at Hvidovre Hospital, where we met with one of the researchers. We discussed the poten-
tial of using a mobile assessment tool to analyze, monitor and test patients more frequently
before, during, and after treatments and experiments.
3.2.3
Personas
A persona is a fictional depiction of a typical end-user used to empathize with the targeted
audience and better understand the user’s needs and challenges [47]. Figure 3.1 shows
the three personas created based on the knowledge gathered through design research
to illustrate the end-users’ demographics, needs, and challenges.
12
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: Personas
Two of the three personas focus on male PD patients as men are one and half times more
likely to develop the disease[48]. Additionally, as this project aims to develop a mobile
application, the user must be capable of handling a smartphone to some degree. Because
of this, we are focusing on the younger part of PD patients and primarily on those in the
earlier stages of the disease.
3.3
Design
This section provides insights into the development process of two prototypes and a draft
of the final application during the design phase. The initial prototype was a wireframe
crafted using the interface design tool Figma to visualize the core design concepts. Sub-
sequently, a second prototype was created using Figma as well. To ease the implemen-
tation of the final application, a simplified version of the second prototype was developed
using the Flutter Framework. The prototypes played an important role in implementing
the final application.
Parkinson Warrior
13
==PAGE:22==
3.3.1
Wireframe
A low-fidelity wireframe was initially developed to establish a foundational structure for the
intended design concepts. The wireframe aimed to establish a shared understanding of
the core ideas before progressing to higher-fidelity prototyping [49]. Since the wireframe
was primarily created to establish common ground, this phase did not include user en-
gagement for prototype validation or testing. The design comprised simple illustrations,
and the wireframe consisted of twelve screens. Arrows connecting the screens were uti-
lized to indicate the navigational flow.
The initial wireframe encompassed various screens, including authentication, onboarding,
permissions, activities, medication tracking, profile, health data visualization, and statis-
tics. The wireframe can be found in Appendix D.
3.3.2
Figma prototype
Following the low-fidelity wireframing, an interactive prototype was created. The Figma
prototype was based on the concepts and design ideas from the wireframe but with sig-
nificantly increased fidelity, including user interactions. The final version of the prototype,
prior to the development of the Flutter application, consisted of sixty screens, and it in-
cluded flows for onboarding, permissions, customized configurations, walkthrough, activ-
ities, statistics, health data visualization, and settings. The prototype showcases both the
design and the functionality through an interactive interface.
Screenshots of the prototype can be found in Appendix E.
3.3.3
Flutter prototype
Before the full implementation of the mobile application, a simple version containing some
of the central features was developed. This was done to test and validate that the core de-
sign concepts also worked as intended on a smartphone. The implementation was based
on the validated Figma prototype and included the main screens, such as onboarding,
permissions, customized configurations, activities, health data visualization, and settings.
3.4
Design Evaluation
To evaluate the design, we used explorative and unmoderated in-person tests to observe
participants interact with the system and to obtain opinions and impressions about the
system [50]. These test types have been applied to both the prototype and the Flutter
application draft. The feedback received from each test cycle was processed and used
to make design choices in the next iteration. The test participants consisted of a PD
patient, a UX Designer, and four people not diagnosed with PD but of the same age as
the intended end-users. Besides using test participants to evaluate the design concepts,
the features were discussed and evaluated with the supervisors of the thesis.
The following sections elaborate on how the evaluation has affected design ideas and
functionality iterations.
3.4.1
Figma Prototype
The evaluation was conducted with the test participants individually, where the participant
was introduced to the prototype. Initially, the participant was given a short introduction
to the main concepts and ideas and was encouraged to provide feedback continuously
while navigating and trying out the prototype.
The evaluation session contributed valuable feedback on the overall concept, the design,
and potential features. The feedback was used to revisit the prototype and make adjust-
ments so it was ready to be used as a template for implementing the Flutter draft. One of
14
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:23==
the common concerns that the participants experienced was about the gamification ele-
ments. Duolingo largely inspired the design ideas for long-term user engagement in the
Figma prototype, and the prototype initially contained many gamification elements, such
as leveling, streak count, scoring, medals, progression paths, achievements, and quests.
The problem with this was that most of the test participants did not fully understand the
purpose of these elements and found them confusing. For this reason, we decided to
revisit and simplify the use of gamification elements.
Another shared comment among the test participants was regarding the statistics module,
saying it was too cumbersome. It showed too much data at once, making it difficult to use.
This comment was one of the main reasons we decided to simplify the statistics page and
later replace it with the Parkinson Index.
Originally, we had designed a medication module allowing users to add and schedule
medication directly through the app. During the early stages of evaluating the prototype,
we decided to remove this part after discussing it with our supervisors, as it did not add
any value that many existing applications did not already offer.
According to a UX designer, the prototype lacked coherence between the different screens
concerning the visual aspects. She pointed out that some screens had a plain white back-
ground while others had a dark to light blue gradient. To accommodate this, we aligned the
backgrounds so that activities and configurations would continue to have a white back-
ground while the surrounding screens would incorporate the dark to light blue gradient
background.
3.4.2
Flutter prototype
The implementation of the Flutter prototype was solely based on the updated Figma pro-
totype after its evaluation. It contained the main features, such as the possibility of com-
pleting the onboarding flow, playing games, answering surveys, and seeing results and
scores. As with the Figma prototype, an evaluation of the Flutter prototype was con-
ducted with the test participants individually. The participants were introduced to the ma-
jor changes that the first evaluation resulted in and were instructed to provide feedback
continuously while testing the prototype.
The evaluation of the Flutter prototype revealed three significant insights. Firstly, there
was a need to simplify the statistics page due to the excessive amount of information
within the limited space, leading to an overwhelming and unclear display. To address
this, we collaborated with our supervisor and introduced the Parkinson Index, which re-
placed the complex statistics page. The Parkinson Index aimed to assess collected data
and present it in a simplified visualization.
Secondly, feedback from test participants highlighted issues with the main screen, specif-
ically the list of activities. The lengthy and fragmented list caused confusion rather than
clarity, although the participants could easily access the activities. As a result, we re-
designed the main screen to enable quick and straightforward access to different activity
types while also prominently featuring the newly introduced Parkinson Index.
Thirdly, the PD patient and the clinical supervisor emphasized the importance of consid-
ering medication intake when assessing PD symptoms. In response, we introduced a
fourth activity type dedicated to registering medication intake. This inclusion of medica-
tion intake not only influenced the calculation of the Parkinson Index but also formed the
basis for handling notifications.
These key takeaways from the evaluation of the Flutter prototype emphasized the impor-
Parkinson Warrior
15
==PAGE:24==
tance of simplifying the statistics page, restructuring the main screen layout, and includ-
ing medication intake into the application. These adjustments aimed to increase usability,
improve the assessment, and better support the needs of individuals with PD. Before pro-
ceeding with the implementation of the final application, we revisited the Figma Prototype
to incorporate the new design ideas that emerged from the gained insights. The updates
ensured that the prototype aligned with the latest understanding. The updated prototype
can be seen in Appendix F.
In addition to the three key takeaways, the evaluation helped us to discover bugs and
spelling errors throughout the application. The discovered bugs included navigational
issues and missing updates of visual values.
3.5
Limitations
One of the key limitations faced during the early stages of the design phase was finding
suitable test users to validate the prototypes. To address this challenge, we extended our
recruitment efforts beyond the targeted audience by seeking help from friends, family, and
colleagues. Even though they may not perfectly align with the intended end-users, they
provided relevant and useful feedback regarding the evaluation of the prototypes. Their
perspectives provided useful insights and helped identify areas for improvement, allowing
us to refine the design iteratively.
16
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:25==
4
Implementation
The application was developed as a cross-platform application for Android and iOS us-
ing the Flutter framework. Various packages have been integrated to aid in developing
the functionality. The packages include the Research Package, Cognition Package, and
Health Package from CACHET.
The Research Package offers various functionalities, including creating customizable sur-
vey forms and questionnaires with multiple-choice, Likert scales, or text input questions.
The non-motor and motor questions used in the application have been created using this
package.
The Cognition Package facilitated the inclusion of cognitive games within the application.
These games aimed to assess the users’ cognitive abilities and deliver an engaging ex-
perience while contributing to their overall cognitive health assessment. The package
contained a total of fourteen cognitive tests where, six of which were selected to be in-
cluded in the application as games. The game selection was based on briefly examining
their testing areas and their relation to PD.
The Health Package made it possible to retrieve health data from the user’s device, includ-
ing steps count, energy burned, and sleep. This data served as inputs for calculating the
Parkinson Index and made it possible for the users to receive an overview of the current
and last week’s health data. The Health Package supported Apple Health Data, Google
Fit, and Health Connect. To access the health data on the user’s phone, it was necessary
to request permission to gather the data. The permission had to be requested directly
from the user and through App Store Connect and Google Play Console.
The application is divided into two distinct flows, i.e., the onboarding flow and the main
flow. The onboarding flow guides the users through the initial setup process of the ap-
plication, ensuring that all necessary information is provided and configured to the user’s
preferences. The main flow is responsible for the applications’s core functionality. It is
also in the main flow that all assessments, calculations, and data processing occur. The
data is also visualized in the main flow, allowing individuals to track and interpret their
PD-related information.
4.1
User Interface
The initial screens of the onboarding flow introduce the user to an application guide de-
signed to provide a walkthrough of the main features of the application. The screen is
shown in Figure 4.1. This interactive guide also introduces the user to the Parkinson
Warrior, a unique character developed specifically for our application. The inclusion of
the Parkinson Warrior aids in differentiating the application from other similar applications
in the market, creating a more engaging and enjoyable user experience.
Parkinson Warrior
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Initial screen of onboarding flow
Additionally, the onboarding flow consists of three views that guide the users in the setup
of customizing the application to match their needs. These views are designed to ensure
that the application aligns with each user’s individual preferences and requirements.
Figure 4.2: Permission, Goals Configuration, Focus areas (Non-motor)
The first screen to the left in Figure 4.2 shows the Permission page where the necessary
permissions are requested. This is done to ensure that they are correctly set up before
launching the main flow. It is required to allow all of the permissions to proceed further.
18
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:27==
Three specific permissions are requested:
• Health data - This permission allows the application to access health-related data
on the user’s phone, including steps taken, calories burned, and sleep patterns.
• GPS Location - This permission is necessary for Android devices to track step data
accurately.
• Notifications - By granting this permission, users can receive push messages at
specific intervals to serve as reminders for taking medication.
The middle screen in Figure 4.2 shows the Goals Configuration page, where the users
have the opportunity to set their personalized goals. These goals are an essential part
of the Parkinson Index as they are included in the calculations. The goals page features
five input fields, all of which must be non-null and greater than zero.
The third screen in Figure 4.2 shows one of the two Focus Areas pages. The page fo-
cuses on symptom selection, allowing users to choose the symptoms they are interested
in tracking and most relevant to them. This decision was informed by a dialogue with
the clinical supervisor of the project, who highlighted the significant variability in symp-
toms among people with PD. To provide a more personalized experience, we divided
the symptoms into a total of twelve categories, seven non-motor categories and five mo-
tor categories. The categorization is established primarily based on the Whitepaper on
Parkinson [4], with some modifications made in collaboration with a Neurologist to align
them with the MDS-UPDRS.
The main flow of the application has four views, all accessible through the bottom menu
tab bar, i.e., Game, Score, Health, and Goals.
The Game page, shown in Figure 4.3, functions as the central hub of the app, offering
users convenient access to a range of activities and a quick overview of the Parkinson
Index. The activities available on the game page include cognitive games, surveys, and
medication registration.
If the user chooses to play a cognitive game, they are presented with a randomly selected
game. Each game lasts approximately thirty seconds, depending on the game type. The
short time frame offers an engaging and time-limited challenge. Before it starts, a brief
introduction is provided to explain the objective.
Alternatively, if the user selects one of the two surveys, non-motor or motor, they are pre-
sented with a set of questions from one of their preselected focus areas. These surveys
aim to gather specific information about the chosen symptom category.
Parkinson Warrior
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.3: Game page, Cognitive game, Motor questionnaire
The Settings page is accessible from the Game page through the settings icon in the upper
right corner shown in Figure 4.3. From the settings page, users are able to access other
pages, such as Notifications, Goals, and Focus Areas, allowing them to customize the
application according to their preferences. Users can also re-experience the onboarding
process if needed. Additionally, the Settings section offers options to export data for per-
sonal records or share with healthcare professionals, as well as resetting data if desired.
The settings page is shown in the rights most screen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Score page, Goals page, Settings page
The Score Page, shown in Figure 4.4 as the leftmost screen, elaborates on the user’s
score and offers a daily, weekly, and overall view of their progress. It showcases the
20
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:29==
Parkinson Index, a composite score calculation. The calculation of the Parkinson Index
is further explained in section 4.4. Users can track their scores over time, gaining insights
into their overall progression of PD.
The center page shown in Figure 4.4, is the Goal page. It offers easy access to the user’s
daily goals and allows them to track their progress toward achieving them. It provides a
clear overview of the goals set by the user, such as exercise and sleep targets, medication
adherence, and survey and cognitive game completion.
The screen presents each goal as a progress bar, providing visual motivation and making
it easy for users to track their progress. This design element allows users to gauge their
goal completion status quickly and stay motivated to achieve their objectives.
The Health page displays the automatically collected data that is used in the calculation
of the Parkinson Index. It presents information about the user’s steps count, calories
burned, and sleep.
Figure 4.5: Health pages
Figure 4.5 shows two screens of the health module. The screen to the left is the initial
screen when accessing the health page, showing an overview of the collected health data
types. The screen to the right shows a graphical representation of a specific health data
type. If the user selects any of these options, they will be taken to a view that presents
graphs showcasing the current and previous weeks’ data. Additionally, the Health page
features four boxes showing highlighted data points of interest, such as max, min, and
average values.
4.2
BLoC
The application uses the BLoC architecture, a software architecture that separates the
business logic from the user interface [51]. The BLoC manages the state of the application
by reacting to event streams. A BLoC listens to events from the user interface, processes
them, and emits a new state back to user interface afterward.
Parkinson Warrior
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Layers of the BLoC architecture (From: [51])
Figure 4.6 shows the layers of the BLoC architecture and the flow of communication. In
this project the BLoC architecture is used in the GameBloc class to manage the state of
the main flow. The GameBloc is separated from the user interface and the repositories.
The communication between the BLoC and the user interface happens through events,
and the repositories are injected into the BLoC, making them accessible to the component.
The GameBloc handles the main events that occur throughout the main flow of the appli-
cation. Figure 4.7 shows the GameBloc constructor that initializes and defines the events
listeners. A specific example is the update of the Parkinson Index after an activity is
completed. When the event ActivityCompleted is triggered, it runs the method _onActivi-
tyCompleted.
Figure 4.7: Codesnippet - GameBloc constructor
22
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:31==
Since multiple types of activities can be completed, such as games, non-motor question-
naires, and motor questionnaires, the _onActivityCompleted function handles each type
separately, as shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Codesnippet - onActivityCompleted method
The onGameCompleted method calculates the game score based on the event provided.
The method retrieves the previous results, such as dailyResult, weeklyResult, and over-
allResult, and updates them with the new data.
Figure 4.9: Codesnippet - onGameCompleted method
In addition to the updated results, the new state is updated with a new game status, Not
Playing, as the game has completed. The state is also updated with a new randomly
selected game as the next game to be played when the user accesses the game activity
again. Lastly, the updated state is emitted, which triggers the user interface to update
accordingly.
Parkinson Warrior
23
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Notifications
Ensuring proper medication management is crucial for the well-being of people with PD.
To address this need, we aimed to develop a feature that reminds patients to take their
medication adherently. Various packages to handle notifications were explored. It was
decided to use the flutter local notifications package to stick to the idea of keeping every-
thing locally on the user’s device.
As a part of the initialization of the flutter local notifications package, it verifies whether the
user has been granted the required permissions. Without the necessary permissions, the
device cannot send push messages to the user. Because of this, the user is requested to
allow notifications in the Permission screen shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.10: Codesnippet - initNotifications method
Once the library is successfully initialized and the necessary permission is granted, the
user becomes eligible to receive push messages in the foreground and background. Cur-
rently, we have predefined default timestamps for when these messages will be delivered.
These timestamps are determined based on the user’s goal settings for medication intake.
For instance, if the user has specified a goal to take medicine five times per day, the appli-
cation will send a notification five times. In this example, the notifications will be delivered
at the predefined timestamps: 8 AM, 11 AM, 3 PM, 6 PM, and 8 PM, every day.
Figure 4.11: Codesnippet - showDailyNotification method
The push notifications that users will receive consist of default messages, including an
icon, a title, and a body as shown in Figure 4.11.
4.4
Parkinson Index
The Parkinson Index is a central metric used to assess the overall well-being of individuals
with PD within the application. The calculation of the Parkinson Index is based on four
components, each contributing to the final score.
The first component is cognitive games, where each game has a unique scoring system,
providing insights into the user’s cognitive abilities. The second and third components are
24
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:33==
motor and non-motor questionnaires, which share the same scoring system. These ques-
tionnaires help assess the user’s motor and non-motor symptoms. The fourth component
includes the user-defined daily goals, including a step count, medication registrations,
hours slept, games played, and non-motor and motor questionnaires answered.
The implementation of the Parkinson Index calculation began with an initial setup in Excel.
Each component’s measurable attributes were listed, and a calculation was created for
each component and subcomponent to transform these measures into a scale ranging
from one to one hundred. This Excel setup served as an initial implementation for the final
calculation method in the application (See Appendix K for a complete overview of the Excel
implementation). Various scenarios were created in Excel to validate the calculations.
The Parkinson Index calculation in the application is performed using the following for-
mula:
PI = GaS + NMQS + MQS + GoS
d
Where:
• PI stands for Parkinson Index.
• GaS stands for Game Scores, representing the average score of the games com-
pleted on a specific day.
• NMQS stands for Non-motor Questionnaire Score, representing the average score
of the completed non-motor questionnaire on a specific day.
• MQS stands for Motor Questionnaire Score, representing the average score of the
completed motor questionnaire on a specific day.
• GoS stands for Goals Score, indicating the average progress of the daily goals com-
bined.
• The divider d is initially set to one and incremented by one if a game, non-motor
questionnaire, or motor questionnaire has been completed that day. Consequently,
d can hold values from one to four.
Figure 4.12 shows the code snippet of the implementation of the Parkinson Index. The
method calculates the subscores of each component and sets the total score afterward.
Figure 4.12: Codesnippet - calculateScore method
The application shows three variations of the Parkinson Index, i.e., one for the current day,
Parkinson Warrior
25
==PAGE:34==
one for the last seven days, and an overall score. The two latter variations are calculated
by taking the average value of the scores from the respective days.
In the application, the scoring calculation for each activity, such as games and question-
naires, is performed after an activity has ended.
Figure 4.13: Codesnippet - calculateReactionScore method
The method _calculateReactionScore in Figure 4.13 shows an example of how the score
from the Reaction Time Game is calculated. It calculates the score using correct and
incorrect attempts, average reaction time, and two predefined constants.
As previously mentioned, the two questionnaire types share a calculation method as they
are structured similarly. Figure 4.14 shows the code snippet of how the score of the ques-
tionnaires are implemented.
Each answer to a question returns a value between zero (lowest) and four (highest). The
highest possible score to achieve in a questionnaire is the number of answers times the
maximum score of four per answer. The score calculated in the method calculateQues-
tionnaireScore is transformed into a percentage based on the total sum of points achieved
in the questionnaire and the highest possible score.
Figure 4.14: Codesnippet - calculateQuestionnaireScore method
To ensure that the calculations were accurate and consistent throughout the development
of the application, unit tests were implemented in the Flutter application.
26
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.15: Codesnippet - Unit test of score calculation
The purpose of the unit test is to validate the accuracy of the score calculation in the
DailyResult class. The test involves decoding a JSON object and passing it to the calcu-
lateScore() function. The expected outcome of this test is to confirm that the result of the
score calculation is equal to 55.75.
4.5
Data structures and Storage
The DailyResult class contains all relevant information needed to calculate the Parkinson
Index. Figure 4.16 illustrates the main data model of the application and depicts the
relationships between different classes.
Figure 4.16: Class Diagram - Main classes
Parkinson Warrior
27
==PAGE:36==
The Result class is an abstract class serving as the base class for other result-related
classes. It includes properties like score, gameScore, questionnaireMotorScore, ques-
tionnaireNonMotorScore, and goalScore, representing different parts of the overall score.
The DailyResult class inherits from Result and contains the results of the user’s activi-
ties and questionnaires in a single day. It includes the goals field to keep track of the
progress of daily goals and three lists, gameResults, questionnaireMotorResults, ques-
tionnaireNonMotorResults, to keep track of the completed activities. The class also im-
plements several private methods for calculating scores and a toJson method for serial-
ization.
The GameResult class is responsible for storing the results of games played by the user.
It contains properties such as type of type ActivityType and double field, score. The class
provides a toJson method for converting data to a serialized format. The Questionnair-
eResult class is the format for storing questionnaire results. Similar to GameResult, it has
the properties type and score and a toJson method for data serialization.
The ActivityType class is an enumeration representing various activities. It has a property
named category of type ActivityCategory, which helps categorize the activities. Activity-
Category is another enumeration class that defines different categories of activities.
The Goals class defines the user’s customized goals for the specific day. It contains the
target values that the user aims to achieve and the achieved values. It includes the prop-
erties gamesTarget, surveysTarget, sleepTarget, sleepValue, distanceTarget, distance-
Value, medicineTarget, medicineValue. The class also offers methods such as incre-
mentMedicationRegistrations and setGoals to manage and set user goals. Similar to the
other classes, it contains a toJson method for data serialization.
In addition to the Parkinson Index related classes, the application keeps track of some
static information, such as enums and static fields.
Figure 4.17: Class Diagram - Constant classes
The ScoreConstants class contains fixed values for calculating the Parkinson Index, such
as default multipliers, cost of errors, and max values. The Routes class holds all routes
used to navigate the app. GameSettings defines fixed values for the in-app games, such
as time limits for short, normal, and long games. ActivityCategories define whether an
activity is a game or a questionnaire, and ActivityType defines the specific games and
questionnaire types.
SharedPreferences is a cross-platform package used for storage of simple key-value
pairs [52]. In this application, it has been implemented in order to save simple data flags,
28
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:37==
such as the fields stated in Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Class Diagram - AppService class
The class diagram represents the AppService class, which holds essential values that
describe the application’s state. The AppService class contains various properties.
The initialized property is a boolean value indicating whether the application has been
initialized, which is used to check if the onboarding flow should be shown on startup. The
onboardingCompleted and permissionsCompleted properties represent whether the user
has completed the onboarding process and granted necessary permissions, respectively.
focusAreasNonMotorCompleted and focusAreasMotorCompleted indicates whether the
user has completed the setup for non-motor and motor-related focus areas. The cur-
rentSetupStage field stores the current active step of the setup. setupComplete denotes
whether the setup process is complete. The two fields are used when revisiting the set-
tings pages from within the application after the onboarding flow has been completed.
The isDarkTheme property stores a boolean value representing whether the application
uses a dark theme.
The AppService class includes several methods, such as toggleTheme to switch between
light and dark themes, onAppStart for actions to be performed when the application starts,
and ’reset’ to reset the values back to default.
A NoSQL database has been implemented to store more complex data such as results,
calculated scores, and progress of daily goals. The framework Isar has been used to
implement the NoSQL database. Isar is made explicitly for Flutter, and it is super fast and
highly scalable [53].
Isar comes with a tool called Isar Inspector that allows easy access to data while running
the application locally, making it easy to view, insert, update, or delete data. It also in-
cludes a filter function to search and extract specific data points of interest. The database
contains a single collection that keeps track of the daily results, with each object repre-
senting a day’s results, scores, activities, and goals.
Parkinson Warrior
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.19: Isar Data Inspector - Overview
Figure 4.19 shows a screenshot of the Isar Inspector and how it visualizes the data stored
for the application. Isar Inspector has assisted during development in verifying that the
data is correctly saved and retrieved, minimizing the risk of data-related issues in the final
application.
In summary, using the Isar database in the application provides a solution for storing com-
plex objects and managing data effectively. Coupled with the capabilities of Isar Inspector,
developers can efficiently interact with and handle data, leading to an easier development
process.
4.6
Pipeline
The application implements branch protection, requiring approval from another developer
before merging any code changes. Additionally, continuous integration was set up using
GitHub Actions to trigger unit tests after each merge. If the tests passed successfully, a
build process was initiated. The application was manually deployed to the Google Play
and App Store after a successful build. Initially, it was deployed to the internal testing
environment for further testing and refinement. Once felt stable, it was then deployed to
the beta group, allowing a limited number of users to access and provide feedback.
An improvement that could be considered is implementing an automated deployment pro-
cess to the app stores. This would eliminate the manual steps in deploying the application,
streamlining the release process and reducing the time to make the application available
to a wider audience.
4.7
Limitations
During the project, certain limitations were encountered that may have influenced the
research outcomes and the overall study:
The Health Package from CACHET relied on Google Fit or Health Connect to access
health data from Android devices. Additionally, Google Fit has been known to have issues
with randomly resetting the step count. This limitation could introduce inaccuracies in the
30
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:39==
measurement of step data, potentially impacting the reliability and validity of health-related
analysis.
The Cognition Package utilized in the study presented limitations. Most games in the
package provided a binary pass or not pass scoring system, which might not align pre-
cisely with the desired scoring criteria for cognitive assessment. Furthermore, the pres-
ence of bugs within the Cognition Package hindered the completion of certain games,
potentially affecting the comprehensive evaluation of cognitive abilities.
Parkinson Warrior
31
==PAGE:40==
5
Study
5.1
Recruitment
Recruitment for the user study posed quite a challenge, requiring us to explore various
communication channels. We contacted multiple sources, including the Danish Parkin-
son’s Association, our supervisors, a representative from Hvidovre Hospital, and a newly
established PD Network. In an effort to connect with patients, we attended the Unity Walk
event hosted by the Danish Parkinson’s Association. Additionally, we identified relevant
Facebook groups related to PD.
Initially, we managed to recruit a small number of people with PD, ranging from two to five
individuals. Through help from personal contacts, we managed to establish communica-
tion with the Danish Parkinson’s Association. The communication resulted in the Danish
Parkinson’s Association featuring the project in their newsletter. This led to an overwhelm-
ing response, and we successfully recruited a diverse group of thirty-three participants for
the user study. The response exceeded our expectations and highlighted the strong en-
gagement within the PD community.
5.2
Methods
The validation study included a test plan to evaluate the mobile application over a test
period of twelve days. The test design included two important meetings. The first meeting
aimed to kickstart the test, allowing participants to become acquainted with the application
and providing an opportunity for immediate feedback. The second meeting concluded the
test, enabling participants to share their final thoughts and ideas. Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2
shows the setup from the two meetings.
Figure 5.1: Setup - Introductory meeting
Figure 5.2: Setup - Debriefing meeting
It was important to prioritize these face-to-face interactions to connect with the partici-
pants, allowing them to open up and share their thoughts with us and, at the same time,
to help everyone get started with the test. Yet, due to limited physical capacity, a decision
was made to create two test groups: one attending the physical meetings and another
participating remotely from home. We provided the participants joining the study remotely
with all the necessary materials, including the project description, test description, and
startup guide.
The goals of the test contained two primary areas of concern.
Firstly, the usability of the mobile application was evaluated using the SUS with a 5-point
32
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:41==
Likert scale to assess each statement. This allowed for valuable insights regarding the
overall experience and feel of the application.
Secondly, the participants were asked to rate their well-being before the test based on
predetermined parameters. This enabled a comparison with the Parkinson Index after
the test to validate its calculation.
Furthermore, both meetings contained feedback sessions that allowed immediate feed-
back before the test and more thorough feedback after the test. We encouraged partici-
pants to share their ideas, suggestions, criticisms, improvements, and praises.
The mobile application was thoroughly evaluated by incorporating these evaluation ele-
ments into the test design. The combination of physical and remote participation allowed
for flexibility and ensured the inclusion of a diverse range of perspectives, improving the
validity and reliability of the study.
5.3
Results
fourteen of the thirty-three recruited participants completed the test, including attending
both meetings, using the application throughout the twelve days test period, and answer-
ing the two surveys. A few other participants, some who were unable to participate in the
test of the application actively, attended the meetings anyway and joined the feedback
and discussion sessions.
5.3.1
Usability
The results of the System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire revealed that nine out of
fourteen test participants rated the application above average. The 50th percentile score
on the SUS is 68, which serves as the threshold for determining whether a score is above
or below average [54].
Figure 5.3: System Usability Scale (SUS) - Bar Chart
In Figure 5.3, the results of the SUS questionnaire are presented in a bar chart format,
with each bar representing an individual user’s total score. The red line indicates the 50th
percentile mark at 68. This visual representation allows for a clear comparison between
each user’s score and the average score, aiding in assessing the application’s usability.
Figure 5.3 shows the lowest score received is 55 and the highest received score is 87.5.
Out of the fourteen scores, nine are above the 50th percentile, while the remaining five
scores fall below the 50th percentile.
Parkinson Warrior
33
==PAGE:42==
To interpret the SUS, it should be compared to something [55]. To help with the interpre-
tation, Figure 5.4 is applied.
Figure 5.4: SUS Interpretation (Based on [55] [56])
Figure 5.4 presents five different ways of interpreting and describing the SUS, namely
Grade, Percentile Range, Adjective, Acceptable, and Net Promoter Score (NPS). In Fig-
ure 5.4, the highest score received from the study is highlighted in green, while the lowest
score is highlighted in red. The blue row indicates the average SUS.
According to Figure 5.4, the SUS for Parkinson Warrior falls under the ”C” grade category
and is in the percentile range of 41 - 59. The corresponding adjectives used to describe
the application’s usability are ”OK” and ”Marginally Acceptable,” while the NPS is labeled
as ”Passive.”
5.3.2
Parkinson Index
The evaluation of the Parkinson Index is divided into three focus areas, i.e., cognition,
motor, and non-motor. The test participants were asked to rate their cognitive abilities
and motor and non-motor functionality on a scale from one to ten during the introduction
meeting prior to the test. These scores were transformed to a scale of one to one hundred
to match the same scale used in the application for score calculation. At the debriefing
meeting, the test participants were asked to share their scores from the app.
On average, the users received a score of 76.02 in the app, slightly exceeding the partic-
ipants’ average self-assessment score of 70 for their cognitive abilities. Figure 5.5 shows
the correlation between the scores obtained from the user study and the scores calculated
in the app regarding the users’ cognitive abilities. Figure 5.6 displays a line chart of the
two separate score types for each user.
34
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.5: Cognition - Linear Regression
Figure 5.6: Cognition - Line Chart
Figure 5.5 shows an alignment between most participants’ in-app scores and their scores
from the user study. A few participants scored considerably higher or lower than their
self-assessment estimations. All of the data points are somewhat close to the trendline,
although the slope of the trendline differs from the optimal slope of one. Figure 5.5 sug-
gests a general consistency between the application and user study scores, with some
deviations.
Figure 5.6 provides a visual representation of the scores for each user, emphasizing the
trend observed in the regression analysis. Three users scored significantly lower in the
application than expected based on the user study, six users had relatively close scores
between the two methods, and four users scored significantly higher in the application
compared to their responses in the study.
The average score in the app is 83.61, while the average score from the user study is
77.69. The difference between the two average scores supports the observation that par-
ticipants generally performed better in the application compared to their self-assessment
scores. Figure 5.7 displays the correlation between the in-app scores and the scores from
the user study in relation to motor symptoms for a set of participants. Figure 5.8 shows a
line chart of the two score types for each user.
Figure 5.7: Motor - Linear Regression
Figure 5.8: Motor - Line Chart
Figure 5.7 shows that all data points are concentrated in the upper right corner of the
graph, both for in-app scores and scores from the user study. This concentration signifies
that most participants achieved high scores in both assessments, highlighting the close
correlation between the scores. The trendline in Figure 5.7 has the steepest slope of the
three focus areas, indicating that it is closest to the optimal slope of one.
Figure 5.8 displays that two participants scored significantly higher in the application than
Parkinson Warrior
35
==PAGE:44==
in the study, and one scored slightly lower. The rest of the data points are closely aligned,
indicating consistency between in-app scores and self-assessment scores for the majority
of participants.
The average score of the non-motor symptoms assessment in the app is 86.24, which is
slightly higher than the average of 80.77 from the user study.
Figure 5.9: Non-Motor - Linear Regression
Figure 5.10: Non-Motor - Line Chart
Figure 5.9 displays that all of the data points except for one are clustered in the upper
right corner. All of the data points are relatively close to the trendline, although the slope
of the trendline is far from the optimal slope of one.
Figure 5.10 shows that two participants scored significantly higher in the user study com-
pared to the application. The majority of participants’ scores closely align between the two
measures. Overall, the graph suggests a consistent relationship between in-app scores
and the user study scores, with some participants showing considerable deviations.
Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12 depicts the combined scores of the three focus areas. On
average, the users scored 77.29 in the app and 76.15 in the questionnaire. The average
deviation between in-app scores and survey scores is 7.29. The difference between the
average scores from the app and the survey is 1.14, indicating a relatively small difference
between the two measures.
Figure 5.11: PI - Linear Regression
Figure 5.12: PI - Line Chart
Figure 5.11 shows a cluster of data points in the upper right corner. The majority of the
users’ scores align well between the two scoring types. Two test users stand out as they
have scores that significantly deviate from each other. The slope of the trendline in Fig-
ure 5.11 is 0.712, which suggests a relatively strong positive correlation between the two
sets of scores.
36
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.12 displays that one participant scored significantly higher in the application than
in the user study, and one user scored significantly higher in the survey than in the appli-
cation. The rest of the test participants’ scores are closely aligned, indicating consistency
between in-app scores and self-assessment scores for the majority of participants.
Overall, the figures demonstrate a relatively strong positive correlation between the two
scoring types, with only a few participants showing significant deviations from the ex-
pected values.
5.3.3
Feedback Sessions
In addition to evaluating the usability and the Parkinson Index, two feedback sessions
were held as a part of the two meetings. The first feedback session allowed for imme-
diate feedback on the overall idea and design of the application, whereas the second
feedback session gave useful and thorough insights into the functionality and usability of
the application. During both sessions, the participants were asked to share their thoughts,
experiences, and ideas for future improvement. The main findings from the feedback ses-
sions are summarized in the list below.
• Language barrier: Participants highlighted language-related challenges, indicating
potential improvements in providing multilingual support.
• Medication tracking: Some participants emphasized the importance of effectively
managing medication, expressing difficulties remembering to take it on time and
understanding its effects over time. This feedback suggests the need for features of
medication tracking and to provide relevant information regarding the effect of the
medication to the user.
• Parkinson Index explanation: Feedback revealed a desire for a more comprehen-
sive explanation of the Parkinson Index, its purpose, calculation method, and un-
derlying elements. The clarity in this area could improve user understanding and
engagement.
• Extending content variety: Participants expressed interest in an expanded selec-
tion of games, questions, and exercise types within the application, providing more
variety and potentially increasing user engagement.
• Health data issues: Some users reported issues with health data on Android de-
vices. Android users who had not set up Google Fit or Health Connect on their
phones could not track steps and sleep in the application.
• Focus on physical exercises: Several participants suggested a greater focus on
physical exercises and activities within the application.
• Change to periodic use: Some participants suggested the option to use the appli-
cation periodically instead of on a daily basis.
The feedback collected during the feedback sessions is a valuable help in improving the
application’s functionality and usability. The complete list of comments can be found in
Appendix I.
Parkinson Warrior
37
==PAGE:46==
6
Discussion
This section focuses on the evaluation and analysis of the developed mHealth application,
Parkinson Warrior. The discussion contains four main points, each contributing insights
to the project’s evaluation.
The four main points of discussion include the results from the study of the application’s
usability, the accuracy of the Parkinson Index calculation, the overall feedback received
from participants, and the limitations encountered during the study.
Additionally, the discussion will outline potential future work, highlighting opportunities for
further development and refinement of Parkinson Warrior to meet the needs of individuals
with PD better.
6.1
Usability
The results of the System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire show overall satisfaction
with the application’s usability. However, there are certain areas where the application
received lower scores, indicating potential issues with user satisfaction, integration of
functionality, and consistency.
One possible explanation for the lower scores is that the system is incomplete in its cur-
rent state. As a result, it is expected that some aspects may not be fully integrated or
consistent.
Another explanation could be, as the verbal feedback also highlights, the language bar-
rier. Participants faced difficulties understanding English, which likely influenced their
perception of the system. This language barrier hindered their understanding and use of
the system, potentially impacting their ratings on the SUS questionnaire.
On a positive note, the SUS revealed higher scores in specific areas. Participants found
the system easy to use, as they could navigate it independently without extensive prior
knowledge. These high scores indicate that the user interface design aligns well with
other familiar applications known to the participants.
In summary, although the overall feedback from the SUS questionnaire suggests a posi-
tive user experience, some areas require improvements, such as addressing the language
barrier and enhancing system integration and consistency.
In terms of self-care, the application incorporates three out of the seven non-exclusive
categories mentioned in section 2.2. These include tracking health-related data, medica-
tion reminders, and support of therapeutic activities.
Regarding long-term engagement, the application covers most of the dimensions men-
tioned in section 2.3 to some extent. By incorporating these dimensions, the application
falls into a combination of archetypes two and three, concentrating on Pursuing Self-Set
Goals Without Rewards and Continuous Assistance Through Positive Reinforcement re-
spectively.
Focusing on relevant self-care categories and the dimensions of long-term engagement
for health applications has aided in the design and development of Parkinson Warrior. Al-
ternatively, other self-care categories or long-term engagement dimensions and archetypes,
such as externally set goals, rewards, or competitive or collaborative elements, could have
been applied in addition to or as a replacement for the current concepts to alter the func-
tionality and increase the application’s usability.
38
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:47==
6.2
Parkinson Index
The results of the study showed a reasonable alignment between the calculated Parkinson
Index and the participant’s assessment of their symptoms and complications based on
the answered questionnaire. On average, there was a slight deviation of approximately 7
points between the users’ perspectives and the calculated scores.
When analyzing the game scores, more variability was observed compared to the in-app
motor and non-motor questionnaire results. This variability can be attributed to users
playing the games for the first time and needing assistance in understanding the tasks,
especially if they skipped the provided instructions. It took users a few games to under-
stand some of the games properly, indicating that game scores may stabilize once users
become familiar with the games.
Although some feedback suggested that the games were too easy, it is worth noting that
none of the participants achieved an average score above 90, indicating that even par-
ticipants who perceived the games as simple were unable to achieve a perfect score of
100 consistently. That being said, it is possible that some of the games were too easy
while others perhaps were too difficult. For future work, it would be interesting to include
a thorough validation of the individual scoring systems for each game type.
This would ensure that the games are appropriately calibrated in terms of difficulty, allow-
ing for a more accurate assessment of users’ performance and progress.
The Parkinson Index is partly inspired by the Digital Neuro Signature mentioned in sub-
section 2.4.2, and it aids in differentiating Parkinson Warrior from other PD-related ap-
plications. While other applications often provide an excessive amount of numbers and
graphs that can overload users with information, the Parkinson Index offers immediate
and concise insights into the current assessment.
Although, there is room for further improvement and elaboration of the Parkinson Index
to provide more transparent and comprehensive information for users seeking a deeper
understanding of their condition.
Overall, the study findings highlight the potential for refining the game scoring mecha-
nisms, improving user guidance during initial gameplay, and improving the Parkinson
Index’s level of detail to provide a more thorough overview of users’ progression. These
improvements would increase the usability of the application.
6.3
Overall Feedback
The feedback received from participants was mainly positive, with many suggestions for
improvements and additional features. Participants expressed a strong interest and in-
vestment in a project like Parkinson Warrior, as they were motivated to fight against the
disease and maintain their health actively. The concept of self-care resonated well with
them, as the application provided a means to engage in cognitive challenges, answer
questionnaires regarding their symptoms, and gain insight into their progression.
Initially, the prototype incorporated various gamification elements to enhance long-term
user engagement. Although the feedback eventually revealed that the end-users were
more motivated by the application’s usefulness rather than gamified elements. This re-
lates very well to the findings in the article on healthcare professionals’ perspective on
self-management mentioned in chapter 2. The key motivator for the users was to ob-
tain a useful outcome from the application rather than to focus on leveling up or receiv-
ing medals. Nevertheless, participants expressed positivity towards the design and the
”Parkinson Warrior” story.
Parkinson Warrior
39
==PAGE:48==
The suggestion of converting the application into a periodic tool instead of a daily tool
highlighted the importance of the application’s usefulness. Even though some users pre-
ferred a periodic tool rather than a daily tool, the users still desired a tool that they could
use as needed to assess their symptoms long-term.
Managing medication is an important aspect of self-care, and most participants appreci-
ated the medication reminders even though most participants desired the medication part
to play a more central role in the application. Customization of medication notifications
and a stronger link between medication registrations and the games could have improved
the application’s usability.
Positive feedback was received regarding the selected cognitive games, which differen-
tiated Parkinson Warrior from other similar PD applications that solely relied on ques-
tionnaires for assessment. Even though the games were a favorable feature, some par-
ticipants asked for a broader variety in both games and questionnaires as they quickly
became very repetitive. The Cognition Package developed by CACHET contains more
games that would be interesting and easy to include in the application.
Additionally, it would be interesting to explore the potential of adding other activity types,
such as physical training and brain games.
Overall, the feedback shows considerable interest in the project and the application, with
users desiring a tool that could provide them with useful insights into their progression.
However, none of the PD-related assessment applications mentioned in chapter 2 have
more than a few thousand downloads, indicating that either these applications do not meet
the users’ needs, that the intended target audience is unaware of their existence, or that
the users are not that interested in an assessment tool after all.
6.4
Limitations
Due to the challenges in recruiting test users, we conducted an extensive search and
were open to a wide range of participants. As a result, we contacted the Danish Parkin-
son’s Association to get an announcement in their newsletter saying that we were looking
for test participants. Through the announcement, we recruited 38 individuals for the test.
The open invitation led to a wide group of test users where not all test participants aligned
with the intended target audience. As a consequence, we ended up investing excessive
time and effort in accommodating their needs.
Reflecting on this experience, it is clear that we should have been more selective in our
recruitment process and specifically targeted individuals who closely matched our defined
personas. By focusing on the intended user base, we could have gathered more relevant
insights and avoided spending resources on participants not representative of the target
audience. Being more precise in our selection would likely have resulted in a more effi-
cient and effective testing process.
Additionally, the challenges of recruiting test users limited access to feedback in the early
stages of the design and development phase. Feedback from the intended target audi-
ence in the early stages could have improved the final application.
Another limitation is in regards to validating the long-term engagement from the user, as
the validation study only covered two weeks. Even though the comments were generally
positive regarding long-term use, it is difficult to validate the actual interest in using an
application like Parkinson Warrior over a longer period.
40
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:49==
6.5
Future work
Several areas of improvement have been identified for the developed mobile application.
These areas represent opportunities for further development to meet users’ needs better
and improve the overall usability of the application.
Firstly, translating the application into Danish is essential to increase accessibility for the
intended target users. Many of the test participants were challenged by the language
barrier. The translation to Danish would improve the user experience for a great part of
the targeted audience in Denmark.
Secondly, the calculation of the Parkinson Index should be more transparent, allowing the
user to understand its function better. The Parkinson Index could also be extended with
a more detailed statistic module showing additional information and graphs.
Thirdly, the medication management feature can be expanded to give users a more pre-
cise understanding of the correlation between medication intake and game scores. Im-
plementing visualizations or graphs that illustrate how medication impacts the user’s per-
formance in cognitive games could help users understand the effects of their medication
better and, at the same time, give better insight into the fluctuations of cognitive compli-
cations. This could help users adhere to their medication schedule more effectively.
Finally, conducting more extensive user testing with a larger group of individuals from the
targeted audience is important. Obtaining feedback and insights from a wide range of
users would allow for a more comprehensive understanding of the application’s usability.
By addressing these areas in future work, the mobile application can be further refined,
ensuring a more usable and functional assessment tool for individuals with PD.
Parkinson Warrior
41
==PAGE:50==
7
Conclusion
The design, development, and evaluation of the mHealth application, Parkinson War-
rior, have provided valuable insights into designing an assessment tool for PD symptoms
and complications while ensuring continued user engagement. By addressing the sub-
questions and goals, we have made significant progress in creating a useful application
for individuals with PD.
The key challenges for self-care and long-term assessment of PD symptoms involve the
individual and complex nature of the disease, the limitations that people with PD face in
the late stages, and a potential lack of motivation in people with PD. The disease affects
every patient differently, making self-care individualized and complex. People with PD in
the late stages are likely to become incapable of using a mobile application like Parkinson
Warrior for continued symptom assessment. Lack of motivation is likely found in people
with PD, making long-term assessment challenging.
PD symptoms can be assessed and monitored over a long period while ensuring contin-
ued engagement from the user through cognitive challenges, standardized rating scales,
physical activity, and personalized goals by making the application offer customization to
fit the user’s specific needs, integrate a captivating storytelling aspect through the Parkin-
son Warrior, and provide the user with continuous assessment and valuable insights into
their condition through the Parkinson Index, giving the user the feeling of them benefiting
from using the app.
When developing an assessment application for PD symptoms, the technical capabili-
ties of the user should be taken into consideration, focusing on ensuring simplicity, easy
navigation, and the avoidance of complex gestures to facilitate usability.
In conclusion, Parkinson Warrior is a potential design of a mHealth application for the as-
sessment of symptoms targeting continued engagement from the users.
The results of the SUS questionnaire indicated overall satisfaction with the application’s
usability. The comparison analysis showed a reasonable alignment between the calcu-
lated Parkinson Index and the users’ assessment of their symptoms. The participants’
feedback was primarily positive and included many suggestions for improvements and
additional features. The concept of self-care resonated well with users, who were moti-
vated to fight the disease and maintain their health actively.
The combination of UCD, gamification elements, and customizable features has resulted
in a prototype for an assessment tool for individuals with PD seeking to assess their condi-
tion over time. The application has met the set goals and research questions, indicating its
potential to address the challenges of long-term PD symptom assessment. However, cer-
tain areas require improvements, including addressing the language barrier, enhancing
system integration, and ensuring consistency. The study showed a reasonable alignment
between the calculated Parkinson Index and the participants’ self-assessment of their
symptoms. There is room for refining game scoring mechanisms, providing better user
guidance during gameplay, and enhancing the Parkinson Index’s level of detail to offer a
more comprehensive overview of users’ status.
Future work on Parkinson Warrior should focus on several areas of improvement. Firstly,
translating the application into Danish is essential to increase accessibility for Danish
users facing language barriers. Secondly, the Parkinson Index should be made more
42
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:51==
transparent and comprehensive to provide users with a better understanding of its func-
tion. Thirdly, customization of medication notifications and a stronger link between medi-
cation registrations and game scores could enhance the application’s usability. This could
be achieved through visualizations and graphs illustrating the correlation between medi-
cation intake and cognitive games.
Parkinson Warrior
43
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1]
Parkinson’s Europe. About Parkinson’s. URL: https://www.parkinsonseurope.org/
about-parkinsons/what-is-parkinsons/ (visited on 02/17/2023).
[2]
National Institute of Aging. Parkinson’s Disease: Causes, Symptoms, and Treat-
ments. URL: https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/parkinsons-disease (visited on 02/11/2023).
[3]
Feigin VAbajobir AAbate K et al. Global, regional, and national burden of neurologi-
cal disorders during 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Dis-
ease Study 2015. URL: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laneur/article/PIIS1474-
4422(17)30299-5/fulltext (visited on 02/19/2023).
[4]
Parkinson-alliancen. Hvidbog om parkinson. 2023.
[5]
Home National Insitute on Aging (NIA). Parkinson’s Disease: Causes, Symptoms,
and Treatments. URL: https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/parkinsons-disease (visited on
07/19/2023).
[6]
Rigshospitalet. Idéliste til Parkinson konsultation. URL: https://www.rigshospitalet.
dk/undersoegelse-og-behandling/find-undersoegelse-og-behandling/Sider/Ideliste-til-
Parkinson-konsultation-29843.aspx (visited on 07/24/2023).
[7]
AlMahadin Ghayth et al. “Parkinson’s disease: current assessment methods and
wearable devices for evaluation of movement disorder motor symptoms - a patient
and healthcare professional perspective”. In: BMC Neurology 20.1 (Nov. 2020),
p. 419.
[8]
Carina Hellqvist; Carina Berterö; Nil Dizdar; Märta Sund-Levander and Peter Hag-
ell. “Self-Management Education for Persons with Parkinson’s Disease and Their
Care Partners: A Quasi-Experimental Case-Control Study in Clinical Practice”. In:
Parkinson Dis (2020).
[9]
Tayla Holman. Definition: mHealth (mobile health). URL: https://www.techtarget.
com/searchhealthit/definition/mHealth (visited on 07/13/2023).
[10]
Gamify. Does Gamification Increase User Engagement? URL: https://www.gamify.
com / gamification - blog / does - gamification - increase - user - engagement (visited on
07/19/2023).
[11]
Parkinson’s Foundation. Stages of Parkinson’s. URL: https://www.parkinson.org/
understanding-parkinsons/what-is-parkinsons/stages (visited on 07/08/2023).
[12]
Rachael Zimlich. Can MRIs Detect Early Onset Parkinson’s Disease? URL: https:
//www.healthline.com/health/parkinsons/parkinsons- mri#other- diagnostic- tests
(visited on 02/25/2023).
[13]
Hill EMangleburg CAlfradique-Dunham I et al. “Quantitative mobility measures com-
plement the MDS-UPDRS for characterization of Parkinson’s disease heterogene-
ity”. In: Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 84 (2021).
[14]
APTA. Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), Movement Disorders
Society (MDS) Modified Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS).
URL: https : / / www . apta . org / patient - care / evidence - based - practice - resources /
test- measures/unified- parkinsons- disease- rating- scale- updrs- movement- disorders-
society-mds-modified-unified-parkinsons-disease-rating-scale-mds-updrs (visited on
02/06/2023).
[15]
Parkinsonforeningen. Bliv klogere på parkinson i ny hvidbog fra Parkinson-alliancen.
URL: https://parkinson.dk/nyheder/hvidbog-om-parkinson/ (visited on 07/03/2023).
[16]
Nationale Neurologisk Behandlingsvejledning. Om nNBV. URL: https://nnbv.dk/
om-nnbv/ (visited on 07/08/2023).
44
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:53==
[17]
Parkinsonforeningen. Parkinson Nyt. URL: https : / / parkinson . dk / wp - content /
uploads/2023/06/Parkinson-02-2023%5C_net.pdf (visited on 07/06/2023).
[18]
Hans Henrik Knoop. Positiv Psykologi. Tænkepauser. 2013.
[19]
Active Minds. self-care. URL: https://www.activeminds.org/about-mental-health/
self-care/ (visited on 07/24/2023).
[20]
Muniba Fayyaz et al. “The Effect of Physical Activity in Parkinson’s Disease: A Mini-
Review”. In: Cureus 10 (2018).
[21]
Francisco Nunes and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. “Understanding the mundane nature of
self-care: Ethnographic accounts of people living with Parkinson’s”. eng. In: Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings 2018- (2018), pp. 1–
15. DOI: 10.1145/3173574.3173976.
[22]
Megan Armstrong et al. “Health care professionals’ perspectives on self-management
for people with Parkinson’s: qualitative findings from a UK study”. en. In: BMC Geri-
atr 21.1 (Dec. 2021), p. 706.
[23]
Francisco Nunes. The everyday life with Parkinson’s and self-care technologies.
eng. Wien, 2017.
[24]
Elina Kuosmanen. “Technological Support for Parkinson’s Disease Patients’ Self-
Care”. PhD dissertation. University of oulu, 2012.
[25]
AppsFlyer. App engagement and user retention: The definitive guide. URL: https:
//www.appsflyer.com/resources/guides/app-engagement-user-retention/ (visited on
07/22/2023).
[26]
Benjamin Daniels. Top 11 app engagement strategies (and how to make your app
sticky). URL: https://strivecloud.io/blog/mobile-app-engagement-strategies/#use-
gamification (visited on 07/24/2023).
[27]
Mindy Jackson (Enspire). Gamification Elements to Use for Learning. URL: https:
//trainingindustry.com/content/uploads/2017/07/enspire_cs_gamification_2016.pdf
(visited on 07/08/2023).
[28]
Schmidt-Kraepelin M; Toussaint P; Thiebes S; Hamari J; Sunyaev A. “Archetypes of
Gamification: Analysis of mHealth Apps”. In: JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(10):e19280
8.10 (2020).
[29]
What’s in the Game? Developing a Taxonomy of Gamification Concepts for Health
Apps. Vol. 51. In Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on Sys-
tem Sciences. 2018.
[30]
Donald Knuth. Knuth: Computers and Typesetting. URL: https://www.apdaparkinson.
org (visited on 02/06/2023).
[31]
Mary Chapman. New APDA Tracker App 2.0 Easier and More Detailed in English
and in Spanish. URL: https://parkinsonsnewstoday.com/news/new-apda-tracker-app-
2-0-easier-and-more-detailed-in-english-and-in-spanish/ (visited on 02/27/2023).
[32]
Connected Neurosciences LLC. Parkinson’s Lifekit. URL: https://apps.apple.com/
us/app/parkinsons-lifekit/id1226151783?platform=iphone (visited on 02/16/2023).
[33]
Parkinson CPR. PRO-PD - Parkinson Symptom Tracker. URL: https://pd-symptoms.
com/ (visited on 04/08/2023).
[34]
LLC At Point of Care. Parkinson’s Disease Manager. URL: https://apps.apple.com/
us/app/parkinsons-disease-manager/id953530845 (visited on 02/15/2023).
[35]
Beats Medical. The Award-Winning Parkinson’s Therapy Service. URL: https://
beatsmedical.com/parkinsons/ (visited on 02/27/2023).
[36]
Beats Medical. The Beats Medical Colbolt© Platform. URL: https://beatsmedical.
com/colbolt/ (visited on 02/27/2023).
Parkinson Warrior
45
==PAGE:54==
[37]
Altoida. Meet the World’s Leading Digital Cognitive Assessment Tool. URL: https:
/ / altoida . com / executive - insights / digital - cognitive - assessment - tool/ (visited on
02/22/2023).
[38]
Alpana Ventures. Additional $14m funding for Altoida to grow further! URL: https:
//alpana-ventures.ch/additional-14m-funding-for-altoida-to-grow-further/ (visited on
02/22/2023).
[39]
Springwise. THROUGH APP, DIABETES IS GAMIFIED AS A MONSTER TO BE
TAMED. URL: https://www.springwise.com/through-app-diabetes-gamified-monster-
tamed/ (visited on 02/24/2023).
[40]
Brian Nordli. How SuperBetter is Gamifying Health and Wellness. URL: https://
builtin.com/design- ux/superbetter- mobile- game- ux- supports- wellness (visited on
02/23/2023).
[41]
Citrusbits. How Gamification Has Catapulted Duolingo, Strava, and Forest to the
Top of their Respective App Categories. URL: https://citrusbits.com/how-gamification-
has - catapulted - duolingo - strava - and - forest - to - the - top - of - their - respective - app -
categories/ (visited on 02/24/2023).
[42]
Lumosity. Discover what your mind can do. URL: https://www.lumosity.com/en/
(visited on 07/07/2023).
[43]
Mobi Health News. Mango Health takes aim at medication adherence with game de-
sign principles. URL: https://www.mobihealthnews.com/21416/mango-health-takes-
aim-at-medication-adherence-with-game-design-principles (visited on 02/23/2023).
[44]
Duolingo. Duolingo Corporate Fact Sheet. URL: https://drive.google.com/drive/
folders/1Rftk_2z4j0_gvQbDDFOasIY5BMd87wlF (visited on 02/26/2023).
[45]
Habitica. Habitica. URL: https://habitica.com/static/home (visited on 02/27/2023).
[46]
Ashley Williams. “User-centered design, activity-centered design, and goal-directed
design: A review of three methods for designing web applications”. eng. In: Sig-
doc’09 - Proceedings of the 27th Acm International Conference on Design of Com-
munication (2009), pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1145/1621995.1621997.
[47]
Interaction Design Foundation - Rikke Friis Dam & Teo Yu Siang. Personas – A
Simple Introduction. URL: https://www.interaction- design.org/literature/article/
personas-why-and-how-you-should-use-them (visited on 07/02/2023).
[48]
Parkinson’s Foundation. Statistics. URL: https://www.parkinson.org/understanding-
parkinsons/statistics#:~:text=The%5C%20incidence%5C%20of%5C%20Parkinson’s%
5C%20disease,have%5C%20Parkinson’s%5C%20disease%5C%20than%5C%20women.
(visited on 07/02/2023).
[49]
Experience UX. What is wireframing? URL: https://www.experienceux.co.uk/faqs/
what-is-wireframing/#:~:text=Wireframing%20is%20a%20way%20to,user%20needs%
20and%20user%20journeys. (visited on 07/09/2023).
[50]
Hotjar. The different types of usability testing methods for your projects. URL: https:
//www.hotjar.com/usability-testing/methods/ (visited on 07/09/2023).
[51]
Rajeev Sharma. Flutter BLoC Architecture: A Quick Guide. URL: https://www.
linkedin.com/pulse/flutter-bloc-architecture-quick-guide-rajeev-sharma/ (visited on
07/25/2023).
[52]
Ashish Rawat. Using SharedPreferences in Flutter. URL: https://medium.flutterdevs.
com/using-sharedpreferences-in-flutter-251755f07127 (visited on 07/21/2023).
[53]
Hasan Basri Bayat. A minimalist guide to Isar. URL: https://itnext.io/a-minimalist-
guide-to-isar-ee43c1e51a85 (visited on 07/16/2023).
[54]
Usability.gov. System Usability Scale (SUS). URL: https://www.usability.gov/how-
to-and-tools/methods/system-usability-scale.html (visited on 07/15/2023).
46
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:55==
[55]
Jeff Sauro. 5 Ways to Interpret a SUS Score. URL: https : / / measuringu . com /
interpret-sus-score/ (visited on 07/10/2023).
[56]
GitLab. System Usability Scale. URL: https://about.gitlab.com/handbook/product/
ux/performance-indicators/system-usability-scale/ (visited on 07/16/2023).
Parkinson Warrior
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:57==
A
Acronyms
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
PD
Parkinson’s Disease
MDS-UPDRS Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale
HY Scale Hoehn and Yarh Schale
UPDRS Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale
APDA American Parkinson’s Disease Association
AR
Augmented Reality
UCD
User Centered Design
DRCMR The Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance
nNBV Nationale Neurologisk Behandlingsvejledning
SUS
System Usability Scale
RKKP Regional Clinical Quality Development Program
NPS
Net Promoter Score
mHealth Mobile Health
BLoC Business Logic Component
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
Parkinson Warrior
49
==PAGE:58==
B
Distribution
The workload has generally been equally distributed between Mathias and Rasmus.
Mathias took responsibility for Chapter 1 (Introduction), Chapter 4 (Implementation), and
Chapter 6 (Discussion) in the report. Mathias’s primary focus during the application de-
velopment was the onboarding flow and managing health data. Additionally, Mathias
concentrated more on the iOS part of the project.
Rasmus took responsibility for Chapter 2 (Prior Work), Chapter 3 (Design), Chapter 5
(Study), and Chapter 7 (Conclusion) in the report. Rasmus’s primary focus during the
application development was the main flow and implementation of the Parkinson index.
Additionally, Rasmus concentrated more on the Android part of the project. Both Mathias
and Rasmus shared the user study and the application’s design.
50
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:59==
C
Links
GitHub Repository
https://github.com/LordHjorth/Parkinson-Warrior
Figma Workspace
https://www.figma.com/file/LQcN23go2thzlu03dcrE2y/Parkinson-gamification?type=design&
node-id=0%3A1&mode=design&t=NUqTVBJQEil0mmlA-1
Links to video demonstrations
Demo of the onboarding flow
https://vimeo.com/849460156?share=copy
Demo of the main flow
https://vimeo.com/849458689?share=copy
Download links
As the application is only available in test environments, it might be necessary to be invited
to the test group to gain access to the download links.
Android
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.gmail.hjorthen05.parkinsonwarrior
iOS
https://testflight.apple.com/join/kmPZrXv9
Parkinson Warrior
51
==PAGE:60==
D
Wireframes
52
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:61==
E
Prototype
Parkinson Warrior
53
==PAGE:62==
F
Updated Prototype
54
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:63==
G
Survey (Introduction meeting)
Parkinson Warrior
55
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
H
Survey (Debriefing meeting)
Parkinson Warrior
57
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
==PAGE:68==
I
Full list of written and verbal feedback
• Bugs i spillene
• Kombination af medicinens virkning og hvordan man klarer sig
• Registrering af medicin mangler lidt kærlig
• Notificationer skal kunne sættes efter behov - og slås fra.
• Data skal kunne bruges af neurologen.
• Bedre registrering af søvn - god/dårlig, sover man faktisk?
• Mere statistik og forklaring af tal/score
• Daglig løbende status (eventuelt i forbindelse med medicin og opgaver)
• Spørg om medicin inden opgaver
• Flere kategorier - der mangler muligheder.
• Det skal være muligt at se sin data over flere perioder, fx uge, måned, år (med
grafer).
• Overveje om det skal være et periode eller ugentlig værktøj i stedet for et dagligt
værktøj
• Bedre resultatsider.
• Nogen mente at det var dårlige spørgsmål.
• Flere spilmuligheder
• Bedre indblik i progress, både på spørgsmål og spil niveau.
• Nuværende spil og varighed var fint.
• Fokusér på medicin og træning.
• Spørgsmål 3 - uddyb emner/spørgsmål generelt. Især i forhold til at koordination og
balance er to forskellige ting
• Fjern default værdier på første side, men indtastede værdier skal vises når man
åbner siden igen.
• Skidt / Km - svært at vide
• Mangler lidt forklaring / introduktion til det (evt. En ad gange eller opdel i mindre
dele)
• Skriftstørrelse i hele appen. Det samme gælder skærm zoom. Stort problem, da
mange har det sat til.
• Bug: Når man vælger alle og derefter fravælger 1, så er vælg alle stadig markeret.
• Medicin - hele flowet kan gentænkes. Kan man inkludere hvad man tager og hvornår
man tager det. Kæmpe udfordring med at medicinen generelt. Forslag: Notifika-
tioner i forbindelse med Medicin eller tilføj Medicin modul til periodiske registeringer
af medicinens virkning. (GOD IDÉER)
60
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:69==
• Dosering er svært for mange
• Sprog.. Meget stor udfordring for mange. Både engelsk/dansk, men også sværheds-
grad?
• Grafer: over medicin indtag, virkning, påvirkning i forhold til opgaver
• Mere uddybet statistik / information
• Stemme
• Swipe er en udfordring for nogen
• Generelt var teknisk niveau faktisk okay højt i forhold til forventet
• Installationsvideoer (GOD IDÉ)
• Udfordring med Google Fit og samspil med andre sundhedsapps.
• Til en anden god gang i forhold til test, så skal vi være mere specifikke i hvilke
testpersoner vi leder efter (skal kunne betjene en telefon, være under fx 65år, være
aktiv i sin hverdag) - i forhold til persona
• Kan ikke have flere bolde i luften og det kniber med værktøj.
• I skulle have lavet installationsvideoer. I skulle have skrevet at indholdet i appen er
på engelsk. Først indtryk er positivt. Jeg har android men bruger ikke google fit,
men derimod Garmin. Kommer der et ...... til garmin?
• ”Det lykkedes ikke at få indtastet skridt, søvn og energi og jeg kunne ændre på
indstillingerne.
• Hvis dette program kunne anvendes af flere, skal det nok foregå på dansk og ind-
stillinger skal være bedre med hensyn til søvn, skridt og energi. Et godt tilbud til alle
med Parkinson ”
• Det er en komplikation at det generelt er på engelsk
• ”Hyggeligt at gennemføre games og surveys, men kan ikke rigtig relatere det til
affektion p.g.a. Parkinson.
• Medicin-score virker tilfældig: Tager depotmedicin (ropinirol og rasagilin) morgen/-
formiddag og levodopa/benserazid 6 gange i løbet af dagen.
• Uklart hvordan den samlede score regnes ud og hvad den betyder.
• Har svaret ””3”” på alle spørgsmål ved. anvendelighed, da det ikke er klart for mig
hvad resultaterne kan bruges til.
• App tillod mig Max to spil i døgnet. Vedr spørgeskemaer går spørgsmålene igen så
der er for mange gentagelser.
• Vedr opstipation spørges der ikke til brugen af laksantia.
• Vedr det at savle, mundtørhed er lige så hyppigt. ”
• Desværre gik jeg allerede kold på 2.dagen. Den vrede viking, var absolut ikke in-
spirerende at kigge på. Og lave de tre -5 opgaver hver gang var kedeligt. Ligesom
at besvare de samme spørgsmål (der var for generelle ) igen og igen var trivielt. Der
kom ingen oplysninger frem, som jeg ikke ved blot at mærke efter, vidste i forvejen.
Måske ville det være som en månedlig tjek jeg havde lyst til at bruge den app. Men
Parkinson Warrior
61
==PAGE:70==
ikke daglig. MÅSKE ER DEN app. GOD TIL NYDIAGNOSTISEREDE. Vh ———
med diagnose i 11 år.
• Jeg var på Roskilde og arbejde uge 26 .. nåede det ikke så meget som jeg gerne
ville
• ”Systemet mangler den røde tråd og virker i høj grad ufærdigt. Stor fejl, at I ikke
prioriterede tid på intromødet, til at vise den røde tråd i den daglige brug.
• Af disse årsager kom jeg aldrig rigtig i gang med at bruge det.
• Jeg mangler søvn data/opsætning. Fint hvis der var mulighed for manuel indtast-
ning.Medicin: jeg kunne ikke rette (nedad). Brugbarhed: der mangler mere om
medicin,aktivitet. Håber at få rapport/opsummering fra jer og mere detaljeret gen-
nemgang
• Sjovt at bruge app’en, men jeg mangler lidt at forstå, hvilket udbytte jeg får af at
bruge den.
• Det burde være på dansk
• kunne ikke registrere søvn
• Skridt og søvn bør gerne blive målt og registreret automatisk af telefonen. På An-
droid telefoner er der dog den udfordring, at det er nødvendigt at have installeret og
sat Google Fit op, da det er fra Google Fit, at vi henter informationerne. Kunne det
tænkes, at du har en Android telefon? Og burger du andre apps end Google Fit til
at tracke aktivitet med?
• Generelt er ideen super god med en app, og herunder er mulighederne fremadrettet
bestemt store - udfordringen er vel de mange timer og penge, som dette kræver
• Små bugs skal tilrettes, så alle feltet bliver synlige ( uden at man skal tilpasse det
selv)
• Hvis app skal kunne hjælpe mig og min neurolog til at løbende vurdere medicin
og virkning, vil det kræve præcis registrering af medicin, og en løbende måling/
registrering af effekten
• Jeg kan godt lide de små tests - men bør jo udbygges med flere
• Spørgsmålene relateret til hvordan jeg har det, bør også udbygges og selvfølgelig
på dansk
• Udfordringen med en app er vel at der skal ind del penge til.. med et samlet antal
syge med PD på ca 12.000 Pers. Er det næppe realistisk at kunne tjene penge på
en app ..
• Under SLEEP taler men om hvordan man har sovet den sidste uge. Min tanke er
at man kun har sidste nat i tankerne. Her kunne spørgsmålende være, havde du
svært ved at falde i søvn, Vågnede du en/flere gange. Fik du sovet nok. Havde du
urolig søvn. Var der ydre faktorer der påvirkede; studenterfest hos naboerne, varm
nat.
• Motion focuserer på gang/løb, men ikke fitness, dans, havearbejde, eller anden
træning. Registrer dagligt
• Power nap er anbefalet og vigtig for velbefindende, dette kunne registreres dagligt
62
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:71==
• Værdien at registrering af medicin er tvivlsom. I mit tilfælde skal medicin tages 07
10 13 16 19. Jeg kan klikke 5 gange om morgenen, men værdien er at tage medicin
til tiden
• Kognitiv træning - Sudoku, Kryds og tværs, Quizz kunne registreres
• Kognitiv test kunne tages månedlig. Husk 15 ord, regnestykke, se 5 tal i 3 sek,
gengiv herefter
• Månedlig vurdering af skridtlængde. Tæl skridt for fast afstand
• løb gang på tid, en form for Coopertest
• Engelsk tekst, bedre styring af medicin fremfor en passiv registering af at der var
taget noget.
• Oplevet at den ikke skifter dag, dvs når jeg vågner står den stadig på gårdsdagens
resultater og fortsætter så derfra.
• Flere spil, de er ikke udfordrende nok.
• Der skal være grafik/statistik til at følge udviklingen/ resultaterne løbende.
• Man skal kunne indstille klokkeslet til medicin indtagelse
• Den skal kunne kobles til de gængse trænningsapp, så man kan følge udvikling
sammen med træning
• Måske nogle af de motoriske of non-motoriske tests skal anbefales 1 gang ugentligt
stedet for dagligt, det var i alle tilfælde ikke alle dage hvor jeg varlige aktiv på appen.
• Motion focuserer på gang/løb, men ikke fitness, dans, havearbejde, eller anden
træning. Registrer dagligt
• Power nap er anbefalet og vigtig for velbefindende, dette kunne registreres dagligt
• Værdien at registrering af medicin er tvivlsom. I mit tilfælde skalmmedicin tages 07
10 13 16 19. Jeg kan klikke 5 gange om morgenen, men værdien er at tage medicin
til tiden
• Kognitiv træning - Sudoku, Kryds og tværs, Quizz kunne registreres
• Kognitiv test kunne tages månedlig. Husk 15 ord, regnestykke, se 5 tali 3 sek,
gengiv herefter
• Månedlig vurdering af skridtlængde. Tæl skridt for fast afstand
• løb gang på tid, en form for Coopertest
• Det vil være en god ide at lave appen på dansk
• I forhold til de forskellige spørgsmål i spørgeskemaerne må man formode, at der
vil være endnu flere spørgsmål i den endelige udgave. Synes at der mangler lidt
indledende spørgsmål
• For mit vedkommende er det for meget at blive påmindet om medicin allerede 3
timer før jeg skal have den næste gang. Det kunne godt at man selv kunne indstille
den.
Parkinson Warrior
63
==PAGE:72==
J
Validation Study Results - Data
64
Parkinson Warrior
==PAGE:73==
Parkinson Index - Compare
Parkinson Index
Navn
In App
User Study
Result
Result (ABS)
Test participant 1
79.23
81.67
-2.44
2.44
Test participant 2
70.50
68.33
2.17
2.17
Test participant 3
75.13
93.33
-18.21
18.21
Test participant 4
81.67
73.33
8.33
8.33
Test participant 5
88.75
95.00
-6.25
6.25
Test participant 6
82.50
85.00
-2.50
2.50
Test participant 7
75.85
81.67
-5.82
5.82
Test participant 8
80.00
68.33
11.67
11.67
Test participant 9
68.65
61.67
6.98
6.98
Test participant 10
84.68
76.67
8.01
8.01
Test participant 11
67.38
66.67
0.71
0.71
Test participant 12
85.25
68.33
16.92
16.92
Test participant 13
65.25
70.00
-4.75
4.75
Mean
77.29
76.15
1.14
7.29
Sum of squares
677.40
1318.80
1032.15
358.46
Variance
56.45
109.90
86.01
29.87
Std. deviation
7.51
10.48
9.27
5.47
Bemærkninger:
Parkinson Index
2 af testbrugerne har 2 score der afviger væsentligt fra hinanden. Resten af brugerne scorer stemmer godt overens
Gennemsnitlig afvigelse på omkring 7 point
Største afvelser er på 18 og 16 point - én havde vurderet egne evner til næsten maks point (90/100/90) og én havde vurderet sig selv væsentligt lavere end appens vurdering.
alle punkterne er samlet i øverste højre hjørne
Forskellen på gennemsnittet af scorene fra appen og scorene fra surveyerne er 1.14, hvilket er ret lille forskel
En hældning på 0.712 indikere en forholdvis stærkt positiv korrelation
2 af testbrugerne har 2 score der afviger væsentligt fra hinanden. Resten af brugerne scorer stemmer godt overens
In App
User Study
Results
Results (ABS)
Navn
Games
Motor
Non-Motor
Goals
Games
Motor
Non-motor
Games
Motor
Non-Motor
Games
Motor
Non-Motor
Test participant 1
81.1
82.1
95.8
57.9
75
80
90
6.1
2.1
5.8
6.1
2.1
5.8
Test participant 2
78
68
81
55
55
80
70
23
-12
11
23
12
11
Test participant 3
71.7
100
91
37.8
90
100
90
-18.3
0
1
18.3
0
1
Test participant 4
84
79
82
0
80
70
70
4
9
12
4
9
12
Test participant 5
83
99
93
80
95
90
100
-12
9
-7
12
9
7
Test participant 6
88
95
91
56
85
90
80
3
5
11
3
5
11
Test participant 7
79.4
83.1
80
60.9
75
80
90
4.4
3.1
-10
4.4
3.1
10
Test participant 8
82
100
100
38
55
70
80
27
30
20
27
30
20
Test participant 9
78
65.8
57.1
73.7
55
60
70
23
5.8
-12.9
23
5.8
12.9
Test participant 10
90.1
89.9
93.2
65.5
80
70
80
10.1
19.9
13.2
10.1
19.9
13.2
Test participant 11
52
75
75
67.5
50
70
80
2
5
-5
2
5
5
Test participant 12
89
75
90
87
55
80
70
34
-5
20
34
5
20
Test participant 13
32
75
92
62
60
70
80
-28
5
12
28
5
12
Mean
76.02
83.61
86.24
57.02
70.00
77.69
80.77
6.02
5.92
5.47
14.99
8.53
10.84
Sum of squares
3236.86
1750.47
1527.35
5915.04
2900.00
1430.77
1092.31
3921.86
1294.78
1490.43
1471.47
803.61
352.15
Variance
269.74
145.87
127.28
492.92
241.67
119.23
91.03
326.82
107.90
124.20
122.62
66.97
29.35
Std. deviation
16.42
12.08
11.28
22.20
15.55
10.92
9.54
18.08
10.39
11.14
11.07
8.18
5.42
Cognition
Motor
Non-motor
==PAGE:74==
Parkinson Index - Compare
Bemærkninger:
Games
5 har scoret væsentligt over, 6 har scoret tæt på forudsagt, 3 har score væsentligt under
Både nogen over og under, men flertallet ret præcist. 
En kommentar siger at spillene var for nemme, men ingen har scoret 100 i gennemsnit, så det kan vel ikke have været alt for nemt
Gennemsnitlig score for spil i appen er på 76, hvorimod den gennemsnitlige score for folks egen vurdering af kognitive evner, koordination og fin-motorik er på 70.
Gennemsnitlig afvigelse 
Gennemsnitlig afvigelse fra egne tanker på 14.99 point.
6 afviger med 1 standardagvigelse, 2 med 2 standardafvigelser, 4 med 3 standardafvigelser, 1 med 4 standardafvigelser - når man kigger på forskellen mellem in-app og user study
De største afvigelser kommer både af bedre resultater end forventet og værre resultater end forventet
Følger generelt ret godt hinanden på kurven
Forskelle kan skyldes at vores spørgeskema til brugeren omkring deres tanker om egne evner ikke har været præcist nok.
Forskelle kan også komme af meget subjektive vurderinger af egne evner
Motor
2 har scoret væsentligt over, 1 har scoret lidt under, resten stemmer meget godt overens
Eventuelle forskelle kan skyldes, at undersøgelsen spurgte indtil en generel vurdering af motorisk funktion, hvorimod appen har valgmuligheder for fokus områder, som gør at det kun er bestemte ting, man bliver spurgt ind til.
Alle punkter ligger i den øverste tredjedel, både for in-app scorene og scorene fra spørgeskemaet
Gennemsnitlig score i appen på 83.61 og et gennemsnit på 77.69 fra spørgeskemaet.
Har den stejleste trendline, der er tættest på den optimale hældning på 1.
Non-Motor
4 har scoret væsentligt over, 1 har scoret lidt under, resten stemmer meget godt overens
Eventuelle forskelle kan skyldes, at undersøgelsen spurgte indtil en generel vurdering af motorisk funktion, hvorimod appen har valgmuligheder for fokus områder, som gør at det kun er bestemte ting, man bliver spurgt ind til.
Alle punkter ligger i den øverste tredjedel, både for in-app scorene og scorene fra spørgeskemaet, pånær 1 som ligge lige uden for
Gennemsnitlig score i appen på 86.24 og et gennemsnit på 80.77 fra spørgeskemaet.
Generelt
Generelt set, så passer resultaterne meget godt med vores tanker om en målgruppe, da alt, pånær et enkelt datapunkt, er blevet scoret eller vurderet til at være i den øvre halvdel af scalaen, hvilket passer med vores tankerne om at brugeren er i et forholdsvis tidligt stadie
At de faktiske brugere passer på den tiltænkte målgruppe gør feedback mere relevant
Note: 
Games in Questionnaire is an average score of Coordination, Balance, Cognition, Memory
Deleted rows:
Test participant 15
Fejl i datagrundlag
Test participant 14
Fejl i datagrundlag
Test participant 30
Fejl i datagrundlag
Test participant 16
Ikke indberettet score
==PAGE:75==
System Usability Scale
Question
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Value
Score
Benchmark
Name
Test participant 11
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
2
3
1
22
55
68
Test participant 14
1
5
5
1
1
5
5
1
5
1
24
60
68
Test participant 10
2
3
4
1
2
4
3
2
5
2
24
60
68
Test participant 15
2
2
4
2
3
3
4
3
4
2
25
62.5
68
Test participant 2
3
1
5
3
2
3
4
2
4
2
27
67.5
68
Test participant 4
4
3
3
4
5
1
4
2
4
2
28
70
68
Test participant 7
3
2
3
1
4
2
4
2
3
2
28
70
68
Test participant 6 
4
2
4
1
2
4
5
1
5
3
29
72.5
68
Test participant 3
4
2
5
1
3
3
3
3
4
1
29
72.5
68
Test participant 9
4
3
4
2
4
2
4
2
4
2
29
72.5
68
Test participant 12
2
2
4
1
5
2
5
1
1
1
30
75
68
Test participant 1
4
2
4
1
3
2
4
1
5
3
31
77.5
68
Test participant 8 
2
1
5
1
3
3
4
1
5
1
32
80
68
Test participant 5
4
1
5
1
5
1
1
1
5
1
35
87.5
68
Mean
2.93
2.29
4.14
1.64
3.21
2.79
3.86
1.71
4.07
1.71
28.07
70.18
Mean Score
48.21
67.86
78.57
83.93
55.36
55.36
71.43
82.14
76.79
82.14
70.18
Avg
SUS Score
Range (User)
Range (Question)
Bemærkninger:
10 / 14 er middel eller derover på SUS scalaen
Alle er arrangeret i OK / D eller derover
Lavest rangeret spørgsmål er 1, 5 og 6, hvor af det kun er spørgsmål 1, der er under en middelscore på 2
1)
Ikke en færdig app. Vi vidste godt, at appen ikke ville være noget for alle - en app til dem, som synes det kunne være sjovt
5)
Hælder til den bedre side, men kunne både skyldes manglende funktionalitet + health data ikke har virket tilstrækkeligt på Android.
6)
Manglende indsigt i Parkinson Index. Nogen havde svært ved at forstå koblingen mellem målsætninger / fokus områder fra onboarding med det, der blev vist i appen
Note: 
https://measuringu.com/sus/
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228593520_SUS_A_quick_and_dirty_usability_scale
https://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/system-usability-scale.html
==PAGE:76==
System Usability Scale
https://measuringu.com/interpret-sus-score/
Deleted rows:
Test participant 13
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
20
50 Forstod ikke spørgeskema
Test participant 17
1
4
2
1
1
5
2
5
2
1
12
30 Kom aldrig rigtig i gang
Test participant 16
4
4
3
5
3
3
4
3
4
2
21
52.5 Var til begge møder, men mente ikke han var blevet introduceret til appen endnu
==PAGE:77==
Intro
Timestamp
Navn
Hvor mange år har du haft parkinson 
Hvordan vil du vurdere dine motoriske evner generelt?
Hvordan synes du, at din koordination og balance er?
Hvordan vil du vurdere dine non-motoriske evner generelt?
Hvordan synes du, at din kognition og hukommelse er?
Kommentarer?
6/21/2023 15:15:17 Test participant 18
3 år
10
10
4
4
6/24/2023 9:27:56 Test participant 19
6
8
8
8
7 Koordination: 9, Balance: 8
6/27/2023 11:46:06 Test participant 20
2-3 år
3
4
6
6 Jeg blev diagnostiseret 2022.10 men mener/tror, at jeg har haft diagnosen i 2-3 år
6/24/2023 9:24:36 Test participant 21
8
3
2
5
5
6/22/2023 17:04:05 Test participant 22
2 år
8
7
7
8
6/22/2023 9:29:25 Test participant 1
2
8
7
9
8
6/24/2023 9:24:07 Test participant 2
7
8
4
7
7 Meget komprimeret skema
6/21/2023 17:12:06 Test participant 14
11
7
5
6
6
6/21/2023 16:55:30 Test participant 3
2
10
9
9
9
6/24/2023 9:28:40 Test participant 23
8
6
4
9
9
6/24/2023 9:19:47 Test participant 24
15
6
4
7
6
6/21/2023 22:26:25 Test participant 4
8
7
6
7
10
6/24/2023 9:23:33 Test participant 16
2,5. 
7
7
9
9 Symptomer siden 1950-1960. peristaltik, tremor, artikulation, muskelstyrke
6/21/2023 17:18:13 Test participant 16
Prognose: jan. 2021, symptomer  1960
7
7
9
9 Første svar
6/21/2023 15:31:20 Test participant 5
< 1år
9
9
10
10
6/21/2023 17:14:13 Test participant 25
8år
8
7
10
9
6/22/2023 14:11:39 Test participant 6 
1
9
9
8
8 Det er stadigvæk meget nyt
6/24/2023 9:30:45 Test participant 7
2
8
8
9
7
6/25/2023 17:07:04 Test participant 26
5
7
7
5
5 Kan ikke have flere bolde i luften og det kniber med værktøj.
6/21/2023 16:08:02 Test participant 27
2
5
6
4
7
6/24/2023 9:29:49 Test participant 28
7
7
5
5
6
6/22/2023 17:37:45 Test participant 8 
11
7
4
8
7
6/24/2023 9:26:16 Test participant 29
2
6
5
7
6 Koordination: 7, Balance: 5
6/24/2023 12:22:56 Test participant 15
4
10
10
10
10
6/24/2023 9:27:07 Test participant 10
2
7
8
8
8 Koordination: 9, Balance: 6, Kognition: 9, Hukommelse: 8
6/24/2023 9:20:27 Test participant 30
0,5
8
6
7
3
6/25/2023 10:21:32 Test participant 31
4
7
6
10
10
6/24/2023 9:16:56 Test participant 11
8
7
4
8
6
Har forsøgt at svare i forhold til, da jeg ikke var syg.
Koordination: 8, Balance: 4. 
6/24/2023 9:29:27 Test participant 12
2,5
8
5
7
6 Koordination: 4, Balance: 5
6/24/2023 9:18:58 Test participant 32
6
8
8
7
7
I skulle have lavet installationsvideoer. I skulle have skrevet at indholdet i appen er på engelsk. Først indtryk er 
positivt. Jeg har android men bruger ikke google fit, men derimod Garmin. Kommer der et ...... til garmin?
6/21/2023 15:48:20 Test participant 13
Godt 3 år
7
5
8
8
Svært at relatere direkte til scorerne (fra 1- 10). I virkeligheden oplever jeg problemer med alle grupper symptomer 
i varierende grad, men balance (og dermed gang) opleves som det værste.
6/21/2023 15:56:09 Test participant 33
31/2
9
8
7
10
==PAGE:78==
Opsamling
Timestamp
Navn
Jeg tror godt, at jeg kunne tænke mig at bruge systemet ofte 
Jeg synes, at systemet var unødigt kompliceret at bruge 
Jeg synes, at systemet var nemt at bruge 
Jeg tror, at jeg ville få brug for support fra en tekniker for at kunne bruge systemet 
Jeg synes, at mange af systemets funktioner var godt integreret med hinanden 
Jeg synes, at systemet var usammenhængende 
Jeg tror, at de fleste hurtigt kan lære at bruge dette system 
Jeg synes, at systemet var meget besværligt at bruge 
Jeg følte mig sikker på, at jeg kunne bruge systemet 
Jeg var nødt til at lære en masse ting, for at komme i gang med at bruge systemet 
Hvad er din gennemsnitlige score for gennemførte kognitive spil? (valgfrit)
Hvad er din gennemsnitlige score for spørgeskemaerne (non-motor symptomer)? (valgfrit)
Hvad er din gennemsnitlige score for spørgeskemaerne (motor symptomer)? (valgfrit)
Hvad er din gennemsnitlige score for dine målsætninger? (valgfrit)
Kommentarer?
6/30/2023 13:26:47 Test participant 12
2
2
4
1
5
2
5
1
1
1
89
90
75
87
6/30/2023 15:48:15 Test participant 8 
2
1
5
1
3
3
4
1
5
1
82
100
100
38
7/1/2023 10:19:55 Test participant 6 
4
2
4
1
2
4
5
1
5
3
88
91
95
56
Det lykkedes ikke at få indtastet skridt, søvn og energi og jeg kunne ændre på indstillingerne. 
Hvis dette program kunne anvendes af flere, skal det nok foregå på dansk og indstillinger skal være bedre med 
hensyn til søvn, skridt og energi. Et godt tilbud til alle med Parkinson 
7/2/2023 10:18:33 Test participant 3
4
2
5
1
3
3
3
3
4
1
71.7
91
100
37.8 Det er en komplikation at det generelt er på engelsk
7/2/2023 14:32:43 Test participant 13
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
32
92
75
62
Hyggeligt at gennemføre games og surveys, men kan ikke rigtig relatere det til affektion p.g.a.  Parkinson. 
Medicin-score virker tilfældig: Tager depotmedicin (ropinirol og rasagilin) morgen/formiddag og 
levodopa/benserazid 6 gange i løbet af dagen.
Uklart hvordan den samlede score regnes ud og hvad den betyder.
Har svaret "3" på alle spørgsmål ved. anvendelighed, da det ikke er klart for mig hvad resultaterne kan bruges til.  
7/2/2023 18:11:50 Test participant 15
2
2
4
2
3
3
4
3
4
2
1
5
5
App tillod mig Max to spil i døgnet. Vedr spørgeskemaer går spørgsmålene igen så der er for mange gentagelser.
Vedr opstipation spørges der ikke til brugen af laksantia. 
Vedr det at savle, mundtørhed er lige så hyppigt. 
7/2/2023 20:25:01 Test participant 14
1
5
5
1
1
5
5
1
5
1
0
0
0
0
Desværre gik jeg allerede kold  på 2.dagen. Den vrede viking, var absolut ikke inspirerende at kigge på. Og lave de 
tre -5 opgaver hver gang var kedeligt. Ligesom at besvare de samme spørgsmål  (der var for generelle ) igen og 
igen var trivielt. Der kom ingen oplysninger frem, som jeg ikke ved blot at mærke efter,  vidste i forvejen. Måske ville 
det være som en månedlig tjek jeg havde lyst til at bruge den app. Men ikke daglig. MÅSKE ER DEN app. GOD TIL 
NYDIAGNOSTISEREDE. Vh Dorte  med diagnose i 11 år.
7/2/2023 22:29:25 Test participant 4
4
3
3
4
5
1
4
2
4
2
84
82
79
Jeg var på Roskilde og arbejde uge 26 .. nåede det ikke så meget som jeg gerne ville 
7/3/2023 10:26:06 Test participant 17
1
4
2
1
1
5
2
5
2
1
70
Systemet mangler den røde tråd og virker i høj grad ufærdigt. Stor fejl, at I ikke prioriterede tid på intromødet, til at 
vise den røde tråd i den daglige brug. 
Af disse årsager kom jeg aldrig rigtig i gang med at bruge det. 
Mvh Test participant 30
7/3/2023 13:45:50 Test participant 1
4
2
4
1
3
2
4
1
5
3
81.1
95.8
82.1
57.9
Jeg mangler søvn data/opsætning. Fint hvis der var mulighed for manuel indtastning.Medicin: jeg kunne ikke rette 
(nedad). Brugbarhed: der mangler mere om medicin,aktivitet. Håber at få rapport/opsummering fra jer og mere 
detaljeret gennemgang
7/3/2023 16:58:49 Test participant 5
4
1
5
1
5
1
1
1
5
1
83
93
99
80 Sjovt at bruge app'en, men jeg mangler lidt at forstå, hvilket udbytte jeg får af at bruge den.
7/4/2023 9:29:49 Test participant 11
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
2
3
1
2
75
75
67.5
7/4/2023 9:36:04 Test participant 9
4
3
4
2
4
2
4
2
4
2
78
57.1
65.8
73.7 Det burde være på dansk
7/4/2023 9:37:31 Test participant 2
3
1
5
3
2
3
4
2
4
2
78
81
68
55
7/4/2023 9:38:59 Test participant 7
3
2
3
1
4
2
4
2
3
2
79.4
80
83.1
60.9
7/4/2023 9:40:24 Test participant 10
2
3
4
1
2
4
3
2
5
2
90.1
93.2
89.9
65.5 kunne ikke registrere søvn
7/4/2023 9:41:38 Test participant 16
4
4
3
5
3
3
4
3
4
2
Ikke modtaget vejledning på mail (Note: var dog tilstede til begge møder..)
==PAGE:79==
K
Excel implementation of Parkinson
Index
Parkinson Warrior
71
==PAGE:80==
Score
Goals (Prioriteret rækkefølge)
Index
Title
Score
Weight
1 Walk X km
1-100
1
2 Sleep X hours
1-100
1
3 Complete X games
1-100
1
4 Answer X Surveys
1-100
1
5 Take Medication
0/100
1
Games
Index
Game
Measurables 
Calculation
Score
Reference
1 Multiple Object Tracking
Wrong guesses, Correct guesses, Total guesses. 
Correct / Total
1-100
2 Flanker
Wrong guesses, Correct guesses, Total guesses. Time
Correct / Total
1-100
3 Visual Array Change
Wrong guesses, Correct guesses, Total guesses. 
Correct / Total
1-100
4 Reaction Time
Reaction time. Errors
350 / avg(reaction time) - (errors * 25) 
1-100
Avg. reaction time is 350-450: https://www.psytoolkit.org/lessons/simple_choice_rts.html
5 Tapping Speed
Speed
avg CPS / measured CPS
1-100
6 Stroop Effect
Wrong guesses, Correct guesses, Total guesses. Time
Correct / Total
1-100
Surveys
Index
Type
Scale
Score
1 MDS-UDPRS
0 (Normal) - 4 (Severe)
1-100 (add 1, mulitply by 20)
 - Andre målsætninger der kunne være relevante at måle på?
 -I forhold til at lave den her scoringsberegning, 
𝑎𝑣𝑔𝐺𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠+ 𝑎𝑣𝑔𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑦𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠+ 𝑎𝑣𝑔(𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒)
3
= 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒
==PAGE:81==
Flanker
Correct
Incorrect
Default
Score
New score
Rounded
10,00
10,00
15,00
0,0%
57,14%
0,0%
14,00
1,00
15,00
86,7%
93,33%
86,7%
20,00
1,00
15,00
126,7%
111,11%
100,0%
1,00
15,00
15,00
-93,3%
6,45%
0,0%
1,00
20,00
15,00
-126,7%
5,56%
0,0%
1,00
1,00
15,00
0,0%
11,76%
0,0%
10,00
10,00
15,00
0,0%
57,14%
0,0%
15,00
15,00
15,00
0,0%
66,67%
0,0%
5,00
5,00
15,00
0,0%
40,00%
0,0%
15,00
2,00
15,00
86,7%
93,75%
86,7%
0,00
0,00
15,00
0,0%
0,00%
0,0%
20,00
0,00
15,00
133,3%
114,29%
100,0%
Mot
Mistakes
Score
0
100,0%
Buffer
1
90,0%
6
2
81,8%
Target
3
75,0%
3
4
69,2%
5
64,3%
6
60,0%
7
56,3%
8
52,9%
9
50,0%  - All targets clicked
10
47,4%
11
45,0%
15
37,5%
Reaction
Avg
Incorrect
Correct
Score
250
0
10
180,00%
Error cost
350
0
10
128,57%
30
450
0
10
100,00%
Base avg
600
0
10
75,00%
450
250
10
10
81,82%
350
10
10
69,23%
450
10
10
60,00%
550
10
10
52,94%
250
5
10
112,50%
350
5
10
90,00%
450
5
10
75,00%
600
5
10
60,00%
650
10
47,37%
Tapping speed
Total taps
cps
score
0
0,0
0,0%
20
1,3
33,3%
Avg cps
30
2,0
50,0%
4
40
2,7
66,7%
Test length (seconds)
50
3,3
83,3%
15
60
4,0
100,0%  - at avg
70
4,7
116,7%
75
5,0
125,0%
80
5,3
133,3%
90
6,0
150,0%
100
6,7
166,7%
110
7,3
183,3%
120
8,0
200,0%
130
8,7
216,7%
140
9,3
233,3%
150
10,0
250,0%
Stroop
mistakes
correct taps
score
Test length
0
10
100,0%
30
1
9
90,0%
display time (seconds)
2
8
80,0%
2
3
7
70,0%
delay time (seconds)
4
6
60,0%
1
5
5
50,0%
Expected guesses
6
4
40,0%
10
7
3
30,0%
8
2
20,0%
9
1
10,0%
10
0
0,0%
Visual array
Correct swipws
Score
0
0,0%
1
20,0%
Test count
2
40,0%
5
3
60,0%
4
80,0%
5
100,0%
Questionnaire
count
Min score
Min of 100
Max score
Max of 100
1
0
0%
5
100%
max score per question
2
0
0%
10
100%
5
3
0
0%
15
100%
min score per question
4
0
0%
20
100%
0
5
0
0%
25
100%
==PAGE:82==
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
G6
G7
G8
G9
G10
Sum
Score
50%
75%
100%
100%
50%
75,00
75,00
50%
75%
100%
10%
50%
50%
75%
25%
30%
50%
51,50
51,50
70%
75%
25%
200%
30%
30%
100%
25%
10%
50%
61,50
61,50
100%
75%
25%
10%
30%
60%
100%
25%
10%
50%
48,50
48,50
100%
75%
100%
100%
30%
50%
200%
25%
100%
100%
88,00
88,00
100%
75%
25%
100%
50%
50%
100%
100%
100%
50%
75,00
75,00
50%
75%
25%
10%
30%
30%
30%
25%
30%
100%
40,50
40,50
80%
75%
25%
100%
50%
50%
75%
25%
30%
100%
61,00
61,00
50%
75%
25%
10%
100%
100%
75%
25%
30%
100%
59,00
59,00
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0,00
0,00
200%
200%
200%
200%
200%
200%
0%
0%
0%
0%
120,00
100,00
==PAGE:83==
Daily
Mixed
Activity types
Activity Type
Score
Activity TypScore
Activity TypScore
G
G
89
G
0
G
89
QM
G
60
G
0
G
58
QNM
QM
50
QM
57
QM
0
QNM
85
QNM
85
QNM
0
QNM
32
QNM
32
QNM
0
61
57,75
73,5
Weekly
WA1
WS1
WA2
WS2
WA3
WS3
WA4
WS4
WA5
WS5
WA6
WS6
WA7
WS7
WA8
WS8
G
89,0 G
90,0 G
98,0 G
89,0 G
89,0 G
89,0 G
89,0 G
89,0
G
60,0 G
60,0 G
55,0 G
60,0 G
60,0 G
60,0 G
50,0 G
60,0
QM
50,0 QM
50,0 QM
100,0 QM
0,0 QM
50,0 QM
50,0 QM
50,0 QM
50,0
QNM
85,0 QNM
85,0 QNM
80,0 QNM
45,0 QNM
85,0 QNM
85,0 QNM
80,0 QNM
85,0
QNM
32,0 QNM
34,0 QNM
35,0 QNM
52,0 QNM
32,0 QNM
32,0 QNM
80,0 QNM
32,0
61
61,5
78
61,5
61
61
66,5
61
64,6
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
