==PAGE:1==
Department of Environmental and
Resource Engineering
Online modelling of hydrogen sulfide
Master thesis - 30 ECTS
R´emi Villain, s212833
Supervised by : Luca Vezzaro and Morten Borup
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Abstract
1
Acknowledgement
2
1
Introduction
3
2
Scope - Definition of problem and system
5
2.1
Model requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Model objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Temporal scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Spatial scale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Types of sewer networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Existing model performances on study requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Simplifying the model for easier use
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Selection of simplified model structure and processes
7
3.1
Introduction to WATS model structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Selected state variables and phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Hydraulic conditions and transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Simplification of processes in the MIKE software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Fictional case study description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Assessing the removal of the XS2 variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.3
Conclusion on MIKE simplification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Simplification of processes - coding structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
Comparison of the Lagrangian and Eulerian methods . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.2
Assumptions for the Lagrangian model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.3
Description of the proposed Lagrangian model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.4
Conclusion on the simplified Lagrangian model structure
. . . . . .
17
3.4
Simplification of model inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.1
Simplification of hydraulic inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.2
Simplification of the WATS variable inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.3
Conclusion on simplification of inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Coding implementation
21
4.1
General description of the implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Coding advantages on the Lagrangian implementation . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Model Diagnosis
23
5.1
Diagnosis of a short gravity pipe with low sulfide increase . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.1
Description of the gravity pipe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.2
Diagnosis of the Manning function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.3
Diagnosis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Diagnosis of the pressure main with large sulfide buildup . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.1
Description of pressure main
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.2
Diagnosis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:3==
6
Sensitivity analysis
36
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.1
Description of the sensitivity method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.2
Selection of parameter and range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Uncertainty analysis
39
7.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8
Discussion for model improvement
40
9
Conclusion
42
References
44
A Appendices
47
A.1 Section 3 appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 Section 5 appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.3 Section 7 appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
2
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In-sewer processes are responsible for the formation of hydrogen sulfide, a corrosive and
dangerous chemical. Model Predictive Control applied to hydrogen sulfide has emerged
as an interesting future strategy to tackle the issues associated with this compound. Such
control strategy require efficient and flexible model that can forecast sulfide buildup. The
existing models of sewer processes in use are deterministic models that are designed to per-
form offline simulations. Those models, however, suffer from extensive data requirements
and complex structure.
The aim of this study is thus to develop a new model structure fit for future online
applications. The scope of performances of this model was narrowed down to the simula-
tion of one pipe section at a time. Because no data was available for this study, a fictional
case study has been used as a baseline instead.
Different type of simplification opportunities from the baseline model were explored
and assessed. Most of the model concepts of physico-chemical processes used in the base-
line was kept in the new designed model with relatively minor adjustments. Simplification
of the inputs was examined more in detail. For example, the simplification of some vari-
able input as constants was quantitatively examined in a sensitivity analysis. Finally, the
most important simplification developed in the designed model is a new model structure
for transport modelling based on the Lagrangian description of fluids.
Performances of the simplified model thus obtained were assessed for pipes of differ-
ent types and lengths from the fictional sewer network. The performances of the model was
generally rather good, except for very long pipe sections under transient hydraulic condi-
tions. It is hypothesized that the hydraulic assumptions behind the Lagrangian transport
model are the cause of the poorer performance in those conditions.
Two distinct research directions could be considered for future development of the
proposed model. First, additional investigation of the designed model should be done to
better identify the cause and the extent of the limitations that were found in the results
from this study. These investigations of the model performance would particularly benefit
from using real-world data. Additionally, further simplification of the inputs would still
need to be developed before a practical implementation of the model can be applied.
1
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my gratitude to both Morten Borup and Luca Vezzaro which
provided great inputs and suggestions, as well as essential guidance to navigate between
the different software!
Thanks to the people from the drainage department at Kr¨uger that welcomed me
in the office.
The ping pong lunch breaks and multiple cakes definitely help me stay
motivated!
2
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Sewer networks are key components of urban water systems for the transport and collec-
tion of wastewater. Before wastewater reaches a treatment plant or a discharge point,
it undergoes a number of significant biological and chemical reactions in the sewers.
[Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 1998] Sewers can thus be regarded as bioreactors where trans-
formation of organic and inorganic compounds takes place. Hydrogen sulfide is among
the most problematic compounds that can form in sewer networks.
When released in
the sewers atmosphere, this gas can cause major corrosion of concrete pipes, leading to
reduced life expectancy of the impacted sewer section or even unexpected pipe failures
[Pomeroy et al., 1974]. Hydrogen sulfide can also cause odour issue when released above
ground and, in higher concentration, have detrimental effect on human health [EPA, 1974].
Several chemical dosing strategies have been developed to tackle the costly and po-
tentially dangerous issues associated with hydrogen sulfide [Park et al., 2014]. Most dosing
strategies implemented so far use open-loop control, with constant or profiled dosing rates
at a single dosing location in the network [Ganigu´e et al., 2011]. The development of real-
time sulfide sensors has allowed the implementation of real-time control (RTC) for sulfide.
Because of the dynamic nature in terms of flow and composition of drainage water, RTC
is a more flexible and adapted solution than open loop control. Ganigu´e et al. have shown
that RTC strategies for chemical dosing could bring important efficiency gain and cost
savings [Ganigu´e et al., 2011]. RTC on a single rising main has been tested and validated
on field studies [Ganigu´e et al., 2016] [Ganigu´e et al., 2018]. Liu et al. [Liu et al., 2016]
have also considered chemical dosing on a network-wide scale, which can more effectively
address multiple sulfide hot-spots over a network.
Because mixing and transformation happen downstream of dosing locations and at
a future time, control strategy for network-wide dosing requires proactive control action.
Therefore, Model Predictive Control (MPC), which periodically optimizes the modelled
future state of the system [Lund et al., 2018], is an interesting strategy for sulfide manage-
ment. One of the essential building components of MPC is an internal MPC model, which
can forecasts future hydrogen sulfide concentrations. The optimization of the forecasts
in the defined prediction horizon must be obtained sufficiently fast (less than the desired
sampling time of the MPC, as explained in 2.1.2)[Lund et al., 2018]. The temporal con-
straints require the internal MPC to be as simplified as possible while providing accurate
and reliable forecasts.
Different hydrogen sulfide models in sewers are available in the literature, with vary-
ing computation time, accuracy and resolution. Early on, empirical, steady-state model
were developed to estimate sulfide production in sewers [Pomeroy and Parkhurst, 1978]
[Nielsen et al., 1998].
As knowledge of the different biological and chemical processes
involved in sulfide formation in sewers progressed, mechanistic models were introduced
[Carrera et al., 2016]. These models allowed a dynamic analysis on a network-wide scale,
at the cost of increased simulation time. The high resolution models are typically cal-
ibrated using offline data on sulfide concentration, and can be used to identify optimal
dosing location. They are, however, not fit for online simulation for a MPC because their
software implementation requires time series as input rather than real-time measurements.
A simplified, online version of those mechanistic model could instead be used as a building
block for later MPC development.
The aim of this master thesis is to build such a simplified online model. The research
3
==PAGE:7==
questions for the thesis can thus be formulated as follow :
• Can the existing mechanistic models for hydrogen sulfide be reduced in complexity
by removing slow changing processes ?
• What would be the required inputs of such a simplified online model and can they
be provided by existing online sensors ?
• What degree of confidence can be expected from the model results ?
To investigate those different research questions, a model building procedure, such
as the one described in [Jørgensen and Bendoricchio, 2001] will be applied in this thesis.
Definition of problem and system - Section 2
Selection of model structure and formulation of processes - Section 3
Transfer to computer - Section 4
Model diagnosis - Section 5
Sensitivity analysis - Section 6
Calibration and Validation - No data available
Uncertainty analysis - Section 7
Model application - Future Work for MPC
Figure 1: A model building procedure diagram, based on [Jørgensen and Bendoricchio, 2001].
The thesis sections corresponding to the model steps are indicated, whereas the missing steps
are shown in bold. It should be noted that model building is actually an iterative process. In
this study, the model structure and processes were revisited multiple times based on the results
obtained
4
==PAGE:8==
2
Scope - Definition of problem and system
As described in Section 1, it is the need for MPC of sulfide that motivates the devel-
opment of a simplified online model. In this section, we will more precisely address the
requirements in terms of spatial and temporal scale. Considerations about model com-
plexity, forcing functions, and the nature of the implementation of the models will also be
included and compared with other existing models. Finally, the model building procedure
(relying on model comparison) followed in the master thesis is introduced.
2.1
Model requirements
2.1.1
Model objectives
According to the requirements of a future MPC of sulfide, the main objective of the
designed model is described as follow :
• Provide a forecast of sulfide concentration at the end of a sewer pipe,
with online measurement available upstream in the pipe
When developing the sulfide sewer model, it is this main objective that will be
considered and assessed through the report. The model can be expanded in the future to
include these secondary objectives, directly related to the main objectives
• Estimate the total amount of sulfide hydrogen released in the sewer atmosphere
• Expand the objectives described above from a single pipe to a pipe network
These secondary objectives might be relevant depending on the mitigation and con-
trol strategies that are considered. For example, the first secondary objective is essential
when considering pH management as a mitigation measure, because pH elevation prevents
sulfide release but not its formation. In that case, using the main objective would actually
be misleading. The other secondary objective needs to be considered when going for a
global control of the sewer network instead of a local approach.
2.1.2
Temporal scale
Problems related to sulfide in sewers typically occur for dry weather flow conditions, for
conditions where residence time of water in the pipe is long (multiple hours). Therefore, it
is typically considered that steady state dry weather flow is a satisfactory approximation,
with possibly different steady state regimes to accommodate for the daily or weekly varia-
tions in long-term simulations [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]. However, in the context of
MPC of sulfide, a finer time scale, accounting for unsteady state conditions (from online
measurements, or dynamic dosing agent inputs) is necessary. The temporal resolution
requirement of the model must thus be of the order of magnitude of some minutes to
account for those dynamic systems.
Additionally, there also exists temporal restriction on how fast solving the model
solution must be. The sampling interval, defined as the chosen interval between the control
re-optimization [Lund et al., 2018], cannot be lower that the time required for the model
optimization.
A simpler, faster-to-run model, therefore allows for a shorter sampling
interval, which is essential to obtain a reactive MPC.
5
==PAGE:9==
2.1.3
Spatial scale
Because the main objective of the model focuses on sulfide concentration downstream of
a given pipe, it is therefore the spatial scale of a pipe that must be considered (from a
few hundred meters to some kilometers, for the long pipes where sulfide issues might be
present).
Within a pipe, no particular spatial resolution is required, as only the input and
output of a given pipe are relevant for the main objective.
It can be noted that for
the secondary objective related to sulfide release in the sewer atmosphere, it might be
beneficial to have access to some spatial subdivision in the case of a very long pipe.
2.1.4
Types of sewer networks
There exists a variety of different sewer components, with different hydraulics, and conse-
quently different activities of in-sewer processes. High sulfide build-up in sewers are gen-
erally observed in pressure mains, and dosing systems are usually implemented directly
upstream of the pressure mains [Ganigu´e et al., 2011]. However, Guanigu´e et al. also note
that in Australia, high sulfide concentrations can sometimes be observed in gravity mains
under certain conditions, such as long retention time and high temperatures. Dosing sys-
tems are also occasionally located on a gravity pipe [Ganigu´e et al., 2011]. Therefore, the
designed model should be able to handle those two types of sewer pipes.
Other sewer components such as sewer drops might be relevant for a corrosion anal-
ysis of a sewer network. For example, sewer drops can lead to significant sulfide release
in the sewer atmosphere. However, as mentioned in 2.1, corrosion analysis does not fall
under the main objectives of the model. The modelisation of the other sewer components
are thus not required.
2.2
Existing model performances on study requirements
As mentioned in Section 1, there already exists a number of existing sewer processes mod-
els related to sulfide production. The two most widely used models in the industry, whose
validity have been tested through a number of projects all around the world, are deter-
ministic models that have been developed from the 2000s. Those two sewer processes
models are the Wastewater Aerobic/Anaerobic Transformations in Sewers (WATS) model
developed at Aalborg University, Denmark [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013] and the SeweX
model developed in Australia [Sharma et al., 2008]. The WATS model has been imple-
mented in different software programs, among which is the WATS template in MIKE
ECO Lab, a numerical module for ecological modelling developed by DHI [DHI, 2017].
The MIKE software being widely used in water utilities in Denmark, its results were used
as a baseline when doing model comparison in this report.
Overall, it can be noted that the WATS model implemented in the MIKE software
fulfills most of the model requirements we described. Indeed, the ECO Lab module makes
use of the hydraulic simulation from the MIKE software (MIKE+) to obtain fine resolution
of its sewer processes.
It uses the hydraulic output of the model to obtain the flow
conditions necessary for the processes simulations.
This implementation allows a fine
temporal resolution, as required in a MPC. The spatial scale requirements is also fulfilled,
as it is able to model an entire sewer network (hundreds of kilometers of pipes) over multiple
days in about an hour. Additionally, because WATS is a conceptual deterministic model,
it is a highly flexible modelling tool that is able to handle a variety of type of sewer
elements, as long as the required hydraulic inputs can be obtained. The WATS ECO Lab
6
==PAGE:10==
module coupled with MIKE+ is therefore able to model both gravity pipes and pressure
mains.
The WATS model concept, as described in [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013], and its
implementation in MIKE ECO Lab therefore offers a satisfactory baseline in terms of
model requirements. However, the high degree of precision and flexibility comes at the
cost of important computational resources required and model complexity. These charac-
teristics make the MIKE model implementation practical and fit for a hot-spot analysis of
sulfide issues. An online model for MPC, on the other hand, would benefit from a simpler
and more easily integrated model for optimisation and control.
2.3
Simplifying the model for easier use
The WATS implementation in MIKE previously mentioned might be able to provide accu-
rate results, but it relies on extensive data availability for the calibration of a large number
of parameters. Hvitved-Jacobsen et al. suggest guidelines on the necessary steps required
to obtain all the data necessary for calibration, but does not indicate the most critical
components and parameters to calibrate in priority, as they are to some degree dependent
on the site and conditions considered [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013].
Therefore, the objective of this study is to evaluate to what extent the WATS base-
line model implemented in MIKE can be adapted in a simplified implementation that
remains fit for all the model requirements described in Section 2.1. The simplification
would involve reducing the number of processes and components of the system, as well as
identifying what would be the required inputs to measure and calibrate and the inputs
that could be more simply approximated.
Because no sewer data was available for this study, only a ”model to model” comparison
will be performed through the master thesis. This means that the results from a WATS
ECO Lab example will be used as a baseline, and the ability of the simplified model to re-
produce those results will be evaluated. This lack of data also implies that the final stages
of the model building procedure, namely calibration an validation, are not included. In
order for the designed simplified online model to be fully assessed, the results would need
to be supplemented by those two steps in future studies.
3
Selection of simplified model structure and processes
In this section, the structure of the WATS model concept will be investigated to assess to
possible model simplifications. The conceptual considerations for model simplification will
be supplemented by quantitative assessment using a fictional case study obtained with the
ECO lab module of MIKE.
3.1
Introduction to WATS model structure
3.1.1
Selected state variables and phases
The WATS model concept is extensively described in [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]. In
the ECO lab implementation of WATS, this model is already simplified to focus on the
water phase. The air phase is not being modelled and, as a result, only local emissions
of hydrogen sulfide in the sewer atmosphere can be obtained with this implementation.
The remaining state variables in the water phase can be classified in different categories,
as shown in Table 3.1.1. Variable that are categorized as ”Dosing components” do not
7
==PAGE:11==
need to be considered unless the associated mitigation strategy is implemented. That is
because those components are not present in sewers or do not have a significant impact
on processes unless a mitigation strategy for sulfide is in place.
In this study scope, mitigation measures are, however, not considered and mod-
elled. Therefore, it is not necessary to include the variables categorized as ”Dosing com-
ponents” in the preliminary simplified model. Those variables are obviously relevant in
the context of a MPC of sulfide, but an adequate simplified model should first be ob-
tained before those constituents can be reintroduced and properly modelled. Therefore,
all ”dosing components” but dissolved oxygen in water, were removed from the ECO lab
model because they are in sufficiently low concentration in typical wastewater composi-
tion [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]. On the other hand, dissolved oxygen was kept in the
model because the variation of oxygen remains relevant even if specific oxygen increase
mitigation measures are not in place [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013].
Finally, two other variables are present in the WATS ECO lab model that are not
described in Table 3.1.1. Those components differ from the other listed because they are
not modified by any processes and are only subject to transport. Those two variables are
temperature and pH. pH variation in sewer was shown to be a particularly key param-
eter when it comes to sulfide release in the atmosphere [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013].
However, the WATS ECO lab module mainly focuses on sulfide production and is not
designed to provide deep insights into hydrogen sulfide release in the atmosphere because
it lacks the sewer atmosphere phase modelling.Therefore, the low-complexity level of pH
modelling has limited repercussion on the model objectives.
Table 1: Description of the 12 state variables in the WATS template of MIKE ECO lab.
Symbol
Description
Variable category
SF
Fermentable and readily biodegradable products
COD
SA
Fermentation products
COD
XHw
Heterotrophic active biomass in water phase
Biomass
XS1
Fast hydrolyzable substrate
COD
XS2
Slowly hydrolyzable products
COD
SO
Dissolved oxygen
Oxygen (Dosing components)
SII
Total Sulfide (H2S+HS−)
Sulfur cycle
SSO4S
Sulfate in water phase
Sulfur cycle
SNO3N
Nitrate in water phase
Dosing components
XF e2
Iron Fe++ (ferrous ion)
Dosing components
XF e3
Iron Fe+++ (ferric ion)
Dosing components
XF eS
Iron (ferrous) sulfide
Dosing components and Sulfur cycle
3.1.2
Hydraulic conditions and transport
Hydraulic conditions are key components of the WATS model implementation because
they are required in the formulation of processes, and are also needed to model transport
of substances.
The set of differential equations that define the conversion and transformation of
the state variables is based on the WATS model concept [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013].
Those differential equations are based on mathematical expressions describing the physico-
chemical in-sewer processes.
Some of those processes are dependant on the hydraulic
conditions of flow in the pipe. WATS ECO lab extracts 7 hydraulic ”forcings”, such as
velocity or wetted area, from the MIKE+ hydraulic simulation.
8
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2: Model structure (not exhaustive) of the general WATS model concept, with the different
phases considered (Water and Gas), as well as the main variables and reactions. Some processes,
such as hydrogen sulfide formation by biomass, are not included in the Figure. Reproduced from
[Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]
9
==PAGE:13==
Transport also needs to be considered to define the evolution in time and space of
state variables. The different WATS processes together with the addition of transport
processes define a set of differential equations that can be numerically integrated. The
generic Advection-Dispersion (AD) equations describe the general transport mechanisms
at play for solutes and particles. One of the built-in simplification of the MIKE water
quality module (MIKE ECO Lab) is to assume vertical homogeneity along the water
column in a sewer.
Depending on the system under study, it can also be possible to
neglect dispersion and diffusion mechanisms of solute and particulate matter. Estimating
the value of some dimensionless numbers in fluid mechanics can be used to assess such
simplification.[Patankar, 2018]
The P´eclet number compares the advective transport term with the diffusive term
(diffusion and/or dispersion), a high value of Pe indicating that diffusive transport can be
neglected [Patankar, 2018]. The P´eclet number (Pe) is defined as :
Pe = L · u
D , where L is the typical lenght of the system under study (at least
100m in lenght for a pipe), u the velocity (typically ranging from cm/s to
m/s for dry-weather flow) and D the diffusion and/or the dispersion coefficient
(m2/s).
Mass diffusion coefficient value are typically in the range 10−10 to 10−9m2/s, [COMSOL, 2017].
The P´eclet number can then be estimated to be Pe>>1 for the sewer system under study,
meaning that diffusion can be neglected.
Longitudinal dispersion coefficients on the other hand show a much wider range of
value, making the dispersion P´eclet number more difficult to estimate. Dispersion coeffi-
cient is typically estimated using field experiments, as it is very dependant on flow regime,
hydraulic conditions and substance considered [Rieckermann et al., 2007]. Results from
[Veliskova and Sokac, 2019] on a specific sewer section for dry-weather conditions show
that the tracer average longitudinal dispersion was 0.12m2/s. This order of magnitude for
the dispersion term leads to Pe>1, but not necessarily Pe>>1 (the advection term being
at least 100 times bigger than the dispersion one) depending on the exact conditions under
study.
However, including an appropriate dispersion factor in rather complex to model.
Rieckerman et al. describe different formulas that can be used to estimate it [Rieckermann et al., 2007].
Unfortunately, those formulas are not compatible with the allowed input of the dispersion
factor in MIKE, which can only be an exponential function of the velocity [DHI, 2023].
It was therefore decided to also neglect dispersion to avoid adding an uncertain layer of
complexity in the model.
Therefore, the only transport process that is considered in the MIKE simulation
is advection.
The resulting differential equations for the state variables, that include
advection and the WATS processes, is then solved with the MIKE water quality module
for a discretized 1D sewer network. The numerical results are obtained with the same
computational grid used for hydraulic simulation in MIKE+.
3.2
Simplification of processes in the MIKE software
3.2.1
Fictional case study description
To effectively assess simplification opportunities in the model, a case study of a sewer
network is required. The ”Sirius” example available in MIKE+ was used as a substitute
for a real-world sewer network with known sulfide issues. This MIKE+ project file was
10
==PAGE:14==
developed by DHI, and describe a 1680ha area which receives 45676 m3 wastewater per
day.
The wastewater loads are distributed across 863 load points, and follow a daily
pattern. Downstream of the network, dry weather flow is pumped on a 10,600m long
pressure main. Pumping is operated via 4 pumping units with a capacity of 320 L/s that
are controlled by simple START/STOP settings.
Figure 3: Map of the Sirius catchment, built-in in MIKE+. Water is flowing towards the WWTP
at the end of the pressure main (Basin and weir to the right).
The WATS ECO Lab model was then added to the Sirius case study for sulfide
investigation. The default values of state variables concentration at the boundary were
kept to the constant value recommended by default in ECO lab. Those default concentra-
tions value fall within the range identified in [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]. The same
concentrations were also used for initial conditions. However, it should be noted that
those initial concentrations are not very relevant as we will mainly focus on results after
the ”warming-up” period of the model (less than 24h, see Figure 26 in Appendices), after
which the effects of the initial conditions are not visible anymore.
Table 2: Typical range of the variable concentration according to [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013],
and selected value for the boundary conditions.
Variable
Min Range
Max range
Selected value
Units
SF
0
40
18
mgCOD/L
SA
0
20
3
mgCOD/L
XHw
20
100
24
mgCOD/L
XS1
50
100
72
mgCOD/L
XS2
300
450
377
mgCOD/L
SO
0
4
1
mgO2/L
SII
0
0
0
mgS/L
SSO4S
20
200
150
mgS/L
The partial differential equations now fully defined by the set of equations described
in 3.1 combined with initial and boundary conditions, was then solved in MIKE+. The
11
==PAGE:15==
results of this simulation can be seen in 4. Sections with high concentrations of sulfide
(> 1 mg/L ) are observed in different part of the sewer network.
The highest concentrations are found directly north of the basin at the start of the
rising main. However, those pipe sections are actually not relevant for the dry-weather
conditions that are simulated, because they are only used for overflow. The extremely
high concentration (> 15 mg/L) found there are only a results of sulfide build-up in the
stagnating water initialized in those pipe. Similarly, a number of high concentration (> 1.8
mg/L ) can also be found in some very short gravity pipe sections outside of the pressure
main. It was also found that very little to no flow was observed in most of those sections
for dry-weather conditions. Therefore, all those very high concentration sections in the
pipe network are not truly showing realistic sulfide build-up.
It is mainly along the pressure main that realistic sulfide build-up can be observed.
The average total sulfide concentration more than double along the more than 10km pipe,
reaching almost 2mg/L on average near the WWTP.
Figure 4:
SII (Total sulfide in water phase) average concentrations in the Sirius catchment.
Concentration are averaged over the length of the simulation (48h)
3.2.2
Assessing the removal of the XS2 variable
The slowly hydrolyzable substrate (XS2) was identified to be a good candidate for variable
removal. It is a slow-changing variable, as it is only consumed during the slow hydrolysis
process, with a hydrolysis rate of 0.5 day−1, ten times slower than the fast hydrolysis
[Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]. The half life of XS2 associated with that process can thus
be estimated to be 1.4 day, while the typical residence time in the Sirius network for water
is less than a day (the residence time of water in the network was estimated by identifying
the end of the ”warming-up” period of the model in time series at the end of the pressure
main, see Figure 26 in Appendices). In order to quantify the effect of this removal, a
model to model comparison was put in place.
A simulation of the same Sirius network was run with an adapted WATS ECO lab
12
==PAGE:16==
model without XS2. The sulfide concentration in the network were then compared with
the results shown in Figure 4. A network wide analysis was obtained by computing the
average difference over 48h of the simulation with and without XS2. Figure 5 shows that
the average difference between the two model is quite limited, with a reduction that never
exceeds 0.05 mg/L. On average, the effect on the upstream part of the network, where
sulfide concentration are low, are very limited. Some gravity pipe further downstream in
the network reach higher reduction of sulfide concentration modelled, up to 0.04 mg/L
in difference.
However, the largest decrease observed is in the pressure main, with a
reduction of more than 0.04 mg/L. The spatial distribution of sulfide reduction observed
is is accordance with the understanding of the role of XS2, which is slowly converted to
a usable substrate for biomass and sulfide production downstream in the system. A few
anomalies ( shown in red in Figure 5), with an unexpected increase in sulfide concentration,
can also be observed. However, those anomalies are either occurring in non-significant part
of the network (northern pipes only used for overflow), or are only numerical error in nodes
where the concentration was very close to 0mg/L initially.
A time-series comparison of the two models can be seen in Figure 6 at the end of
the pressure main. It can be noticed that the absolute difference remains relatively low at
all time. The relative difference RelD, defined as RelD = Difference
Baseline , can be calculated
from this time series. For this critical section of the network, RelD ranges from 1.7%
(at 12:10) to 4.0 % (at 15:03). The maximum absolute difference is found at 09:54, only
reaching 0.07 mg/L.
Figure 5: Average difference of SII between the simplified and baseline WATS model, calculated
for the nodes of the Sirius catchment.
3.2.3
Conclusion on MIKE simplification
The WATS model concept was studied to identify a suitable formulation of processes for the
desired model implementation. The built-in simplification of the ECO lab implementation
were identified (phases considered, choice of transport model).
Additionally, some of
13
==PAGE:17==
Figure 6: Time series of SII concentration at the end of the pressure main for the second day of
the simulation. Absolute difference of the baseline and simplified model is calculated.
the state variables and associated processes were removed from the model. The dosing
components were discarded in ECO lab, because they were of no immediate use for the
model objectives, even tough they could be later reintroduced if needed. On the other
hand, XS2 removal from the model was considered because it is defined as a slow-changing
variable. The effects of its removal were analyzed on a fictional case study of a sewer
network. The results showed that XS2 could be reasonably removed, as its impact on
sulfide concentration was proven to be limited. Overall, the implementation thus obtained
in MIKE ECO lab constitutes a relevant baseline for the construction of our own simplified
implementation and its verification.
3.3
Simplification of processes - coding structure
In order to further simplify the MIKE ECO lab model and allow an implementation in a
coding language fit for online application, a new model structure for transport is proposed.
Instead of the Eulerian perspective that is used in MIKE through the hydrodynamic
simulation of MIKE+, a Lagrangian approach for water flow in pipe is developed. This
choice of coding structure allows significant simplification of the computation requirement
allocated to hydrodynamics, and only requires relatively basic measuring sensors as input.
3.3.1
Comparison of the Lagrangian and Eulerian methods
Modelling the transport phenomena described in 3.1.2, requires knowledge of fluid motion
in time and space. There exist two different ways to describe fluid motion depending on
the viewpoint [Kleinstreuer, 2018]. The Lagrangian description considers individual fluid
particle, whose position, velocity, etc. are tracked in time. As the particle travels through
a system, it adjusts itself continuously to the new conditions. The Eulerian description
on the other hand, does not identify fluid particle, but focuses instead on a fixed control
14
==PAGE:18==
volume. The Eulerian approach leads to the introduction of vector and scalar fields to
describe the fluid properties in time and space.
The Eulerian description is typically
preferred in fluid dynamics, because the evolution of a fixed point in space of the fluid
properties are usually more directly relevant and usable than the fate of moving fluid
particles. For example, it is the Saint-Venant equations, based on Eulerian description,
that are solved in hydrodynamic simulations in MIKE+ [DHI, 2023]. The same Eulerian
computational grid is used again in the MIKE ECO lab implementation.
An alternative modelling structure based on the Lagrangian approach is instead
used in this study. While Lagrangian methods usually consider mesoscopic scale water
”package” [Kleinstreuer, 2018], we instead consider macroscopic size water packages within
a given pipe. Those water packages will be designated as ”water slices”. Each water slice
consist of the total amount of wastewater that goes through the beginning of a pipe in a
given time frame. The fate of the water slices are then followed until they reach the point
of interest further downstream in the pipe. The status of the water slices at this point are
then extracted and combined to recreate the temporal variations of state variables at the
fixed point of interest
3.3.2
Assumptions for the Lagrangian model
The proposed Lagrangian approach relies on the following assumptions :
a. Each water slice is considered homogeneous in terms of kinematics and concentra-
tions
b. The kinematics (velocity, deformation) of each water slice are constants in time in a
given pipe
c. Dispersion and diffusion can be neglected
The validity of the first assumption directly depends on the chosen time frame as
well as the time and space variability of fluid properties and concentrations. As explained
in Section 3, a similar assumption on vertical homogeneity only is made for the water
column in MIKE. The shorter the selected time frame for the slice definition is, the more
accurate this first assumption is.
The second assumption allows significant simplification in the model. It implies that
no external forces are applied to each individual system, and therefore uniform motion and
no deformation can be considered. This is equivalent to considering the water slices kine-
matically independent from each other and their surroundings. Knowing the initial state
of a water slice is thus sufficient to model their fate in the pipe. At steady state and for a
pressurized pipe, this assumption is equivalent to a ”plug-flow” model [Kleinstreuer, 2018].
Finally, the third assumption about transport processes other than advection has
been already discussed in 3. This assumption is also necessary in order to obtain indepen-
dency of the state variables of WATS between different water slices, and thus simplify the
implementation of the model.
If the 3 assumptions above are considered acceptable approximation, a Lagrangian
modelled that integrate the WATS processes can then be developed.
3.3.3
Description of the proposed Lagrangian model
As required in the general model objective stated in 2.1, the proposed model output is
the time evolution of state variables at a point downstream of a given pipe. The model
requires two kinds of input at the starting point of the simulation upstream in the pipe.
15
==PAGE:19==
• Hydrodynamic inputs : Velocity is needed to define the Lagrangian water slice.
Other hydrodynamic forcings are also required in the formulation of the WATS
processes, see 3.1.2.
• WATS variable inputs : Initial conditions for the state variable of each Lagrangian
water slice
Those two inputs and their potential simplifications are further described in 3.4.
The model operates at a fixed time step. At each time step, a water slice is generated
based on the current velocity at the beginning of the pipe. Similarly, the current WATS
variables inputs are used as initial values for the new water slice. For each following time
step, the position of the front of the water slice is updated based on the slice velocity
until it reaches the end of the pipe section. As it travels downstream, the water slice
constitutes a closed system which undergoes the WATS sewer processes. When it exits
the modelled section of the pipe, the modified value of state variables are extracted to
deduce the concentration at this time step in the point of interest (end of the pipe).
When the pipe conditions correspond to a steady state, only one water slice exits at
a time, as shown in Figure 7. The WATS concentrations at the point of interest are then
simply set equal to the water slice currently exiting.
Figure 7: Schematic representation of the water slices in the pipe at two different time-steps. At
the top, the first water slice is generated based on the initial velocity. At the bottom, 3 time steps
later, the same water slice is found at the end of the pipe. The concentration of slice S1 are then
appended to the time series for the end of the pipe.
Under transient conditions, however, their might exist gaps (deceleration) between
the water slices or a superposition of slices (acceleration, see Figure 8) in our model. In
reality, no such phenomenon are observed in real conditions. Instead, the transient flow
16
==PAGE:20==
conditions, best described by the continuity and momentum equations [Kleinstreuer, 2018],
lead to the formation of a pressure wave propagating at a certain wave celerity. With quick
changes in velocity, the pressure wave is significant and assumption b no longer holds true.
As the pressure waves quickly propagates, the subsequent water slices can no longer be
considered independent and are directly affected by the pressure wave generated upstream.
If the change is gradual enough, however, with ∆v << v (∆v being the change of velocity
between two time steps) then the resulting pressure wave has a negligible effect.
Numerically, the changes in velocity only have a noticeable effect on the model
output if the following condition is verified :
∆L · Ntimesteps > L
(1)
with L the length of the previous water slice, ∆L = ∆v · τ the difference in distance
travelled during τ, Ntimesteps = Lpipe
L , Lpipe the total length of the pipe. This leads to the
following, equivalent condition on ∆v :
∆v > v2 · τ
Lpipe
(2)
If this inequality is verified, then a superposition (shown at t = 3τ in 8) or a gap at
the exit of the pipe is observed. The coding procedure to handle those boundary cases is
the following :
• If a gap is observed (no slices exiting the pipe at a given time step), the last concen-
tration value appended at the end of the pipe is used again.
• If a superposition is observed (multiple slices exiting the pipe at a given time step),
the output concentrations at the exit are a weighted average of the exiting slices.
The weight of each slice is determined by their associated velocity. This method
therefore accounts indirectly for the mass of each slice (slice size being determined
by velocity).
3.3.4
Conclusion on the simplified Lagrangian model structure
The proposed Lagrangian model structure allows significant simplification for model trans-
port compared to the MIKE implementation. While the Eulerian approach requires ex-
tensive hydrodynamic calculation for every meshing element, the Lagrangian approach
requires very little operation between the entry point and the exit of the pipe of inter-
est. This simplification relies on strong assumption whose validity is reliant on the flow
conditions and time step chosen. However, because the model is not coupled with a hy-
drodynamic simulation, it requires a significant number of hydrodynamic parameters as
external inputs.
In order for the designed model to prove useful, it is thus necessary
to find a practical way to obtain the hydrodynamic parameters without the need for a
hydrodynamic simulation.
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 8: Schematic representation of water slices with an increase in velocity from the second
time-step. This leads to a partial superposition of S1 and S2, which results in the two slices exiting
simultaneously the pipe in the bottom part of the figure.
3.4
Simplification of model inputs
3.4.1
Simplification of hydraulic inputs
In MIKE ECO lab, there are 7 hydraulic parameters, listed in Table 3.4.1, that are im-
ported from the MIKE+ hydraulic simulation. Not all of the imported parameters are
fully independent, as there exists explicit dependencies between some of them that also
involve the pipe characteristics. For example, knowing the Relative depth and the geome-
try of the pipe can be used to determine the Flow area. It should also be noted that some
of the MIKE ECO Lab hydraulic parameters are defined relatively to the Eulerian grid
cell used for calculation (Awp and Vraw). For the Lagrangian model, those variables are
instead defined per water slice.
18
==PAGE:22==
Table 3: Description of the imported hydraulic parameters in MIKE ECO Lab from the hydro-
dynamic simulation
Symbol
Description
Unit
v
Flow velocity
m/s
Farea
Flow area (cross-section)
m2
Reldepth
Relative depth
(Ratio between the water depth and the pipe diameter)
m/m
Swater
Water surface slope
m/m
Wsurface
Water surface width
m
Awp
Wetted area (used as biofilm area)
m2
Vraw
Bulk water volume (of a Eulerian gridcell)
m3
In order to simplify the required inputs of the designed Lagrangian model, a relation
between only one of the hydraulic parameter and all the others is developed. By measuring
this single parameter and knowing the relevant pipe characteristics, the other parameters
can easily be deduced.
Depending on the type of pipe considered (pressure main or
partially-filled gravity pipe), the measured parameter and equations of interest differ :
• For a pressure main, it is very straightforward to obtain almost all of the hydraulic
parameters based on the geometry of the pipe since it is fully flowing. The only
required external input is the flow velocity, which is easily accessible as it is
typically controlled by the pump operating the pressure main.
• For a partially-filled gravity pipe, on the other hand, the relations between the differ-
ent parameters are not as direct. It is necessary to introduce an additional equation;
the Manning equation [Manning et al., 1890]. This equation links the flow rate with
the pipe slope, Manning coefficient of roughness, and the hydraulic radius Rh defined
as Rh =
Awp
Farea · L, where L is the length of the water slice. It is possible to derive
the hydraulic parameters from this relation combined with geometry characteristics
of the pipe using as an input the water depth. The equations linking water depth
with the other desired parameter is developed in [Saatci, 1990]. The water depth in
a gravity pipe is a convenient input as it can be easily measured with a basic sensor.
3.4.2
Simplification of the WATS variable inputs
In addition to the simplification of the hydraulic parameters, it is also interesting to
consider the potential simplification of the WATS variable input for the Lagrangian model.
There exist no convenient sensor capable of easily measuring the 7 state variables selected
in 3.2, so a convenient modelling approximation is required for a practical application of
the model. In order to assess the simplification opportunity for the Sirius example, the
temporal variability of those variables in the pressure main, where most of the sulfide
buildup occurs, is studied.
The time variability of the outputs of the MIKE model is presented here at the
beginning of the pressure main. The time series of the 7 variables is shown in Figure 9.
Selected statistics values of those times series are presented in Table 3.4.2
19
==PAGE:23==
Figure 9: Time series of all the variables of the simplified WATS Ecolab model. The first day
(’warming up’ period of the model) of a 3 day simulation is excluded from the presented data.
Table 4: Selected statistical metrics used to evaluate time variability of variables at the beginning
of the pressure main. Based on data presented in Figure 9
Variable
Boundary value
Mean
Standard deviation (SD)
Average/Boundary
Mean/SD
SF
18
0.29
0.87
5%
0.34
SA
3
0.04
0.04
1%
1.09
XHw
24
34.29
0.96
143%
0.03
XS1
72
52.24
4.24
73%
0.08
SO
1
0.05
0.07
5%
1.29
SII
0
0.17
0.05
/
0.29
SSO4S
150
149.79
0.05
100%
0.00
The last two columns of the statistical table 3.4.2 reveal different groups of state
variables for which simplification to a constant value can be considered :
• The depleted variables : These variables (SF , SA and SO) all show a Average/Bound-
ary ratio of 5% or less. This reveals that, at this point in the network, very little
amount of the readily biodegradable substrate and dissolved oxygen is remaining on
average. Because these variable do not show a particularly high standard deviation,
they can be set to a low-constant value as a simplification.
• The low variability variables : These variables (XHw and SSO4S) show very low
Mean/SD Ratio. Because their relative variability is so low, they can be set to a
constant, average value. This is particularly true for SSO4S which appears to be in
large excess for the chosen boundary value, with only a marginal diminution of its
concentration observed.
Only two variables appear not to be suitable for a simplification as a constant input.
That is because SII shows a significant variability, while XS1 is far from being depleted
while showing noticable variability. Because SII online sensors are available, SII online
20
==PAGE:24==
concentrations measurements are actually a realistic input of the model, thus simplification
is not required. XS1, however, cannot be easily measured online as it is a COD component.
Therefore, XS1 concentration input needs to be modelled more in depth. This modelisation
of XS1 beyond a constant value, was not further explored in the context of this master
thesis but would be necessary to use the model in real conditions.
Therefore, in the
following parts of the report, XS1 concentration extracted from the MIKE simulation
were instead used as an input of the Lagrangian model.
3.4.3
Conclusion on simplification of inputs
The simplification of the Lagrangian model input is a necessary step to make the model
usable in a real world setting. Simplification opportunities have been identified for the
fictional case study. The only remaining inputs thus needed through measurements are
rather realistic; water flow/depth for hydraulics, and dissolved hydrogen sulfide measure-
ment (combined with pH measurement to obtain total sulfide). The fast hydrolyzable
substrate, XS1, however, was not identified as a good candidate for input substitution as
a constant. A simple daily pattern could maybe be used to model its concentration in the
input, but this modelisation of the input was not further explored.
The proposed simplification and associated performances of the Lagrangian model
will be assessed and compared to the MIKE results in Section 5.
4
Coding implementation
4.1
General description of the implementation
The proposed Lagrangian model was implemented in python. The implemented model
operates at a fixed time step. A description of the operations performed at each time step
is represented in Figure 10. This python implementation uses as input the time series
described in Section 3.4, as well as two constants objects.
The pipe characteristics is
the first required constant object. Those characteristics are easily accessible information
about the geometry of the pipe (slope, diameter,length) as well as its Manning coefficient
of roughness (based on the pipe material). The other required constants are the WATS
constant that are involved in the sewer processes. For the selected WATS processes in the
model, there are 37 distinct constants, including Temperature and pH that are treated as
constants in this model. The output of the model is a concentrations time series at the
end of the pipe.
The numerical integration of the WATS processes is only performed when the slices
reach the end of the pipe, based on their residence time in the pipe.
4.2
Coding advantages on the Lagrangian implementation
The Lagrangian implementation show interesting advantages compared to a Eulerian ap-
proach for online modelling.
The first advantage of the model lies on the reduced number of operations required
at every time step. The Eulerian approach requires continuous update of the mass balance
everywhere in the computation grid. However, the obtained concentrations at interme-
diate point within the system are of no use for the model objective.
The Lagrangian
implementation, on the other hand, does not need to perform any intermediate operation
besides updating the position of the slices. It only performs the numerical integration of
the WATS processes at the point of interest.
21
==PAGE:25==
Figure 10: Schematic diagram of the model implementation in python. The diagram shows the
different coding elements involved in the calculation performed at every time step. Some of the
pseudo-functions mentioned in the diagram are not formally defined as python functions.
22
==PAGE:26==
The model structure also has potential benefits specifically for online application.
Thanks to the independency of the water slices, the model structure show interesting
resilience if there are any issues with acquisition, transmission and processing of the mea-
sured data or with the server. Once initialized in the system, the water slices constitute
entirely closed systems until they reach the end of the pipe, whereas any of the mass bal-
ances involved in Eulerian method can be disrupted by the online-specific issues mentioned
above.
5
Model Diagnosis
In this section, the Lagrangian model results applied to the Sirius case study are compared
to the MIKE simulation results (with the 7 selected variables stated in 3.2 which is used
as a baseline. The objective of the model diagnosis is to answer qualitatively the following
question :
Can the simplified Lagrangian model accurately reproduce the results obtained
in MIKE ?
The performance of the model are assessed qualitatively in this section, before a more
quantitative approach is put in place for the Sensitivity and Uncertainty analysis in Section
6 and Section 7.
For the model diagnosis, different pipe sections within the Sirius network are con-
sidered in order to assess the model performance under different conditions.
Figure 11: Average sulfide concentration over 3 day of the baseline simulation (with XS2 removed)
in MIKE. The location of the gravity pipe studied in 5.1 is indicated with a G. The three different
end points of the pressure main simulations described in 5.2 are indicated with a P.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 12: Zoom in on the map described in Figure 11. The extent of the modelled gravity pipe
is shown with an oval shape.
5.1
Diagnosis of a short gravity pipe with low sulfide increase
5.1.1
Description of the gravity pipe
A short gravity pipe with a limited increase in sulfide build-up is chosen from the Sirius
network for the model diagnosis. The chosen pipe is indicated with a G on figure 12. The
choice of a short gravity pipe located upstream in the sewer network was made in order
to obtain a simple input pattern and thus ease the interpretation of the results.
The required ”Pipe characteristics” for the Hydraulic function (see Figure 10) were
found in the MIKE definition of the collection system and are listed in Table 5.1.1.
Table 5: Selected information and pipe characteristics of the studied gravity pipe
Pipe ID
C20194901
Simulated Length
195 m
Slope
3 · 10−4 m/m
Roughness coefficient
0.017s.m−1/3 (Smooth concrete)
Diameter
1.7 m
Average water depth
0.07 m
Average velocity
0.14 m/s
Average residence time
23 min
24
==PAGE:28==
Figure 13: Time series extracted in MIKE view of the state variables at the start (Input) and
end (Output) of the gravity pipe. The last two days of a three days simulation are shown
The time series, visible in Figure 13, show that that the sewer processes are active
in the considered section, with a visible difference between the input and the output in
MIKE. The 23 minutes average residence time in the pipe is visible as an offset that
results in a small delay for the output shape compared to the input shape. For example,
the peak of XHw occurs slightly later in the output than in the input. The total sulfide
concentration generally increase along the pipe, reaching an average concentration higher
than 0.2 mg/L. However, this is not always the case, with practically no change in sulfide
observed between the input and the output of the model around 05:00. At this time of the
day, the input and output concentration of dissolved oxygen remain constant, meaning
that oxygen consumption by aerobic processes is sufficiently low to be compensated by
reaeration. The rest of the time, oxygen is quickly depleted which allows the anaerobic
production of sulfide.
The ability of the designed model to reproduce the MIKE output in this particular
setup will now be studied.
5.1.2
Diagnosis of the Manning function
Before implementing the full Lagrangian model, the ”Hydraulic function” based on the
Manning equation was tested first. The water depth time series was extracted from MIKE
with a one minute frequency, similarly to what could have been obtained with a sensor.
The Manning function can accurately estimate the flow velocity at the beginning of
25
==PAGE:29==
Figure 14: Time series comparing Water depth and Velocity both extracted from MIKE and
modelled with the Manning function. The ”End of pipe” point where data was extracted is located
30m upstream of the next pipe junction. The water depth at the beginning of the pipe was used
as the input for the Manning function
the pipe based on the water depth, as shown in Figure 14. The daily pattern and the scale
of the velocity obtained in MIKE at the beginning of the pipe are similar to the modelled
results. It can be noted that a consistent underestimation is observed, with on average a
reduction of 6% relative to the velocity in MIKE at the beginning of the pipe ( maximum
relative reduction is 10% in the afternoon).
However, some large discrepancy of velocity is observed between the beginning and
the end of the pipe. In MIKE, the velocity increases abruptly near the end of the pipe
(shown in Figure 27 in the Appendices, which plots velocity at different intermediate
point in the pipe). This sudden increase in pipe velocity is probably due to the junction
with another pipe in MIKE. The Manning equation is not able to able to model such
quick changes in velocity in the pipe that are probably caused by the influence of other
neighbouring systems.
However, because the modelled velocity obtained is close to the MIKE results ob-
tained along the majority of the pipe section, it was decided to proceed with the model
implementation using the results of the Manning function.
5.1.3
Diagnosis results
For the model diagnosis, the output of the Lagrangian model is compared with the ex-
tracted MIKE results. The time series of the 7 state variables are shown in Figure 15. The
first 5 variables (visible in the 4 upper plots of the Figure) show little variation between
the two modelisations. These variables are relatively slow changing, as evidenced by the
26
==PAGE:30==
moderate changes compared to the input, which are visible in Figure 28 in the Appendices.
SII and SO, on the other hand, show higher discrepancy during early-morning peri-
ods, where the flow reach its lowest value (see Figure 14). The modelled dissolved oxygen
concentration during those periods is considerably higher in the Lagrangian model than
in MIKE, which leads to an inhibition of sulfide production.
Apart from this short period of time where sulfide concentration appear to be un-
derestimated, the Lagrangian model accurately reproduces the sulfide concentration daily
pattern found in MIKE.
Overall, the results from Lagrangian model applied to a short gravity pipe are very
close to the MIKE simulation. Some additional analysis of the processes at play leading
to the spike in Dissolved oxygen could help understand why the two model differ during
the early-morning hours.
Figure 15: WATS variable evolution in time at the end of the gravity pipe, for both the Lagrangian
and the MIKE models.
5.2
Diagnosis of the pressure main with large sulfide buildup
5.2.1
Description of pressure main
The other pipe section selected for the Lagrangian model implementation is the more than
10km long pressure main leading to the WWTP. This corresponds to the most critical part
27
==PAGE:31==
of the Sirius network as it is where the highest concentration of dissolved sulfide are found
(as well as total amount, given the large flow).
Similarly to what has been done for the gravity pipe, the hydraulics of the pres-
sure main are studied first before the implementation. The kinematic time independency
assumption of the Lagrangian model is tested by examining the velocity along the pipe.
Table 6: Selected information and pipe characteristics of the studied pressure main
P1 - 349 m
Simulated Length
P2 - 3589 m
P3 - 10308 m
Diameter (remains constant
1 m
Average velocity
0.67 m/s
Average residence time (Total length)
4h
Figure 16:
Flow velocity evolution in time, at different point in the pressure main (Legend
corresponds to the distance from start of the pressure main)
28
==PAGE:32==
Figure 17: Zoom in on the night hours of the flow velocity figure 16 (Legend corresponds to the
distance from start of the pressure main)
Figure 18: Flow discharge time series, used as input of the Lagrangian model. The raw data was
smoothed using a 20 minutes window
29
==PAGE:33==
The analysis of Figures 16 and 17 reveal that the assumption on velocity uniformity
along the pipe generally holds true. The different time series of flow velocity overlap at
most times. Some oscillations, particularly in the early morning hours, do show some
deviations between the different curves. A zoom-in on the nigh hours, visible in Figure
17, show that the scale of oscillations tend to increase downstream of the pipe.
The
propagation of the velocity change across the different time series is rather fast and, as
expected, corresponds to the pressure wave celerity rather than the much slower average
flow velocity mentioned in Table 5.2.1. In a real-life pressure main system however, the
oscillations observed would be actively avoided as they can be damaging to the sewer
elements.
The cause for these oscillations could be a pressure wave generated by the
sudden change in velocity, but could also be caused by the numerical MIKE pumping
scheme. Furthermore, those oscillations are problematic for the Lagrangian model as it
can’t effectively model them and their effect on transport of solute and particles. Therefore,
in order to obtain more realistic input that is also easier to model, the discharge (m3/s)
extracted from MIKE, was smoothed as shown in Figure 18. The time window was chosen
to reduce the scale of the very quick oscillations obtained in the morning hours, while
preserving the overall shape of the input.
Using the hydraulic inputs described here, the Lagrangian model could then be
implemented for the pressure main. In order to better understand the Lagrangian model
results, three consecutive simulation of increasing length were implemented for the pressure
main. The starting point of all simulations is located near the pressure main start, where
data required for the input could be extracted from MIKE view. The endpoint of each
simulation is indicated in Figure 11, and the corresponding length of simulated pipe is
shown in Table 5.2.1.
Before analyzing the results of the Lagrangian simulations, a preliminary analysis
of the MIKE results for the three point of interests and the input was first conducted.
The results shown in Figure 19 show the processes dynamics at play in the pressure main.
The graph reveals that anaerobic conditions that are prone to sulfide production are very
quickly established. The readily biodegradable substrate are progressively depleted in the
pipe, and cannot be replenished by aerobic hydrolisation. A net decay of biomass thus
become noticeable at the end of the pipe when the readily biodegradable substrate is
almost fully depleted. Finally, it can also be noted that the scale of changes over the short
P1 section is very small compared to the two longer sections.
5.2.2
Diagnosis results
In this section, the results of the Lagrangian model are compared with the MIKE simu-
lation. The different components of the models that have been described in the previous
sections are introduced progressively, in the following order :
1. A simulation is performed using the raw (with large oscillations) discharge as an
input. The concentration time series extracted from MIKE view are used as input.
2. The discharge is smoothed with a 20 min window. The same MIKE concentrations
time series are used as input again.
3. The discharge is smoothed and in addition, selected variables concentration in the
input are averaged as described in Section 3.4.2
30
==PAGE:34==
Figure 19: WATS variable evolution in time for the input and the three selected point of interest
in the pressure main. Last 2 days of a 3 day simulation are shown
5.2.2.1
P1 simulation
The results of the short modelled section, P1, were studied first. In Figure 20, the benefits
of using the smoothed discharge input are visible. The oscillations, that are reaching very
large amplitude for SII when using the raw input, are attenuated with the smoothed input.
Using a smoothed discharge as input helps obtain a more steady daily profile that is closer
to the MIKE results.
However, there is one important between the MIKE and the model with smoothed
input that can be highlighted. In the MIKE simulation, anaerobic conditions are con-
sistently observed in the system, whereas visible oxygen peaks are remaining in the La-
grangian model. The SO peaks observed find their source in the input, visible in Figure
31
==PAGE:35==
19. The magnitude of those peaks were reduced by half approximately in the Lagrangian
method, whereas oxygen was entirely and quickly consumed in the MIKE model.
Figure 20: Daily profile obtained for P1 pipe section. The results obtained with Mike and with
the Lagrangian model (both for the raw discharge input - Simulation 1 , and the 20min-window
smoothed one - Simulation 2) are compared
Finally, the simplification of the concentration inputs, corresponding to simulation
3, is introduced. The results of this simulation for section P1 are shown in Figure 21. The
concentration of the variables with an averaged input are, as expected, heavily influenced
by this simplification and thus significantly deviate from the MIKE results and previous
simulation. The total sulfide concentration (SII), on the other hand, is only very slightly
reduced compared with Simulation 2. Therefore, it can be concluded that the inclusion
of the additional layer of simplification on the concentration inputs does not markedly
impact the forecast of SII buildup.
32
==PAGE:36==
Figure 21:
Daily profile of WATS variables obtained in the P1 pipe section for Lagrangian
and MIKE simulations (Simulation 2 and Simulation 3). The variables averaged in the input of
Simulation 3 are SSO4S, XHw, SF , SA and SO
5.2.2.2
P2 simulation
The different simulations of the Lagrangian model with varying input were applied to the
P2 pipe section, which is approximately 10 times longer than P1. The daily profile of SII
concentration obtained with those simulations is presented in Figure 22.
Different characteristics of the profile thus obtained can be highlighted.
First, a significant delay of the morning peak can be observed in all the Lagrangian
models obtained for pipe section P2. However, neither the width of the peak, nor the
time of the minimum, appear to be impacted. One possible explanation of this observed
33
==PAGE:37==
delay in the sulfide peak could be that it is the maxima of the flow oscillations observed
between 5am and 9am that regulate the transport of particles in MIKE. This hypothesis
is further described in the Discussion 6. Whereas, in the Lagrangian model simulations
presented here, a smoothed discharge input is used, meaning that the transport is mainly
linked with the mean value of the oscillations.
It can also be noticed that the Lagrangian model consistently underestimates SII
concentration build up. The maximum concentration observed is for example 15% lower
than with the MIKE results.
Finally, no major differences can be noticed between the results of Simulation 2 and
Simulation 3. Therefore, the assumption that average inputs can be used instead of time
series for selected variables appear to be valid in this case.
Figure 22: Daily profile of WATS variables obtained in the P2 pipe section in MIKE and for 2
Lagrangian simulation (Simulation 2 and Simulation 3)
5.2.2.3
P3 simulation
The same procedure was applied for the entire length of the pipe, with pipe section P3.
The results are shown in Figure 23. The same general comment made for pipe section P2
also apply here.
However, the impact of high concentration ”noise” on the results becomes very
significant. The noise is caused by very high value that are probably linked with slow
34
==PAGE:38==
moving slices that arrive at the end of the pipe with a very high residence time in the pipe
and thus high sulfide concentration. Even tough those ’small” slices might be averaged
with bigger, faster ones (as described in the model handling procedure in Section 3) they
might still significantly skew the value and cause the observed noise.
This phenomenon appears to be further amplified by the variation of the concen-
tration input. Indeed, the averaged constant concentration input help reduce the noise
observed, except in the afternoon, during which noise remains significant.
Overall, the performances of the model for the entire length of the pipe seem to be
compromised by the transport limitations exposed in 3.3.3. Further development would
thus be required to be able to directly model the entire length of the pipe with the designed
Lagrangian model.
Figure 23: Daily profile of WATS variables obtained in the P2 pipe section in MIKE and for 2
Lagrangian simulation with smoothed discharge as input for both (with averaged, constant input
for selected variable)
35
==PAGE:39==
6
Sensitivity analysis
6.1
Method
6.1.1
Description of the sensitivity method
In the previous section, the Lagrangian model developed and its hypothesis have been
qualitatively tested for the Sirius fictional case study. The results that have been obtained
are based on the boundary conditions extracted from MIKE, and the same model parame-
ters that were used in the MIKE simulation (WATS constants). Because no historical data
is available for this fictional case study, it is interesting to understand what could be the
possible ranges of results obtained depending on the different modelling choices (boundary
conditions, parameters, structure) of the model. This exploration of the possible model
results is studied in the Uncertainty analysis in the following section, but it first requires to
reduce the dimensionality of the large model parameter space to be numerically feasible.
The sensitivity analysis precisely aims at narrowing down the model parameters to
the one that are most impactful on the model results [Beven, 2010]. The dimensional space
of selected WATS model parameters and boundary conditions are thus explored in order
to identify their impact on the results. This analysis is quantitatively performed using an
objective function, that measures the deviation between the different model results. The
chosen objective function is the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) applied to the MIKE
results used as a baseline.
RMSE(y, ˆy) =
sPN−1
i=0 (yi −ˆyi)2
N
(3)
Where ˆyi is the Lagrangian SII concentration at time step i, and yi is the baseline
MIKE concentration. The [0; N −1] time period considered for the time steps correspond
to the last two days of a 3 day simulation (thus excluding the warming-up period from
the analysis). RMSE uses the absolute value of the residuals, and thus introduce a skew
toward the large concentration difference. This skew is relevant for the model analysis,
as it is not necessarily the average SII concentration that are of interest for the model
objectives, but rather the high concentrations of the sulfide peaks.
The sensitivity analysis was performed on the P2, where good performances of the
model were observed in Section 5. This choice of the pipe section was made because the
pressure main is the most interesting part of the network to model for the sulfide analysis,
and because the P2 pipe section is long enough to be subject to significant changes of
concentration due to the sewer processes, while not suffering from the noise issues detailed
for section P3.
There exists different sensitivity analysis method, with varying details of reliability
of sensitivity indices and how thoroughly the range of parameter values are explored. In
order to fully explorer the parameter space, a Global sensitivity analysis was selected.
However, each Lagrangian simulation for pipe section P2 requiring approximately 20 sec-
onds, methods requiring fewer simulations were preferred. The Morris screening method,
a Global sensitivity method, that ranks the tested parameters relatively to their sensitiv-
ity , explores the parameter space with fewer simulations than more extensive sensitivity
methods [Campolongo et al., 2007]. This method was thus applied in this section. The
output of the Morris method consist of two elements ; µ∗, which quantifies how influential
this parameter is relative to the objective function, and σ, which indicates non linearity
36
==PAGE:40==
or possible interactions with other parameters.
6.1.2
Selection of parameter and range
The number of parameters that are tested in the sensitivity analysis directly correlate with
the simulation time required. Given the very large number of WATS constants (more than
30 different constants), including all constants in the sensitivity analysis would result in
an extremely long sensitivity analysis. Therefore, only a few selected constants for the
model could be considered. Khalil et al. have identified the most sensitive parameters for
a specific pressure main simulation [Khalil et al., 2021]. Those WATS constants, described
in table 6.1.2, were the only constants included in this sensitivity analysis.
Temperature and pH, considered as constant in the Lagrangian model, were not
included in the sensitivity and uncertainty analysis, despite being identified as very relevant
parameters of the WATS model. In the case of Temperature, this is because we assume
that the range of variation of the parameter is relatively narrow for underground pipes.
The parameter can be measured and estimated relatively easily , therefore the forward
uncertainty related to this parameter is expected to be limited. pH is also identified as
a key parameter in the WATS processes [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013], and can be very
critical if pH specific mitigation measures are put in place. But since pH mitigation is
outside of the scope of the designed model, its sensitivity was not investigated either.
The parameter ranges for the sensitivity analysis are based on literature range rec-
ommended in [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]. The sampling of the values in the parameter
space was done with the Latin Hypercube Sampling from pyDOE model, using the cen-
termaxmin option. The recommended range for parameters found in the literature was
modified for oxygen. Because it is expected that, at this point in the sewer system, the
oxygen level is already relatively low, the maximum bound of the oxygen range was reduced
from 1 mg/L to 0.1 mg/L.
Table 7: Selected range of the WATS constant and range for the boundary value of concentrations
according to [Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013]. Variables in red correspond to WATS constants. The
µ∗and σ refer to the results of the sensitivity analysis. The top four parameters with the most
influence (highest µ∗) are shown in bold.
Variable
Units
Min Range
Max range
Value in Baseline
µ∗
σ
SSSO4
mgS/L
20
200
150
0.07
0.06
SF
mgCOD/L
0
40
1
0.15
0.11
SA
mgCOD/L
0
20
0.02
0.08
0.06
XHw
mgCOD/L
20
100
34
0.03
0.03
SO
mgO2/L
0
0.1
4.10−5
0.18
0.07
kh1
d−1
2
10
5
0.01
0.01
KX1
gCOD/gCOD
1
2
1.5
0.003
0.01
nfe
dimensionless
0
1
0.14
0.001
0.002
qfe
d−1
0
10
3
0.003
0.01
A
g0.5S.m−0.5.h−1
0.009
0.017
0.013
1.25
0.62
Table 8: Description of the WATS constants selected for the sensitivity analysis.
Variable
Description
kh1
Hydrolysis rate constant, fast hydrolyzable fraction
37
==PAGE:41==
Table 8: Description of the WATS constants selected for the sensitivity analysis.
Variable
Description
KX1
Saturation constant for hydrolysis, fast hydrolyzable fraction
nfe
Anaerobic hydrolysis reduction factor
qfe
Maximum rate for fermentation
A
Rate constant for sulfide formation.
6.2
Results
Figure 24: Scatter plot of the sensitivity analysis results. The red points correspond to WATS
constants, the blue ones to the input. The dotted diagonal separates the parameters with non
linear response or interactions on top from the parameter with linear response on the bottom. A
zoomed-in version of the plot is shown in Figure 32 in (Appendices)
The Morris sensitivity method was implemented with 30 trajectories. The results
from the sensitivity analysis, detailed in Table 6.1.2 and plotted in Figure 24, show that
the most sensitive parameter of the analysis is the Rate constant for sulfide formation. It
shows little variability, as its σ value is smaller than µ∗. The other WATS constants, on
the other hand, are much less sensitive than other parameters tested. Their calibration
would therefore not be of primary concern when implementing the model. Similarly for the
constant input of SA and XHw, the sensitivity analysis show that using a rough estimation
for the implementation does not significantly impact the results.
Sulfate concentration SSSO4, Fermentable and readily biodegradable product SF
and Dissolved oxygen SO, are of intermediate importance between the sulfide production
rate and the other factors. None of the parameters show a particularly high variance and
are therefore not showing non-linear effects or strong interactions.
38
==PAGE:42==
The results of the sensitivity analysis can be interpreted considering the biochemical
conditions in the pressure main and the previous study of the Lagrangian model results.
The sulfide production rate largely dominated the sensitivity index.
This results was
expected, as this rate is directly related to the objective function that considers sulfide
buildup. The other WATS constants that are related to COD conversion, have a rather
minor impact on the model.
It could be because those processes are actually mostly
regulated by the concentration of the input rather than those processes constants. Among
the most sensitive constant inputs are SF and perhaps more importantly DO. Indeed,
Section 5 results showed that the dissolved oxygen diminution in the Langrangian model
did not appear to reduce as quickly as they do in the WATS model.
Therefore, the
boundary value of oxygen remains a sensitive parameter whose choice of value needs to
be carefully considered in the input.
7
Uncertainty analysis
7.1
Method
Once the most sensitive parameters of the model have been identified, it is possible to pro-
ceed with the forward uncertainty analysis of those parameters. The uncertainty analysis
results can then be used to describe the model ouput in terms of range, which is important
to effectively use the model, knowing its limitation.
Because no historical data is available, a Monte Carlo method [Metropolis and Ulam, 1949]
can be used to obtain stochastic results from the deterministic model that we developped
[Beven, 2010]. In order to conduct the uncertainty analysis, it is necessary to make deci-
sions about prior information related to the parameters considered. The parameters that
have been identified as less sensitive in Section 6 can thus be fixed at a constant value.
Information about the distribution of the most sensitive parameters must then be gath-
ered. No mention of possible co-variation of the parameters considered were found, so their
distribution is assumed to be independent. Only the expected range of the parameters,
detailed in Table 6.1.2, are known. Therefore, a uniform distribution within the range was
chosen for all the parameters included in the uncertainty analysis.
7.2
Results
Only the 3 parameters with the highest µ∗, the most influential on average were included
in the Monte Carlo simulation. 300 different simulations were performed with a different
combination of those 3 parameters, using a uniform prior.
The results of the Uncertainty analysis are shown in Figure 25. It can be seen that
the output of the MIKE simulation still falls outside of the 5% and 95% percentile interval.
It can also be noticed that the shape of the median and the percentile appear to be similar,
with increasing amplitude. This is probably cause by the dominating role of A, the rate
constant for sulfide formation on the uncertainty.
Overall, the stochastic results from the uncertainty analysis provided range of ex-
pected values, which are essential to get a good understanding of the model output.
39
==PAGE:43==
Figure 25: Results of the Monte Carlo method for 300 simulations with a uniform prior for A,
SO and SF . The results of the MIKE simulations are also included for comparison
8
Discussion for model improvement
The different results that have been studied in the previous sections have allowed us to
assess the performances of the simplified sewer model. Because no data was available in
this project, the output of the WATS implementation in MIKE has been used instead
as a baseline. The different simplifications of the model have been tested against this
baseline, both qualitatively in the model diagnosis, and quantitatively with the sensitivity
analysis. The results thus obtained have shown that the developed model was capable
of reproducing the baseline results in many pipe sections. However, in order to improve
the model accuracy, as well as allowing an even easier implementation of the model, some
points of improvement and research directions for the model can be identified.
First, further simplification of the model input should be investigated to ease the
application of the model in a real-world conditions. In Section 3, it has been shown that
most of the WATS variable in the input could be approximated at a constant value. The
results obtained in the diagnosis (Section 5) validated this assumption, as the Lagrangian
model prediction on sulfide concentration was barely impacted by the use of the constant
inputs. Among those constant concentration inputs, some were identified more impactful
than others in the sensitivity analysis (Section 6). In a real-world case study with available
data, those sensitive inputs could thus be calibrated through optimization, while a default
value could be used for the less sensitive ones. However, the temporal analysis conducted
40
==PAGE:44==
in Section 3 concluded that two of the concentration inputs could not be simplified with
a constant value. One of the two variable input is the total sulfide concentration. This
input can be conveniently obtained using online a dissolved sulfide sensor as a dynamic
input.
The other variable input identified is XS1, the hydrolyzable substrate.
In the
Sirius simulation, the time series at the starting point of the simulation were used as input
for this variable, but in a real world case study, this input cannot easily be measured.
Practical way to model this component input must then be found in the future.
Therefore, it would be interesting to test different modelling options for XS1 and see
their impact on the results. Despite the conclusion of the temporal analysis, a simplifica-
tion as a constant value could still be considered, and its sensitivity tested. If the constant
simplification does not prove satisfactory, other modelling option such as a profiled input
could also be considered.
Another key finding of the comparison of the Lagrangian and MIKE simulation is
the difference in the timing of the peak of sulfide concentration described in Section 5.
Despite the shape of the daily profile being similar, the main peak of the Lagrangian
model is delayed by approximately two hours compared to the MIKE simulation for the
P2 simulation. This delay seem to increase for the longer pipe section P3, although the
shape is harder to guess because of the noise. This increasing delay could indicate that the
MIKE average velocity is consistently higher in the pressure main, and actually correspond
with the maximum velocity of the oscillations (the difference in velocity would result in
the correct range of delay for the P2 section).
One possible explanation for this overestimation of the velocity in MIKE could be a
low sampling frequency (based on the MIKE ECO Lab time steps) that do not fulfill the
conditions of the Sampling theorem and thus degrade the signal input [Stranneby, 2004].
This hypothesis could therefore be further explored by analyzing the time resolution setup
of the MIKE simulation. It could also be relevant to set up a particle tracking for similar
flow conditions in order to better understand the Lagrangian dynamics. Therefore, fur-
ther investigation of hydrodynamic differences between the models constitute the second
direction of research that could be consider to improve the designed model.
Finally, the last major direction of improvement for the model is related to the
results obtained for the entire pipe length simulation P3. The high concentration ”noise”
that is observed in the Lagrangian modelisation of P3 make any analysis and use of the
forecast obtained rather difficult. Different improvement strategies could be explored to
try to address and understand the issues encountered when simulating such long pipe. To
begin with, further analysis of the existing model could be done to identify the cause of
the noise. For example, the maximum ”age” of the slices entering the exit at each time
step could be analyzed. This data could help confirm the hypothesis that slow moving
slices with long residence time are responsible for the noise observed.
Depending on the finding, different solutions to the problem could be considered
to help achieve more usable results for very long pipes. For example, the pipe section
could be divided in a few smaller pipe sections in series.
Because each intermediate
endpoint would smooth out the concentration, the outlier effect on the noise could thus be
avoided. Another option is to increase the 20 minute window that was chosen to smooth
the discharge in the input. Different smoothing windows could thus be considered, and
their effects on the results could be assessed quantitatively with a sensitivity analysis.
41
==PAGE:45==
9
Conclusion
The focus of this study was on the development of a new model structure for sulfide
concentration modelling. The need for such new model is motivated by the increasing
availability of sulfide concentration sensors together with the potential benefit of MPC of
sulfide that require simplified, online models. The designed model aimed at simplifying the
existing model implementation both in its structure and through its inputs. This study
focused on the development of such model by following a model building procedure.
First, the model requirements for a model structure fit for a future MPC integration
were defined. Despite the lack of real-world data available for the study, a fictional study-
case sewer network was used a substitute to perform analysis and test the developed model.
The result of the MIKE implementation of the WATS model for was used as a baseline
that the developed model aimed at replicating.
Starting from the WATS implementation in MIKE ECO Lab, different types of simplifi-
cations were then considered and assessed for the model :
• Simplification of the WATS variables were considered. These simplification included
discarding a slow changing variable and simplifying other variables as constants for
the model input.
• Simplification of the model structure for transport of variables was also considered.
This second kind of simplification led us to the development of an entirely new
model structure for transport. This model relies on a Lagrangian description for
hydrodynamic transport, rather than the typical Eulerian approach.
The resulting simplified model was then implemented in python for the simulations of one
pipe section at a time.
An analysis of the results obtained for the baseline and the simplified model was then
done for the fictional case study. The comparison of the results showed that good repli-
cating performance were achieved for most pipe sections in the network. However, when
simulating the entire length of a 10km pressure main, some high-concentration ”noise”
significantly degraded the performance of the model.
In order to further understand the role of the different elements of the model struc-
ture, and provide a more complete picture of the range of possible output, a sensitivity
and uncertainty analysis were also conducted. The results showed that the production
rate of sulfide, a constant of the WATS model, was the dominating factor influencing the
sulfide concentration profile.
Finally, some of the next development steps were identified in the discussion of
the results. These potential development steps often rely on hypotheses that need to be
tested first in supplementary studies. Many of the future development steps that have
been identified would benefit from having available data which could help test hypothesis
and also assess the full range of the model capacities and its limitations.
42
==PAGE:46==
To conclude, the following key conclusions can be drawn from this study :
• The Lagrangian based model for transport represents a promising direction of de-
velopment for a simplified, online model.
• The developed model showed poorer performance in very long pipe stretches that
are affected by transient hydraulic conditions
• Further simplification and analysis are still required before the model can be applied
in a practical way
• Assessing the model performance with real-world data would be the next logical step
to proceed with the model building procedure
43
==PAGE:47==
References
[Beven, 2010] Beven, K. (2010). Environmental modelling: an uncertain future?, chapter
3 - Simulation with no historical data available. CRC press.
[Campolongo et al., 2007] Campolongo, F., Cariboni, J., and Saltelli, A. (2007). An effec-
tive screening design for sensitivity analysis of large models. Environmental modelling
& software, 22(10):1509–1518.
[Carrera et al., 2016] Carrera, L., Springer, F., Lipeme-Kouyi, G., and Buffiere, P. (2016).
A review of sulfide emissions in sewer networks: overall approach and systemic mod-
elling. Water Science and Technology, 73(6):1231–1242.
[COMSOL, 2017] COMSOL (2017).
COMSOL multiphysics cyclopedia - Diffusion
coefficient.
https://www.comsol.com/multiphysics/diffusion-coefficient#:~:
text=A%20typical%20diffusion%20coefficient%20for,%2D9%20m2%2Fs.
[Online;
accessed 02-June-2023].
[DHI, 2017] DHI (2017).
WATS in MIKE ECO Lab, scientific description.
https://
manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/2017/General/DHI_H2S_module_WATS2013.pdf.
[Online; accessed 01-June-2023].
[DHI, 2023] DHI (2023). User Guide for MIKE+ Collection System. https://manuals.
mikepoweredbydhi.help/latest/Cities/MIKE_Plus_Collection_System.pdf. [On-
line; accessed 02-June-2023].
[EPA, 1974] EPA, U. S. (1974).
Process design manual for sulfide control in sanitary
sewerage systems. US Environmental Protection Agency, Technology Transfer.
[Ganigu´e et al., 2011] Ganigu´e, R., Gutierrez, O., Rootsey, R., and Yuan, Z. (2011).
Chemical dosing for sulfide control in australia: an industry survey. Water research,
45(19):6564–6574.
[Ganigu´e et al., 2018] Ganigu´e, R., Jiang, G., Liu, Y., Sharma, K., Wang, Y.-C., Gonza-
lez, J., Nguyen, T., and Yuan, Z. (2018). Improved sulfide mitigation in sewers through
on-line control of ferrous salt dosing. Water research, 135:302–310.
[Ganigu´e et al., 2016] Ganigu´e, R., Jiang, G., Sharma, K., Chen, J., Vuong, L., and Yuan,
Z. (2016). Online control of magnesium hydroxide dosing for sulfide mitigation in sewers:
Algorithm development, simulation analysis, and field validation. Journal of Environ-
mental Engineering, 142(12):04016069.
[Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 2013] Hvitved-Jacobsen, T., Vollertsen, J., and Nielsen, A. H.
(2013). Sewer processes: microbial and chemical process engineering of sewer networks.
CRC press.
[Hvitved-Jacobsen et al., 1998] Hvitved-Jacobsen, T., Vollertsen, J., and Nielsen, P. H.
(1998). A process and model concept for microbial wastewater transformations in gravity
sewers. Water Science and Technology, 37(1):233–241.
[Jørgensen and Bendoricchio, 2001] Jørgensen, S. E. and Bendoricchio, G. (2001). Fun-
damentals of ecological modelling, volume 21. Elsevier.
44
==PAGE:48==
[Khalil et al., 2021] Khalil, A., Santoro, D., Batstone, D. J., and DeGroot, C. T. (2021).
Uncertainty analysis of rising sewer models with respect to input parameters and model
structure using monte carlo simulations and computational fluid dynamics. Water Sci-
ence and Technology, 83(10):2486–2503.
[Kleinstreuer, 2018] Kleinstreuer, C. (2018). Modern fluid dynamics. Springer.
[Liu et al., 2016] Liu, Y., Ganigu´e, R., Sharma, K., and Yuan, Z. (2016). Event-driven
model predictive control of sewage pumping stations for sulfide mitigation in sewer
networks. Water research, 98:376–383.
[Lund et al., 2018] Lund, N. S. V., Falk, A. K. V., Borup, M., Madsen, H., and
Steen Mikkelsen, P. (2018). Model predictive control of urban drainage systems: A
review and perspective towards smart real-time water management. Critical Reviews in
Environmental Science and Technology, 48(3):279–339.
[Manning et al., 1890] Manning, R., Griffith, J. P., Pigot, T., and Vernon-Harcourt, L. F.
(1890). On the flow of water in open channels and pipes.
[Metropolis and Ulam, 1949] Metropolis, N. and Ulam, S. (1949).
The monte carlo
method. Journal of the American statistical association, 44(247):335–341.
[Nielsen et al., 1998] Nielsen, P. H., Raunkjær, K., and Hvitved-Jacobsen, T. (1998). Sul-
fide production and wastewater quality in pressure mains. Water Science and Technol-
ogy, 37(1):97–104.
[Park et al., 2014] Park, K., Lee, H., Phelan, S., Liyanaarachchi, S., Marleni, N.,
Navaratna, D., Jegatheesan, V., and Shu, L. (2014). Mitigation strategies of hydro-
gen sulphide emission in sewer networks–a review. International Biodeterioration &
Biodegradation, 95:251–261.
[Patankar, 2018] Patankar, S. (2018). Numerical heat transfer and fluid flow. Taylor &
Francis.
[Pomeroy et al., 1974] Pomeroy, Bailey, J. ., and of Technology Transfer, U. S. E. P. A. O.
(1974). Process design manual for sulfide control in sanitary sewerage systems. US
Environmental Protection Agency, Technology Transfer.
[Pomeroy and Parkhurst, 1978] Pomeroy, R. D. and Parkhurst, J. D. (1978). The fore-
casting of sulfide build-up rates in sewers. In Eighth International Conference on Water
Pollution Research, pages 621–628. Elsevier.
[Rieckermann et al., 2007] Rieckermann, J., Neumann, M. B., Ort, C., Huisman, J. L.,
and Gujer, W. (2007). Dispersion coefficients of sewers from tracer experiments. UN-
CERTAINTY ANALYSIS FOR PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND DESIGN OF
URBAN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE, 52(5):123–133.
[Saatci, 1990] Saatci, A. (1990). Velocity and depth of flow calculations in partially filled
pipes. Journal of environmental engineering, 116(6):1202–1208.
[Sharma et al., 2008] Sharma, K., de Haas, D. W., Corrie, S., O’Halloran, K., Keller, J.,
and Yuan, Z. (2008). Predicting hydrogen sulfide formation in sewers: a new model.
Water, 35(2):132–137.
45
==PAGE:49==
[Stranneby, 2004] Stranneby, D. (2004). Digital signal processing and applications. Else-
vier.
[Veliskova and Sokac, 2019] Veliskova, Y. and Sokac, M. (2019).
Dispersion process in
sewer pipes with sediments and deposits. In IOP Conference Series: Earth and Envi-
ronmental Science, volume 362, page 012107. IOP Publishing.
46
==PAGE:50==
A
Appendices
A.1
Section 3 appendix
Figure 26: Time series of total sulfide concentration at the end of the pressure main for a 3 day
simulation in MIKE. The ”warming up” period of the model is visible in the first 24hours which
show a daily profile different from the next two day. It can thus be concluded that the residence
time in the sewer network is less than 24 hours.
47
==PAGE:51==
A.2
Section 5 appendix
Figure 27: Flow velocity at different point along the modelled gravity pipe (The legend indicates
distance from the starting point of the modelled section of the pipe).
The ”Beginning of the
pipe” and the ”End of the pipe” mentioned in Figure 14 refer to 0m and 195m respectively. Data
extracted from MIKE View
48
==PAGE:52==
Figure 28: WATS variable evolution in time at the end of the gravity pipe, for both the Lagrangian
and the MIKE models. The input of the concentrations, extracted from MIKE at the beginning
of the pipe, is also shown
49
==PAGE:53==
Figure 29: Elevation profile of the pressure main
50
==PAGE:54==
Figure 30: WATS daily profile for pipe section P2, for different simulations of the Lagrangian
model, and from MIKE
51
==PAGE:55==
Figure 31: WATS daily profile for pipe section P3, for different simulations of the Lagrangian
model, and from MIKE
52
==PAGE:56==
A.3
Section 7 appendix
Figure 32: Scatter plot of the sensitivity analysis results. The red points correspond to WATS
constants, the blue ones to the input. The dotted diagonal separate the parameters with non
linear response or interactions on top from the parameter with linear response on the bottom. A
zoomed-out version of the plot is shown in Figure 24
53
