==PAGE:1==
Topology-Adaptive Neural Networks for
Power System Application
Report
Authors
Catherine Cheylan - s212802
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Paper structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
6
2.1
Power Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Power Grid as Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Network Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
The Power Flow Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
"N-k" security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Fully Connected Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
The perceptron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
The multi-layer perceptron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Graph Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Message Passing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Graph Convolutional Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.3
GNN for preprocessing graph data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
16
3.1
Baseline Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Definition of the methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Training Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.3
Loss function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
One-Hot Encoded FCNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Guided Dropout Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
The concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.2
The implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Graph Neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Physics-Informed Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.1
Physics-equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.2
Regularization term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
1
==PAGE:3==
Project Plan
Contents
4
Experiments
26
4.1
Dataset Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1
Data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.2
Datasets construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Models architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Comparison of the methods (no PINN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.1
Selecting the best models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.2
Comparing the best models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Implementation of the Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN) . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Interpretability Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Conclusion and future work
48
2
==PAGE:4==
Project Plan
Contents
Abstract
This thesis investigates the applicability and reliability of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) for power system applications, focusing on the prediction of grid state variables
in scenarios involving topology changes and security assessment. Traditional methods for
solving power flow equations, such as iterative algorithms, face challenges in terms of com-
putational speed and scalability for larger grids.
To address these limitations, Machine
Learning (ML) techniques, particularly Neural Networks (NNs), have gained attention for
emulating power flow calculations.
However, existing NN models lack the ability to in-
corporate topology changes without complete retraining, and their interpretability remains
limited.
To address these issues, this research explores the potential benefits of GNNs in power
system applications. Three main aspects are investigated: (1) a comparison between GNNs,
topology-aware NN models, and traditional power flow solvers for N-k security problems
involving single to multiple line outages; (2) the enhancement of GNNs’ physics-awareness by
incorporating the physical model of the power system into their training process to improve
prediction accuracy; and (3) the exploration of interpretability techniques for GNNs and
topology-aware NNs in N-2 security scenarios to provide post-hoc explanations for model
predictions.
The research contributes to advancing the field by assessing the performance of GNNs
and topology-aware NN models in capturing topology changes and predicting grid state
variables. It investigates the effectiveness of incorporating physics-based models into GNNs
to improve accuracy and explores interpretability frameworks to enhance understanding and
trust in the decision-making process of GNN models. The findings from this research have
implications for power system operators seeking efficient and reliable methods for security
assessment and decision-making.
Page 1 of 51
==PAGE:5==
Project Plan
Contents
Notations
Throughout the whole report, we use the following notations:
We use calligraphic letters (e.g., H ) to represent sets, where the elements b, c, d of a
set are enclosed in curly brackets as H = b, c, d. The size of a set is denoted by |H |.
Scalars are represented by lowercase or uppercase letters (e.g., a), while vectors, matrices,
and tensors are represented by bold letters (e.g., H). The imaginary unit is denoted by j,
and complex entries are indicated by an underline for scalars (a) and matrices (H). The real
and imaginary parts of H are denoted as Re(H) and Im(H), respectively, and H∗represents
its complex conjugate form.
Page 2 of 51
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
To ensure power system security, Transmission System Operators (TSOs) must be able
to calculate the state variables of the grid for any load case and any topology changes
(N-k scenarios). For instance for assessing the viability of the steady-state reached by a
power system following a contingency (i.e. a sudden line, transformer, or generator outage).
Traditionally, this is done by solving the Power Flow (PF), which involves a set of non-
linear, non-convex equations derived from Kirchhoff’s current law most commonly using
iterative methods such as Newton-Raphson method [1]. However, this approach incurs high
computational speed, making it impractical for larger grids or rapid analysis of different grid
configurations.
In recent years, Machine Learning (ML) methods have been investigated to enhance or
replace PF computations [2]. By utilizing a Neural Network (NN) model, it becomes possible
to predict unknown variables of PF based on known variables and emulate the calculation
process. In particular, Multi-Layered Perceptrons (MLPs) models have been widely used.
As an example, the work presented in [3] utilizes a Fully Connected Neural Network (FCNN)
to replicate the output of AC-PF.
However, traditional NN models are unable to capture grid topology changes and need to
be completely re-trained whenever the grid topology and other operation conditions change
in daily operations. To address this limitation, researchers have explored techniques such as
one-hot encoding [4], which introduces additional binary variables to represent the connection
or disconnection of components (e.g., lines or generators). While this method shows promise,
its scalability to larger systems with hundreds of components might be a concern. Another
approach, introduced in [4, 5], is called "guided dropout." This technique utilizes dropout
to integrate topology changes into the NN architecture. During training, the network is
simultaneously trained on samples obtained from the reference topology and elementary
topology changes (N-1 scenarios), with the topology changes encoded in the neural network
by activating "conditional" hidden units. This technique allows for regular generalization
for N-1 scenarios that has not been seen before but also for super-generalization for N-2
scenarios, by activating the corresponding conditional hidden units.
3
==PAGE:7==
Project Plan
1.2. Problem statement
On the other hand, recent advancements in NNs have led to the emergence of Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs), which inherently incorporate the structural characteristics of the
power system by integrating graph topology into the NN training process [6]. GNNs have
been successfully applied to solve the AC Optimal Power Flow (ACOPF) problem, as demon-
strated in [7]. The results indicate that GNN models outperform FCNN models in terms
of performance. The key mechanism of GNNs is message passing, where a target node ag-
gregates information from its neighbors, enabling the extraction and absorption of locality
features within the graph representation of the power grid. Despite their promising potential
for power system analysis, GNNs remain a black box tool for system analysis because of its
lack of physics of electricity and interpretation thus limiting their adoption by power system
operators.
This thesis aims to investigate the applicability and reliability of GNNs for power system
applications by examining the potential benefits of their adoption. The research contributes
in three main aspects. Firstly, it compares the performance of GNNs with topology-aware NN
models and traditional power flow solvers in scenarios involving single to multiple line out-
ages, specifically N-k security problems. Secondly, it seeks to enhance the physics-awareness
of GNNs by incorporating the physical model of the power system into their training pro-
cess, aiming to improve prediction accuracy. A comparative analysis between the enhanced
GNNs and Physics-Informed NNs will be conducted. Lastly, the interpretability of GNNs
and Physics-Informed NNs in N-2 security scenarios will be explored to provide post-hoc
explanations for the predictions generated by the different NNs. This interpretability frame-
work aims to enable the identification of any physical equivalences with the power system
under study and to facilitate the understanding of the GNN models’ decision-making process.
1.2
Problem statement
Formally the goals for this thesis are:
• Design supervised and data-driven neural network models implementing three methods:
– One-hot encoding method (OH)
– Guided dropout method (GD)
– Graph convolution method (GNN)
• Train and test those methods for various grid test cases: case 14, case 57, case 118.
• Discuss experimental results with focus on generalizability to unseen grid topologies.
• Integrate physical equation of the power balance to the three methods to render them
Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN) and compare the results.
• Apply interpretability techniques to the neural network models generated to discover
any physical equivalence in the predictions made.
Page 4 of 51
==PAGE:8==
Project Plan
1.3. Paper structure
1.3
Paper structure
The thesis is divided into four parts:
• Chapter 2: Theory. This chapter presents the necessary theoretical background
both for the power flow problem and the artificial neural network models used to solve
it. It covers fundamental concepts and principles related to these topics.
• Chapter 3: Methodology. In this chapter, the baseline methodology of this study
will be presented, i.e. definition of the neural networks, training procedure and loss
function, together with detailed methodology of the different neural networks imple-
mented.
• Chapter 4: Experiments. The focus of this chapter is on the experimental phase
of the study. It encompasses various aspects such as the construction of the dataset,
the selection and configuration of the neural network parameters, and the presentation
and interpretation of the experimental results.
• Chapter 5: Conclusion. The final chapter provides concluding remarks based on
the findings and results obtained from the conducted experiments. It also discusses the
limitations of the study’s approach and suggests potential areas for further improve-
ment and future research.
Page 5 of 51
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Theory
For understanding the full scope of this thesis, theoretical knowledge on both power flow
and machine learning will be needed. This chapter aims at giving the required background
for understanding the power flow problem for energy grid and the Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) models to solve it. Section 2.1 gives an overview of the power flow analysis and issues,
section 2.2 introduces the fundamentals of Fully Connected Neural Networks (FCNNs) and
section 2.3 covers Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
2.1
Power Flow
This section aims at giving an overview of power systems and their mathematical back-
ground. It will point out the power flow problem and the relevance of machine learning for
some applications.
2.1.1
Power Grid as Graphs
An electric power system is a network composed of two primary entities: buses that
represent significant points in the network (generator, demand, substations), and transmis-
sion or distribution lines that connect these buses. This power system can, therefore, be
represented as an undirected graph G = {V , E } with a vertex set V (busbars) and an edge
set E (lines and power transformers). The total number of buses in the system is N = |V |
and the number of branches is M = |E |. The way those buses are interconnected by the lines
and power transformers is called "topology" and the action to modify it is called "topological
change". Topological changes are quite frequent during operation of the grid or for security
assessment. For instance, for assessing the N-1 security criteria, power flow calculations
must be performed on N-1 topology scenarios. In this study, the topology is represented by
a binary vector τ called structural vector and where each element can take a value of either
0 or 1, indicating the connectivity status of the corresponding branch or line. For instance, it
can be seen in the figure 2.1 the IEEE-14 bus system and its undirected graph representation
of N = 14 buses and M = 20 branches connected in base architecture τ = τ θ.
6
==PAGE:10==
Project Plan
2.1. Power Flow
Figure 2.1: IEEE-14 bus system grid (left, [8]) and its undirected graph representation
(right).
2.1.2
Network Equations
In this study, the components that connect the different buses in the power system, such
as transmission lines, transformers, and phase shifters, are modeled with a common branch
model based on the framework provided by MATPOWER [9]. MATPOWER is an open-
source package consisting of Matlab-language M-files for solving steady-state power system
simulation and optimization problems, such as the power flow problem. This branch model
consists of a standard π transmission line model, with series impedance zs = rs + jxs and
total charging susceptance bc in series with an ideal phase shifting transformer. A scheme
taken from the MATPOWER manual [9] is shown in figure 2.2 below to illustrate the π
transmission line model.
Figure 2.2: Branch model from the MATPOWER manual [9]
The branch model is used to characterize the connection between two buses and allows
Page 7 of 51
==PAGE:11==
Project Plan
2.1. Power Flow
the construction of a complex N × N bus admittance matrix Ybus that characterizes the
connection between all buses of a N buses network. This matrix can fully describe the graph
topology and relates the complex nodal current injections N × 1 vector Ibus to the complex
node voltages N × 1 vector V by the following equation:
Ibus = YbusV
(2.1.1)
Furthermore, the apparent power injection at each bus denoted by a N × 1 vector Sbus
can be deducted from the nodal current injection Ibus and the complex bus voltages V with
the following matrix equation:
Sbus = diag(V)I∗
bus = diag(V)Ybus
∗V∗
(2.1.2)
Additionally, we denote Sgen the N × 1 vector of complex generator injections at each
bus. The power injection at bus i is determined by the equation:
sgen
i = pi
gen + jqi
gen
(2.1.3)
where pi
gen and qi
gen represent the active and reactive power, respectively. If there is no
generator at a particular bus, the generator injection is set to zero.
Similarly, constant
power loads are defined as a specified amount of real and reactive power consumed at a
given bus. For a load at bus i, the power consumption is represented as:
sload
i = pi
load + jqi
load
(2.1.4)
The complex loads at all buses can be represented as a N × 1 vector Sload.
To ensure a balanced power system, it is crucial to match the net apparent power
injections at every bus with the injections from loads and generators. This allows us to
maintain equilibrium in the system. The net apparent power injection at every bus is equal
to the total generation minus the total load connected at the bus. In vector form:
Sbus = Sgen −Sload
(2.1.5)
Combining (2.1.2) and (2.1.5), the AC nodal power balance equations can be expressed as a
function of the complex bus voltages, complex matrix admittance, and generator injections
of the form
gS(V, Ybus, Sgen, Sload) = 0
(2.1.6)
constructed by solving the following in matrix form:
diag(V)Ybus
∗V∗+ Sload −Sgen = 0
(2.1.7)
These power balance equations are non-linear, non-convex equations usually solved with an
iterative algorithm known as Newton-Raphson. Those equations serve as fundamental tools
for studying and analyzing the steady-state behavior and will be used further in the thesis.
Page 8 of 51
==PAGE:12==
Project Plan
2.1. Power Flow
2.1.3
The Power Flow Analysis
The load flow or power flow study aims at determining the solutions of equation (2.1.7)
for a given power system under static conditions of operation. In a power system network,
each bus is characterized by four variables: active power (P), reactive power (Q), voltage
magnitude (V), and phase angle (δ). There are three types of buses: slack bus, PV bus, and
PQ bus. Depending on the bus type, two of these variables are known and two are unknown.
The power flow analysis method is used to calculate the unknown variables based on the
known variables [1].
The slack bus serves as a reference bus in the network, where the voltage angle and
magnitude are specified. There is only one slack bus in the network. The PV bus, also
known as the generator bus, fixes the active power and voltage magnitude using a prime
mover. The PQ bus, also called the load bus, fixes both active and reactive powers using
the load.
The following table summarizes the types of buses and their known and unknown vari-
ables:
Bus Type
Known Variables
Unknown Variables
Slack (Reference)
V , δ
P, Q
PV (Generator)
P, V
Q, δ
PQ (Load)
P, Q
V , δ
Table 2.1: Types of Buses and their Known and Unknown Variables
Knowing all the variables at each bus is essential in power system engineering. For
instance, a generator needs it to determine the optimal power output required to fulfill the
network’s demand. Power flow analysis is widely used by power system engineers to plan and
operate electrical systems. By considering the network’s topology, component parameters,
and levels of demand and generation, power flow analysis can help identifying potential issues
such as voltage instability, equipment overheating, and other critical factors.
2.1.4
"N-k" security
Ensuring the security of the electrical grid is crucial for providing reliable and uninter-
rupted electricity supply. This involves that the components such as transformers, circuit
breakers, cables, etc., always operate within their imposed thermal limits, even in the case
of some other components tripping or failing.
In the domain of power grid security, we
speak about "N" security when the grid is complete, where "N" represents the number of
network components i.e lines, generators, transformers. In this study, we will be looking
at lines/tranformers only which we will refer to as "branch" and "N" will thus refer to the
number of branches in the system. When assessing security of the power grid with one or
more branches disconnected, we thus speak about "N-k" security, where "k" represents the
number of branches disconnected.
Transmission System Operators (TSOs) usually apply the N-1 security criterion, thus
ensuring the grid stability and continuous electricity supply in case of any single component
Page 9 of 51
==PAGE:13==
Project Plan
2.2. Fully Connected Neural Networks
tripping. To apply this criteria, power system operators must therefore compute N power
flow calculations and assess the security of the system N times. Verifying the N-2 security
criteria would require N(N+1)
2
additional calculations which is currently very heavy for TSOs.
Assessing higher-order security measures, such as considering the failure of all possible
triplets of elements, is currently impractical for TSOs because of the high number of com-
putation required. This level of assessment is time-consuming and not feasible for real-time
operations.
To address these challenges, artificial intelligence, particularly machine learning, can
play a valuable role. Machine learning algorithms can significantly reduce the time of com-
putation by predicting power flow results based on historical data, eliminating the need to
calculate all possible combinations of load and generation. By leveraging machine learning
techniques, TSOs can enhance grid security analysis and decision-making processes more
efficiently.
2.2
Fully Connected Neural Networks
In the previous section, we went through the main equations of the power flow and
the challenges linked to it. This section will introduce the fundamentals of artificial neural
networks which serves as the primary tool of this whole study.
2.2.1
Neural Networks
Neural networks, also referred to as artificial neural networks (ANNs), are a specific
type of machine learning framework that forms the foundation of deep learning algorithms.
Their name and structure come from the human brain’s functioning and seeks to imitate the
communication between biological neurons. ANNs are composed of interconnected nodes
known as neurons, organized in layers.
In a neural network, each neuron receives input from other neurons in the previous
layer. Then, it processes the input using a nonlinear function and generates an output. This
output is then forwarded to the next layer in the network for further processing. A typical
ANN architecture is composed of an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and an output
layer. Such an architecture is represented in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Example of a Neural Network
Page 10 of 51
==PAGE:14==
Project Plan
2.2. Fully Connected Neural Networks
The interconnections between neurons are characterized by weights, which determine
the strength of the information flowing through the network. Initially, these weights are
assigned random values and are adjusted during the training process to enhance the network’s
performance on a given task. This adjustment is done with a backpropagation algorithm.
This consists of computing the error between the network’s output and the desired output,
and then updating the weights to minimize this error. Through multiple iterations of this
training process, the network gradually refines its weights to capture the underlying patterns
and relationships in the data. This iterative learning process allows the network to improve
its performance on the given task and make accurate predictions or classifications.
2.2.2
The perceptron
The original idea behind a deep artificial neural network comes from an early machine
called the "perceptron" developed by Rosenblatt in 1957 [10]. The perceptron, also called
"artificial neuron," serves as a binary classifier. It takes multiple inputs, computes a weighted
sum of these inputs, and applies an activation function to generate the output. The activation
function is usually a threshold function that produces a binary output based on whether
the sum is greater or less than a threshold value. The weights associated with each input
determine the contribution of that input to the final output, and are adjusted during the
training process to enhance the performance of the perceptron.
A perceptron is thus composed of four parts: input values, weights and a bias, a weighted
sum, and an activation function as it can be seen in figure 2.4 taken from [11].
Figure 2.4: Example of a perceptron
If we note m the number of input values, xi, i ∈[1, m] the i-th input value, wi, i ∈[1, m]
the i-th weight value, and b the bias, the output y of the neuron can be written as in equation
(2.2.1) below
y = φ
 m
X
j=1
wjxj + b
!
(2.2.1)
With φ representing the activation function.
Page 11 of 51
==PAGE:15==
Project Plan
2.2. Fully Connected Neural Networks
2.2.3
The multi-layer perceptron
Rosenblatt’s perceptron algorithm was limited to a single layer of neurons, which was
only capable of solving linearly separable problems. The breakthrough came in 1986, when
Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams introduced the backpropagation algorithm in [12], which
allowed for training multi-layer neural networks or multi-layer perceptron (MLP). This algo-
rithm made it possible to optimize the weights of a neural network by propagating the error
back from the output layer to the input layer.
An activation function φ is applied at every layer (except the output one) and the
weights are represented by a matrix W. If we note η the number of hidden layers in the
MLP, the output of layer l can be expressed as (Alpaydin 2014 [13]):
h(0) = x
(2.2.2)
∀1 ≤l ≤η,
h(l) = φl

h(l−1) · W(l) + b(l)
(2.2.3)
y = φη+1

h(η) · W(η+1) + b(η+1)
(2.2.4)
where x ∈RFx×1 is the input vector, y ∈RFy×1 is the output vector, φl is the "activation
function" of layer l, W(l) ∈RFl×Fl−1 its weight matrix and b(l) ∈RFl×1 its bias vector. Fl is
the number of hidden units in hidden layer l. Such a MLP is represented figure 2.5 with 3
inputs (green circles - left) and 3 outputs (blue circles - right). It counts two hidden layers
of 6 neurons, represented by the the two times 6 centered red circles. The straight gray lines
represents the connections (weights) and the three weights matrices W(1), W(2) and W(3)
have been represented.
Figure 2.5: Representation of a neural network, also called "fully connected neural network".
The backpropagation algorithm is used to train neural networks by adjusting the weights
in each layer to minimize the difference between the network’s predictions and the actual
targets, i.e, taking the same notations as in equation (2.2.3), its aim is to minimize d
 y, h(η)
,
d being a measure of the difference between the MLP’s output and the true target y, such
as the mean squared error.
If the activation function is linear, the MLP is equivalent to a linear regression model,
Page 12 of 51
==PAGE:16==
Project Plan
2.3. Graph Neural Networks
which is limited in its ability to capture complex relationships between inputs and outputs.
On the contrary, non-linear activation functions, like the sigmoid or ReLU function, introduce
non-linearity into the model, enabling it to learn more complex and abstract representations
of the input data. The use of non-linear activation functions thus allowed the perceptron to
expand its capabilities to more complex patterns. MLP have since then been used to solve
a wide range of problems in various fields, including power systems.
2.3
Graph Neural Networks
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a type of neural network specifically designed to
handle data with a graph structure. As briefly said in subsection 2.1.1, a mathematical
graph G = {V , E } is defined by a set of nodes (or vertices) V and a set of edges (or
arcs) E that connect them.
On the contrary to FCNN, the neurons of a GNN are not
fully connected. In a GNN, the neurons can be thought of as nodes in the graph, and the
connections between them represent the edges of the graph. Graphs can capture complex
relationships and dependencies between entities, making them a natural choice for modeling
real-world systems such as social networks, knowledge graphs, molecular structure, or in our
case, power systems. In this section, the core principals of graph neural networks will be
seen.
2.3.1
Message Passing
As said before, the neurons of a GNN are not fully connected to the neurons in the
previous layer like in FCNN. Instead, the inputs to a neuron in a GNN comes from itself
and its neighboring nodes in the graph.
The K-neighbors of a node are defined as the
nodes connected to it with a distance K. If K=2, the neighboring nodes are every nodes
that are until two hops away from it. The process of passing information from one node
to its neighbor nodes is called message passing. At each step of message passing, a node
aggregates information from its neighbors, transforms the aggregated information, and then
passes the transformed message to its neighboring nodes. The aggregation step involves
combining the features or states of neighboring nodes using an aggregation function, such as
summation or averaging. This allows the node to gather information from its neighbors and
form a collective representation of the neighborhood. This whole process enables GNN to
capture and utilize the structural information and dependencies present in graph-structured
data. We note hv the feature vector associated with node v. Figure 2.6 illustrates a message
passing that happens at node 4 at layer L+1, with K=1. Node 4 thus obtains information
from itself and its one-hop away neighbor nodes 3, 5, 6, 7, from their state in the previous
layer L.
h4
L+1 = σ((h3
L + hv
L + h5
L + h6
L + h7
L)WL)
(2.3.1)
Page 13 of 51
==PAGE:17==
Project Plan
2.3. Graph Neural Networks
Figure 2.6: One node’s message passing
The equation (2.3.1) account for a simple message passing at node 4 and layer L+1
with summation function. The same thing applies to every node in the layer so that every
node learns information from itself and its one-hop away neighbors in the layer. By stacking
multiple layers, we can thus increase the neighborhood of each nodes. Indeed, after several
layers, a given node has learned from distant nodes in the graph. This process is illustrated
in figure 2.7 below. The figure represents successive message passing in a two layers GNN.
From step 0 to step 1, the state of node 7 is updated by aggregating information from its
neigboring nodes 8, 7 and 4. At step 1, the information learned from node 7 is transmitted
to node 4 which also learns form its other close neighbors. Thus, by step 2, node 4 has
indirectly learned from node 8 as well. The same thing applies to every node in the graph
so that, at the last state, each node has two-hops away message passing.
Figure 2.7: A simple illustration of successive message passing in a typical two layers GNN.
2.3.2
Graph Convolutional Networks
One widely used variant of GNNs is Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), which was
proposed by Kipf and Welling in [14].
GCN uses an averaging message passing and its propagation rule is defined in equation
(2.3.2). Given a graph with N nodes, we note X ∈RN×D the initial feature matrix, where
D is the number of features at each node. A matrix A ∈{0, 1}N×N called adjacency matrix
is used to represent the graph connections. Aij = 1 if there exists an edge between nodes i
and j, and Aij = 0 otherwise.
Page 14 of 51
==PAGE:18==
Project Plan
2.3. Graph Neural Networks
H(l+1) = σ( ˜D−1
2 ˜A ˜D−1
2H(l)W(l))
(2.3.2)
where H(l) ∈RN×F represents the hidden representation of nodes at layer l (F is the
number of features in the hidden feature vector at layer l), W(l) ∈RFl−1×Fl is a weight
matrix, ˜A = A + I is the adjacency matrix with added self-connections, ˜D is the diagonal
node degree matrix of ˜A (the degree of a node refers to the number of edges connected to
that node), and σ(·) is an activation function such as ReLU.
The propagation involves aggregating information from neighboring nodes at each layer
based on the adjacency matrix A. The resulting aggregated information is then multiplied
by the weight matrix W(l) and passed through a non-linear activation function.
2.3.3
GNN for preprocessing graph data
GNNs (Graph Neural Networks) are commonly used for preprocessing graph data and
extracting meaningful representations from the graph structure. After passing the input
through one or more GNN layers, the output of the GNN layer(s) can be flattened out and
fed into a fully connected neural network (FCNN) layer for further processing or prediction
tasks.
Page 15 of 51
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Methodology
In the previous chapter, the theoretical background for understanding the challenges
and progress of this thesis was presented. In section 2.1.4, we outlined the objective of our
thesis, which focuses on leveraging machine learning techniques to support Transmission
System Operators (TSOs) in approximating power flow under the "N-k" security criterion,
which refers to assessing the stability and security of a power grid under the possibility of up
to k contingencies. To achieve this objective, our focus is on predicting power flow outcomes
for various and unpredictable grid topologies. This chapter will present the methodology
employed to achieve this goal.
3.1
Baseline Methodology
In this section, the baseline methodology will be thoroughly explained. First we will
define the methods that will be implemented and compared in this study according to the
inputs and outputs we are interested in as well as the training procedure we will apply and
the loss function we will use. Then, we will go through the methodology of each of those
methods and explain their core principles.
3.1.1
Definition of the methods
Input and output of the methods
As explained in subsection 2.1.3, each bus is characterized by four variables: active
power (P), reactive power (Q), voltage magnitude (V), and phase angle (δ). Knowing those
four variables provides comprehensive knowledge of the entire grid. Furthermore, by working
with these node variables, we can effectively exploit the graph structure of the power grid,
which sets the foundation for applying graph neural networks (GNNs).
Usually, the inputs of the power flow are the active and reactive power consumption
at each bus that we will note Pload and Qload. This will thus be the inputs of our Neural
Networks. Depending on the type of bus, we will want to predict the bus active power
injection P, bus reactive power injection Q, V or δ. In this thesis, we disregard the specific
behavior of the slack bus as it is a particular bus that is adjusting P and Q to meet the
16
==PAGE:20==
Project Plan
3.1. Baseline Methodology
requirements of the grid and has a fixed voltage angle and magnitude. Hence, our goal is to
predict (Q, δ) at the PV buses and (V, δ) at the PQ buses. Qload being known as it is an
input, predicting the bus reactive power injection Q means predicting the generator reactive
power injection Qgen. Furthermore, predicting V and δ can be done using real and imaginary
parts of V which is more practical for a per unit representation of the dataset. Hence, our
goal is to predict Re(V ), Im(V ), and Qgen at PV and PQ buses knowing Pload and Qload,
and this for any topological changes.
Notations and definitions
Let’s consider a grid with N nodes and M branches. We denote the input vector as x ∈
Rp. The inputs of our NN being Pload and Qload the active and reactive power consumption
at each bus, dim x = p = 2N. Similarly, we denote y ∈Rq the output vector. The output of
our NN being Re(V ), Im(V ) the real and imaginary parts of the bus voltages and Qgen the
generator reactive power injection at each bus, dim y = q = 3N. To differentiate between
the actual values and the ones predicted by our NN, the prediction will be denoted with a
hat symbol. Hence, ˆy = NN(x; W) with W the trainable weight matrix.
In this study, in addition to considering the input variable x, we also take into account
the topology of the power grid, encoded by the structural vector τ ∈{0, 1}r. The structural
vector τ is a binary vector that encodes the system’s structural information. Each element
in the vector corresponds to a branch in the grid, where a value of 1 indicates that the branch
is connected and a value of 0 indicates that it is disconnected. Therefore, the dimension of
the structural vector τ is equal to the number of branches in the grid, denoted as M. Thus,
dim τ = r = M.
Our objective is to find a neural network architecture, noted NN, that can accurately
predict the bus output variables for different grid configurations and bus input variables. In
other words, we aim to find:
ˆy = NN(x; τ; W)
(3.1.1)
Furthermore, our NN should provide accurate approximation of the power flow in dif-
ferent network configurations. Thus, we focus on two aspects for our study:
• Generalization: The NN should be able to perform well on test inputs that were not
part of the training set but still belong to grid topology scenarios that were seen during
training. Specifically, ˆy = NN(x; τ; W) should be able to accurately predict y for test
inputs x that were not in the training set and τ values present in the training set.
This ensures that the NN can predict good the variables solution of the power flow for
scenarios it has seen during training.
• Super-generalization: On the oppposite, if τ values present in the test set are not part
of the training set, we are evaluating super-generalization. In other words, the NN
should be able to accurately approximate power flow for unseen topology scenarios.
For N-2 security criteria, it implies that the NN should be able to predict cases of
disconnection of pairs of lines, having only trained on single-line contingency scenarios
and complete grid connectivity.
Page 17 of 51
==PAGE:21==
Project Plan
3.1. Baseline Methodology
The methods
In order to investigate the performance of GNNs in comparison with other NNs, we
train and test three different methods of NNs. These methods are listed below:
• A One-Hot Encoded FCNN: In this method, the topology information is integrated by
using a one-hot encoded vector as an input to the neural network. This approach aims
to leverage the knowledge of the grid’s structure.
• A Guided-Dropout Neural Network: This architecture is inspired by the work of Don-
not in [5].
The topology is not treated as an input feature, but rather the neural
network’s inherent architecture is designed to incorporate the topology information.
The vector τ encodes the architecture of the NN.
• A Graph Neural Network (GNN): This architecture is particularly appealing due to
its ability to capture the graph structure of the power grid. The GNN is expected to
demonstrate strong performance by leveraging the graph representation of the grid.
In a second time, we will incorporate the physical equations of power flow in the guided
dropout NN and GNN, making them Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs). The idea
is that, knowing the power balance equation that relates the input and the output of the
NN (see equation 2.1.5), it will perform better on unseen topologies. The physics-equation
will not be implemented with the one-hot encoded FCNN has it will show limited interest.
3.1.2
Training Procedure
The training procedure in machine learning aims to learn from a finite dataset consisting
of input-output pairs (xi, yi) for 1 ≤i ≤D, where D represents the size of the dataset. The
goal is to learn the optimal function fwopt, parameterized by weights w, that minimizes the
distance between the function’s outputs fwopt(x) and the corresponding true values y. To do
that, a machine learning model is trained on several epochs.
To assess the performance of our learned function fwopt, we evaluate it on pairs of data it
has never seen during training. This is known as the "generalization error" and is computed
using a separate dataset called the "test set" which is distinct from the data used in the
training procedure. The test set must thus only be used for reporting the error of the final
model (after the the function fwopt has been optimized in the learning procedure).
A separate "validation set" is often employed to select the best model from a set of
tested models. During training process the learned estimator is evaluated on data from the
validation set it has not trained on to keep track on the evolution of the function fwopt. The
validation set will also be used for implementing an early stopping condition: if the distance
between fwopt(x) and the corresponding true values y in the validation set start increasing
after some epochs, the model will stop learning earlier than its maximum number of epochs.
This allows to select the best model during training and prevent overfitting or underfitting
of the model.
In our study, we utilize two distinct test sets. The first test set is used to evaluate
the generalization error and contains data points that were not part of the training or
Page 18 of 51
==PAGE:22==
Project Plan
3.2. One-Hot Encoded FCNN
validation sets, but the corresponding τ vector is known. The second test set, called the
super-generalization test set, is used to assess the super-generalization error and contains
unseen data points with unseen structural vectors.
In summary, the training procedure in this study adheres to the following points:
• The objective of machine learning is to determine the best representative fwopt from
a class of functions f parametrized by weights w. The "best" refers to the ability of
fwopt to minimize the error on an unseen test dataset.
• To achieve this, we establish four sets:
– Training set: used to train the model and determine the optimal weights wopt.
– Validation set: used to select the best model and implement an early stopping
condition.
– Test set: used to report the generalization error of the final model. It is not used
for any other purposes.
– Super test set: used to report the super-generalization error of the final model.
It is not used for any other purposes.
Each of the models will be trained and tested 30 times on the test set and super test set
to see how it performs (only one training is not representative of how the model performs).
Throughout this study, we strictly applied this training procedure.
3.1.3
Loss function
In this study, we are interested in evaluating the generalization and super-generalization
losses. The mean squared error (MSE) loss is a commonly used loss function for regression
models. It measures the average squared difference between the predicted and true values.
For our analysis, the MSE loss is defined as:
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(3.1.2)
where n is the number of samples, yi is the true value, and ˆyi is the predicted value. The
MSE loss penalizes larger deviations between the predicted and true values more heavily,
providing a measure of the overall error.
In this study, we will focus on both the regular-generalization and super-generalization
MSE losses as explained in subsection 3.1.2. This will ensure characterizing the NN’s per-
formances on seen and unseen topology scenarios.
3.2
One-Hot Encoded FCNN
This subsection outlines the methodology used for the one-hot encoded Fully Connected
Neural Network (FCNN).
Page 19 of 51
==PAGE:23==
Project Plan
3.2. One-Hot Encoded FCNN
The model is based on a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) described in Section 2.2.3, this
time incorporating the structural vector τ (defined in Section 2.1.1) into the input vector
x. By including the structural vector, the neurons can learn the specific characteristics of
contingencies by associating the encoding of a line contingency as additional information to
predict the output.
Let’s define the variables:
• x ∈R2N represents the input vector of the system, with a dimension of 2N indicating
the number of injections in the power system.
• y ∈R3N represents the output vector, with a dimension of 3N indicating the number
of outputs in the power system.
• τ ∈{0, 1}M represents the structural vector, with dimension M indicating the number
of branches.
The structural vector τ is a binary vector that encodes the system’s structural in-
formation. Its dimension is equal to the number of branches if every branch can be dis-
connected without resulting in an unfeasible grid topology, i.e not converging with the
Newton Raphson algorithm in MATPOWER. The plain architecture, where all lines are
connected, is denoted as τ0 = (1, 1, 1, . . .). The action of disconnecting branch i is encoded
by τi = (1, 1, . . . , 1, 0, 1, . . . , 1), with the 0 at the i-th position.
A simple MLP will be represented in figure 3.1a, with input layer containing 2N units
and output layer containing 3N units. This NN has two hidden layers and doesn’t include any
information on the topology of the system. Next to it, a one-hot encoded neural network
is represented in figure 3.1b. It can be seen that the NN with one-hot incorporates the
structural vector τ in the input units. One added unit (in yellow in the figure) corresponds
to the encoding of one branch. This results in an input layer of size 2N + M.
(a) Regular neural network also called Multi-
Layer Perceptron.
(b) Neural network with one-hot encoding of
the branches (in yellow).
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the one-hot encoding methodology for neural networks.
Page 20 of 51
==PAGE:24==
Project Plan
3.3. Guided Dropout Neural Network
By including the structural vector τ as part of the input vector x, the neural network
can learn and leverage the specific characteristics of different contingencies. The network
associates the encoded information of a line contingency with the output prediction, allowing
it to capture and understand the impact of contingencies on the power system behavior more
effectively.
3.3
Guided Dropout Neural Network
In the previous section, we discussed the one-hot encoding of power grid topologies.
Now, we will explore how this encoding can be integrated into the architecture of a neural
network using the Guided Dropout method.
3.3.1
The concept
The Guided Dropout method is based on the work by B. Donnot in [5, 4], which draws
inspiration from the dropout technique used for regularizing convolutional neural networks.
This dropout technique consists in randomly disabling hidden units during training and then,
during prediction, reactivating all units with their outputs being scaled by the probability
of being connected during training. This technique can be thought of as training the same
architecture of NN with multiple different NNs and averaging the results. It has been showed
to improve the generalization ability of NN models.
The Guided Dropout algorithm follows a similar idea but instead of randomly dis-
abling units, it selectively activates units based on the encountered power grid topology. In
essence, it incorporates topology-related properties into the neural network architecture. It’s
important to note that the term "guided dropout" can be misleading as it actually involves
dropping in units based on the topology.
To illustrate the concept of guided dropout, let’s consider a 3-bus system with 3 trans-
mission lines. We consider 3 input units x = (x1, x2, x3), 3 output units y = (y1, y2, y3), and
3 possible unary actions encoded by the structural vector τ (with dim(τ) = 3). Those unary
actions are respectively:
• Disconnection of line 1 encoded with τ1 = (0, 1, 1).
• Disconnection of line 2 encoded with τ2 = (1, 0, 1).
• Disconnection of line 3 encoded with τ3 = (1, 1, 0).
No line disconnection is encoded by τ0 = (1, 1, 1). The neural network represented in
figure 3.2 has 2 hidden layers of 6 units each, with the guided dropout method being imple-
mented on the second hidden layer. The key idea behind the guided dropout methodology is
to activate units based on the structural vector τ. Consequently, in the plain architecture,
3 units are already hidden with use of a mask (units are showed in red in the scheme). This
holds true in all cases: when no actions are performed, the neural network has fewer units.
Figure 3.2b shows action encoded by τ1, which activates one more unit. The choice of which
units are affected by this action is randomly made from the masked units present in the
Page 21 of 51
==PAGE:25==
Project Plan
3.3. Guided Dropout Neural Network
plain architecture at first, but then the same unit is assigned to the same line disconnection
for the rest of the training and test. This procedure is applied to all unary actions listed
above. Through this process, the activated neuron learns the specific characteristics of the
line disconnection.
The main concept of guided dropout is to modify the architecture of the neural network
in a deterministic manner to reflect combinations of actions. That is where the super gen-
eralization properties of guided dropout come from. Indeed, by combining unary actions, it
becomes able to predict the actual output y even for unseen structures τ, in our case, unseen
topologies of the grid that are harder to calculate like N-2 topologies. This is illustrated in
figure 3.2d
(a) Plain architecture of the neural network. 3
units in the second hidden layer are encoding
1 unary action respectively.
Those units are
showed in red in the scheme and are masked in
case of no line disconnection (base topology).
(b) Unary action encoded by τ1 corresponding
to the disconnection of line 1.
The unit en-
coding line 1 is dropped in (green). The other
encoding units remain masked (red).
(c) τ = τ2 corresponding to the disconnection
of line 2, encoded by the dropping in of the
second masked unit, all other encoding units
remaining masked.
(d) Disconnection of lines 1 and 2 encoded by
τ = (0, 0, 1).
The two corresponding units
are dropped in (green) while the remaining one
stays masked (showed in red).
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the Guided Dropout methodology with guided dropout imple-
mented in the second hidden layer.
Page 22 of 51
==PAGE:26==
Project Plan
3.4. Graph Neural network
3.3.2
The implementation
In our implementation, we made a design choice to assign two neurons per unary action,
which resulted in improved performance compared to other configurations. This means that
the structural vector τ now has a dimension of 2M with M the number of branches in the
system.
Within the guided dropout layer, there are units that are always present, ensuring a
consistent baseline structure in the architecture. Additionally, there are masked units that
may be present or absent based on the specific unary actions encoded by τ with dim(τ) =
2M. As a result, the overall architecture of the neural network depends on the size of the
grid system investigated.
Furthermore, we conducted experiments to explore different configurations of the guided
dropout architecture. For instance, we tested applying dropout to all hidden layers or only
a single layer. These variations in the guided dropout setup aimed at identifying the most
effective architecture for the given task, taking into account the specificities of the power
grid system and the desired performance outcomes.
3.4
Graph Neural network
The theory on Graph Neural Network (GNN) was explained in section 2.3. In this
study, we will use Pytorch Geometric which is a Pytorch extension library that allows easy
configuration of graph neural networks for implementing our GNN layers.
The GNN model used from this library is the Chebyshev spectral graph convolutional
operator. This operator enables us to implement graph convolutional layers with varying
number of neighbors K.
For our GNN model, GNN layers will be used for processing our graph data, and then
the output will be flattened out to be processed further in FCNN layers.
In order to do that, we will transform our flat datasets into graph data. This will be
done using Pytorch Geometric as well.
3.5
Physics-Informed Neural Network
In previous sections of this chapter, the three methods that will be compared in this
study were presented. However, purely data-driven approaches have the disadvantage that
known physical relations (e.g. conservation of energy), are neglected. Recent research has
focused on a particular regularization architecture, known as Physics Informed Neural Net-
works (PINNs), where physical knowledge of a system is included in the training procedure
to act as regularization agent that limits the space of admissible solutions, increasing the
correctness of the function approximation. This section will present such research and a
similar approach will be implemented to each of our methods as an attempt to enhance their
performance.
Page 23 of 51
==PAGE:27==
Project Plan
3.5. Physics-Informed Neural Network
3.5.1
Physics-equation
PINNs were first applied to power systems in [15] to predict swing equation dynamics.
In this case, partial/differential equations are used explicitly to regularize NN training. In
our study, we deal with steady-state power flow analysis so we will try to implement an
other kind of PINN. In [16], they propose a PINN architecture to predict the AC Optimal
Power Flow (AC-OPF) and demonstrate that physics-informed neural networks in this case
achieve higher accuracy and lower constraint violations than standard neural networks. The
AC-OPF problem is an optimization problem and typically involves an optimization function
and few constraints. In this study, we are looking at a simple power flow calculation so the
only equation being observed here is equation 2.1.7 described in subsection 2.1.2:
diag(V)Ybus
∗V∗+ Sload −Sgen = 0
(3.5.1)
We recall that Ybus is the admittance matrix of the system that describes entirely the
grid topology as defined in 2.1.2. So for each electrical grid with the respective graph G with
N bus, the admittance matrix is Ybus ∈CN×N. As done in [17], this matrix is further split
into real- and imaginary part that correspond with the nodal susceptance and conductance
matrices, in order to use the rectangular version of the power flow equations.
G = Re({Ybus})
B = Im({Ybus})
(3.5.2)
With G and B defined as above, and recalling that P and Q are the real and imaginary
part of S respectively, the power flow balance equations in 3.5.1 can be written in the
rectangular version as:
E = diag(Vreal)
F = diag(Vimag)
(E · G + F · B) · Vreal + (F · G −E · B) · Vimag + Pload −Pgen = 0
(3.5.3)
(F · G −E · B) · Vreal + (E · G + F · B) · Vimag + Qload −Qgen = 0
(3.5.4)
Equation 3.5.3 is the active power balance equation and 3.5.4 is the reactive power
balance equation and will be denoted
gP(G, B, Vreal, Vimag, Pload, Pgen) = 0
(3.5.5)
gQ(G, B, Vreal, Vimag, Qload, Qgen) = 0
(3.5.6)
respectively. We recall that:
• Pload ∈RN×1 and Qload ∈RN×1 that are the input vectors of our NNs,
• Vreal ∈RN×1, Vimag ∈RN×1 and Qgen ∈RN×1 that are the output vectors,
• Pgen ∈RN×1 that is known and fixed for every bus (disregarding slack bus),
Page 24 of 51
==PAGE:28==
Project Plan
3.5. Physics-Informed Neural Network
• G ∈CN×N, B ∈CN×N that are calculable matrices characterizing the grid topology.
The equations above are thus the underlying physics equation of our NNs in rectangular
form.
3.5.2
Regularization term
Knowing the equations 3.5.3, 3.5.4, it is possible to add a regularization term to the
training loss of our NN to make it physics-aware and bounded. The active and reactive power
balance equations must be satisfied at each bus (disregarding slack bus). To implement that
in the model, we can have a set of collocation points in the training set. The collocation
points are a set of random input values from the input domain. However, unlike the training
data points, we have not pre-calculated the outputs associated with them. Instead, they will
serve as training points for learning the physical equations of the system. Let’s define Nc
the number of collocation points in our training set and Nt the number of training points
for which there is a ground truth output in the dataset. We will still be using the MSE
loss for those Nt trainig points but for the colocation points, we will use a tolerance ϵ and a
regularization factor α such that:
Perr = max (0, gP −ϵ)
(3.5.7)
Qerr = max (0, gQ −ϵ)
(3.5.8)
Lphysical = α (Perr + Qerr )
(3.5.9)
To compute Perr and Qerr as in the equations above, we use the ReLU function which
is known as f : x →max(0, x). the tolerance ϵ corresponds to the precision with which
we want the power balance equations to be respected. For instance, the MATPOWER [9]
Newton-Raphson algorithm has a termination tolerance set by default to 1E-08 (parameter
pf.tol, termination tolerance on per unit P and Q). The overall loss function can then be
calculated by combining the classical mean squared error between target and prediction as
in 3.1.3 and physical loss. The factor α is used to scale both terms such that both losses
have an impact on the gradients and are empirically chosen.
The total training loss is then:
Ltotal = LMSE + Lphysical
(3.5.10)
Page 25 of 51
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Experiments
4.1
Dataset Construction
4.1.1
Data generation
The data in this study is obtained by resampling values from reference grids. Specifi-
cally, we utilize the case grids available in MATPOWER [9], which are based on real-world
power systems or IEEE systems. This choice guarantees a certain level of realism in our
analysis. We focus on three distinct cases: IEEE-14 bus, 57 bus, and 118 bus test cases.
To maintain the integrity of our models and prevent them from learning from infeasible
variations, we discard grids that fail to converge using the Newton-Raphson implementa-
tion. While this approach does not guarantee complete realism, it ensures solvability of the
grids to some extent. The sampling ranges used in the study are somewhat conservative
due to the challenges in acquiring data that satisfied the aforementioned requirements when
wider ranges were considered. To perform the power flow calculations, we utilized MATLAB
and its MATPOWER package, and subsequently extracted the results into Excel files for
convenient processing in Python. The sampling procedure for data acquisition is as follows:
• Active and reactive load values on buses are uniformly sampled within a range of 60
to 100 percent of their original values in the reference grid. For example, if a bus in
the reference grid has an active load of 40 MW, the sampling range for this bus would
be from 24 MW to 40 MW.
• Three different files are generated for N-0, N-1, and N-2 topologies. Only feasible line
outage scenarios are considered, meaning that line outages resulting in isolated buses
are excluded from the analysis. For instance, in the IEEE-14 bus case, line 14 cannot be
disconnected as it would isolate bus 8. Consequently, there are 19 distinct N-1 topology
configurations (20 branches minus 1 branch). Similarly, for N-2 scenarios, the number
of possibilities is reduced to 168 instead of the theoretically expected 20×19
2
= 190 for
the IEEE-14 bus system.
• The power flow problem is solved using the "runpf()" command in MATPOWER,
without enforcing reactive power limits or modifying any options. As a result, the
26
==PAGE:30==
Project Plan
4.1. Dataset Construction
active power on generators remains constant as a power setpoint, and the voltage
magnitudes at PV buses are also fixed. However, the reactive power on generators is
not strictly enforced within the limits provided in the file. After sampling, a check
is performed to verify if the reactive power on PV generators exceeds its boundaries.
It is observed that in N-0 configurations, this limit is not exceeded, but when one or
more lines are disconnected, the reactive power often surpasses its limits.
• All values are expressed in per unit to facilitate standardization.
• The Excel file generated by MATPOWER contains one row for each simulation and
one column for each variable. In the case of the IEEE-14 bus test case, there are thus
14 columns for the active power injection at each bus, 14 columns for the reactive power
injection at each bus, and an additional 28 columns for the real and imaginary parts
of the voltage at each bus. To accommodate one-hot encoding, the system topology
is incorporated into the Excel file by adding a column for each branch. Each branch
is encoded as a binary number, representing 1 if the branch is connected and 0 if it
is disconnected. Considering the inclusion of one-hot encoding, the IEEE-14 bus test
case requires a total of 78 columns in the Excel file.
The power system information for the different IEEE test cases, along with the sampling
details, is summarized in Table 4.1. The table presents the parameters of Case 14, Case 57,
and Case 118, including the base MVA, number of buses, branches, generators, loads, and
the slack bus. Additionally, it shows the number of feasible N-1 scenarios and N-2 scenarios
for each test case, considering the exclusion of islanded buses.
Parameter
Case 14
Case 57
Case 118
Base MVA
100
100
100
Bus
14
57
118
Branches
20
80
186
Generators
5
6
53
Loads
9
42
99
Slack Bus
1
1
69
Feasible N-1 scenarios
19
78
177
Feasible N-2 scenarios
168
2921
15502
Table 4.1: Power System Information
4.1.2
Datasets construction
Having data for the different topologies allows for evaluating both the generalization
loss and super-generalization loss.
As explained in 3.1.1, "regular generalization" is the
property to obtain good performance on a test set with known grid topology and the "super-
generalization" is the ability to accurately predict the desired output in an unseen grid
Page 27 of 51
==PAGE:31==
Project Plan
4.1. Dataset Construction
topology. In this study, we generate the dataset for train, validation and "regular" test with
N-0 and N-1 topology scenarios. This dataset is made with equal number of sample of each
topology scenario to ensure it learns equally from each topology N-0, N-1. 1000 datapoints
are taken from each of the possible topology scenario when possible.
For case 118, the
high computation complexity of powerflow calculations for every possible N-1 contingency
scenarios limited us to 300 datapoints per N-1 scenarios (Error message "out of memory"
when trying to get more). The N-2 dataset will be used for the "super-generalization" test
evaluation.
The summary of the different datasets used for training and testing can be found in
table 4.2 below.
Property
Case 14
Case 57
Case 118
Input vector x
2 × 14 = 28
2 × 57 = 114
2 × 118 = 236
Output vector y
3 × 14 = 42
3 × 57 = 171
3 × 118 = 354
Number of
powerlines τ
20
80
186
N0 dataset
15,000 samples
15,000 samples
15,000 samples
N1 dataset
19,000 samples
(1000 × 19)
78,000 samples
(1000 × 78)
53,100 samples
(300 × 177)
N2 dataset
1,680 samples
(10 × 168)
2,921 samples
(1 × 2921)
15,502 samples
(1 × 15,502)
N0 + N1
Dataset
1,000 datapoints of N0
and each topology N1
(=20,000 datapoints)
1,000 datapoints of N0
and each topology N1
(=79,000 datapoints)
300 datapoints of N0
and each topology N1
(=53,400 datapoints)
Training Set
80% of the dataset
-
-
Validation Set
10% of the dataset
-
-
Test Set
10% of the dataset
-
-
Super Test Set
1,680 datapoints of the
N2 dataset
2,921
15,502
Table 4.2: Summary of the training and test sets for the different reference grids
We will refer to the "regular generalization" loss as the loss on N-1 and N-0 topologies
and "super-generalization" loss as the loss on N-2 topologies. The loss evaluated will be the
MSE as detailed in 3.1.3
Page 28 of 51
==PAGE:32==
Project Plan
4.2. Models architecture
4.2
Models architecture
Each of the three methods described in the methodology will be trained and tested. In
order to compare the models properly, each of their architectures will be tuned to give their
best performances. The hyperparameters being tuned in this study will be:
• For all methods:
– hidden layer size: 64, 128, 256, 512
– batch size: 64, 128, 256, 512
– learning rate: 0.001, 0.0001
• Only for GNN and OH:
– random dropout: None, 0.2, 0.5
• Only for GNN:
– feature node size: 8, 32, 64, 128, 256
– number of Neighbors: 1, 2, 3
We base our analysis on the results for Case 57 as it is a good compromise between
number of samples available for each topology configuration during training (1000) and
training dataset size (case 118 has a high complexity so tuning according to this case would
be very long and case 14 is too simple to be representative).
The following parameters were taken:
• For the learning rate, we chose to set the same for all the models as it characterizes
the rate at which the models learn. A learning rate of 0.0001 was giving better results
than a learning rate of 0.001 for the GD and similar results than a learning rate of
0.001 for the GNN and the OH. Thus, we chose to take a learning rate of 0.0001 for
all of them.
• The hidden layer size and batch size were tuned with grid search in WandB. For case
57, several associations of batch size and hidden layer size were yielding good results
so we chose a batch size of 64 as it was used in some of the literature we reviewed and
chose the hidden size accordingly.
• Trying to implement random dropout for GNN and OH yielded worse results than
without so we kept the model with no dropout between the layers.
• The number of layers of our models was set to four arbitrarily because it is common
practice.
Similarly, the ReLU activation function was used because it is common
practice.
Page 29 of 51
==PAGE:33==
Project Plan
4.2. Models architecture
Regarding the batch size, we will adapt it to the size of the training set. This means
that, having chosen a batch size of 64 for case 57 which is the case with the biggest training
set, we will choose lower batch sizes for the two other cases. To determine the batch size
according to the training set size, we will try to keep the ratio of batch size over train set
size of case 57 and we will respect the rule of thumbs found in most literature which is
that the batch size must be powers of 2 from 16 to 1024. Thus we will take the power of
2 that is superior or equal to the number batch size calculated with the given ratio. The
admissible batch sizes are: 16, 32, 64, 128, 512 and 1024. Case 57 has a training dataset
with 0.8 × 79, 000 = 63, 200 datapoints, which means the ratio will be 63,200
64
= 987.5. Let’s
calulate the batch size we will thus take for case 14 and case 118. Case 14 has a training
set of size 0.8 × 20, 000 = 16, 000.
Therefore, the calculated batch size for this case is
calculated the ratio:
16,000
987.5 ≈16.3. the power of 2 directly superior to 16.3 is 32 so we will
take a batch size of 32 for this case. On the other hand, case 118 has a training set of size
0.8 × 53, 400 = 42, 720, so the calculated batch size for this training set when keeping the
ratio for case 57 constant is 42,720
987.5 ≈43. 43 not being a power of 2, we will take a batch size
of 64 for the case 118.
Overall, the best architectures obtained after tuning the model for each methods for
case 57 are summed up in the table below.
Hyperparameter
Value for OH
Value for GD
Value for GNN
Learning Rate
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
Hidden linear layer size
(number of layers)
128 (3 layers)
128+2×ntopo (3)
512 (1)
Hidden convolutional layer size
(number of layers)
-
-
128 (2)
Number of neighbor
-
-
2
Activation Function
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
Table 4.3: Hyperparameters used for the three methods being compared: One-Hot encoding
(OH), Guided Dropout (GD) and Graph Convolution (GNN).
It is important to note that the hidden layer size will significantly grow for GD with
the size of the network (see table 4.3). We recall that we chose the hyperparameters to have
the best performance of each method respectively, regardless of their number of parameters.
The total number of trainable parameters for each method is summarized in table 4.4.
Case
OH
GD
GNN
14
44,714
94,994
77,869
57
80,043
324,215
210,094
118
132,834
983,634
397,669
Table 4.4: Number of trainable parameters for OH, GD, and GNN methods in different grid
cases
Page 30 of 51
==PAGE:34==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
This table shows the clear growth in the number of trainable parameters for GD method
with the size of the network (10 times as much parameters for case 118 compared to case
14). We also observe a growth in the number of parameters with the network size for the
two other methods, related to the increase in input size, output size and number of branch.
However this growth is not as significant as for GD, the number of trainable parameters for
case 118 is about 5 times the number of parameters for case 14 for GNN and around 3 times
for OH. Therefore the desequilibrium in the number of parameters among the methods also
increases as the size of the network increases. This leads to a high unbalance in the number
of parameters for the three methods in case 118. This desequilibrium can be easily observed
when plotting the number of trainable parameters per methods for each case as represented
in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Number of trainable parameters per method for three grid case: gase 14, case
57 and case 118.
4.3
Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
In this section, we will first generate 30 models for each methods and see how they
perform on regular generalization and super generalization test sets. We will then choose
one of the 30 models for each method according to a fair methodology to compare the three
methods in depth.
4.3.1
Selecting the best models
In this first task, our objective is to train and test three different neural network methods
outlined in section 3.1. These methods include the one-hot encoded neural network without
guided dropout (referred to as "OH"), the one with guided dropout ("GD"), and the neural
network with graph neural network layers ("GNN").
To assess the performance of each
method, we will evaluate them on three distinct reference grids: case14, case57, and case118.
For each case and each method, we will conduct thirty independent runs, randomly shuffling
the data each time. This approach allows us to determine if the results are consistent across
Page 31 of 51
==PAGE:35==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
multiple runs or if there is variability. Performing thirty runs for each method and case
ensures a robust comparison between the three methods. By conducting multiple trainings
and tests, we can obtain a comprehensive understanding of their performance characteristics.
We recall that the goal is to predict the power flow solution of these grids in terms
of voltage magnitude, phase angle, and generator reactive power output at the buses. All
information on the dataset is detailed in section 4.1. The hyperparameters chosen for this
model are shown in the table 4.3. Thirty runs were performed with early stopping and a
maximum of 1000 epochs to train and test the model with random shuffling and see how
it would perform on regular generalization and super-generalization MSE losses. The MSE
loss is calculated as defined in 3.1.3.
We recall that the loss calculated here is the mean squared error on the whole test set
(and super test set) for various trainings of the different methods, Each training yields a
different model with different weights and biases, yielding a corresponding loss that is added
in a list. The goal here is to determine the best model of each method to be able to compare
the three methods. The results shown in the tables 4.5, 4.6 are the mean and standard
deviation values of those lists of 30 elements (because there were 30 runs). The distribution
of the results for each methods is represented in a histogram for better visualization. For
each case/network, bold text is used to highlight which method gave the lowest mean value.
Case
OH
GD
GNN
Case 14
2.96e-06 [8.15e-07]
6.34e-06 [2.12e-05]
9.18e-04 [9.17e-05]
Case 57
6.45e-06 [9.03e-07]
7.39e-06 [1.89e-05]
4.94e-06 [2.88e-06]
Case 118
2.79e-05 [9.35e-06]
7.88e-06 [1.63e-05]
1.82 [1.13e-05]
Table 4.5: Regular generalization MSE Loss for 30 training and tests of the three methods
with parameters as in 4.3 and for three different grid cases. Results are mean[std].
Case
OH
GD
GNN
Case 14
9.18e-04 [9.17e-05]
5.52e-04 [2.91e-04]
8.37e-04 [9.25e-05]
Case 57
7.65e-05 [4.17e-06]
2.64e-04 [7.16e-04]
8.18e-05 [8.92e-06]
Case 118
1.13e-04 [1.77e-05]
1.48e-04 [3.69e-04]
7.57e-05 [3.28e-05]
Table 4.6: Super generalization MSE Loss for 30 training and tests of the three methods
with parameters as in 4.3 and for three different grid cases. Results are mean[std].
Page 32 of 51
==PAGE:36==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
(a) Regular generalization MSE loss case 14
(b) Super-generalization MSE loss case 14
(c) Regular generalization MSE loss case 57
(d) Super-generalization MSE loss case 57
(e) Regular generalization MSE loss case 118
(f) Super-generalization MSE loss case 118
Figure 4.2: Regular and super-generalization MSE losses for 30 models with the architecture
proposed in 4.3 for OH, GD and GNN methods for three different grid case.
Page 33 of 51
==PAGE:37==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
The first thing we notice when looking at the histograms is that the distribution of loss
values for the thirty runs for the GD method is broader compared to the OH and GNN
methods. This shows higher variability of the GD model compared to OH and GNN. In
contrast, the OH and GNN methods exhibit smaller distribution, indicating more consistent
results.
Let’s take case 57 as an example. Although the mean super-generalization MSE loss for
GD is higher than that of OH (2.64e-04 > 7.65e-05), a closer examination of the histogram
reveals that the GD method is capable of achieving significantly better results for certain
instances, as evidenced by the blue blocks on the left side of the histogram. While a few
outlier values contribute to the higher mean squared error for GD, the bulk of GD’s values
are located to the left of the OH values. This demonstrates the GD method’s potential to
produce models with lower MSE loss compared to the OH method.
The reported higher variability of the GD model can be attributed to its unique archi-
tecture and questions the reliability of its predictions, especially in real-world applications.
This also brings difficulties in model selection. Since the model’s performance fluctuates for
the GD method, it becomes harder to identify which model can be representative for the
performance of this particular method.
Therefore, to account for these variations and select a representative model for each
method, we followed a rigorous methodology. We removed the top 10% and bottom 10% of
models based on their super-generalization MSE loss from the initial batch of 30 models. This
step ensured that our selected models were not influenced by extreme outliers and provided a
more accurate representation of each method’s performance. After this elimination process,
we were left with 80% of the original batch, equivalent to 24 models. From these remaining
models, we selected the single model that achieved the best performance, i.e., the lowest
super-generalization MSE loss. This model, referred to as the "best model," embodies the
method’s performance without being skewed by extreme values.
This approach will allow us to evaluate the methods based on their optimal performance,
taking into account the potential spread of values within each method. The results of this
analysis will shed light on the capabilities of each method and facilitate a fair comparison.
4.3.2
Comparing the best models
The regular generalization and super-generalization losses for the best OH, GD and
GNN model selected is summed up in the table below. Here the mean and standard values
correspond to the evaluation of one model in particular which is the best model. We look at
how this best model performs on each of the N-0 and N-1 topologies (regular generalization
test set) and each of the N-2 topologies (super generalization test set) separately. To illustrate
this, along with the table listing the mean and standard values for three different grid case,
we plot the histogram of the distribution of the test loss in the test set.
Page 34 of 51
==PAGE:38==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
Case
OH
GD
GNN
Case 14
3.09e-06 [3.72e-06]
9.44e-07 [1.35e-06]
2.65e-06 [2.61e-06]
Case 57
4.66e-06 [7.46e-06]
6.50e-07 [7.79e-07]
3.15e-06 [4.70e-06]
Case 118
1.96e-05 [2.13e-05]
3.95e-06 [9.06e-06]
1.36e-05 [2.32e-05]
Table 4.7: Regular generalization losses for testing with the best model weights and biases of
each of the methods GD, OH and GNN for three different grid cases. Results are mean[std].
Case
OH
GD
GNN
Case 14
8.19e-04 [1.65e-03]
4.68e-04 [1.65e-03]
6.97e-04 [2.14e-03]
Case 57
7.36e-05 [6.96e-05]
4.98e-05 [6.20e-04]
7.11e-05 [6.45e-04]
Case 118
9.40e-05 [4.52e-04]
2.52e-05 [3.12e-04]
5.15e-05 [3.69e-04]
Table 4.8: Super generalization losses for testing with the best model weights and biases of
each of the methods GD, OH and GNN for three different grid cases. Results are mean[std].
(a) Regular generalization MSE loss case 14
(b) Super-generalization MSE loss case 14
(c) Regular generalization MSE loss case 57
(d) Super-generalization MSE loss case 57
Page 35 of 51
==PAGE:39==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
(e) Regular generalization MSE loss case 118
(f) Super-generalization MSE loss case 118
Figure 4.3: (continued) Histogram with logarithmic scaling of the regular generalization (N-
0, N-1) and super-generalization losses (N-2) for comparing best models of three methods:
OH, GD and GNN.
The presented tables 4.7 and 4.8 provide valuable insights into the comparative perfor-
mance of the GD, OH and GNN methods across three different grid cases. First thing we
notice is that the MSE loss results for super-generalization evaluation are all higher than
the MSE loss results for regular generalization. Indeed, the average regular MSE loss across
all cases and all methods is 5.81e-06 (average of the values in table 4.7) whereas the average
super MSE loss is 2.61e-04 (average of the values in table 4.8), around 100 times higher.
This difference was expected as regular generalization loss measures the model’s ability to
generalize to unseen data whereas for super-generalization loss, the model is tested on both
unseen data and topology.
However, the difference between regular and super-generalization loss is not the same
for every test case and every method. In this subsection, we will compare the three methods
in terms of regular MSE loss and super MSE loss and assess their scalability on the different
grid size cases. Before comparing the methods, let us comment on the different grid cases. It
can be seen from the table 4.7 that the regular generalization MSE loss results are relatively
homogeneous for case 14 and 57 (on the order of 1e-06) whereas it is higher for case 118
(on the order of 1e-05). On the other hand, for super-generalization loss in table 4.8, it
can be seen that case 14 is overall yielding higher loss than case 57 and 118 (order 1e-04
versus 1e-05). This is summarized in the table 4.9, which contains the average regular and
super-MSE losses across the three investigated methods for the three grid cases.
First thing we notice in this table 4.9 is that case 57 is not designated as the highest
loss in any of the columns. This was expected as we tuned our hyperparameters according to
case 57 as explained in section 3.1. The higher super MSE loss for case 14 can be explained
by the fact that case 14 is a small grid of 14 buses with only 20 branches. The disconnec-
tion of pairs of two branches in case 14, compared to the disconnection of single branches,
represents a more significant change (going from 5% to 10% of lines being disconnected).
Page 36 of 51
==PAGE:40==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
Case
Regular MSE
Super MSE
Case 14
2.23e-06 [1.13e-06]
6.61e-04 [1.78e-04]
Case 57
2.82e-06 [2.025e-06]
6.48e-05 [1.31e-05]
Case 118
1.24e-05 [7.90e-06]
5.15e-05 [3.47e-05]
Table 4.9: Average of the regular and super-generalization MSE loss for different network
sizes on the three methods OH, GD and GNN. Results are mean[std]. The bold numbers is
the highest value per column.
Consequently, the model struggles to generalize to such a different scenario without having
seen N-2 topology during training. In contrast, case 57 and case 118 have a smaller change
in topology from N-1 to N-2 contingencies (1.25% to 2.5% and 0.5% to 1% of the powerlines
being disconnected, respectively). Therefore, without even talking about the model itself,
case 57 and 118 will have more bus variables that remain the same when a contingency
occurs, allowing for a lower loss compared to case 14 for which in case of a N-2 contingency,
every bus undergoes heavy change to cope with the 10% lines loss. This also explains the
relatively small difference between the regular generalization and super generalization losses
for case 118. Indeed, the average super MSE is the same order of magnitude than the average
regular MSE for case 118 whereas it is 10 times higher for case 57 and 100 times higher for
case 14 (see table 4.9). It is because from N-1 to N-2 contingency scenarios (i.e from regular
to super test sets), it is not of a significant change compared to case 14 and case 57.
On the other hand, the analysis of regular generalization loss reveals that case 118 ex-
hibits higher loss values compared to case 14 and case 57. This disparity could be attributed
to the differences in the training dataset. Specifically, case 118 has only 300 training points
per N-0 and N-1 topology, whereas the other cases feature 1000 datapoints per topology. This
decision was made due to the larger number of N-1 topology scenarios in case 118 and the
challenges associated with generating additional points using MATPOWER (further details
provided in section 3.1). Consequently, it becomes difficult to draw definitive conclusions
regarding the scalability of the methods from case 14 to case 118 or from case 57 to case
118. To assess scalability, it is more appropriate to examine the variations between case 14
and case 57, which, based on the average losses presented in table 4.9, indicate a good level
of scalability.
For assessing the scalability of each methods, we will consider the regular generalization
MSE loss. This is because for super generalization MSE loss, from case 14 to case 57, the
results are impacted by the fact that case 14 presents a significantly lower number of branches
than case 57 and thus is yielding an overall higher super-generalization MSE loss (on N-2).
Looking at table 4.7, we can make several observations:
• The regular generalization MSE loss values for GD decreases when moving from case
14 to case 57. This suggests that GD method performs better on a larger system (case
Page 37 of 51
==PAGE:41==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
57) compared to smaller one (case 14). The percentage change is calculated as
Percentage ChangeGD =
6.50 × 10−7 −9.44 × 10−7
9.44 × 10−7

× 100 ∼= −31.96%
• On the contrary, the regular MSE loss increases when moving for OH and GNN when
moving from case 14 to case 57, resulting in a loss 50.16% higher and 18.87% higher
respectively. This suggests that OH and GNN scale poorly to bigger systems.
However, the percentage change is not as significant for all the cases and a small percentage
change can also be considered random. In this study, we will define a 50% increase in loss
as the indicator of a bad scalability. With this criteria, we can assume that GD and GNN
methods scale up relatively good from case 14 to case 57, whereas OH method scales up
poorly.
Now looking at the different methods performance, let us distinguish between the regular
and super MSE loss. For more consistency, we will mainly compare on case 57 results.
First, for regular-generalization MSE loss, we can see in table 4.7 that the GD method
consistently outperforms both OH and GNN methods across all three grid cases. The differ-
ence in regular generalization MSE loss between GD and OH can be substantial, reaching
up to a 86% reduction in loss when comparing to OH (for case 57). The superiority of GD
over OH is consistent and holds across all the investigated grid cases. This demonstrates the
effectiveness of the guided dropout technique in enhancing the model’s ability to generalize
and produce accurate predictions. On the other hand, the comparison between GNN and
OH indicates that GNN also shows improved performance in terms of regular generalization
loss. Although the difference is not as substantial as that observed between GD and OH (up
to 32%, also observed for case 57), GNN shows a better regular generalizability than the OH
method. Table 4.10 shows the percentage loss decrease of GD and GNN methods compared
to OH method for the three cases. Overall, the percentage decrease in loss is homogeneous
across all three cases for each of the methods. This shows consistency in the improvement
capability of both methods compared to OH method. Indeed, both GD and GNN methods
leverage the topology information of the grid inherently on the contrary to OH method.
Thus, it is expected that they would perform better than OH. However, GNN is shown to
perform less good than GD for regular generalization loss in this study, even though GNN
directly leverages graph data.
The aspect we are the most interested in in this study is the supergeneralization capa-
bility of the methods implemented. Looking at table 4.8, it can be seen that GD outperforms
OH and GNN methods for all three cases. However, on the contrary to regular MSE loss, the
percentage decrease of both GD and GNN methods is very heterogeneous across the three
grid cases as shown in table 4.10.
Page 38 of 51
==PAGE:42==
Project Plan
4.3. Comparison of the methods (no PINN)
(a) Decrease in regular MSE loss
Case
GD
GNN
Case 14
69%
14%
Case 57
86%
32%
Case 118
80%
31%
(b) Decrease in super MSE loss
Case
GD
GNN
Case 14
43%
15%
Case 57
32%
3%
Case 118
73%
45%
Table 4.10: Percentage decrease in MSE loss of GD and GNN compared to OH for the three
cases.
Looking at this table, we can make a few observations:
• The highest decrease in MSE loss with GD method occurs for case 118 (73% decrease
compared to OH) and it is also the highest decrease in MSE loss using GNN method
compared to OH method (45%).
• The lowest percentage decrease is observed for case 57 (3% decrease for GNN compared
to OH and 32% decrease for GD compared to OH). This suggests that the improvement
in MSE loss for GNN is relatively modest in this particular case.
• It is worth noting that GD and GNN consistently outperform OH across all three grid
cases, regardless of the percentage decrease. This indicates that both methods are
capable of achieving better results than the baseline OH approach.
We recall that case 118 is the most complex grid of all three cases as it describes a 118
bus system with 186 lines (see table 4.2). Regarding the high percentage decrease in loss
observed for case 118 for both GD and GNN methods, some hypothesis can be made:
• Firstly, we consider the scalability of OH as a contributing factor. OH may not scale
well with larger and more complex grids, leading to higher MSE loss values. Thus,
when comparing the super MSE loss of GD and GNN to OH in case 118, the decrease
appears significant. This suggests that GD and GNN have better scalability and can
handle the complexity of case 118 more effectively, resulting in lower MSE loss values.
• Furthermore, we examine the number of trainable parameters in each method. Case
118 exhibits the highest number of trainable parameters, with GD having a 7.4 times
increase and GNN having a 3 times increase compared to OH, as shown in table 4.4.
The substantial increase in the number of parameters introduces additional flexibility
and capacity for the models to capture and learn from the intricacies of the grid.
Consequently, this results in a larger difference in MSE loss between GD and GNN
compared to OH for case 118.
However, the hypothesis proposed based on case 118 need to be further examined when
considering case 57. Despite being a larger grid system like case 118, case 57 demonstrates a
relatively modest percentage decrease in MSE loss for both GD and GNN. Additionally, the
number of trainable parameters for case 57 also experiences a significant increase across the
Page 39 of 51
==PAGE:43==
Project Plan
4.4. Implementation of the Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN)
methods (2.6 times increase for GNN and 4 times increase for GD compared to OH). These
observations question the direct relationship between the size of the grid, the scalability of
the methods, and the percentage decrease in MSE loss.
In conclusion, while the percentage decrease in MSE loss provides valuable insights, the
relationship between grid size, scalability, and the observed results is complex. Further anal-
ysis and investigation are required to fully understand the underlying factors contributing
to the observed performance differences in the three grid cases.
4.4
Implementation of the Physics-Informed Neural Net-
work (PINN)
In this section, we aim to investigate the potential improvement of the GD and GNN
methods by incorporating physical equations using the PINN approach. Specifically, we will
evaluate the performance of the GD and GNN methods when augmented with the PINN
implementation. However, we did not test the PINN on the OH methods as it has shown
limited scalability and lacks topology-informed characteristics, making it less relevant for
our analysis. Additionally, the computational speed of the PINN is considerably slower, and
thus we prioritize the evaluation of GD and GNN methods, which are more pertinent in this
context.
We recall that the physics-equation are implemented in the form of a regularization
term in the loss equation as described in section 3.5. This regularization term is scaled by a
factor α.
To assess the impact of the PINN implementation, we will vary two key factors:
• The regularization coefficient α. We try two different values for α: 1.00E-04, 1.00E-05.
We will try it on only one method as it is suppose to yield the same impact on both
methods. Because it computes faster, we will try both values of α on the GD method
and for a number of collocation points Nc = 31600 and a number of training datapoints
Nd = 31600 (corresponding to 500 datapoints per N-0, N-1 topology scenarios instead
of 1000 taken initially. For more on the dataset creation, see subsection 3.1.2).
• The number of collocation points Nc. We will study the influence of the number of
collocation points in the total training set on the performance metrics of each methods,
and thus vary this factor between 0% and 100% of the number of datapoints in the
training set.
We fix the tolerance ϵ at 1 × 10−5, as it is the tolerance achieved when validating
the power balance equations on the dataset using the Newton-Raphson algorithm in MAT-
POWER, considering the corresponding input values. We will denote as Nc the number of
collocation points, Nd the number of training data points for evaluating MSE loss, and Ntot
the number of datapoints in the total training set.
First let’s choose the value of α that will yield the desired impact on the total loss of
the GD NN. The values for the regular and super- generalization MSE loss for GD methods
Page 40 of 51
==PAGE:44==
Project Plan
4.4. Implementation of the Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN)
with α = 1.00E-04 and α = 1.00E-05 are summarized in table 4.11 below. The column with
α = 0 serves as a comparison.
Parameter α
1.00E-04
1.00E-05
0
Regular MSE
7.94E-06
1.00E-06
8.40E-07
Super MSE
6.05E-05
4.94E-05
4.96E-05
Table 4.11: Regular and super-generalization MSE losses for different values of alpha with
GD method and Nc = 0.5Ntot.
Looking at the table 4.11
In our investigation, we aim to explore the impact of the proportion of collocation points
on the performance of the methods. We conduct experiments using different percentages of
collocation points in the total training set. Specifically, we evaluate the neural networks
using both methods with 0%, 10%, 50%, 90%, and 100% of the training set comprising
collocation points.
For all configurations except the one with 100% collocation points, we utilize the same
validation set as in the absence of collocation points, meaning we keep an early stopping
condition based on the mean squared error (MSE) of the validation set. By doing so, we
ensure that the regularization term we introduce targets the enhancement of the MSE loss
on the final test set.
In the case where Nc = Ntot (as shown in the last column of Table 4.12 and 4.13), we
exclude the early stopping mechanism. Instead, we allow the neural network to train for
100 epochs before evaluating its performance on the test set and the super set in terms of
the MSE loss. Applying early stopping in this scenario would be irrelevant since the model
trains solely on the physics equations and does not consider the MSE loss. Therefore, we let
it train for the designated 100 epochs and subsequently evaluate its performance.
The results are summarized in tables 4.12 and 4.13, which present the regular and
super-generalization MSE loss respectively for the GD and GNN methods across different
configurations with α = 1.00E-05. For computation speed and because of the limitation of
the machine used and the time frame of this study, we only computed the results one time
for each configuration. This needs to be taken into consideration when analysing the results.
Nc
0
6320
31600
56880
63200
Nd
63200
56880
31600
6320
0
Nc/Ntot
0
0.1
0.5
0.9
1
GD
6.50E-07
1.42E-06
1.00E-06
4.13E-06
4.06E-01
GNN
3.15E-06
3.69E-06
5.07E-06
8.82E-06
4.90E-01
Table 4.12: Regular-generalization MSE loss for GD and GNN methods with varying pro-
portion of collocation points in the training set.
Page 41 of 51
==PAGE:45==
Project Plan
4.4. Implementation of the Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN)
Nc
0
6320
31600
56880
63200
Nd
63200
56880
31600
6320
0
Nc/Ntot
0
0.1
0.5
0.9
1
GD
4.98E-05
5.53E-05
4.94E-05
5.81E-05
4.01E-01
GNN
7.11E-05
8.50E-05
7.87E-05
8.52E-05
4.87E-01
Table 4.13: Super-generalization MSE loss for GD and GNN methods with varying propor-
tion of collocation points in the training set.
From the results, we can make several observations and hypothesis:
• Having 100% of the dataset being collocation points is yielding a very high MSE loss
for both methods (order of 1E-01). Indeed, the neural network not having seen any
true target value (Nd = 0), its training results solely on performing well with regards
to the physics-informed regularization, which as in section 3.5 is defining a bound of
no-violation of the power balance equation with tolerance ϵ. After training with 100
epochs, the model has learned to respect the power balance equation for each bus with
a tolerance ϵ from the 0 value but cannot predict the actual target values at each bus.
• For regular generalization (table 4.12), with a one time run for each configuration, the
case with no physics-equation included in the neural network is still the one performing
best, this suggests that regarding regular generalization, the introduction of physics-
based regularization term as implemented in this study doesn’t reveal efficient.
• For super generalization (table 4.13), with also a unique computation per configura-
tion, we observe that a 50% introduction of the collocation points (and thus physics
regularization) results in a slightly better loss than with the base case of 0% for the
GD method. However, the improvement being of
Percentage ChangeGD =
4.98 × 10−5 −4.94 × 10−5
4.98 × 10−5

× 100 ∼= 0.74%
, it can be considered equal. This suggests that introducing 50% collocation points
in the training set and thus reducing the amount of datapoints with ground truth
output for training by 50% results in the same super-generalization loss than with
no collocation points and twice as much training points for the GD method. On the
other hand, the GNN is showing its lowest error for Nc/Ntot = 0, suggesting that the
introduction of the regularization term is not enhancing the loss.
• For super generalization again, except for the last column, the values presented in the
table are relatively close to each other and it is difficult to identify a specific trend.
Let’s calculate the coefficient of variation:
– For GD method: mean = 5.32E-05, standard deviation = 1.51E-06,
CV (GD) = 1.51E−06
5.32E−05 = 0.0284 ∼= 2.8%
– Similarly for GNN method: CV (GNN) = 3.77E−06
7.88E−05 = 0.0478 ∼= 4.8%
Page 42 of 51
==PAGE:46==
Project Plan
4.5. Interpretability Techniques
Assuming that a CV of less than 5% is acceptable here, this suggests that the addition
of a regularization term to the neural networks with GD and GNN methods respectively
has a small effect on the performance of the neural network.
• On the opposite, when calculating the coefficient of variation for the regular general-
ization loss values, we obtain a 99% variation for GD and 38 % variation for GNN
(excluding the value for Nc = Ntot. This suggests that adding a physics-based regular-
ization term has a bad impact on the regular generalization ability of the model.
From the results and observations made, it can be concluded that the addition of a
physics-based regularization term as in section 3.5 has a bad impact on the regular gener-
alization ability of the neural networks with both methods employed and no effect on their
super-generalization ability.
4.5
Interpretability Techniques
In this section, we aim to further interpret the results obtained without PINN using
heatmaps. As shown in the histograms in figure 4.3, the regular and super MSE loss are
distributed in a certain range of values for each methods and each grid case. We recall
that the regular generalization error represents the error calculated on a test set containing
unseen data for scenarios with seen N-1 and N-0 topology, while the super-generalization
error corresponds to the error calculated on a test set containing unseen data for unseen N-2
topology scenarios.
However, simply considering the mean squared error obtained for these types of loss does
not provide insights into which line disconnections result in higher or lower losses compared
to others. To gain a better understanding of the predictions made by each method, we
will analyze the specific loss for each pair of line disconnections and attempt to provide
interpretations for the obtained results. This analysis will allow us to compare the methods
further.
To visualize the MSE loss for all possible N-2 contingency scenarios, we have chosen to
use heatmaps. In this visualization, the two axes represent the disconnected branches (one
line and another line), and each square in the heatmap corresponds to the corresponding
loss value, displayed using a color scale. Heatmaps are an effective 3D visualization tool in
this context. Figure 4.4 presents the heatmaps generated for each of the three grid cases and
the three methods investigated in this report. Of course, the axis and color bar as well as
the heatmap itself is hard to read in the report as the number of buses and thus branches
increases. However, this allow us to visualize the patterns and identify similarities/differences
among the cases. The colorbar is indicated on the right for all three methods of a grid case.
Page 43 of 51
==PAGE:47==
Project Plan
4.5. Interpretability Techniques
(a) OH Case 14
(b) GD Case 14
(c) GNN Case 14
(d) OH Case 57
(e) GD Case 57
(f) GNN Case 57
(g) OH Case 118
(h) GD Case 118
(i) GNN Case 118
Figure 4.4: Heatmaps of the super MSE loss for all possible pairs of branch disconnection
for OH, GD and GNN methods and grid cases 14, 57 and 118.
As a first observation, it can be seen in figure 4.4 that the patterns are similar for OH,
GD and GNN methods within a given grid case. Also, as it can be seen more clearly for
case 14 in subfigure 4.4a, OH is shown to have a similar pattern compared to GD and GNN
but with way more light colors, indicating higher loss for a significant amount of pairs of
Page 44 of 51
==PAGE:48==
Project Plan
4.5. Interpretability Techniques
Figure 4.5: Topology of the IEEE-14 bus sys-
tem with some branches highlighted in red.
Branch
From Bus
To Bus
1
1
2
2
1
5
3
2
3
4
2
4
5
2
5
6
3
4
7
4
5
8
4
7
9
4
9
10
5
6
11
6
11
12
6
12
13
6
13
14
7
8
15
7
9
16
9
10
17
9
14
18
10
11
19
12
13
20
13
14
Table 4.14:
Table of the branch
numbers and their corresponding
from and to bus used in this study.
line disconnection compared to the two other methods. Case 14 being the simplest case to
analyze as it is the smaller grid system, we will perform a deeper analysis on case 14.
By examining the heatmaps, we can identify the combinations represented by lighter
colors, which correspond to the most problematic scenarios. At a first glance, the disconnec-
tion of Branch 10 emerges as a primary factor behind these errors. The heatmaps highlight
pairs such as [10,7], [10,8], [10,11], [10,15], [10,16], [10,17], and [10,18] with lighter colors,
indicating that the absence of Branch 10 results in notably higher loss. Another branch that
seems to significantly impact the model’s performance is Branch 7, as indicated by lighter
colors for pairs like [7,1], [7,3], [7,4], and [7,10].
To gain a better understanding of the grid system and its corresponding branches, we
refer to Figure 4.5. This graphical representation depicts the 14 bus system used as ’Case 14’
in our study, with the branch mentioned highlighted in red. The table on the right provides
the arbitrary branch numbers assigned to each branch given for each branch in the system
and referred to in the heatmaps.
Let’s describe the system studied.
It can be seen in figure 4.5 that there are two
generators, three synchronous compensators and eleven loads. When looking at the graph
for the IEEE bus system, we can identify two major "islands" or clusters of bus.
One
Page 45 of 51
==PAGE:49==
Project Plan
4.5. Interpretability Techniques
consistuted by the bus 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and one constituted by the bus 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. Those three islands are linked together by transformer windings that correspond to
what we call branch 8, 9, 10 and 15.
We notice that bus 8 is linked to the rest of the system only by branch 14, which
according to methodology explained in section 3.1 was kept connected at all times.
The pairs of branch disconnection that are identified as challenging for the models are
pairs [10,7], [10,8], [10,11], [10,15], [10,16], [10,17], and [10,18]. This means that, having
learned from N-1 contingency scenarios (each branch disconnection except branch 14 which
would result in an islanded bus), the model is unable to predict accurately the bus variables
in case of those pairs of line disconnection.
Indeed, disconnecting for instance branches
10 and 8 individually result in a certain state.
However, when both of these lines are
simultaneously disconnected, leaving only one transformer to interconnect the islands, it
introduces a unique and more complex system state. Since the model has not been exposed
to this specific scenario during training, it encounters difficulty in accurately predicting the
system behavior and variables. As mentioned before, this is also a consequence of the fact
that case 14 is a small system where pairs of line disconnection can have e big impact
compared to single line disconnections, thus resulting in wrong prediction from the NNs.
Looking at case 57 and case 118, it becomes harder to interpret the specific losses for
N-2 contingencies. Figures 4.6a and 4.6b show the topology of both bus system, illustrating
its complexity compared to the 14-bus system.
For instance, the highest errors identified in case 57 across the three methods and
represented by the two white squares and the two light red squares in subfigures 4.4d, 4.4e,
4.4f correspond to disconnection of branches 8 and 3 simultaneously and branches 2 and 15
simultaneously. Those branches are highlighted in red and blue respectively in figure 4.6a
that represents the 57-bus system studied here.
(a) Topology of 57-bus sys-
tem with some branches high-
lighted in red and blue.
(b) Topology of 118-bus system with some branches high-
lighted in red.
The 57-bus system has 7 generators, 42 loads and no transformer. It can be seen that
disconnecting branches 2 and 15 simultaneously is likely to result in a big change for buses
Page 46 of 51
==PAGE:50==
Project Plan
4.5. Interpretability Techniques
1 and 2 as they get more isolated for the rest, thus explaining why it is a topology hard
to predict for the models. Further analysis would be needed to gain more insight into the
model’s limitations and its inability to accurately predict system states in certain contingency
scenarios.
Taking case 118, the pairs of branch disconnection identified as challenging for the
model when looking at the heatmaps are pairs [104, 105], [104, 106], [104, 107], [104, 30].
The 118-bus system has 54 generators, 91 loads and 9 transformers. Looking at the buses the
mentioned branches are connected to, we see that it is mostly branches that are connected
to buses 69 and 68, which are the two ends of a transformer as illustrated in figure 4.6b.
However, similarly to case 57, further analysis would be needed to gain more insight into the
model’s limitations and its inability to accurately predict system states in certain contingency
scenarios.
Page 47 of 51
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and future work
In this chapter, we will write a general conclusion from the experiments conducted and
propose possible improvements.
As a whole, the experimental results show that for predicting the bus power flow vari-
ables for N-1 and N-2 contingency scenarios, having only trained on N-0 and N-1 topology,
a NN model with guided dropout method (GD) performs better than a NN with one-hot
method (OH) or a NN with graph convolutional layers (GNN). Both GD and GNN methods
are shown to scale up good when going from case 14 to case 57 and both outperform OH, thus
showing that the way they incorporate the topology in their architecture is more suitable for
power system application than a simple one-hot encoding method. Indeed, among the three
methods implemented, OH is shown to yield the worst performances both regarding regular
generalization (N-0, N-1) and super generalization (N-2). It is also showing bad scalability
when looking at how it evolves from case 14 to case 57. This can lead to conclude on the
superiority of the GD method over the two other methods for predicting data on unseen
topology scenarios. However, the high variability of the GD method observed when trying
to select the best model is putting into question its reliability and is a problem in real-world
applications. Further research and development are needed to address this variability issue
and enhance the stability and reliability of the GD method.
With the implementation of physics-based equation in the neural networks with both
GD and GNN methods, we observed that the regular generalization loss increases compared
to the models with no physics-based regularization. However, it showed constant perfor-
mance for super-generalization loss in both methods. This enables the model to yield similar
performances with 90% of the dataset being collocation points than with 100% training
datapoints. This is valuable in situations where data availability is limited or costly.
Furthermore, interpretability techniques applied to analyze the results proved useful in
uncovering the physical equivalences between the models’ predictions and the real power
system, particularly for case 14. Some troubles with interpreting the heatmaps for case 57
and case 118 come from the fact that both cases involve a large grid system. Further analysis
and understanding of these grids will enhance the interpretation of heatmaps and allow for
a better understanding of the limitations of the models in relation to the specific grid cases.
48
==PAGE:52==
Project Plan
In terms of future work, many things can be done. A natural extension of this thesis
would be to address the variability issue of the GD method thus enhancing its reliability and
stability. Additionally, investigating methods to improve the interpretability of results for
larger grid systems will further enhance the understanding of the models’ limitations and en-
able more informed decision-making. Furthermore, exploring alternative regularization tech-
niques to effectively incorporate domain knowledge and physical constraints. In addition,
while Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have shown promise in graph-based applica-
tions, alternative network architectures can be explored to further enhance the performance
of GNNs in power system applications. This may involve investigating variations of GCNs,
such as Graph Attention Networks (GATs), GraphSAGE, or Graph Isomorphism Networks
(GINs), and evaluating their suitability and performance on power system datasets.
Page 49 of 51
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1] P.S.R. Murty. Chapter 19 - load flow analysis. In P.S.R. Murty, editor, Electrical Power
Systems, pages 527–587. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2017.
[2] Laurine Duchesne, Efthymios Karangelos, and Louis Wehenkel. Recent developments in
machine learning for energy systems reliability management. Proceedings of the IEEE,
108(9):1656–1676, 2010.
[3] Neel Guha, Zhecheng Wang, Matt Wytock, and Arun Majumdar. Machine learning for
ac optimal power flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08842, 2019.
[4] Benjamin Donnot, Isabelle Guyon, Marc Schoenauer, Antoine Marot, and Patrick Pan-
ciatici.
Fast power system security analysis with guided dropout.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.09870, 2018.
[5] Benjamin Donnot, Isabelle Guyon, Marc Schoenauer, Patrick Panciatici, and Antoine
Marot.
Introducing machine learning for power system operation support.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.09527, 2017.
[6] Shaohui Liu, Chengyang Wu, and Hao Zhu. Topology-aware graph neural networks for
learning feasible and adaptive ac-opf solutions. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
2022.
[7] Damian Owerko, Fernando Gama, and Alejandro Ribeiro.
Optimal power flow us-
ing graph neural networks. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 5930–5934. IEEE, 2020.
[8] Ali R. Al-Roomi. Power Flow Test Systems Repository, 2015.
[9] R. D. Zimmerman and C. E. Murillo-SĂĄnchez. MATPOWER User’s Manual, Version
7.1, 2020.
[10] Frank Rosenblatt. The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and
organization in the brain. Psychological review, 65 6:386–408, 1958.
[11] Ke-Lin Du, Chi-Sing Leung, Wai Ho Mow, and M. N. S. Swamy. Perceptron: Learn-
ing, generalization, model selection, fault tolerance, and role in the deep learning era.
Mathematics, 10(24), 2022.
50
==PAGE:54==
Project Plan
Bibliography
[12] David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. Learning represen-
tations by back-propagating errors. Nature, 323:533–536, 1986.
[13] Ethem Alpaydin. Multilayer Perceptrons, pages 267–316. 2014.
[14] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolu-
tional networks. CoRR, abs/1609.02907, 2016.
[15] George S. Misyris, Andreas Venzke, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis.
Physics-informed
neural networks for power systems, 2020.
[16] Rahul Nellikkath and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. Physics-informed neural networks for ac
optimal power flow. Electric Power Systems Research, 212:108412, 2022.
[17] Steven de Jongh, Frederik Gielnik, Felicitas Mueller, Loris Schmit, Michael Suriyah,
and Thomas Leibfried. Physics-informed geometric deep learning for inference tasks in
power systems. Electric Power Systems Research, 211:108362, 2022.
Page 51 of 51
