==PAGE:1==
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Con­
ditions in Daycare Centers
Master Thesis
DTU Engineering Acoustics
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
Master Thesis
June 21, 2023
By
Clara Cecilia Virén Riise
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Room Acoustics, De­
partment of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Engineering Acoustics, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of acoustics and statis­
tics.
Clara Cecilia Virén Riise ­ s184143
Signature
Date
ii
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
June 21st 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study aimed to investigate the prevalence of hearing problems among educators
working in daycare centers and to test several hypotheses related to noise levels and
other factors influencing hearing damage. The main hypothesis focused on the higher
prevalence of hearing problems among educators, even though the noise levels were be­
low the critical threshold. The study utilized data from measurements and questionnaires
collected from a sample of daycare centers.
The findings indicated that it was not possible to conclude the main hypothesis based on
the study’s results. The noise levels measured in the daycare centers were below the
critical threshold, and the prevalence of hearing problems was based solely on subjective
questionnaire data, which had a small sample size for each daycare center, making it
difficult to compare subjective and objective data.
However, the study did find some significance in the sub­hypotheses related to the dura­
tion of employment in daycare centers. The longer the educators worked with children,
the higher the risk of hearing damage. No significant correlations were found between the
age of educators, the number of children per educator, implementation of acoustic regu­
lation, age of children, variation in children’s ages within each room, and the occurrence
of hearing damage.
The majority of respondents reported hearing­related problems, with hyperacusis being
the most common issue. There was a trend indicating a higher prevalence of low noise
levels in daycare centers with acoustic regulation. Additionally, daycare centers with flutter
echo showed higher noise levels. Further analysis is needed to explore these trends fully.
It is important to note that the results presented in this study are based on a specific sample
size and questionnaire data. Further research with a larger sample size is necessary to
obtain more representative results and gain a clearer understanding of the hypotheses
being studied.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Clara Cecilia Virén Riise, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
This endeavor would not have been possible without help from several people.
Jonas Brunskog, Associate Professor, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engi­
neering, Technical University of Denmark
Jens Hjortkjær, Associate Professor, Department of Health Technology, Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark
Ole Vestergaard, Managing Director, Alpha Akustik Aps
For help and support, and for making sure my work did not go unnoticed.
Jens Christian Riise, Market Manager, Urban Water and Climate Change, Rambøll
For believing in the project and helping me proofread the final work.
Kirsten Nabe­Nielsen, Ph.D. in Public Health, Department of Public Health Sciences
For giving me information on the subject and on other specialists who would help me with
my project.
Susanne Nemholt, Ph.D. in Hyperacusis and Tinnitus among Children and Adolescents,
Syddansk Universitet
For giving me crucial information about tinnitus and hyperacusis in schools and daycare.
Sofie Fredriksson, Ph.D. at Occupational and Environmental Medicine and Licensed
Audiologist, University of Gothenburg
For helping me and sharing her data on similar projects to discover as much in the field
as possible.
Per Tybjerg Aldrich, Working environment policy consultant, Danish Union of Early Child­
hood (BUPL)
Stine Lee Gerner Jakobsen, Ph.D. Student, SDU Health Informatics and Technology
iv
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview of Room Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Comparing Objectivity and Subjectivity: Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Understanding the Difference between Tinnitus and Hyperacusis . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
4
2.1
Acoustic Foundations: Background and Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Statistical Analysis and Hypotheses Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Daycare Centers in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Literary review
9
3.1
Preview Studies on Building Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Factors Resulting in Good Building Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Formula of Rindel in Food Establishments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Problems caused by noise exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Trends and Findings in the Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.6
Implications for Designing Daycare Centers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Methodology
22
4.1
The Use and Development of Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
The Measuring and Determining Good Room Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Results and Analyses
30
5.1
The Presentation of Grouped Data – Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.2
Analysis of Questionnaire Responses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
The Presentation of Grouped Data – Noise Level Measurements . . . . . . 39
5.4
Curve Fitting Results and Rindel’s Formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5
Correlation and Fitting Parameters: Group Size and Lombard Slope . . . . 44
6
Discussion
49
6.1
Summary and Interpretation of Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
The Influence of Flutter Echo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6.3
The Influence of The Lombard Effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6.4
Strengths and Weaknesses of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.5
Recommendations for Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7
Conclusion and further comments
59
Bibliography
61
A Appendix
63
A.1 Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The study concerns the understanding of the correlation between room acoustic condi­
tions and the effects the noise in a mentioned room has on a population of childcare takers.
This is about professional educators wanting to ensure an optimal pedagogical environ­
ment possible for both children and adults. It is widely known, that excessive noise levels
in daycare centers are a problem affecting educators in the workplace. Unfortunately, the
issue of excessive noise levels in daycare centers is complex because of the parameters
affecting a workday in a communication­intense such as a daycare center. Educators
must be able to communicate with each other and understand the problems occurring
during a workday.
1.1
Overview of Room Acoustics
Room acoustics is the understanding of sound propagation in enclosed rooms. When
assessing the acoustic environment of a room, it is essential to consider the sound en­
vironment; The noise exposure is a factor determining whether the room’s acoustics are
good or bad. The definition of noise is “any sounds at hazardous levels or sounds that are
perceived as unwanted” [1]. A bad sound environment can result in hearing impairment,
which affects the quality of life.
Noise­induced hearing loss is the most prevalent form of hearing loss, particularly among
individuals aged 45 and above. The safety levels are determined by the amount of time
a person can be exposed to a continuous noise level before their hearing begins to suffer
damage. Beyond this level of exposure, hearing loss can be permanent and irreversible.
Table 1.1 illustrates the varying levels of exposure time. It can be observed that for every
3 dB increase in noise level, the permissible exposure time is halved. The exposure
level is defined as the equivalent noise level a person can tolerate before their hearing is
compromised.
Continuous dB
Exposure Time
85 dB
8 hours
88 dB
4 hours
91 dB
2 hours
94 dB
1 hours
97 dB
30 minutes
100 dB
15 minutes
103 dB
7.5 minutes
106 dB
<4 minutes
109 dB
<2 minutes
112 dB
∼1 minute
115 dB
∼30 seconds
Table 1.1: Permissible exposure levels, Leq for which the hearing starts to damage.
For centuries, noise has been acknowledged as a potential occupational hazard, yet it
has been confined to a few industries for a long time [2]. Generally, an 8­hour workday is
a standard, thus Leq,8h is equivalent to the allowable sound pressure level of 85 dB(A).
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
1
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Comparing Objectivity and Subjectivity: Hypotheses
The subject of the study was chosen with an idea and an observation of educators in
daycare centers experiencing problems with noise levels. A study of biological studies,
where the effect of the physical parameters, such as the building acoustics, had already
been tested under different conditions. The main hypothesis was stated below:
Educators working in daycare centers experience a higher prevalence of hearing
problems, especially hyperacusis, and tinnitus, even though the equivalent noise level
for an 8­hour workday is below the critical level of 80 dB(A).
The realization of the complexity of this subject came to mind when the project began
evolving. Both the literature study, the questionnaire work, and the measurements with
unofficial interviews and thoughts given by educators gave new perspectives to more
specific hypotheses.
Table 1.2: Hypotheses
Hypothesis
Descriptions
Hypothesis 1
Flutter echo might increase the overall noise level, even when the re­
verberation time meets the required threshold of 0.4 seconds.
Hypothesis 2
Despite maintaining a noise level below 80 dB, educators still experi­
ence a high prevalence of hearing problems.
Hypothesis 3
Implementing acoustic regulation measures by Alpha Akustik leads to
reduced noise levels in the workplace.
Hypothesis 4
The number of children per educator significantly influences the occur­
rence of hearing damage.
Hypothesis 5
Children aged 4 to 7 years have higher noise levels compared to
younger children (0 to 3 years old).
Hypothesis 6
Greater variation in the ages of children within each room affects the
overall noise levels.
Hypothesis 7
The risk of hearing damage increases with the duration of employment
in childcare settings.
When measuring noise levels in daycare centers more than one educator was made
aware of the noise production of older children. This made for an interesting take on
the differences in daycare centers, which resulted in hypotheses 5 and 6.
The hypotheses are based on the variables investigated in the questionnaire, revolving
around the parameters that may be possible to examine in this study.
1.3
Understanding the Difference between Tinnitus and
Hyperacusis
Excessive and prolonged exposure to sound levels of 85 dB(A) or higher can lead to
permanent hearing damage, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), reduced tolerance to high noise
levels (hyperacusis), and difficulty understanding speech in noisy environments.
Tinnitus is a common hearing­related problem, characterized by the perception of sound
in the ears, even when there is no external sound present.
Hyperacusis is also a hearing­related problem, also known as a symptom of sound intol­
erance disorder. There are multiple interpretations of the term, usually involving an abnor­
mal level of sensitivity, discomfort, or pain when exposed to everyday sounds at moderate
2
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:10==
volumes [3]. A nationwide examination made by Danish National Research Centre for the
Working Environment (NFA), has described the two types of hearing­related problems oc­
curring in specific work environments [4]. The classical type is impaired hearing caused
by excessive noise. This includes workers from the industrial workforce such as machine,
metal, and wood industry workers, as well as dock and harbor workers. The new type is
sound intolerance or hyperacusis. This type of hearing problem is seen more in the labor
force within the educational field. Hyperacusis includes strongly reduced tolerance for
ordinary, everyday sounds. Tinnitus can occur with both types of hearing problems [4].
1.3.1
Definition of Tinnitus
Tinnitus is hearing a high­pitched sound at all times and is often described as a ringing,
buzzing, humming, clicking, or hissing sound, although those affected by it may also hear
other types of sounds. The condition can be intermittent or continuous and can vary in
intensity from mild to severe. It can affect people of any age and may be caused by var­
ious factors, such as hearing loss due to age or noise exposure, certain medications, or
even head or neck injuries.
In Figure 1.1, the anatomy of the ear is depicted. The ear is composed of three distinct
parts: the outer ear, the middle ear, and the inner ear. The outer ear and the middle ear
serve to convey sound waves to the inner ear, which perceives the sound and sends
signals to the brain. This perception of sound is enabled by hair cells located in the
cochlea, which is a spiral­shaped structure in the inner ear. The hair cells are divided
into outer and inner hair cells. The outer hair cells amplify weak sounds to the inner
hair cells, while the inner hair cells convert vibration signals into electrical signals that are
transmitted by the auditory nerve to the auditory cortex. Prolonged exposure to excessive
noise levels can damage the outer hair cells, leading to hearing loss. Since hair cells do
not regenerate in mammalian species, this can result in permanent hearing impairment
[2].
Figure 1.1: Sketch of the anatomy of the ear
Tinnitus occurring from noise exposure is the most known and well­described form of tin­
nitus, and the risk of tinnitus increases above noise levels of 85 dB(A). Tinnitus can have
a wide range of effects on an individual, including difficulty concentrating, difficulty sleep­
ing, irritability, fatigue, anxiety, and depression. In addition, tinnitus can impact a person’s
quality of life, as it can be a constant source of distraction and discomfort. Tinnitus can
also result in people withdrawing from social interactions [5].
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Acoustic Foundations: Background and Concepts
Acoustics is a large subject of physics, important to ensure sound quality, comfort, and
safety in different settings. The aspects of the acoustical foundations are important to
understand in order to use the correct theory. The study is both about the objective mea­
surements of good room acoustics, but it also looks like the study of psychoacoustics is
necessary to understand, to comprehend the effect of hyperacusis.
2.1.1
Room Acoustics
Room acoustics involves how sound propagates, reflects, and interacts with room bound­
aries, and materials in the room. The theory includes reverberation time, early reflections,
sound decay, and the impact of room geometry [6]. The reverberation time is the time it
takes for the sound pressure level to decline 60 dB, which is usually measured in a 20 dB­
or 30 dB interval, T20 or T30. The measurements of room acoustic parameters, including
the reverberation time in ordinary rooms, are taken from the ISO Standard 3382­2 [7].
The reverberation time of Sabine’s formula can be seen in Equation 2.1.
T60 = 0.16V
Sa
(2.1)
Where V is the room volume, and S ·a is the total absorption area. The absorption area is
an important part of design considerations when trying to achieve desired acoustic qual­
ities. The area of absorption contra the area of reflection can result in the required room
acoustic. In daycare settings, the solution seems to be as much absorption area as pos­
sible. But in terms of design consideration, there are factors playing into the optimization.
2.1.2
Flutter Echo Phenomenon: Occurrence and Solutions
A very common phenomenon in room acoustics is the occurrence of flutter echo. Flut­
ter echo occurs when the sound waves are experienced being bounced back and forth
between two smooth surfaces [8]. The sound is a series of distinct echos, which is expe­
rienced as a metallic decay sound.
Flutter echo is removed, if the parallel surfaces in a room are ensured not to be reflective.
Furthermore, it can also be avoided if the surfaces are not parallel, which means ensuring
more diffuse surfaces.
When sound absorption is added to ensure better room acoustic, a lot of room is usually
taken on the walls, and the absorption is added to the ceiling.
2.1.3
The Lombard Effect
When describing room acoustics, an essential connection between room acoustics and
psychoacoustics is the phenomenon of the Lombard effect. The Lombard effect is a phe­
nomenon in which speakers alter their vocal production in noisy environments [9]. Af­
fected by the Lombard effect, not only the loudness was affected, but also the vowel
duration, amplitude, and shifts in the vowel space. The Lombard effect has been expe­
rienced as very important in spaces, where people are supposed to communicate with
each other. In 2010 Jens Holger Rindel used the Lombard effect to explain verbal com­
munication and noise in food establishments [10]. This is further explained in the literary
review in section 3.2.
4
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:12==
The correlation between the Lombard Effect and the measurements of daycare centers is
tested by fitting the results to the formula of Rindel. This is done by the use of statistical
tools of Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). RMSE calcu­
lates the standard deviation of the data and gives a value that represents the overall error
[11].
RMSE =
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
(ˆyi + yi)2
n
(2.2)
This is the differences between the measured data and the actual data. MAE calculates
the absolute differences between the actual data and the predicted data.
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(2.3)
The equations of RMSE, 2.2, and MAE, 2.3, are both used to evaluate the performance
of regression models. The value of ˆyi is the predicted output and the value of yi is the
actual output.
2.2
Statistical Analysis and Hypotheses Development
Statistical analysis is necessary when analyzing a large population to determine patterns
and trends happening in many aspects. Statistics are the use of scientific methods for
collecting, organizing, summarizing, presenting, and analyzing data [11].
The study includes analyses of raw data collected by measuring sound pressure levels in
daycare centers and answers to a questionnaire from 65 educators of daycare centers.
The measuring data set is a finite continuous variable, whereas the questionnaire data is
a finite discrete variable. It is important to ensure the robustness of the statistical analy­
sis by making sure the sample size is large enough to transform the data into a normal
distribution.
A sufficiently large sample size is crucial for accurate statistical tests, which can result in
reliable conclusions. The normal distribution or Gaussian distribution is often used for the
transformation of data. The distribution is known for the symmetric bell­shaped curve. It
is defined by the Equation 2.4.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the bell­shaped normal distribution [12].
Y =
1
σ
√
2πe−1/2(X−µ)2/σ2
(2.4)
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
5
==PAGE:13==
Where µ = mean, σ = standard deviation, π = 3.14159, and e = 2.71828 [11]. The σ2
is known as the variance [11]. By transforming the data into a normal distribution, the
assumption of normality is satisfied, enabling the application of parametric tests that rely
on this assumption. Normality ensures that the statistical techniques used in this study,
such as variance analysis, give accurate and valid results.
The data or transformed data can be tested for normality in different ways. A very powerful
tool for a test of normality is the Shapiro­Wilk test. The Shapiro­Wilk test is a parametric
test that assesses whether a given data set follows a normal distribution [13]. The test is
given by Equation 2.5.
W = (Pn
i=1 aixi)2
Pn
i=1(xi¯x)2
(2.5)
Where xi is the sample needed to be tested for normality, and ¯x is the sample mean. The
purpose of the test is to assess whether the null hypothesis, which states that the data
follows a normal distribution, can be either rejected or accepted. If the P­value is above
the significant level of α = 0.05, then the data set is normally distributed [13].
If the data is normally distributed, sampling theory can be used to check whether the
relation between the variables is of significance. The importance of statistics is to en­
sure the patterns seen between the variables are not due to chance variation but instead
statistically significant.
For sampling theory, the two populations from which the samples are drawn, have the
same variance. In many situations, this study included, there is a need to test the signifi­
cance of differences between three or more sampling means or, equivalently, to test the
null hypothesis that the sample means are all equal [11].
If more than one group is compared in the analysis, it is known as an Analysis of Variance
or an ANOVA analysis. In this study, the One­Way Classification or One­Factor Experi­
ment is used. This experiment is usually used for a independent groups of samples, where
the number of measurements in each group is b [11]. The independent groups change
due to the hypotheses that wanted to be analyzed.
The ANOVA analysis aims to determine whether the null hypothesis is not true, which indi­
cates the means are not equal. If the statistics are significantly large, it can be concluded
that there is a significant difference between the treatments and the null hypothesis can
be rejected. If not, the null hypothesis is either accepted or reserved judgment. The sig­
nificant test is known as the F­test, where the P­value should be below 0.05, which equals
a 95% confidence of the means being different.
2.3
Daycare Centers in Denmark
The number of educators in daycare centers in Denmark as of 2021, with the statistical
information updated 1st February 2023 for the years 2019­2021, is officially around 61,000
[14].
6
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.1: Full­time Equivalent Educational Staff in Municipal and Independent Daycare
Institutions and Daycare[14].
Year
Total
Daycare
Educator
Pedagogical
Pedagogical
Pedagogical
Education
Leader
Assistant
Assistant Student
Student
2018
57,176
9,673
25,406
3,377
18,720
­
­
2019
57,722
9,378
25,879
3,299
14,832
335
749
2020
60,136
8,892
26,483
3,294
16,990
343
741
2021
61,439
8,374
26,881
3,274
18,191
347
734
Daycare centers have some similarities and differences to each other. The construction
code of 2015 describes the acoustic conditions of daycare centers in Denmark published
by the Danish Transport and Construction Agency [15]. The guidance report includes a
table of the room acoustics of daycare centers.
Table 2.2: Daycare Institution Buildings – Room Acoustics [15]
Reverberation Time
T
Frequency Range
Occupancy Room
T ≤0.4 s
[125Hz­4000Hz]
Absorption Area
A
Occupancy Room with ceiling height > 4m
A ≤1.2 s x floor area
[125Hz­4000Hz]
& room volume > 300m3
As a supplement to the construction regulations, in a workplace, if the equivalent noise
level of 8 hours is below 80 dB(A), the workplace is not regulated to ensure hearing pro­
tection. This regulation is based on the knowledge of hearing damage and exposure time
seen in Table 1.1.
To get an objective description of the acoustical conditions in the daycare centers, mea­
surements of the A­weighted noise levels were conducted, also to complement the subjec­
tive data obtained from the questionnaire. The noise level measurements were conducted
during the same time, from 7 am to 12 am, on four different days. The purpose was to
capture the noise environment at the same time in three different acoustic environments.
The daycare centers were divided differently from each other.
Table 2.3: Daycare Center Information
Daycare
Rooms/Institutions
Age Group
Troldhøj daycare
Red room
3­4 year old
Troldhøj daycare
Green room
4­5 year old
Troldhøj daycare
Blue room
5­6 year old
Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
0­2 year old
Skjoldungerne
Aslak
3­4 year old
Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
3­5 year old
Skovmosen
Bikuben
3­6 year old
Skovmosen
Myretuen
3­6 year old
2.3.1
Troldhøj Daycare Center
Troldhøj Daycare Center was an institution located in Svogerslev of Roskilde municipality.
The daycare center was divided into two separate buildings: one for toddlers (0­2 years),
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
7
==PAGE:15==
and one for older children (2­7 years). Only the institution with the older children was
used for measurements. The rooms were divided into different age groups; Red room for
2­ to 3­year­olds, Green room for 3­ to 4­year­olds, and Blue room for 5­ to 6­year­olds.
The rooms were separated by a common room/kitchen where most of the children ate
for lunch. The kitchen was also used as a common room for the first kids arriving in the
morning.
2.3.2
Skjoldungerne Daycare Center
Skjoldungerne Daycare Center was an institution located in Lejre. The daycare center
was a bigger institution divided into multiple rooms for both toddlers and older children.
The two divisions were called Uglehøj and Ravnshøj with respectively 6 and 5 rooms for
each daycare. Skjoldungerne had acoustic regulation made in 2021 by Alpha Akustik to
help with the acoustic environment in specific rooms. For this study, measurements were
made in the rooms of Ravnshøj: Aslak for 4­ to 5­year­olds, Svanerne for 3­ to 6­year­
olds, and Gæslingerne for 2­3­year­olds. The rooms were separated, and no common
rooms were measured.
2.3.3
Skovmosen Daycare Center
Skovmosen Daycare Center was an institution located in Roskilde. The daycare cen­
ter followed a distinct approach to organizing the older children. Unlike the other two
institutions where the older children were divided into specific age groups and allocated
separate rooms, Skovmosen took a different approach. Instead of dividing them into more
specific age groups, Skovmosen accommodated all children between the ages of 3 to 6
in two rooms. The names of the rooms were Bikuben and Myretuen.
At Skovmosen, the layout consisted of a common room/kitchen, serving as a central hub,
which separated the areas dedicated to toddlers from those designated for older children.
In the case of this study, the focus was on investigating the rooms assigned to the older
children, including the common room.
8
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:16==
3
Literary review
The literature study was a part of the study establishing the initial idea of noise level prob­
lems in daycare centers in Denmark. The process included interviews with researchers
in Denmark and Sweden helping to get the information needed.
3.1
Preview Studies on Building Acoustics
The studies are divided into distinct subsections, each of which concentrates on a particu­
lar aspect. Upon examining prior studies, it became evident that the emphasis was either
on the physical parameters of optimal building acoustics or the issues that arise from a
substandard environment. Additionally, the articles and studies are presented.
3.1.1
The Selection Process
The selection process was helped by researchers and specialists in the subject of daycare
centers and occupational noise. Especially Sofie Fredriksson was very helpful with all the
information about the Swedish studies, which have been taking place in the last couple of
years. Also, Kirsten Nabe­Nielsen was very helpful and skilled in finding relevant literature
useful for this study. It was also because of her, I came in contact with other researchers.
It was important the literature was relevant, which meant the articles and studies had to
be no older than 2015. Some of the articles were older than this, but this was to establish
the evolution of daycare centers over the years. It was especially interesting to look at the
occupational noise evolution because hyperacusis is a fairly new concept. As an addi­
tional article, the Counsel for the Green Transition of Denmark (Rådet for Grøn Omstilling)
published an article about the Indoor Environment i Daycare Centers in Denmark in April
2023.
The articles and studies included in this literature study are listed below:
• ’Pædagoger og folkeskolelærer rammes af lydoverfølsomhed’ article in Danish based
on a survey by Danish National Research Centre for the Working Environment
(NFA), 2002 [4].
• ’The Case For Good Acoustics at Daycare Centers’ by Mike Nixon, 2003 [16].
• ’Acoustic design of school: a design guide’ of ’Building Bulletin 93’ (BB93) by the
Association of Noise Consultants and the Institute of Acoustics, 2003 [17].
• ’Verbal communication and noise in eating establishments’ by Jens Holger Rindel,
2010 [10].
• ’Copenhagen Municipality leads the way for the wellbeing of daycare teachers’ brought
by AcousticBulletin by Ecophon, 2012 [18].
• ’Acoustic design of schools: performance standards’ is a revised section supersed­
ing the first section of ’Building Bulletin 93’, 2015[19].
• ’Preschool Personnel Exposure to Occupational Noise by Darja Kaluznaja and Svet­
lana Lakisa from the Department of Occupational and Environment Medicine in
Riga, 2016 [20].
• ’Pædagoger får høreskader af børns råb’ by Christoffer Heide for the Danish Radio
(DR), 2018 [21].
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
9
==PAGE:17==
• ’There is no ’day­care effect’: Why acoustics are critical in childcare facilities’ by
Connie Enghus, 2019 [22].
• ’Occupational noise exposure: A review of its effects, epidemiology, and impact with
recommendations for reducing its burden’ by Elizabeth A. Masterson and Christa L.
Themann for the Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 2019 [2].
• ’Toward Child­Appropriate Acoustic Measurement Methods in Primary Schools and
Daycare Centers’ by Karin Loh, Manuj Yadav, Kerstin Persson Waye, Maria Klatte,
and Janina Fels, 2022 [23].
• ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure on Hyperacusis: a Longitudinal Pop­
ulation Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ by Sofie Fredriksson, Laith Hussain­
Alkhateeb, Kjell Torén, Mattias Sjöström, Jenny Selander, Per Gustavsson, Kim
Kähäri, Lennart Magnusson and Kerstin Waye Persson for the Department of Occu­
pational and Environmental Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy in Gothenburg, Swe­
den, 2022 [3].
• ’Nurses’ and preschool teachers’ experiences of taking part in a participatory in­
tervention project in communication­intense working environments’ by Kristina Gyl­
lensten, Sofie Fredriksson, Stephen Widen, Mia Söderberg, and Kersten Persson
Waye, 2022 [24].
• ’The experience of noise in communication intense workplace: A qualitative study’
by Kristina Gyllensten, Sofie Fredriksson, Stephen Widen, and Kerstin Persson
Waye, 2022 [1].
• ’Indeklima i Daginstitutioner’ by Lone Hjort Mikkelsen, 2023 [25].
3.2
Factors Resulting in Good Building Acoustics
Some of the studies have been conducted with regard to the broader issue of acoustics
in construction, as well as more specific examinations of the acoustics of daycare centers
and preschools.
The importance of good acoustics is discussed in daycare centers and preschools already
at the beginning of the century [16]. The knowledge of bad sound environments is clearly
well­known at this point, and parents are given guides pointing out the problems of acous­
tics in daycare centers. It explains that exposure to excessive noise can be harmful to
hearing, and that high background noise levels and sound­reflective hard surfaces can
cause a noise buildup that can be detrimental to speech development and learning. Par­
ents are told to evaluate daycare centers and preschools for their acoustical environment.
This is not based on a research study, but more as an information article [16].
In today’s society, with an increasing number of households having two working parents,
the need for preschool childcare outside the home is greater than ever. When choosing
a daycare center, there are many factors to consider. The American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) has developed acoustical standards for school facilities, but these do not
yet include criteria for daycare centers or preschool facilities.
Open­plan facilities are much louder than smaller spaces, and the more children present,
the noisier the space generally is. When choosing a daycare center, parents are told to
consider the acoustical conditions of the space, including the height of the ceiling, the
type of wall and floor surfaces, and whether there is a kitchen area in the larger open
10
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:18==
space. The ANSI standards for classroom acoustics state that the reverberation time of
10.000 cbft should be less than 0.6 s, and the background noise should be less than 35
dB in unoccupied classrooms. To check the reverberation time, parents can perform a
simple test with a hand clap. By taking these factors into account, parents can be sure
that the daycare center they choose will provide a safe and conducive environment for
their children.
It is not only parents having to look out for the hearing of their children. Construction reg­
ulations have been set to ensure the room acoustics and the indoor environment keep the
standards [17][19]. It sets out minimum performance standards for the acoustics of school
buildings and describes the normal means of demonstrating compliance with the Building
Regulations in the United Kingdom. Building Bulletin 93 provides a regulatory framework
for the acoustic design of schools. It also gives supporting advice and recommendations
for the planning and design of schools and provides a comprehensive guide for all those
involved in the design of new school buildings. The standards for acoustics have been
updated to reflect current research and the relevant requirements of the Disability Dis­
crimination Act. The bulletin also recommends a structured approach to acoustic design
at each stage of the planning and design process, to ensure good acoustic conditions in
the classroom and reduce the strain on teachers’ voices. Noise activity and sensitivity
levels and upper limits for indoor ambient noise levels can be seen in table 3.1:
Type of room
Tmt seconds
New build
Refurbishment
Primary school:
Classroom
≤0.6
≤0.8
Secondary school:
Classroom
≤0.8
≤1.0
Open plan:
Teaching area
≤0.5
≤0.5
Lecture rooms:
Small (<50 people)
≤0.8
≤1.0
Large (>50 people)
≤1.0
≤1.0
Table 3.1: Selected acoustic performance standards in reverberation times from the re­
vised version [19].
The construction regulation used in Denmark for Daycare Centers is the construction code
of 2015 describing the acoustic conditions of daycare centers in Denmark published by the
Danish Transport and Construction Agency [15]. The table of the regulation requirements
can be seen in Table 2.2.
The excessive noise levels in daycare centers and preschools is something the population
started to take notice of, and the regulations also had to be maintained. This made for
several projects trying to ensure better indoor environments in daycare institutions. The
study ’Plads til Alle’ (’Room for everybody’) was initiated by Copenhagen Municipality
in 2011 [26][18]. The study was to improve the sound environment in daycare centers,
as studies had shown that noise was the primary cause for daycare teachers leaving
their profession. Three different daycare centers were chosen for the project, and they
all committed to taking part in pedagogical, organizational, and building changes to test
different types of noise control. Acoustic treatments such as sound insulation, sound
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
11
==PAGE:19==
absorption, and the building of new walls and sound tunnels were implemented. Results
showed that the acoustic treatment lowered reverberation time to under 0.4 seconds in
all frequency bands, and the Lombard effect was gone. The teachers reported that they
could work all day without getting a headache, and the percentage of employees who felt
annoyed by noise decreased from 63% to 16%. The project concluded that teachers and
children in daycare centers struggled with noise levels when the acoustic treatment was
not good enough, and when the right materials are chosen, the work environment would
be positive and the teachers could perform higher­quality work with reduced stress and
annoyance. In figure 3.1 it is possible to see the results of acoustical treatment in the
daycare center Bjørneborgen:
Figure 3.1: Reverberation time in the room ’Tårnfalken’ in the daycare center ’Bjørnebor­
gen’ in Copenhagen [18].
The acoustician Per Mølberg has asserted that, unless the acoustic treatment of a room
is appropriate and adequate, neither organizational nor pedagogic alterations will be of
any assistance in reducing noise issues [18]. A survey published by BUPL also shows
excessive noise in general in daycare centers up to 80 dBA.
All of these articles, studies, and projects were published before 2015, and it is possible
to see a further understanding of the complexity of this subject in the further studies. The
study ’Plads til Alle’ sure enough takes a lot of the different parameters into consideration,
but the main focus was the shortage of reverberation times.
In 2019 Connie Enghus wrote an article based on the study ’Indoor Climate Problems in
Day Institutions for Children: Practical, Administrative and Policy Perspectives” done by
NFA written by Jens Steensberg in 1984. The article focuses on the learning problems
following noise pollution in daycare institutions. According to the article, what is known as
the ’cocktail­party effect’ is not developed in children, and this can have an effect on the
so­called ’shouting culture’ existing in daycare centers. This article discusses the issue of
noise in daycare facilities, which can have a negative effect on learning. Noise is not a new
discovery when it comes to daycare centers, but according to a study from NFA in 2018,
it concluded 70% of childcare workers were disturbed by noise more than 25% of their
working hours. Furthermore, the study by Steensberg concludes one­third of evaluated
rooms did not comply with the acoustic requirements of the Danish building code. To
improve the acoustical environment, it is suggested to reduce the number of children in
the rooms and to use soundproof insulation and sound absorption materials on the walls
and ceiling. These measures can help improve the acoustical environment and other
elements of the indoor climate, such as temperature and humidity, which will benefit both
the kids and the staff. When using this article, it has to be taken into consideration, it is
12
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:20==
written in order to increase absorption in buildings, which is beneficial for the company,
Rockwool, who has published the article.
Noise can be detrimental to children’s health, and the room acoustics of most of the sam­
pled rooms in a German study were found to need improvement [23]. The sound pressure
level during activities was measured to be approximately 66 dBA, which is lower than in
other countries. Utilizing transducers and psychoacoustic parameters could potentially
be advantageous in more thoroughly analyzing the noise environment in educational set­
tings. It is important to note that the number of children, their ages, the activities, and the
room acoustics can vary greatly.
The german study provides preliminary results of room acoustics and in­situ noise mea­
surements in classrooms and playrooms in Germany [23]. The acoustic measurement
methods used in primary schools and daycare centers are questioned due to the fact that
the psychoacoustic parameters vary with room volumes, and suggest the use of child­
appropriate HATS for in­situ measurements. The procedure was approved by the Medical
Ethics Committee at the RWTH Aachen University, Germany.
The SPLs measured in the study ranged from 42­100 dB, and the equivalent a­weighted
sound pressure level was measured to be 60­85 dB for periods ranging from 2 min to five
working days. It is important to measure and control noise levels in educational institutions
to provide optimal learning and development environments for children.
The psychoacoustic parameters have been used to investigate various sound environ­
ments for adults but it is not clear whether they apply to children’s perception. The study
aims to determine measurement and analysis methods that best characterize the subjec­
tive perception of both children and adults.
The acoustic measurements were conducted in 10 educational buildings in Germany, in­
cluding four primary schools and six daycare centers. Results showed that primary school
rooms had better acoustics than daycare centers, with lower T30, EDT, and TS and higher
C50, D50, and STI. None of the rooms had any substantial acoustic treatment, and it is
suggested that the relevance of good/bad acoustics be further explored based on subjec­
tive impressions of children and adults.
3.3
Formula of Rindel in Food Establishments
As established in the theoretical background, a possible connection between the room
acoustics and psychoacoustics can be described by the Lombard effect. In 2010, Jens
Holger Rindel published a new prediction model used for food establishments such as
restaurants, cafes, and canteens, where the Lombard effect can be quite noticeable. The
phenomenon occurs when many people speaking in a room increase the sound level
because the noise from the other person speaking means everyone has to raise their
voice.
The new prediction model has been developed to predict the average A­weighted noise
level due to many people speaking in a room with an assumed diffuse sound field. The
model takes into account the Lombard effect. The model was verified by comparison
to experimental data found in the literature. The model was used to create a design
guide for the acoustic treatment of food establishments, which suggests that the minimum
required absorption area per person is 4 m2 for ”sufficient” verbal communication, 8 m2
for ”satisfactory” verbal communication, and 17 m2 for ”good” verbal communication. The
vocal efforts were described according to ISO 9921 and can be seen in table 3.2, where
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
13
==PAGE:21==
LS,A,1m is the equivalent continuous A­weighted sound pressure level of the direct sound
in front of a male speaker at a distance of 1 m from the mouth.
Figure 3.2: Description of vocal effort at various speech levels [10].
The Lombard effect was found to start at an ambient noise level around LN,A = 45 dB and
a speech level LS,A,1m = 55 dB. The equation for the suggested prediction model for the
noise in a food establishment looks as in Equation 3.1, with the primary input parameters
being the room volume, V , the reverberation time in the empty state, T0, and the number
of people in the room, N. Additionally, the equation also takes into account the Lombard
slope, c, the group size, g, and the sound absorption per person in m2, Ap.
LN,A =
1
1 −c · (69 −c · 45 −10 log(g · (0.16V
T0 · N + Ap)))[dB]
(3.1)
The sound absorption per person, Ap can vary from 0.2 to 0.5 m2, and mostly depends
on the clothes worn. This parameter though, does not have the strongest influence. The
parameters of the group size g, and the Lombard slope c, have a bigger influence. The
group size describes the number of people per group talking. This is essentially describing
how noisy the people in the room are. The usual group size parameter is said to be
within 2­4. The Lombard slope should be fixed at 0.5 dB/dB [10]. The prediction model
was verified and tested against results from 10 different food establishments, where the
number of seating ranged from 40 to 126.
The equation of Rindel has been used to minimize the Lombard effect in food establish­
ments since the publication of the article in 2010.
3.4
Problems caused by noise exposure
Studies conducted had a primary emphasis on individuals who work with children, such
as preschool teachers or those employed in daycare centers. Across different countries,
the regulation and definition of education vary slightly.
In the early 2000s the Danish National Research Center for the Working Environment
(NFA) made a survey showing the prevalence of hyperacusis in educators in daycare in­
stitutions [4]. The survey was based on information from the National Work Environment
Cohort (NAK) of the Work Environment Institute. A representative sample of 5,395 wage
earners and 460 self­employed entrepreneurs participated in the interview survey. Ac­
cording to NAK, educators, and elementary school teachers were particularly affected by
sound intolerance, which is a greatly reduced tolerance for ordinary, everyday sounds.
This may be due to a high noise level due to many noisy children without the possibility
of remedying the situation, for example by using hearing protection, or it may be due to
14
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:22==
stress. This type of hearing problem occurs more frequently in women than in men and
appears to be independent of age.
The classic type of hearing problem, characterized by reduced hearing, mainly affects
employees in noisy, industrial sectors, such as machine, metal, and wood industry workers
as well as warehouse and dock workers. This type is more common in men than in women
and often occurs in older people than in younger people. 13% of the men surveyed and 8%
of the women surveyed reported reduced hearing. For men aged 50­59, this is particularly
serious, as one in four reports reduced hearing ­ and over a third of these feel particularly
affected. It is important to note that tinnitus can occur based on both hearing impairments.
The influence of occupational noise exposure over the years and of different industrial
sectors is interesting when wanting to research the evolution of noise in the daycare sec­
tor. The article ’Occupational noise exposure: A review of its effects, epidemiology, and
impact with recommendations for reducing its burden’ is a review paper mainly focused on
the noise exposure of manufacturing work, where more general effects and recommen­
dations are discussed [2]. The review paper focuses on the effects of occupational noise
exposure and the impact it has on workers and their quality of life. Repeated overexposure
to noise at or above 85 dB(A) can cause permanent hearing loss, tinnitus, and difficulty
understanding speech. It is an American study, and about 22 million U.S. workers were
currently exposed to hazardous occupational noise, and even workers in sectors with low
or no direct exposure could be affected. High noise levels can interfere with speech com­
munication, which is critical to job performance and safety. It had been found that workers
in the Healthcare and Social Assistance (HSA) sector have a 17% prevalence of hearing
difficulty and a 52% higher risk of material hearing impairment than the reference industry.
As depicted in Figure 3.3, the incidence of noise­exposed workers by the industry sector
has shifted over the course of 25 years. Notably, the healthcare and social assistance
sector is the only one with data available from the 2000s.
Figure 3.3: Hearing loss over time looking at different professions [2].
The study introduces a graph comparing the background noise level and talker­listener
distance and references it to the speech communication ability, as depicted in Figure 3.4.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.4: Speech communication ability as a function of background noise level and
talker­listener distance [Source: Miller (1971)] [2].
The deleterious effects of hearing loss on quality of life are well­documented, with cogni­
tive decline, depression, and anxiety all contributing to a diminished sense of well­being.
Disability­adjusted life years (DALYs) are a useful metric for assessing the quality of life
and can be used to compare between groups and track changes over time. To reduce
the impact of occupational noise exposure, the authors suggest a range of strategies,
including the use of personal protective equipment, engineering controls, administrative
controls, and medical surveillance.
In 2016, Darja Kaluznaja and Svetlana Lakisa from the Department of Occupational and
Environment Medicine in Riga conducted a study to determine preschool personnel’s oc­
cupational noise and its relationship with subjective health complaints [20]. The study
collected data from 155 respondents, as well as objective measurements of 37 preschool
classrooms. The average 8­hour noise exposure was 70 dB, which exceeded the 35­40
dBA noise limit in the educational environment guidelines recommended by the WHO.
Noise levels during playing time ranged from 66.8 dBA to 77.6 dBA, while during studying
time they ranged from 59.7 dBA to 76.3 dBA. The difference between playing time and
studying time was at least 3 dBA.
The survey results showed that 70% of the respondents felt a necessity to increase their
voice because of noise. The most common health complaints were feeling the need to
speak in a high­pitched tone, the desire not to speak for some time, and hoarseness.
Constant feelings of fatigue, headache, and irritability as well as a desire to isolate oneself
from others were also more common among respondents exposed to increased noise.
The figures 3.5, 3.6, and 3.7 show the survey results about three groups of subjective
health complaints ­ voice apparatus, physiological and psychological.
16
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Voice apparatus health complaints that have occurred at work from the survey
[20].
Figure 3.6: Physiological health complaints that occur at work from the survey [20].
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.7: Psychological health complaints that have occurred from the survey [20].
It is important to bear in mind that the study took place in the wintertime, when many
children were sick, which may have decreased the level of noise. The questionnaire
was designed at the Institute of Occupational Safety and Environmental Health in Riga
and included questions about general personal data and subjective health complaints.
The subject group included children of different age groups. In comparison with other
countries, children are in the age group 3­6 years old while in daycare centers. The noise
level of different age groups during playing and studying time can be seen in figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Leq noise level during studying and playing times and Leq,8h in different age
children groups, dBA [20].
The results concluded that noise at work may contribute to voice problems since people
increase their voice level when speaking in a noisy environment. Therefore, it is essential
to reduce the noise levels in the educational environment, in order to protect preschool
18
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:26==
personnel from potential health risks.
Even though studies of the health hazards of excessive noise in daycare institutions have
been around for more than 20 years, newer articles still show the occurring problem of
educators in daycare institutions experiencing hearing problems. In Sweden, this has
been taken as a problem needing more attention. The Swedish researchers Kersten
Way Persson and Sofie Fredriksson, among others, have made multiple studies between
2017 and 2023 focusing on educators in preschools, midwives, and other sectors with
female workers experiencing excessive noise levels at the workplace [3][24][1]. Teachers
in kindergartens and nurseries experience high levels of sick leave and a stressful work
environment due to noise levels [21]. There are often reports of high noise levels which are
detrimental to both the teachers and children. There is a competition for attention which
results in a ’shouting culture’ which is not good for anyone. A Swedish study has shown
that noise in primary school classes causes hearing loss and stress among teachers [24].
The study aims to find a way to specify the problems and solutions proposals in com­
munication intense environments where the work required speech communication, thus
making it difficult to wear hearing protection.
The research article examines the experiences of nurses and preschool teachers in com­
munication intense working environments. High sound levels have been found in sectors
such as health care and education. To improve the sound environment and the psy­
chosocial work environment, a participatory intervention project was conducted. Through
semi­structured interviews, five main themes were identified: Awareness, taking control
of the sound environment, the influence of the building and interior design, circumstances
influencing the intervention process, and motivation to maintain change. The intervention
methods included physical and acoustical interventions, as well as the reduction of the
number of children in the group. The personnel was involved in choosing the interven­
tion method, and an increased acceptance and usage of hearing protection devices were
reported. The layout of the rooms played an important role, but a lack of economic re­
sources was an obstacle. This research provides insight into the experiences of nurses
and preschool teachers in communication­intense working environments and highlights
the importance of participatory intervention projects.
One of the major focus points of the Swedish studies was the acknowledgment of hy­
peracusis as an occupational injury. The aim was to assess the risk of hyperacusis in
relation to occupational noise exposure among female workers in general and among
women working in preschool specifically A.5. It is indicated, occupational noise exposure
below the currently regulated 8­hour exposure limit of 85 dB(A) still increases the risk of
hyperacusis in female workers. This possibly changes the construction regulation being
upheld in daycare centers. Survey data from two cohorts from Västra Götaland were
collected in 2013 and 2014, and the final study included 8,328 women. Analysis of the
data revealed that there was a significantly increased risk of hyperacusis among women
working in any occupation with noise exposure between 75 and 85 dB. A more than three
times increased risk was found among women working in preschool, while an increased
risk of at least 30% was found in other occupations with noise exposure 75 to 85 dBA.
Hyperacusis is a symptom of loudness perception disorder or sound intolerance disorder
and is characterized by abnormal intolerance, hypersensitivity, loudness discomfort, or
pain from everyday sounds even at moderate sound levels.
The prevalence of self­reported hyperacusis has been reported to be 8­9% among Swedish
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
19
==PAGE:27==
adults, with a higher prevalence among women than men. Furthermore, research sug­
gests that stress may increase the susceptibility to detrimental noise effects on the au­
ditory system and that intervention studies in preschools have shown small reductions
in sound levels after acoustic measures. The key result of this study is the significantly
increased risk of hyperacusis among women working in occupational noise exposure in
the interval 75 dBA to 85 dBA. These findings suggest that occupational noise exposure
below the current regulated 8­hour exposure limit of 85 dBA may be a risk factor for hyper­
acusis and that interventions such as the use of hearing protection devices and acoustic
measures may be beneficial in reducing the risk.
The results with the total events of hyperacusis found on the basis of occupation can be
seen in Appendix A in Figure A.5. More than half of the events of hyperacusis occurred
during years of working as a preschool teacher.
Especially the communication in the daycare sector creates multiple challenges, which is
not as easily handled as in other sectors, for example by use of hearing protection.
The research article ’The experience of noise in communication intense workplace: A
qualitative study’ by Kristina Gyllensten, Sofie Fredriksson, Stephen Widen, and Ker­
stin Persson Waye was published by the Department of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine from the University of Gothenburg, and Sahlgrenska University Hospital 2022
[1]. Through interviews, the study found that workers in these environments experienced
the sound environment as challenging and at times harmful, causing hearing­related
symptoms. Despite this, a good sound environment did not appear to be a priority of the
participating organizations. The participants expressed motivation to improve the sound
environment, but constrained budgets and the fact that noise seems to be down­prioritized
limited the possibility of change. The detrimental health effects of a challenging and harm­
ful sound environment can be auditory, such as hearing loss, tinnitus, or hyperacusis. In
a large survey including almost 5000 preschool teachers, 70% reported noise annoyance
at work. This research highlights the need for more qualitative studies to gain a better
understanding of personnel experience of noise in communication­intense work environ­
ments.
3.5
Trends and Findings in the Field
An official trend concluded by the literature is, in general, the workplaces within the Health­
care and Social Assistance sector stay within the regulations set up by the government
in the given countries. Furthermore, noise is still described as a worldwide problem in
daycare centers and preschools. According to regulations, the 8­hour lower action value
is 80 dBA whereas the permissible limit is 85 dBA in Sweden. [3]. It interacts with the
knowledge of permissible exposure levels seen in Table 1.1. Studies showed measure­
ments of sound pressure levels in daycare centers to be in the interval of 60 dBA to 85
dBA. Especially, events of hyperacusis seem to occur at a noise exposure level between
75 dBA and 85 dBA A.5, but because noise is seen as a non­specific stressor, decreased
ability to focus and worsening of memory are observed already at a sound level of 60 dBA
[20].
In general, some important research has been made on behave of the subject. Especially,
Sweden has made a lot of research studies in the latter years exploring the problem of
noise exposure within the healthcare sector. According to Sofie Fredriksson, Sweden’s
work environment authorities have started including additional questions on sound intol­
erance to discover the propagation of hyperacusis. This is not confirmed by any article
20
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:28==
or the Swedish authorities. But no measurable outcomes have resulted from the studies.
The effects of noise annoyance and the diagnosis of hyperacusis is, according to Figure
3.3, a new revelation measured since the beginning of the century.
When looking at Denmark, the same trends of noise exposure can be observed. After a
work environment and occupational health survey has been made by the NFA, the focus
in Copenhagen has been to minimize the acoustic problems in daycare centers. In 2007
an internal working environment study was done in daycare centers, which showed noise
problems [18]. The problem of noise has been promoted since the beginning of the 2000s
when the focus shifted from regular hearing impairment to noise sensitivity [4]. The sector
of childcare has limited budgets, and even though the employees of daycare are aware
and willing to change procedures, expensive solutions are not a realistic option [24].
According to the survey done by NFA, ’Danmarks sundhedsprofil’, there is an increase in
people suffering from tinnitus in all of Denmark.
3.6
Implications for Designing Daycare Centers
The project ’Plads til Alle’ showed implications for Daycare Centers in Copenhagen. Ac­
cording to the study, Copenhagen Municipality has focused on improving the acoustical
conditions in daycare institutions [26][18]. With only three daycare centers it is difficult
concluding whether this includes more daycare centers in Denmark in general. Studies
showed five main themes able to improve the sound environment and psychosocial work
environment in daycare centers [24].
1. Awareness of the problem
2. Taking control of the sound environment
3. Influence of the building and interior design
4. Circumstances influencing the intervention process
5. Motivation to maintain change
Awareness of noise exposure has been promoted a lot in the latter years and the ac­
knowledgment of hyperacusis as a diagnosis and the fact, it can result in tinnitus and
other hearing impairments is an important revelation. According to the studies from 2022
[3][24][1], employees were aware of the severity of the problem. The lack of motivation
comes from the lack of correct regulation and economic advantages. Preschools and
daycare centers are in most cases public offers. When the regulations are met, as with
most institutions, it is difficult to initiate further action. As in the project ’Plads til Alle’, the
intuitive choice is to change the acoustic design to ensure a better sound environment.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
21
==PAGE:29==
4
Methodology
The primary form of data collection was a quantitative research method, in the form of
a questionnaire, which created the baseline of specific necessary acoustical measure­
ments. The objective of this study was to investigate the impact of excessive noise on
educators in daycare centers, aiming to gather both subjective and objective quantitative
data regarding the physical and psychological toll it imposes on their workplace.
4.1
The Use and Development of Questionnaire
Given the significant number of educators in the daycare sector, it was crucial to employ
a questionnaire as a means of including a substantial sample size. A questionnaire was
also chosen to optimize the limited time of the project. The questionnaire was developed
on the basis of prior knowledge from the Swedish study ’ The Impact of Occupational
Noise Exposure on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers
in Sweden’ given by Sofie Fredriksson[3], and the Latvian study ’ Preschool Personnel
Exposure to Occupational Noise’ by Darja Kaluznaja and Svetlana Lakisa[20]. The ques­
tions and purpose behind them can be seen in the appendix in Danish A and in English
A. The questionnaire was in both languages to ensure Danish­speaking educators were
met in their native language. The questionnaire included questions from different areas
such as:
• Difficulty Perceiving Speech
• Hearing Related Problems
• Excessive Noise at the Workplace
• Hearing Protection
• Physical Problems
• Noisy Activities During Leisure Time
• Vocal Effort
• Habits Causing Hearing Problems
The questionnaire was essential to create a data set with enough information to ensure
an understanding of the hearing problems possibly occurring among educators at the
workplace.
The sample size was chosen by contacting the managers at different daycare centers in
Roskilde, Copenhagen, and other municipalities around Sealand to ensure their partic­
ipation. The questionnaire was also shared on a Facebook group ’Pædagoger, Pæda­
gogmedhjælpere Og Pædagogiske Assistenter’ including 6,800 educators from all around
Denmark. The target population was educators who have been working with children for
more than 5 years, in different acoustic environments. The sample size was a mix of volun­
teering daycare centers without noticeable acoustic regulation and former Alpha Akustik
customers, who within the last three years have made better acoustic environments in
their daycare centers. The former Alpha Akustik customers included the daycare centers
in Table 4.1.
22
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.1: Daycare Centers (Alpha Customers) and their Respective Municipalities
Name of Institution
Municipality
Børnehuset Hyrdehøj
Roskilde
Børnehuset Universet
Hedehusene
Børnehuset Carlshøj
Lyngby­Taarbæk
Alfehuset
Holmegaard
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Lejre
A total of 65 participants were included in the study from all over Denmark, but more than
half of the participants were from the bigger municipalities on Sealand. Unfortunately, this
was a smaller sample size than preferred.
The questionnaire was administered online from a secure survey platform SurveyXact by
Rambøll. Participants were invited to complete the questionnaire voluntarily either by their
manager or in the formerly named Facebook group, and informed consent was obtained
before their participation. The inclusion of the manager made for a higher answering rate.
Clear instructions were provided to ensure the participants understood the purpose of the
study and the questionnaire items. For the participant answering through a Facebook
group trust was not built for everybody wanting to name the institution, but this did not
create any noticeable problems. The data collection period spanned six weeks to allow
for a sufficient sample size.
The questionnaire was conducted and adhered to ethical guidelines, which ensured the
respondents’ rights and privacy. The questionnaire was also anonymous and no personal
identification was collected. The participants were also in their right to answer ’Unknown’
on specific questions if their daycare center or municipality was not wanted to be informed.
Participants were assured of the confidentiality and anonymity of their responses.
Statistics were used to analyze the data with a focus on the descriptive parameters. If
more than one variable were in play, the ANOVA analysis was used. It is acknowledged,
the study has some limitations considering the small sample size. The self­report nature
can also create biased answers. The results from the study are supported by the study
made by The Council of Green Transition of Denmark (Rådet for Grøn Omstilling) in 2023,
about the indoor environment in daycare centers in Denmark [25].
4.1.1
The Selection Process of Daycare Centers for Measurements
When the questionnaire was distributed, the results determined the selection process of
daycare centers for measurements. In Figure 4.1 the different daycare centers of the
questionnaire can be seen distributed.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.1: Distribution of Daycare Centers of the Questionnaire.
The far highest answering rate was received from the daycare centers Børnehuset Trold­
høj, Børnehuset Skovmosen, and Børnehuset Skjoldungerne. These three daycare cen­
ters had different approaches to organizing the children, and the immediate impression of
the questionnaire answers was quite different. The three daycare centers were located
in the same area, with the municipalities Roskilde and Lejre. The distribution of all the
daycare centers across municipalities can be seen in Figure A.9 in Appendix A.
4.2
The Measuring and Determining Good Room Acoustics
The measurements were conducted in accordance with ISO 3382­2, which specifies the
procedure for determining the reverberation time in ordinary rooms [7]. The measure­
ments were performed in an empty yet furnished condition, ensuring that the room’s
acoustic properties were representative of its typical usage. The survey method was fol­
lowed with a single source position and two microphone positions. Given the low volume
of the rooms under investigation, the two source­microphone combinations were deemed
sufficient to capture the reverberation characteristics adequately. To assess the preci­
sion of the survey method, a comparison was made between the survey method and the
precision method (described in section 4.2.2).
The integrated impulse response method was used, thus the impulse response of the
room was measured by the use of a balloon pop. The impulse source was designed to
generate a peak sound pressure level that ensured a decay curve with a signal­to­noise
ratio (SNR) of 45 dB. The measurement microphone was an NTi Audio XL calibrated to
94 dB. The gain was adjusted for the first source­receiver­position, in a way to get reliable
results for the reverberation time T30 in all frequency bands. Measurements were made
in octave bands with center frequencies 125, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz.
In this study, a total of 10 different rooms were measured. The measurements were
conducted over a four­day period in the morning hours from 7 am to 12 am. The dates
were March 23rd, April 13th, April 18th, and April 20th. The Sound Level Meter used
for the measurements was the same as for the reverberation times, NTi Audio XL. The
24
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:32==
sound pressure level was recorded in 30­second sections with one recording minimum 15
minutes apart. When multiple recordings took place within a 15­minute block, the sound
pressure levels were aggregated using Equation 4.1.
Leq,T = 10log10
PN
i=1 10Lpi/10
N
(4.1)
The measurements of the Troldhøj Daycare Center were conducted over two days due
to the absence of the oldest children. Detailed sketches depicting the room layouts, in­
cluding the positions of sound sources and microphones, can be found in section 4.2.1.
The sketches aim to illustrate the furniture arrangements, windows, doors, and existing
acoustic plates and room dividers, represented as pink silhouettes.
In Skjoldungerne, the majority of the acoustic regulation was implemented on the ceiling,
as evident in the sketch plans. It is important to note that the sketches may not depict the
complete extent of the kitchens and common rooms, as they continue beyond the given
illustrations. The volumes were measured while considering this additional area.
Additionally, for the measurements of Svanerne in Skjoldungerne, only the common rooms
were measured, excluding the side rooms.
The measurements of the reverberation times and the volumes of the respective rooms
can be seen in the Tables 4.2.
Troldhøj
Red
Green
Blue
Kitchen
V [m3]
90.5
99.0
99.0
151.9
T0 [s]
0.34
0.38
0.40
0.34
Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
Aslak
Svanerne
V [m3]
94.2
125.7
90.5
T0 [s]
0.37
0.33
0.28
Skovmosen
Bikuben
Myretuen
Common
V [m3]
110.8
116.2
245.8
T0 [s]
0.34
0.32
0.38
Table 4.2: Reverberation time measurements and volumes included from all rooms in­
vestigated for the study.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
25
==PAGE:33==
4.2.1
Sketches of the Daycare Centers
Figure 4.2: [a] Sketch plan of Red room
Figure 4.3: [b] Sketch plan of Blue room
Figure 4.4: [c] Sketch plan of kitchen
Figure 4.5: [d] Sketch plan of Green room
26
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.6: [a] Sketch plan of Aslak
Figure 4.7: [b] Sketch plan of Gæslingerne
Figure 4.8: [c] Sketch plan of Svanerne
Figure 4.9: [a] Sketch plan of Bikuben
Figure 4.10: [b] Sketch plan of Myretuen
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.11: [c] Sketch plan of the common room
4.2.2
Reverberation time: Precision Check
To make sure, the survey method was precise enough for the measurements of the rever­
beration times in the daycare centers, the survey method and the precision method were
compared in a similar room for the measurements. For the precision check, the confer­
ence room of Alpha Akustik in Roskilde was used. A sketch of the room can be seen in
Figure 4.12. The volume of the room was 66.3 m3.
Figure 4.12: Sketch of the conference room at Alpha Akustik used for precision check
measurement, V=66.3 m3
From the ISO standard 3382­2 the execution of the different methods in described in Table
4.3.
28
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.3: Minimum numbers of positions and measurements [7]
Survey
Engineeringa
Precision
Source­microphone combinations
2
6
12
Source­positionb
≥1
≥2
≥2
Microphone­positionsc
≥2
≥2
≥3
No. decays in each position
1
2
3
(interrupted noise method)
a When the result is used for a correction term to other engineering­level measurements,
only one source position and three microphone positions are required.
b For the interrupted noise method uncorrelated sources may be used simultaneously.
c For the interrupted noise method and when the result is used for a correction term, a
rotating microphone boom may be used instead of multiple microphone positions.
For the measurements, the source­microphone combinations could be seen illustrated
in Figure 4.12. The filled source­ and microphone positions were used for both meth­
ods, whereas the line positions were also used for the precision method. For the survey
method, two source­microphone combinations were used, and for the precision method,
12 source­microphone combinations were used. The results could be seen in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Comparison between the Survey and Precision Methods
Frequencies
Survey
Precision
Difference
63
1.68
1.79
­0.11
125
0.99
0.96
0.03
250
0.41
0.45
­0.04
500
0.30
0.34
­0.04
1000
0.34
0.36
­0.02
2000
0.42
0.41
0.01
4000
0.43
0.41
0.02
8000
0.33
0.34
­0.01
The differences between the two methods are more noticeable at lower frequencies. How­
ever, it’s important to mention that the 63 Hz octave band is not relevant to this project, so
the differences in that range can be disregarded. Based on the measurements obtained,
it can be concluded that the survey method is suitable for this project.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
29
==PAGE:37==
5
Results and Analyses
In this section, the findings of the study are presented and analyzed. The results are based
on a combination of responses from a questionnaire obtained amongst 22 daycare cen­
ters, where 9 have more than one response, and measurements of the A­weighted noise
levels in three later­selected daycare centers. The daycare centers were chosen based
on the responses from the questionnaire: Troldhøj Daycare in Svogerslev, Skjoldungerne
Daycare in Lejre, and Skovmosen Daycare in Roskilde. The total of responses from the
questionnaire was 65, which provided valuable insight into the perception of the acous­
tic conditions in the daycare centers. The noise level measurements were conducted
to further investigate the objective acoustical environment in the three selected daycare
centers.
5.1
The Presentation of Grouped Data – Questionnaire
The data from the questionnaire resulted in a 65x33 Excel table, with information sampled
from 65 educators. The raw data of the data set is seen in Appendix A.1. To ensure
easier analyses the raw data was grouped differently and presented. The distribution
of respondents included 86.2 % women, 7.7 % men, and 3.0 % of other or unknown
sex. The minimum age of the respondents was 21 years and the maximum age was 65
years, which gave a range of 44 years. The illustration of the distributions can be in the
pie charts in Figure A.8, whereas the grouped data is stated in the tables 5.1 and 5.2.
Furthermore, the age the respondents started working with children ranges from 13 years
to 55 years resulting in a range of 42 years. The years of working with children among
the respondents can then be grouped into categories and presented in Table 5.3.
Table 5.1: Table presenting the age groups, dividing the respondents into their current
ages.
Age Groups
Number of Respondents
Under 25 years
2
25­35 years
21
36­45 years
17
46­55 years
10
Above 55 years
10
Total
65
Table 5.2: Table presenting the sexes of the respondents.
Sex of Respondent
Count
Percentage [%]
Female
58
89.2
Male
5
7.7
Other
1
1.5
Unknown
1
1.5
Total
65
100
30
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:38==
Table 5.3: Table presenting the groups of the number of years the respondents have been
working with children.
Categories
Number of Respondents
0­10 years
21
10­20 years
15
20­30 years
18
30­40 years
6
40­50 years
5
Total
65
5.1.1
Total Count of Respondents Experiencing Problems
Without looking at any of the restrictions, it was interesting to examine the questionnaire in
order to determine the experience of noise levels at the workplace. Inspired by other stud­
ies [3], the noise level was considered experienced as noisy if the respondent answered
occurrence of noise more than 25 % of the workday.
This was done by examining the questions of the noise­exposed strata: ’Is the sound level
at your workplace sometime so high that you have difficulty hearing what other people are
saying?’ and ’How often are you at your workplace exposed to such high sound levels
that you have to raise your voice to be able to talk to other people?’.
The noise exposure strata include both elements of the problem of hearing properly at the
workplace and the problem of raising the voice at the workplace.
Figure 5.1: Bar Chart Illustrating the Experience of Noise at the Workplace.
The results illustrate a majority of the respondents experiencing exposure to noise at
the workplace which affects their hearing and voice effort. The voice effort problems
were also illustrated in Figure 5.2. The graph is retrieved from SurveyXact, which means
the description is in Danish as the questionnaire. The graph illustrates the percentages
of respondents experiencing the need for Raised voice, Wanting to not talk for a while,
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
31
==PAGE:39==
Hoarseness, Lost voice, and Difficulty speaking. The colors illustrate the options of often,
sometimes, and never.
Figure 5.2: Graphical representation of voice problems amongst respondents. Retrieved
from SurveyXact [Danish].
The graphical representation of the respondents with and without hearing­related condi­
tions is illustrated in Figure 5.3. From the chart, it is possible to see 41.5% of the respon­
dents have stated no hearing­related condition, whereas the rest 58.5% have some kind
of hearing­related problem. The majority of problems is stated to be hyperacusis. Hearing
loss is stated as an autopsied hearing loss.
Figure 5.3: Bar Chart Illustrating the Hearing Related Conditions Experienced by the Re­
spondents of the Whole Data Set.
32
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:40==
5.2
Analysis of Questionnaire Responses
The analysis of the questionnaire responses revealed valuable information regarding the
perceptions and experiences of daycare center staff regarding the acoustical conditions.
To analyze the data sets and determine their significance, a variance analysis proves
to be an effective approach. The initial step in conducting a variance analysis involves
ensuring that the data conforms to a normal distribution. In accordance with the research
hypotheses, certain variables were of particular interest for investigation (refer to Table
1.2). Hypotheses 4 to 7 specifically focused on educators’ subjective noise experiences
and associated risks. The variables considered in these hypotheses were as follows:
• Hypothesis 4: The Number of Children per Educator
• Hypotheses 5 & 6: The Ages of Children
• Hypothesis 7: The Duration of Working with Children
The normal distribution was used for the transformation of data. The normal distributions
before and after the transformation of data can be seen for the three variables in Figures
5.4, 5.5 & 5.6.
Figure 5.4: The Normal Distribution of Questionnaire Answers Regarding How Many Chil­
dren per Educator There Is According to the Educators.
Figure 5.5: The Normal Distribution of Questionnaire Answers Regarding The Distribution
of Ages of The Children According to the Educators.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.6: The Normal Distribution of Questionnaire Answers Regarding How Many
Years the Educators Have Been Working with Children.
The normal distributions give certainty to whether a variance analysis would be able to
show any significance in accepting or supporting the hypotheses. As can be seen in
the Figures, the only data showing normal distribution is the number of years educators
have been working with children in Figure 5.6. By use of a Shapiro­Wilk statistic test,
the P­value was 0.96, which means the transformed data is normally distributed. For the
other two data sets the Shapiro­Wilk tests gave P­values of 0.00, which rejects the normal
distribution.
Table 5.4: Percentage Distribution of Hearing Problems Among Respondents According
to the Number of Children per Educator.
Count with
Total
Number of
Total count
hearing
Hearing
Tinnitus
Hyperacusis
Hearing
children
problems
Loss
Problems
0­5 children
9
2
22.22%
0.00%
0.00%
22.22%
5­10 children
14
5
0.00%
14.29%
21.43%
35.71%
10­15 children
11
9
0.00%
27.27%
54.55%
81.82%
15­20 children
7
6
0.00%
28.57%
57.14%
85.71%
> 20 children
24
16
20.83%
20.83%
25.00%
66.67%
For the variance analyses, the proper results are obtained by use of population per group
and not percentages. Analyzing data by percentages can give a false picture of how the
problems are distributed. This is also why the normal distribution is an important part of
the analysis. As a comparison, the percentage distribution is observed for the number of
children per educator and the years of working with children.
34
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.7: Box Plot of the Distribution of Numbers of Children and the Hearing Problems.
The analysis of the percentage distribution reveals a notable trend: individuals who work
with more than 10 children simultaneously tend to experience a higher prevalence of hear­
ing problems. However, it is important to note that the number of individuals working with
more than 20 children is so substantial that it could potentially have a significant influence
on the overall findings. This is further observed in Figure 5.7, where the range of hearing
problems among educators working with 10­15 and 15­20 children, could indicate a small
sample size.
On the other hand, the percentage distribution of hearing problems among educators
grouped into the years of working with children is a little harder to specify. But the box
plot of the distribution shows a clear correlation to the normal distribution shape. Which
gives a good indicator of the data being possible to test for variance.
Table 5.5: Percentage Distribution of Hearing Problems Among Respondents According
to the Years the Educators have been Working with Children.
Count with
Total
Number of
Total count
hearing
Hearing
Tinnitus
Hyperacusis
Hearing
years
problems
Loss
Problems
0­5 years
10
3
10.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
5­10 years
9
2
11.1%
0.0%
11.1%
22.2%
10­15 years
11
4
0.0%
27.3%
27.3%
36.4%
15­20 years
4
4
25.0%
50.0%
50.0%
100%
20­25 years
12
7
0.00%
25.0%
50.0%
58.3%
25­30 years
6
1
0.0%
0.0%
16.7%
16.7%
> 30 years
13
7
15.4%
23.1%
30.8%
53.9%
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.8: Box Plot of the Distribution of Years Working with Children and the Hearing
Problems.
Also the voice effort problems was distributed into the groups of years working with chil­
dren. This can be seen in Table 5.6 and in bar chart in Figure 5.9.
Table 5.6: Voice Problem Statistics by Years Working with Children
Number of
Total
Raised
Wanting not
Hoarseness
Lost
Difficulty
Total Voice
years
count
Voice
to talk
Voice
talking
Problems
0­5 years
12
41.67 %
8.33 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
50.00 %
5­10 years
9
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
10­15 years
11
18.18 %
36.36 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
54.55 %
15­20 years
4
25.00 %
25.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
50.00 %
20­25 years
12
50.00 %
33.33 %
8.33 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
91.67 %
25­30 years
6
16.67 %
0.00 %
16.67 %
16.67 %
0.00 %
50.00 %
Above 30 years
11
0.00 %
9.09 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
9.09 %
36
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.9: Bar Plot of Voice Problems Amongst Respondents over Years Working with
Children.
The bar plot is related to the graphical representation of voice problems amongst respon­
dents illustrated in Figure 5.2.
This initial phase of the analysis served as a foundation for the subsequent Analysis of
Variance. By establishing the normality of the data and understanding the distribution
patterns, the ANOVA analysis is to further explore the relationships and significance of
the variables under investigation.
5.2.1
Analysis of Variance and Supported Hypotheses – Questionnaire
It was necessary to present the ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) analysis conducted for the
examination of the prior variables. More than one of the hypotheses earlier stated had
different noticeable variables. As a reminder, the hypotheses can be seen in section 1.2.
The variables tested for the ANOVA analysis were based on parameters as possible indi­
cators of hearing problems. For the questionnaire, this was stated as hearing problems.
The One­Way Classification was performed in Python, with a significant level of 0.05.
Null­Hypothesis
F­Value
P­Value
Significance
Hypothesis 4
2.11
0.11
No
Hypothesis 5
0.61
0.52
No
Hypothesis 6
0.96
0.38
No
Hypothesis 7
2.64
0.036
Yes
Table 5.7: Table showing the significance of hypotheses tested by ANOVA analysis in
Python.
5.2.2
Comparing Variance Analysis: Current Age and Years Working with
Children
The analysis of variance (ANOVA) conducted on educators working with children demon­
strated statistical significance. It is crucial to investigate the potential influence of age on
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
37
==PAGE:45==
hearing problems over time. To address this, a comparative analysis is performed be­
tween the variance analysis conducted on the educators’ current age, as reported in the
questionnaire, and the variance analysis conducted on the presence of hearing problems.
Figure 5.10: Box Plot Illustrating the Distribution of Hearing Problems over the Current
Age of Respondents.
The compared ANOVA analyses can be seen in Table 5.8.
Table 5.8: Comparison of ANOVA Results
Variable
F­value
P­value
Significance
Years of working with children
2.64
0.0359
Yes
Current age of the educators
2.10
0.1121
No
The results of the ANOVA revealed a statistically significant relationship between years
of working with children and the presence of hearing problems. This indicates that the
duration of working with children has an impact on the likelihood of experiencing hearing
problems among educators.
In contrast, the ANOVA analysis conducted on the current age of the educators did not
demonstrate a statistically significant association with hearing problems. These findings
suggest that age alone may not be a significant predictor of hearing problems among
educators.
The comparison of these results indicates that the hypothesis proposing an association
between years of working with children and hearing problems is supported, as the ob­
served significance suggests that it is not the only parameter affecting educators’ ad­
vancing age over time. This suggests that other factors related to the duration of working
with children, such as exposure to noise or specific work conditions, may play a role in
the development of hearing problems among educators.
38
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:46==
5.3
The Presentation of Grouped Data – Noise Level
Measurements
The measurements described earlier were to establish the reverberation time and the
background noise in the rooms. The representation of the raw data includes the mea­
surements of the sound pressure level during a regular workday.
The number of children and adults was stated as well as notes of irregular behavior. Only
the rooms in question were measured. Other places where the educators were located,
such as gym halls or the outside, were not taken into consideration. The equivalent noise
levels can be seen in Table 5.9. The full data can be seen in Appendix and is referenced
in the table.
Table 5.9: Noise Measurements Based on the Total Number of Measurements Seen in
Appendix.
Institution
Room
Length of
Leq­values
Table
Measurement
Reference
Troldhøj
Red
3.5 hours
71.3 dB(A)
Table A.1
Troldhøj
Green
3 hours
72.2 dB(A)
Table A.2
Troldhøj
Kitchen
3.5 hours
61.2 dB(A)
Table A.3
Troldhøj
Red
4 hours
65.4 dB(A)
Table A.4
Troldhøj
Green
4 hours
68.5 dB(A)
Table A.5
Troldhøj
Blue
4 hours
67.5 dB(A)
Table A.6
Troldhøj
Kitchen
4 hours
64.0 dB(A)
Table A.7
Skjoldungerne
Aslak
3 hours
67.8 dB(A)
Table A.8
Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
3 hours
62.4 dB(A)
Table A.9
Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
2 hours
66.6 dB(A)
Table A.10
Skovmosen
Bikuben
3 hours
69.2 dB(A)
Table A.11
Skovmosen
Myretuen
4 hours
69.5 dB(A)
Table A.12
Skovmosen
Common room
4 hours
61.8 dB(A)
Table A.13
The sketches of the rooms can be seen in section 4.2.1. The reverberation times of rooms
were measured to determine the acoustical conditions, which can be seen in Table 4.2.
The length of measurements is determined based on the measurements with people in
the room. At times, some groups of children or adults were located in other places, which
resulted in empty rooms. Troldhøj Daycare was measured over a 2­day period, because
the older children of room Blue, were out of the house the first day.
The choice of going back to measure in Troldhøj Daycare for another day was based on
the interviews with the educators working in the daycare on the first day. According to
their statement, the older children were very noisy, especially in the late period until they
began preschool at the beginning of May. The second measurement day was performed
just before the older children started school.
The scatterplots of the measurements of each daycare center can be seen in Figures
5.11, 5.12 and 5.13. The raw data of all measurements are collected in Excel and can
be seen in Appendix A.1. All measurements are below the sound pressure level of 80
dB(A). Based on the literature study, the noise level between 65 dB(A) and 75 dB(A) is an
interesting interval. The measurements are plotted in the interval between 50 dB(A) and
80 dB(A).
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.11: The graph depicts the relationship between the noise level (LAeq) and the
number of people, specifically focusing on the purposeful range between 65 dB and 75
dB of Troldhøj daycare.
Figure 5.12: The graph depicts the relationship between the noise level (LAeq) and the
number of people, specifically focusing on the purposeful range between 65 dB and 75
dB of Skjoldungerne daycare.
40
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.13: The graph depicts the relationship between the noise level (LAeq) and the
number of people, specifically focusing on the purposeful range between 65 dB and 75
dB of Skovmosen daycare.
The first impression of the measurements shows a lack of measurement data from the
Skjoldungerne Daycare Center. Especially from the rooms of Svanerne, which immedi­
ately seemed interesting because the acoustic conditions were very good, and the noise
levels seemed low. Unfortunately, it was not possible to schedule a second measurement
in Skjoldungerne Daycare Center before the deadline.
Furthermore, it is important to emphasize that based on the data, none of the measure­
ments were above the noise level of 80 dB(A), but many of the measurements seemed
to be within the interval of 65 dB(A) to 75 dB(A).
The room conditions can be described a little differently depending on the daycare. Trold­
høj Daycare Center featured standardized square rooms with small playrooms located
on either the left or right side. The volumes of the rooms were not large. Skjoldungerne
Daycare Center had small volume rooms as well, but where Troldhøj Daycare had a flat
ceiling the Skjoldungerne Daycare had a sloping ceiling. Skovmosen had slightly larger
rooms in terms of volume, and the sketches of these rooms depict a more angular layout.
The rooms mostly had a sloping ceiling, but Myretuen also had a flat ceiling in one half of
the room. The sketches of the rooms are illustrated in section 4.2.1.
5.3.1
Reverberation Times and Flutter Echo
Along with the room conditions, the reverberation times were measured in all the rooms
of the daycare centers. The reverberation times were measured at the beginning of the
measurements, while there were no children or educators in the room. The reverberation
times are included in Table 4.2, in an earlier section. The reverberation times are plotted
or depicted for all frequencies within the range of 125 Hz to 4000 Hz.
The reverberation times of both the Troldhøj Daycare Center and the Skjoldungerne Day­
care Center exhibit the expected behavior, showing longer reverberation times at lower
frequencies. This can be seen in Figure 5.14. All measured reverberation times are be­
low the expected regulation threshold of 0.4 seconds. However, it should be noted that
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
41
==PAGE:49==
Skjoldungerne Daycare Center generally has shorter reverberation times compared to
Troldhøj Daycare Center, particularly in the room of Svanerne.
Figure 5.14: Reverberation times, Troldhøj Daycare & Skjoldungerne Daycare
According to the measurements, the Daycare Center of Skovmosen should also have
reverberation times below the threshold of 0.4 s. But when the graphical representation
of the reverberation times for all frequencies within the range of 125 Hz to 4000 Hz in
Figure 5.15, shows a noticeable behavior of the sound waves.
The reverberation times of the rooms Myretuen and Bikuben show irregularities or a spike
in the case of Myretuen at the frequency of 500 Hz. A sudden increase in sound energy
can be a sign of flutter echo, which occur because of sound reflections bouncing between
two parallel walls. This assumption is also based on the metallic sound present when the
measurements were made.
Figure 5.15: Reverberation times, Skovmosen Daycare
When looking at the layout of the room, the rooms are divided into multiple smaller ’rooms’
to create privacy in the large volume. Unfortunately, only some of the wall separators have
high absorption levels, which can make more than one case of flutter echo.
42
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:50==
5.3.2
Analysis of Variance and Supported Hypotheses – Measurement
Data
By processing the data of the measurements in the same way as the questionnaire data,
objective data can be used to explain variance and explain the significance. Because the
data of the questionnaire was not strong enough, the analysis of the variance of Hypothe­
ses 1­3 is only based on the objective measurement data.
For hypothesis 1, the noise levels of Skjoldungerne Daycare Center were compared to
the other daycare centers. This is based on the flutter echo experienced and measured
in the rooms of Skjoldungerne. All reverberation times of the 10 rooms were measured to
be below the regulation threshold of 0.4 s.
For hypothesis 2, it is not possible to depict any prevalence of hearing problems, but the
noise levels of 75 dB(A) to 85 dB(A) is investigated on the basis of the Swedish study
’’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure on Hyperacusis: a Longitudinal Population
Study of Female Workers in Sweden’, which indicates a significant increase the risk of
hyperacusis among women working in occupational noise exposure in the interval. Be­
cause of the measurements of the noise levels, the bottom threshold is chosen to be 65
dB(A) for this study.
For hypothesis 3, the Skjoldungerne Daycare Center was compared to the measurements
of the Skovmosen and Troldhøj Daycare Center. Skjoldungerne was the only customer
of Alpha Akustik for the measurements. Unfortunately, the number of measurements in
Skjoldungerne made for no possible analysis of variance.
The ANOVA analysis was tested in Python and is listed in Table 5.10.
Null­Hypothesis
F­Value
P­Value
Significance
Hypothesis 1
0.47
0.64
No
Hypothesis 2
­
­
No
Hypothesis 3
0.32
0.73
No
Table 5.10: Table showing the significance of hypotheses tested by ANOVA analysis in
Python.
Only basing the ANOVA analysis on the measurement data, it is not possible to get any
significance describing the difference in the noise levels.
5.4
Curve Fitting Results and Rindel’s Formula
After interviews with educators, a lot talked about ’the shouting culture’, which was also
described in multiple articles [22][21]. The talk about the problem kept on occurring, which
surrounded the difficulty in keeping the noise down in daycare centers because the noise
kept increasing during necessary communication.
The description brought to mind the phenomenon known as the Lombard effect, which is
elaborated upon in the theoretical background section. The Lombard effect serves as the
fundamental basis for the Rindel formula, widely employed in food establishments to de­
termine occupancy limits based on room volumes. This made for an idea of a correlation
between the formula of Rindel and the measurement data, using the known parameters
and fitting the unknown parameters. All the parameters are listed in Table 5.11. There are
two unknown parameters: c, the Lombard Slope, and g, the group size. For curve fitting
the program Matlab 2021b was used for coding the necessary method.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
43
==PAGE:51==
Known Parameters
Unknown Parameters
V , volume
c, the Lombard Slope
T0, reverberation time
g, the group size
N, number of people
Ap, sound absorption per person
Table 5.11: Table of Known and Unknown Parameters for Curve Fitting of Rindel’s Formula
to Actual Data.
The equation of Rindel is used for predicted noise in food establishments. The equation
can be seen in the literature review, Equation 3.1. The room volume and the reverberation
times were used from Table 4.2. The number of people was counted while measuring
the noise levels. The number of people included both children and adults. The sound
absorption per person was assumed to be 0.5 m2. Because most of the subjects were
children, the sound absorption could be assumed to be smaller, but in general, the sound
absorption has little influence compared to the other parameters.
5.5
Correlation and Fitting Parameters: Group Size and
Lombard Slope
The Lombard function was made as a function with free parameters, c and g. The Lombard
function was optimized by giving initial guesses of values while assuring the bounds of
the parameters were set.
0 ≤c ≤1
0 ≤g ≤4
The Lombard slope, c, gives an indication of whether the people in the room are affected
by the Lombard effect more or less. The initial guess was for the younger children to be
less affected by the Lombard effect compared to the older children. The group size, g,
describes how many people are per talking person. In general, the lower the number is,
the louder the people. The group size is usually between 2 and 4 for food establishments.
By optimizing the equation in Matlab, the values of c and g were calculated for the different
rooms depending on the actual data.
Table 5.12: Table Overviewing the Lombard Slope and the Group Size when Optimizing
the Equation of Rindel.
Daycare Center, Room
cOpt
gOpt
Troldhøj, Red
0.0
0.3
Troldhøj, Green
0.0
0.2
Troldhøj, Blue
0.0
0.4
Troldhøj, Kitchen
0.0
0.2
Skjoldungerne, Gæslingerne
0.0
0.4
Skjoldungerne, Aslak
0.0
0.2
Skjoldungerne, Svanerne
0.0
0.3
Skovmosen, Bikuben
0.0
0.2
Skovmosen, Myretuen
0.0
0.2
Skovmosen, Common room
0.2
0.1
44
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:52==
The parameters of c and g act noticeably different than in the use of food establishments.
The Lombard Slope has very little influence, whereas the group size has more influence.
When the formula was optimized the actual measured data was plotted with the predicted
data. All the parameters of the Lombard slope were predicted to be 0, which made the
group size interesting to look at. Compared to the food establishments and the verification
of the formula in the study of Rindel, the number of people was very few and the volume
was far bigger. The seating number in the eating establishments was between 40 and
126, whereas the population of the daycare centers was between 0 and 24 people.
The correlation between the actual data and the predicted data was checked as good or
bad by the Root­Mean­Square Error (RMSE) and the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) by use
of the Equations 2.2 and 2.3. If the errors were low the correlation was considered good.
Institution
Daycare
Measuring Date
RMSE [dB]
MAE [dB]
Correlation
Red
Troldhøj
April 18th
11.7
8.8
Good
Red
Troldhøj
March 23rd
21.3
13.8
Bad
Green
Troldhøj
April 18th
16.7
12.6
Bad
Green
Troldhøj
March 23rd
9.8
6.0
Good
Blue
Troldhøj
April 18th
15.9
12.2
Bad
Kitchen
Troldhøj
April 18th
10.4
9.5
Good
Kitchen
Troldhøj
March 23rd
7.3
5.9
Good
Bikuben
Skovmosen
April 20th
9.8
5.8
Good
Common room
Skovmosen
April 20th
20.4
18.9
Bad
Myretuen
Skovmosen
April 20th
6.4
4.9
Good
Aslak
Skjoldungerne
April 13th
16.6
12.0
Bad
Gæslingerne
Skjoldungerne
April 13th
5.4
3.7
Good
Svanerne
Skjoldungerne
April 13th
8.1
5.8
Good
The actual data were plotted with the formula of different group sizes and illustrated the
correlation in addition to the calculated errors. The correlation included both good and bad
examples for the fitted function. The two­day measurements in Troldhøj Daycare Center
showed both good and bad correlations. It is interesting because it is not one specific
date showing bad results.
Figure 5.16: Relationship between people present and measured/predicted noise levels
in the Red room of Troldhøj daycare (90.5 m³), with predicted curves for different group
sizes (g) in Rindel’s formula [10].
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
45
==PAGE:53==
The correlations for the Red room of Troldhøj Daycare can be seen in Figure 5.16, where
the correlation of April 18th show a good correlation and the correlation of 23rd March
shows a bad correlation.
In comparison, for the Green room of Troldhøj Daycare, the correlation was bad on April
18th and good on March 23rd. The correlations can be seen in Figure 5.17. The notice­
able is the correlation between the noise level measurements of the Green Room on April
18th and the group size, g = 0.1. This could indicate a more noisy day in this specific
room.
Figure 5.17: Relationship between people present and measured/predicted noise levels
in the Green room of Troldhøj daycare (99.0 m³), with predicted curves for different group
sizes (g) in Rindel’s formula [10].
The difference between the two days was the older children of the Blue room were present
or not. On March 23rd, the older children were out of the house on a day trip. The
correlation is considered bad for the Blue Room, but what is not possible to see in the
results is the influence of the pedagogical approach. This is further discussed in the
discussion in the section 6.3.
Figure 5.18: Relationship between people present and measured/predicted noise levels
in the Blue room of Troldhøj daycare (99.0 m³), with predicted curves for different group
sizes (g) in Rindel’s formula [10].
46
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:54==
The rooms of Skovmosen Daycare Center also showed good correlations to the predicted
function of Rindel with group size, g = 0.2. The curve seems to rise up until the number
of people in the room is around 5, whereas the noise levels seem to flatten out.
Figure 5.19: Relationship between people present and measured/predicted noise levels
in Bikuben and Myretuen of Skovmosen daycare ([110.8 m3],[116.2 m3]]), with predicted
curves for different group sizes (g) in Rindel’s formula [10].
Figure 5.20: Relationship between people present and measured/predicted noise levels in
the common room of Skovmosen daycare ([245.8 m3]), with predicted curves for different
group sizes (g) in Rindel’s formula [10].
The kitchen/common rooms of Troldhøj Daycare Center and Skovmosen Daycare Center
were measured and fitted to the predicted data in the same way as the other measure­
ments. What is not taken into account is the noise of the kitchen machines in the rooms.
The rooms were bigger, and in Troldhøj Daycare the room was used for eating lunch.
The correlations of the kitchen in Troldhøj Daycare and the rooms of Skjoldungerne Day­
care are included in the Appendix. The correlations seem less important for the fitting of
Rindel’s formula than some of the other rooms.
Although one interesting observation is the correlation of the fitted function in the common
room in Skovmosen Daycare, see Figure 5.20. According to the parameters c and g of
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
47
==PAGE:55==
Table 5.12, the common room of Skovmosen is the only room with a higher Lombard slope
than 0.2. It is also the only room with a room volume larger than 200 m3. The correlation
of the common room is stated as bad, but this could be because of the undetermined
noise happening in the kitchen. The deviation from the predicted slope can be seen when
the number of people is 1.
48
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:56==
6
Discussion
To comprehensively analyze and interpret the findings obtained in this study, a thorough
discussion was conducted, relating to the primary domain knowledge of the subject matter.
The hypotheses formulated for this research were critically examined to determine the
influence of the findings. As a reminder, the hypotheses were stated as follows:
Table 6.1: Hypotheses
Hypothesis
Descriptions
Hypothesis 1
Flutter echo might increase the overall noise level, even when the re­
verberation time meets the required threshold of 0.4 seconds.
Hypothesis 2
Despite maintaining a noise level below 80 dB, educators still experi­
ence a high prevalence of hearing problems.
Hypothesis 3
Implementing acoustic regulation measures by Alpha Akustik leads to
reduced noise levels in the workplace.
Hypothesis 4
The number of children per educator significantly influences the occur­
rence of hearing damage.
Hypothesis 5
Children aged 4 to 7 years have higher noise levels compared to
younger children (0 to 3 years old).
Hypothesis 6
Greater variation in the ages of children within each room affects the
overall noise levels.
Hypothesis 7
The risk of hearing damage increases with the duration of employment
in childcare settings.
The examination of these hypotheses was related specifically to the field of Room Acous­
tics. The obtained results were subsequently contextualized in relation to the relevant
literature discussed in the Literature Review section.
The main purpose of the study was to examine the occurrence of hearing­related problems
in daycare centers in Denmark because of exposure to occupational noise. This compre­
hensive analysis establishes the foundation for a meaningful and scientifically grounded
discussion of the research outcomes.
6.1
Summary and Interpretation of Findings
The key findings, based on the results, were examined in relation to the hypotheses.
The data were already tested for significance in the results, leading to the acceptance or
rejection of the null hypotheses.
Only the current age of the respondents and the years of working with children were
normally distributed, resulting in only certain data being suitable for variance analysis.
However, despite these limitations, some of the analyses still revealed interesting trends.
A trend was observed, indicating a higher occurrence of hearing­related problems among
educators working with more than 10 children compared to those working with 10 or fewer
children. However, due to the high number of educators working with 20 children or more,
achieving statistical significance was challenging.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
49
==PAGE:57==
The variance analyses show a significance in the duration an educator of the question­
naire has been working with children, and whether or not the respondent has a hearing­
related problem. This significance is naturally questioned by the fact, natural aging could
add to the significance. This is further examined in the section 6.1.1.
A majority of the respondents from the questionnaire reported experiencing noise during
25% of their workday, which affected both hearing and vocal effort. Although the effect
of vocal effort was not a primary focus of the hypotheses, it still emerged as a noticeable
result.
According to the questionnaire, the respondents especially had problems with raising their
voices during the workday. It was only 25% of the respondents said they did never ex­
perience this. In the Latvian study, a similar result occurred according to voice apparatus
health complaints.
Figure 6.1: Figures of Voice Apparatus Complaints from Latvian Study [20]. Reference
to Figures 3.5 and 5.2.
The survey results showed 70% of the respondents of the Latvian study felt the need
to increase their voice because of noise. For this study, the survey showed a similar
result, with 75% of the respondents. When comparing the Figures in 6.1, the percentages
of the other health complaints look very similar. It is not only hearing­related problems
the educators’ experience but also vocal effort problems. A variance analysis can also
be performed to examine the variability within the data and assess the significance of
observed differences within the years of working with children. This refers to the bar plot
in Figure 5.9.
50
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:58==
Table 6.2: Result of ANOVA Analysis of Vocal Effort Problems
Variable
F­value
P­value
Significance
Years of working with children
4.65
0.005
Yes
The results of the ANOVA analysis can be seen in Table 6.2. There is a definite signifi­
cance between the duration the educators have been working with children and the voice
apparatus complaints.
More than 50% of the respondents experienced some form of hearing­related problems,
such as diagnosed hearing loss, tinnitus, or hyperacusis. Conversely, 41.5% of the re­
spondents did not report any hearing­related issues. The hearing­related conditions were
tested by all the respondents. The questionnaire also included questions about potential
factors that could influence the results.
To ensure the results mainly illustrated the conditions with a higher relevance when ana­
lyzing the data according to the noise environment, some of the data was tested excluded
to ensure clearer data. The exclusion criteria can be seen in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Description of the Exclusion Criteria in Order to Clean the Grouped Data.
Exclusion Criteria
Years of working with children below 5 years
Exposed to leisure time noise more than once a week
without the use of Hearing protection
Exposed to loud music in headphones more than a few times a week
Loud music was a volume setting at 75% of the maximum setting or more.
Problems with ear infections many times or long­term
Family history of hearing loss and older than 55 years.
The number of people originally in the questionnaire was 65, whereas the exclusion crite­
ria resulted in a minimization from the original number to 32 people. This is a minimization
of 49%. This is a big difference, and with the sample size not being large, to begin with,
the exclusion criteria were not used other than illustrating the distribution of conditions. In
comparison, the difference in the number of people with the different conditions can be
seen in Table 6.4.
Condition
All data
Excluding criteria
Difference [%]
Hearing Loss
7
4
57.1
Tinnitus
12
6
50.0
Hyperacusis
19
12
63.2
No condition
27
10
37.0
Total
65
32
49.2
Table 6.4:
Data Presenting the Hearing Related Conditions Comparing the Original
Grouped Data with the Data Excluding Specific Criteria.
It is important to consider the limitations in the sample size when examining this data
set. Besides that, it seems like the exclusion criteria, in this case, show some interesting
results. Based on the table, it can be observed to particularly affect the number of people
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
51
==PAGE:59==
with hearing loss and those who reported no­hearing­related conditions, which supports
the assumption of the exclusion criteria affecting these parameters.
On the other hand, the higher percentage difference for hyperacusis indicates a close
relationship between sound sensitivity and a potentially poor noise environment. The
illustration of the distribution with and without conditions can be seen in the bar plot in
Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Bar Chart Illustrating the Hearing Related Conditions Experienced by the Re­
spondents Comparing the Whole Data Set with the Exclusion Criteria.
The trend in this case shows, even though the criteria are excluded from the data set, the
hearing­related problems still seem to show high occurrence. Especially the occurrence
of hyperacusis, where the number of people is only reduced by 37%.
6.1.1
Questioning the Significance of the Variance Analyses
The ANOVA analysis of the duration of working with children showed a definite signifi­
cance of hearing­related problems. According to the P­value, the possibility of the corre­
lation happening by chance is 4%, which means there is a 96% chance of the educators
having more hearing­related problems the longer they have been working with children.
An important point is this result is based on the sample of this questionnaire, and the
results could be different with another population.
In section 5.2.2 the singular variance of the duration of working with children was ques­
tioned. A natural assessment was the effect the current age could have on the variance
analysis. The ANOVA analysis gave a P­value of 0.11, of the current age of the educators
correlating with the hearing­related problems. This indicates an 89% chance of correla­
tion. For the variance analysis, the cut­off value is 5%, which indicates a 95% confidence
level.
Based on these results, the duration of working with children definitely affects the occur­
rence of hearing problems, but age is not far from having a significant effect on the results,
52
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:60==
and obviously, there is a natural correlation between the duration of working with children
and the current age of the educators.
Also the distribution of children shows a trend of resulting in hearing­related problems.
According to the ANOVA analysis, the P­value is above the cut­off value with a value of
0.11. This is the same case as with the age of the educators. The variance analysis
indicates an 89% chance of correlation, so even though the number of educators working
with 20 children or more is very high, it is still possible to discover a trend in the results.
According to Table 5.4 the percentage distribution shows, of the educators in the study, if
they worked with 10 children or less the total percentage of people with hearing problems
was between 20% and 40% of the group. Whereas when the educators worked with
above 10 children at the time the percentage of total hearing problems was between 65%
and 90% of the group. The analysis cannot solely be based on the percentages, because
it does not take the group sizes into account, but a trend can be observed. Furthermore,
when working with 0­5 children, the respondents only reported one case of autopsied
hearing loss, which could be the fault of other factors. Most cases of hyperacusis occurred
in people working with more than 10 children.
6.1.2
Indoor Environment in Daycare Centers
As an addition to the literature study, during study, a new report was published investi­
gating the indoor environment in 30 daycare centers in Denmark. ’Indeklima i daginstitu­
tioner’ by Lone Hjort Mikkelsen is a report with results and recommendations for daycare
centers released in April 2023 by the Counsel of the Green Transition of Denmark. The
30 daycare centers were located in seven municipalities, where 5 were in Jutland, one in
Fyn, and one in Sealand. The indoor climate was assessed on nine different parameters:
C02, temperature, humidity, TVOC, chemicals, ultrafine particles, radon, noise, and ar­
tificial lighting [25]. For the sake of comparison, noise was the main focus interesting for
this study. The measurements of noise proceeded from November 2021 to fall 2022, with
the analysis processing until April 2023.
The measurements of noise levels were determined a little differently in the two studies.
The purpose of this study was to determine the noise level according to the occupational
health conditions and also the room’s acoustic conditions. Because of this aspect, the
noise levels were measured in the rooms whether or not the educators and/or children
were in the specific rooms. Some days the weather was sunny and the children were more
outside. Other times the children went on day trips or had gym classes. For the study of
Mikkelsen, the educators were geared with a sound level meter on the body assuring the
personal sound pressure levels during a workday.
In 12 daycares of the 30 institutions measured the study showed periods of noise levels
above 80 dB(A) [25]. In one institution the noise level was measured to be above 85 dB(A).
This is a 40% of the population experiencing hazardous noise exposition. None of the
daycares of this study experienced noise levels above 80 dB(A). The study of Mikkelsen
also mentioned the propagation of hyperacusis, by referring to the Swedish study of Sofie
Fredriksson [3]. This is referred to the hazardous effect of noise already at low noise
levels. Noise can be determined as psychologically burdensome [25]. According to the
Swedish study ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure on Hyperacusis’ [3], survey
data of 8,238 women revealed a significant increase in the risk of experiencing hypera­
cusis with noise exposure between 75 dB(A) and 85 dB(A).
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
53
==PAGE:61==
6.2
The Influence of Flutter Echo
Based on the measurements it is not possible to encounter any significance to whether
the measurements of Skovmosen should be noisier than the measurements of the other
daycare centers. According to the ANOVA analysis, there is a 36% occurrence of Skov­
mosen being noisier than the other two daycare centers. The ANOVA analysis is based
on the number of measurements in the noise level intervals seen in Table 6.5.
Table 6.5: Number of Measurements Used for the ANOVA Analysis for Testing the Influ­
ence of Flutter Echo.
Daycare Center
Measurements
55­65 dB
65­75 dB
75­85 dB
Troldhøj
48
14
16
3
Skjoldungerne
24
12
6
0
Skovmosen
28
8
19
0
With the difference in the number of measurements, it is very difficult to determine sig­
nificance by variance analysis. The determined hazardous noise level interval of 75­85
was also not possible to examine with these measurement data. Besides that, the per­
centages of measurements in Table 6.6 show a trend of Skovmosen having a greater
proportion of the measurements being within the interval of 65 dB(A) to 85 dB(A).
Table 6.6: Percentage of Measurements within Range of 65 dB(A) to 85 dB(A)
Daycare Center
Percentage
Troldhøj
39.6%
Skjoldungerne
25.0%
Skovmosen
67.9%
It is important to consider possible factors affecting the percentages, such as the number
of measurements done with no people in the room. But it is noticeable, the daycare of
Skovmosen is showing signs of flutter echo in the rooms of Myretuen and Bikuben. The
rooms of Skovmosen were also experienced as the loudest during the hours of measure­
ment.
Another difference between this daycare center and the other two is the division of age
groups. Skovmosen divided the children into two groups of 3­6 years olds, whereas the
other two divided the groups into narrow age groups such as 1 to 2­year­olds, 3­4 years
olds, 5 to 6­year­olds, etc. According to the variance analysis, based on the questionnaire,
gave a P­value of 0.38, when testing the hypothesis of wider age groups being more noisy
than narrow age groups. This means there is a 72% chance of the parameter affecting
the noise levels.
6.3
The Influence of The Lombard Effect
The influence of the Lombard effect is difficult to determine. The study of daycare cen­
ters is definitely quite different from the study of food establishments. There are different
parameters to consider, which are not just separate from each other. These are the pa­
rameters:
• The number of children
• The ages of children
54
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:62==
• The weather conditions (sunny/rainy)
• Other indoor environmental conditions
• The pedagogical approach
• Narrow­/ or wide range in ages per room
• The number of educators per child
These parameters are already different aspects of an educator’s life in a daycare center. It
is just based on instincts and education instead of science. Some of these parameters are
discussed and observed in the study. By communicating with the educators, more than
one case of unconsciously mentioning the Lombard effect came up. One of the specific
quotes was:
[When conversing about the noisy environment in the daycare] ’ .. Yeah, sometimes the
noise is so bad I have to raise my voice to be heard, and then the noise is even worse.’ ­
Anonymous educator, Skovmosen Daycare Center
The Lombard slope being around 0 for the majority of the cases could be the result of more
than one thing. It is still possible to see a rising in noise levels as the number of people
increases. The cases could be so vastly different, the formula of Rindel is not possible to
fit into the actual data of this study. Another parameter could be the measurements are not
divided into playing time, study time, lunchtime, etc. The observations while measuring
made it clear, there was a difference in the noise levels depending on the pedagogical
approach.
Another aspect of the Rindel formula, which could be discussed more thoroughly is the
group size. The meaning of the group size in the study of Rindel is how many people
per talking person, there is in each group. This indicates a limit of g not being able to be
lower than 1. This is not the case in this study. It leads to a possible reevaluation of the
parameter is more of a ’noise level parameter’. The lower the group size, the noisier the
population of the rooms.
As mentioned in the results, a difference was experienced in the results depending on
the two days of measurements conducted in the Troldhøj Daycare Center. The difference
was the presence of the older children on April 18th. The decision of visiting the daycare
a second time was based on interviews with the educators of the institutions. These were
quotes like:
’You should try to be here when the Blue room is here, then you would experience the
real noise conditions’ ­ Anonymous educator, Troldhøj Daycare Center
According to the educators, especially the older children were noisy and uneasy in the
springtime, because they were expected to begin preschool at the beginning of May.
When visiting the daycare center again on April 18th, it was expected to show very high
noise levels based on the statements of educators. What was actually experienced was
a higher noise level in the other room, especially the 3 to 4­year­olds, whereas the older
children seemed to have a lot of energy. Still, they also seemed more watchful and atten­
tive to the educators. This observation is based on the study time of the rooms. Because
the weather was sunny on April 18th, most of the playing time was done outside, which
was a little unfortunate for the study.
The importance of pedagogical behavior seemed to have an effect on the children. This
can also be compared to the Latvian study, presenting the different equivalent levels dur­
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
55
==PAGE:63==
ing studying and playing times, see Figure 3.8 [20]. According to this study, the 5 to
6­year­olds seemed to make less noise than 3­4 and 4 to 5­year­olds during study time.
Actually, the 5­6­year­olds seemed to be the least noisy group with an equivalent noise
level during study time of 66.6 dB(A), and the 3 to 4­year­olds had an equivalent noise
level of 69.6 dB(A). The noisiest group was the 4 to 5­year­olds with an equivalent noise
level of 71.1 dB(A).
Because of the low values of the Lombard slope, c, the effect of the Lombard Slope is
not generally noticed in the study. When comparing the results and the data set to the
prediction function of Rindel’s formula, there are some definite differences to consider.
One of them is supported by the common room of Skovmosen Daycare. As stated in the
results, the common room is the only room showing a correlation between the actual data
and the predicted data with a value of the Lombard slope higher than 0, c = 0.2. The room
is also the only room bigger than 200 cbm. The study of Rindel used food establishments
with a larger sample size and larger room volumes.
6.4
Strengths and Weaknesses of the Study
For the strengths and weaknesses of the study, the focus has been on the potential of
the subject compared to what the study resulted in. Throughout the research project, a
notable challenge was the collection of accurate data on the number of educators experi­
encing hearing­related problems. While my primary focus was initially on room acoustics,
I also aimed to explore the impact of poor room acoustics on the hearing of educators in
daycare centers. It was considered to make autopsied hearing tests before and after a
workday of selected educators. Unfortunately, if this idea was to be executed, a series of
ethical permissions were to be accepted in order to perform the project properly. Because
of the short time frame, it could turn out to be a fruitless journey. In order to determine
the hearing­related problems, the quantitative method of a survey was chosen to collect
a big amount of responses.
One of the strengths of the questionnaire was the way the daycare centers were chosen.
The variety of daycare centers as former Alpha Akustik customers, seeking out as many
daycare centers as possible wanting to participate, and sharing it as an anonymous ques­
tionnaire in an educators group of Denmark on Facebook, ensured unpredictability in the
answers, which strengthened the data for the purpose. Unfortunately, daycare centers
in Denmark are already under pressure, which made a lot of managers turn down the
opportunity to participate in the project. Underway, the responses to the question about
participation also resulted in questions about anonymity. Contact with managers of the
daycare centers helped the educators to be more relaxed about the project. Some mu­
nicipalities also expressed concern about reaching out to daycare centers questioning
whether the questions about bad noise environments could result in complaints. Eventu­
ally, the seeking respondents resulted in 65 educators answering the questionnaire after
a lot of unforeseen obstacles.
One obvious weakness ended up being the relatively small sample size. An examination
of the precision in statistics gave an idea of some of the obstacles. The confidence inter­
val can be estimated for population parameters [11]. For the confidence interval, it was
interesting to explore how many possible respondents there could have been. For this,
answers were sought in the statistics. Based on Table 2.1, the total number of daycare
takers is around 61,000. Based on a staff political statement article of Roskilde munici­
pality, the number of educators in daycare centers in the municipality in 2020 was 968,
the Table from the article is in Figure A.10 in Appendix [27]. Keep in mind, these statistics
are based on counts from November 2019, which possibly be different in 2023. Because
56
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:64==
Roskilde and Lejre were the common municipalities for this study, a more realistic number
of possible answers are 1000. In general, given the population size, a satisfactory sample
size would be as in Table 6.7.
Table 6.7: Sample Size based on the Population Size with a Margin of Error of 5.0%.
Taken from the website of Sawtooth Software used for calculation of sample size [28].
Confidence level
95%
99%
Population Size
1000
1000
Sample Size
278
400
The sample size of the study is relatively small, but because not all daycare centers have
been asked to participate, the confidence level was higher. For a sample size of 65 and
a population size of 1000, the margin of error would be higher than the 5% mentioned in
Table 6.7.
One problem occurs when the daycare centers are compared to each other. When N <
30, an approximation is poor, and a small sampling theory must be employed [11]. In
reference to this study, most responses were received from Troldhøj Daycare Centers
with 12 responses. The small sample sizes created obstacles in comparing the daycare
centers.
Some other weaknesses of the quantitative method of a questionnaire can be the nature of
self­reporting. If the respondents know the questionnaire is surrounding questions about
hearing problems, the chance of people experiencing hearing problems is bigger than
people not experiencing hearing problems. This is especially the case by distributing the
questionnaire in a Facebook group. The problem is minimized by contacting managers
and making them distribute the questionnaire.
A major strength of the study in general was the understanding of the severity of the noise
level problems in daycare centers in general. Almost every time a specialist, manager,
or someone within the field was contacted, they were very persistent and eager to help,
because of the relevance. With the help of more than one doctor within the field, a lot of
necessary literature and knowledge on the subject were received.
Along with the study being incredibly relevant, there were also a lot of parameters possibly
affecting different aspects of the noise levels in daycare centers. It quickly became a very
complex project needing a lot of measuring and observations. The time frame of 6 months
was not nearly enough to get into the depth of the subject.
6.5
Recommendations for Further Research
Further research would include more systematic testing of the different parameters. For
it to be possible to make variance analyses of the different parameters, measurements
would be necessary for more daycare centers with different variances. For the research
to be adequate, the measurements would have to be proceeded for a whole school year,
understanding how the children acted with each other and the educators.
Another aspect would be to research in cooperation with specialists in the field of social
psychology or/and in the field of biology. Audio tests could be completed to create an
objective understanding of the educators’ hearing. Furthermore, it is still questionable
whether the room acoustic regulations of daycare centers are sufficient based on the new
knowledge of the effects of hyperacusis. Other room acoustic conditions such as the
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
57
==PAGE:65==
amount of acoustic regulation, the effect of flutter echo, and the effect of the Lombard
effect showed interesting trends during this study, which would include more research
to conclude significance or not. The daycare center showing the occurrence of flutter
echo could be further examined by minimizing the flutter echo, and performing further
measurements in order to determine the differences.
The correlation between the actual data and the formula of Rindel also showed some
interesting results, but too many aspects between these two studies were too different,
and some of the parameters should definitely be re­evaluated. The effect of the Lombard
slope seems to have a definite effect in the workplace of the daycare centers, but the
question is whether the effect evolved in children or whether it only exists in adults. This
aspect is not examined and only exists on a hypothetical level.
58
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:66==
7
Conclusion and further comments
In conclusion, the hypothesis was stated as follows:
Educators working in daycare centers experience a higher prevalence of hearing
problems, especially hyperacusis, and tinnitus, even though the equivalent noise level
for an 8­hour workday is below the critical level of 80 dB(A).
It was not possible to conclude the main hypothesis based on the findings of the study.
The variance in noise levels in the measurements was only below the level of 80 dB(A).
Furthermore, the prevalence of hearing problems was only based on the data retrieved
from the questionnaire, which had a sample size of each daycare center too small in order
to compare the subjective data to the objective data.
The sub­hypotheses on the other hand, created a possibility of concluding on different
aspects of the hypothesis. The descriptions of the hypotheses and the significance found
by variance analysis can be seen in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1: Significance found in each hypothesis based on the study
Hypothesis
Descriptions
Significance
Hypothesis 1
Flutter echo might increase the overall noise level,
even when the reverberation time meets the required
threshold of 0.4 seconds.
No
Hypothesis 2
Despite maintaining a noise level below 80 dB, ed­
ucators still experience a high prevalence of hearing
problems.
No
Hypothesis 3
Implementing acoustic regulation measures by Alpha
Akustik leads to reduced noise levels in the work­
place.
No
Hypothesis 4
The number of children per educator significantly in­
fluences the occurrence of hearing damage.
No
Hypothesis 5
Children aged 4 to 7 years have higher noise levels
than younger children (0 to 3 years old).
No
Hypothesis 6
Greater variation in the ages of children within each
room affects the overall noise levels.
No
Hypothesis 7
The risk of hearing damage increases with the dura­
tion of employment in childcare settings.
Yes
Significance was found in one of the sub­hypotheses stated at the beginning of the study.
The risk of hearing damage showed a significant correlation with the duration of working
with children. Because significance was not found between the age of caretakers and the
occurrence of hearing damage, it strengthened the hypothesis of noise levels in daycare
centers being the only problem.
Another trend found in the findings was the occurrence of hearing­related problems among
educators working with more than 10 children. According to a majority of the respondents,
the number of children they were responsible for was more than 20 children. The number
of educators working with 20 children or more was a lot bigger than of the other groups,
which made the data set not optimal for variance analysis. The variance analysis had a
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
59
==PAGE:67==
P­value of 0.11, which showed an 89% chance of hearing­related problems correlating
with the number of children per educator.
The majority of respondents (58.5%) registered a hearing­related problem, where hyper­
acusis was the most common. Tinnitus can result from hyperacusis, which could look like
a case of occupational injury.
A trend showed a higher prevalence of low noise levels among daycare centers with active
acoustic regulation. The amount of acoustic regulation was based on the work of Alpha
Akustik. Of the daycare centers used for measurements, some of the daycare centers not
registered as having any acoustic regulation had absorbing room dividers or absorption
plates on the walls. The absorption was acknowledged but not further analyzed. Further­
more, another trend showed the occurrence of higher noise levels in the daycare center
with flutter echo. If more time was given, it would be interesting to minimize the flutter
echo and measure in the same daycare center in order to determine the differences.
It is crucial to highlight that the results presented in this study are based on a specific sam­
ple obtained from the questionnaire. It is important to recognize that further investigation,
involving a larger sample size, is necessary to obtain results that are more representative
of the overall population and provide a clearer understanding of the hypotheses being
studied.
60
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1]
Kristina Gyllensten et al. The experience of noise in communication intense work­
places: A qualitative study. PLoS ONE 18(1): e0280241. https://doi.org/ 10.1371/jour­
nal.pone.0280241, 2023.
[2]
Christa L. Themann and Elizabeth A. Masterson. Occupational noise exposure: A
review of its effects, epidemiology, and impact with recommendations for reducing
its burden. Acoustical Society of America, 2019.
[3]
Sofie Fredriksson et al. The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure on Hyperacu­
sis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden. Department
of Occupational, Environmental Medicine, School of Public Health, and Community
Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 2021.
[4]
Søren Peter Lund and Bonnie Bügel Sperling. Pædagoger of folkeskolelærere rammes
af lydoverfølsomhed. Det National Forskningscenter for Arbejdsmiljø, 2002.
[5]
Byung In Han and Ho Won Lee. “Tinnitus: Characteristics, Causes, Mechanisms,
and Treatments”. In: (2009).
[6]
Jens Pohl. Building Science: Concepts and Application. California Polytechnic State
University, 2011, pp. 166–195.
[7]
International Standard. ISO 3382­2. “Acoustics ­ Measurements of room acoustic
parameters, Part 2: Reverberation time in ordinary rooms”. In: (2008).
[8]
Ole Vestergaard. Stående Bølger ­ hvad er det, og hvordan fjerner man det? 2023.
URL: https://www.alpha-akustik.dk/staaende-boelger.
[9]
Priscilla Lau. “The Lombard Effect as a Communicative Phenomenon”. In: (2008).
[10]
Jens Holger Rindel. Verbal communication and noise in eating establishments. Mul­
ticonsult AS, Post Box 265, Skøyen, N­0213 Oslo, Norway, 2010.
[11]
Murray R. Spiegel and Editor David P. Lindstrom. Statistics. Vol. 2nd Edition. The
McGraw­Hill Companies, 2011, pp. 1–54, 69–121.
[12]
Unknown. Math is Fun – Normal Dsitribution. 2023. URL: https://www.mathsisfun.
com/data/standard-normal-distribution.html.
[13]
Unknown. Shapiro­Wilk test. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shapiro%
5C%E2%5C%80%5C%93Wilk_test.
[14]
Bjarne Mann. Danmarks Statistik: Børnepasning. Last updated 1st February 2023.
URL: https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/borgere/husstande- familier- og-
boern/boernepasning.
[15]
Birgit Rasmussen and Dan Hoffmeyer. “Vejledning om lydbestemmelser i Bygn­
ingsreglement 2015 (akustisk indeklima)”. In: (2016).
[16]
Mike Nixon. The Case For Good Acoustics at Daycare Centers. Hearing Health, a
publication of Deafness Research Foundation, 2003.
[17]
Richard Daniels, Alex Freemantle, and Mukund Patel. ACOUSTIC DESIGN OF
SCHOOLS: A DESIGN GUIDE. Building Bulletin 93, Department for Education and
Skills, London, 2003.
[18]
Acoustic Bulletin. Copenhagen Municipality leads the way for the wellbeing of day­
care teachers. AcousticBulletin by Ecophon, 2012.
[19]
Richard Daniels. Acoustic design of schools: performance standards. Building Bul­
letin 93, Department for Education, 2015.
[20]
Darja Kaïuþnaja and Svetlana Lakiða. PRESCHOOL PERSONNEL EXPOSURE
TO OCCUPATIONAL NOISE. Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine,
Rîga Stradiòð University, Dzirciema iela 16, Rîga, 2016.
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
61
==PAGE:69==
[21]
Christoffer Heide. Pædagoger får høreskader afbørns råb. DR.DK, 2018.
[22]
Connie Enghus. There is no ‘day­care effect’: Why acoustics are critical in childcare
facilities. Rockwool, 2019.
[23]
Karin Loh et al. Toward Child­Appropriate Acoustic Measurement Methods in Pri­
mary Schools and Daycare Centers. Institute for Hearing Technology and Acoustics,
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 2022.
[24]
Sofie Fredriksson et al. Nurses’ and preschool teachers’ experiences of taking part
in a participatory intervention project in communication­intense working environ­
ments. Occupational, Environmental Medicine, School of Public Health, and Com­
munityMedicine, Institute of Medicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Swe­
den, 2022.
[25]
Lone H. Mikkelsen. Indeklima i Daginstitutioner. Rådet for Grøn Omstilling, 2023.
[26]
Inger­Marie Wiegman, Maya Flensborg Jensen, and Tilde Rye Andersen. Plads til
Alle: Forbedring af lydmiljøet i 3 fritidsordninger i Københavns Kommune. TeamAr­
bejdsliv and Akustik ApS for Københavns Kommunes Børne­ og Ungeforvaltning,
2011.
[27]
Henrik Kolind. Personalepolitisk Redegørelse 2020. Roskilde Kommune, 2020.
[28]
Unknown. Sample Size Calculator. 2023. URL: https : / / sawtoothsoftware . com /
resources/sample-size-calculator?fbclid=IwAR2VOHjouexZS37ZZew_Q4O3qsyFlVl73%
5C%5C%20g2CX9AIaZGFQWn3jvtJPKawfko.
62
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:70==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Summary of noise and room acoustic parameters in previous studies [23]
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.2: Overview of selected classrooms (CRs) and playrooms (PRs). Background
noise measurements conducted in unoccupied rooms. [23]
64
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.3: Overview of selected classrooms (CRs) and playrooms (PRs). Background
noise measurements conducted in unoccupied rooms. [23]
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.4: Summary of room acoustic parameters from table A.3[23]
66
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.5: Characteristics of study participants categorized by occupational noise expo­
sure assigned by the Swedish Job­Exposure Matrix for noise [3].
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
67
==PAGE:75==
Spørgeskemaet er lavet til studiet ’’Arbejdsmiljø og rumakustiske forhold i daginstitutioner’ af Clara Riise for
the Department of Health Technology på Danmarks Tekniske Universitet i samarbejde med Alpha Akustik, 4000
Roskilde. Vejledere på projektet har været Jens Hjortkjær og Jonas Brunskog. Spørgeskemaet er inspireret af et lignende
spørgeskema fra det svenske studie ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal
Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ givet af Sofie Fredriksson.
1
Spørgeskema
Spørgsmål i fuld tekst
Svaralternativer
Udledte variable af svaralternativer
Sværhedsgrad ved at forstå tale
’Har du, på din arbejdsplads, problemer med at høre,
hvad der bliver sagt når flere mennesker taler
på samme tid?’*
- Ja
- Nej
Svært ved at forstå tale almindeligt
er defineret ved svaret: ’ja’ til
både problemer i arbejdstiden og
i fritiden.
’Har du, i din fritid, problemer med at høre,
hvad der bliver sagt når flere mennesker taler
på samme tid?’*
- Ja
- Nej
Tinnitus
’Har du tinnitus (en ringen, piben eller
anden lyd uden en ekstern kilde),
der varer mere end fem minutter af gangen?’*
- Nej
- Nej, men jeg har haft det
- Ja, et par gange
om måneden eller mere
- Ja, en eller to gange
om ugen
- Ja, flere gange
om ugen
- Ja, hver dag
Tinnitus er defineret ved svaret:
’Ja, en eller to gange om ugen eller
oftere.
Hyperacusis
’Er du følsom overfor lyd (føler ubehag eller
smerte ved almindelige lyde)?’*
- Nej
- Nej, men jeg har haft det
- Ja, et par gange
om måneden eller mere
- Ja, en eller to gange
om ugen
- Ja, flere gange
om ugen
- Ja, hver dag
Hyperacusis er defineret ved svaret:
’Ja, en eller to gange om ugen eller
oftere.
*Danske spørgsmål fra spørgeskemaet lavet til den svenske undersøgelse ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure
on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ af Sofie Fredriksson i 2022,
sofie.fredriksson@gu.se
1
==PAGE:76==
Symptomer
’Hvornår bemærkede du første gang,
at du havde [høretab/ vanskeligheder
med at opfatte tale/ tinnitus/ hyperacusis]?
Prøv at svare enten det præcise år eller din alder,
da du første gang bemærkede det.’*
- Årstal
- Alder
Alder er brugt hvis rapporteret.
Hvis år er rapporteret, er alder
udregnet.
Spørgsmål angående ’Råbekulturen’
’Er lydniveauet på dit arbejdssted
nogle gange så højt, at du har svært ved at høre,
hvad andre mennesker siger?’*
- Aldrig/næsten aldrig
- Omkring 25% af tiden
- Omkring 50% af tiden
- Omkring 75% af tiden
- Altid/næsten altid
Rapportering af ’Omkring 25% af tiden
eller mere er brugt som grænseværdi
for begge spørgsmål.
Støjeksponering er defineret ved svaret:
25% af tiden eller mere.
’Hvor ofte er du på dit arbejdssted
udsat for så høje lydniveauer,
at du skal hæve stemmen for at kunne
tale med andre mennesker?’*
- Aldrig/næsten aldrig
- Omkring 25% af tiden
- Omkring 50% af tiden
- Omkring 75% af tiden
- Altid/næsten altid
Skiftet job eller arbejdsplads på grund af støj
’Har du nogensinde skiftet job
eller arbejdsplads på grund af støj
eller høje lydniveauer?’*
- Ja
- Nej
At have skiftet job på grund af støj
blev defineret ved svaret: ’ja’
Høreværn på arbejdet
’Bruger du ørepropper eller andre høreværn
på arbejdet?’*
- Altid/næsten altid
- Ofte
- Nogle gange
- Aldrig/sjældent
Brug af høreværn på arbejdet
er defineret ved svaret: ’altid’
eller ’ofte’.
Stress på arbejdet
’Har du haft dage i de sidste tre måneder,
hvor du har følt dig konstant stresset?’*
- Overhovedet ikke
- Nogle gange
- Rimelig ofte
- Næsten hele tiden
Stress er defineret ved
svaret: ’rimelig ofte’ eller
’næsten hele tiden’.
Støjende aktiviteter i fritiden
’Hvor ofte deltager du, i din fritid, i aktiviteter,
hvor støj eller høje lydniveauer forekommer?’*
- Hver dag
- Et par gange
om ugen
- Et par gange
om måneden
- Et par gange
om året
- Aldrig/sjældent
Støjeksponering i friteden
er defineret ved svaret:
’et par gange om måneden’
eller oftere.
Med aktiviteter mener vi f.eks. skydning/ jagt,
band, koncert, kørsel på motorcykel,
arbejde med støjende værktøj/maskiner.
Høreværn i fritiden
’Bruger du høreværn, når du deltager
i støjende aktiviteter i din fritid?’*
- Altid/næsten altid
- Ofte
- Nogle gange
- Aldrig/sjældent
Brug af høreværn i fritiden
er defineret ved svaret: ’altid/ næsten altid’
eller ’ofte’.
*Danske spørgsmål fra spørgeskemaet lavet til den svenske undersøgelse ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure
on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ af Sofie Fredriksson i 2022,
sofie.fredriksson@gu.se
2
==PAGE:77==
Høretab
’Har du fået et høretab obduceret af
en professionel?’
- Ja
- Nej
Et høretab er defineret
ved svaret: ’ja’
Nuværende alder
’Hvor gammel er du, og hvor gammel var du,
da du begyndte at arbejde med børn?’
- Alder
Alder er brugt,
hvis det blev rapporteret
Høretab i familien
’Har nogen af dine biologiske forældre
og/eller søskende haft høretab før 55 års alderen?’*
- Ja
- Nej
- Ved ikke
Rapportering af høretab i familien
er defineret ved svaret: ’ja’.
Øreinfektioner
’Har du nogensinde haft problemer med
ørebetændelse eller øreinfektioner?’*
- Aldrig eller
mindst én gang
- Ja, et par
gange
- Ja, mange
gange og/eller
langvarig
Definition af tilbagevendende
infektioner: ’ja, mange gange
og/eller langvarig’.
Rygning
’Har du nogensinde røget dagligt i mindst en måned?’*
- Ja
- Nej
Langvarig rygning var defineret
ved svaret: ’ja’
Lydeksponering fra hovedtelefoner
’Hvor ofte lytter du til musik i hovedtelefoner?’*
- Hver dag
- Et par gange
om ugen
- Et par gange
om måneden
- Et par gange
om året
- Aldrig/sjældent
Høj lydeksponering i hovedtelefoner
var defineret ved svaret: ’Et par gange
om måneden’ i kombination med
en volume på ’75% på
maksimum volume’ eller mere.
’Når du lytter til musik, cirka hvor meget af
den maksimale lydstyrke lytter du så til?’*
- 25% af max
- 50% af max
- 75% af max
- 100% af max
Fordelingen af pædagoger
’Hvor mange børn har hver pædagog ansvar for?’
- 0-5
- 5-10
- 10-15
- 15-20
->20
Definerer antallet af børn per pædagog.
Definerer den mest almindelige
gruppestørrelse.
Aldersgruppe
’Hvad er normalt alderen på de børn,
du passer på institutionen?’
- 0-2 år
- 3-4 år
- 5-6 år
- >6 år
Definerer aldersgruppen af børnene
til sammenligning.
*Danske spørgsmål fra spørgeskemaet lavet til den svenske undersøgelse ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure
on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ af Sofie Fredriksson i 2022
3
==PAGE:78==
Stemmebrug
Hvor ofte har du haft et stemmeproblem de sidste
tre måneder?
- Ofte
- Noglegange
- Aldrig
Klager over helbredsproblemer med stemmen
bliver samlet og sammenlignet med det
lettiske studie**
- Brug for hævet stemme
(højere stemmeniveau)
- Lyst til ikke at snakke i et stykke tid
- Hæshed
- Mistet stemme
- Svært at tale
**Danske spørgsmål baseret på det lettiske studie: ’Preschool Personnel Exposure to Occupational Noise’ af
Darja Kaluznaja og Svetlana Lakisa i 2016
4
==PAGE:79==
The questionnaire is made for the study ’Occupational health and room acoustic conditions in daycare centers’
by Clara Riise for the Department of Health Technology at the Technical University of Denmark in cooperation with
Alpha Akustik, 4000 Roskilde. Guidance counselors of the project have been Jens Hjortkjær and Jonas Brunskog.
The questionnaire is inspired by a similar questionnaire from the Swedish study ’The Impact of Occupational Noise
Exposure on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ given by Sofie Fredriksson.
1
Questionnaire
Questionnaire item in full text
Response alternatives
Derived variables
Difficulty perceiving speech
’Do you at work have trouble hearing
what is said in an environment where
several people are talking at the same time?’*
- Yes
- No
Difficulty perceiving speech
was defined as responding: ’yes’ to
both work and leisure time
’Do you in leisure have trouble hearing what
is said in an environment where several
people are talking at the same time?’*
- Yes
- No
Tinnitus
’Do you have tinnitus (a ringing, whistling
or other sound without an external source),
that lasts more than five minutes each time?’*
- No
- No, but I have has it
- Yes, a few times
each month or more
- Yes, once or twice
a week
- Yes, many times
each week
- Yes, everyday
Tinnitus was defined as responding:
’Yes, once or twice a week’ or more
often.
Hyperacusis
’Are you sensitive to sound (feel discomfort
or pain by everyday sounds)?’*
- No
- No, but I have has it
- Yes, a few times
each month or more
- Yes, once or twice
a week
- Yes, many times
each week
- Yes, everyday
Hyperacusis was defined as
responding: ’Yes, once or twice a
week’ or more often.
*Questions taken from questionnaire made for the Swedish study ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure
on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ by Sofie Fredriksson in 2022,
sofie.fredriksson@gu.se
1
==PAGE:80==
Symptom onset
’When did you first notice that you had
[hearing loss/ difficulty perceiving speech/
tinnitus/ hyperacusis]? Try to respond either
exact year or age when you first noticed.’*
- Year
- Age
Onset age is used if reported.
If year is reported, age can be
calculated.
Questions about the ’Shouting-culture’
’Is the sound level at your workplace sometimes so high
that you have difficulty hearing what other people are
saying?’*
- Never/almost never
- About 25% of time
- About 50% of time
- About 75% of time
- Always/almost always
Reporting ’About 25% of time’
or more was used as cut-off
each item. Noise exposed
strata was defined as
reporting: ’25% of time’
or more often on both items.
’How often are you at your workplace exposed to such
high sound levels that you have to raise your voice to
be able to talk to other people?’*
- Never/almost never
- About 25% of time
- About 50% of time
- About 75% of time
- Always/almost always
Changed job or workplace due to noise
’Have you ever changed job or workplace
due to noise or high sound levels?’*
- Yes
- No
Having ever changed job due
to noise was defined as
responding: ’yes’
Hearing protection at work
’Do you use earplugs or other hearing protection
devices at work?’*
- Always/almost always
- Often
- Sometimes
- Never/rarely
Hearing protection at work
defined as responding: ’always’
or ’often’.
Stress at work
’Have you had days during the last three months,
where you have felt constantly stressed?’*
- Not at all
- Sometimes
- Pretty often
- Almost all the time
Stress was defined as
responding: ’pretty often’ or
’almost all the time’.
Noisy activities during free time
’How often in your free time do you participate in
activities where noise or high sound levels occur?’*
- Every day
- Some or a few times
each week
- Some or a few times
each month
- Some or a few times
each year
- Never/ rarely
Leisure time exposure was
defined as responding:
’some or a few times a month’
or more often.
With activities we mean for example: shooting/
hunting, band-practice, concert, driving a
motorcycle, working with noisy tools/machines.
Hearing protection during free time
’Do you use hearing protection when you engage
in noisy activities in your free time?’*
- Always/almost always
- Often
- Sometimes
- Never/rarely
Hearing protection in leisure
time was defined as
responding: ’ ’always/almost
always’ or ’often’.
*Questions taken from questionnaire made for the Swedish study ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure
on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ by Sofie Fredriksson in 2022,
sofie.fredriksson@gu.se
2
==PAGE:81==
Hearing loss
’Have you had a hearing loss autopsied by
a professional?’
- No
- Yes
Hearing loss was defined
as responding: ’yes’
Current age
’How old are you, and how old were you when you began
working with children?’
- Age
Onset age is used if
reported.
Family history of hearing loss
’Did any of your biological parents and/or siblings have
a hearing loss before the age of 55 years?’*
- No
- Yes
- Don’t know
Family history of hearing
loss was defined as
responding: ’yes’.
Ear infections
’Have you ever had problems with otitis or ear infections?’*
- Never or
at most one time
- Yes, a few
times
- Yes, many
times and/or
long-term
Recurrent infections
was defined as
responding: ’yes,
many times/or long-term’.
Smoking
’Have you ever smoked daily during at least a month?’*
- No
- Yes
Smoking was defined as
responding: ’yes’
Loud music in headphones
’How often do you listen to portable music players with
headphones?’*
- Every day
- Some or a few
times each week
- Some or a few
times each month
- Some or a few
times each year
- Never/ rarely
Loud music in
headphones was defined
as responding: ’some or
a few times a month’
in combination with
a volume of ’75% of
max’ or more.
’When you listen, approximately how much of the maximum
volume setting do you listen to?’*
- 25% of max
- 50% of max
- 75% of max
- 100% of max
Distribution of childcare takers
’How many children does each childcare taker have at
a time?’
- 0-5
- 5-10
- 10-15
- 15-20
->20
Defining the number of
children per adult.
Determining the most
common group size.
Age group
’What is the age of the children you normally take
care of?’
- 0-2 years
- 3-4 years
- 5-6 years
- >6 years
Determining the age
group of the children
for comparison.
*Questions taken from questionnaire made for the Swedish study ’The Impact of Occupational Noise Exposure
on Hyperacusis: A Longitudinal Population Study of Female Workers in Sweden’ by Sofie Fredriksson in 2022
3
==PAGE:82==
Vocal effort
How often have you had this voice apparatus problem during
the last three months?
- Often
- Time to time
- Never
Vocal apparatus health
complaints have been
organized and compared
with Latvian study**
- Speaking on a raised voise level
- Desire not to speak for some time
- Hoarseness
- Loss of voice
- Difficulty to speak
**Questions taken from questionnaire made for the Latvian study ’Preschool Personnel Exposure
to Occupational Noise’ by Darja Kaluznaja and Svetlana Lakisa in 2016
4
==PAGE:83==
A.1
Raw Data
Daycare institution ­ Troldhøj, Svogerslev
Table A.1: Noise measurements in the Red room in Troldhøj daycare institution. Posi­
tioned in the middle of the room. Measured 23rd March.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
8.00­8.30
1 adult
61.7
1
14 children
8.30­9.00
3 adults
62.8
1
16 children
9.00­9.30
3 adults
62.1
1
16 children
9.30­10.00
1 adult
77.8
1
10 children
10.00­10.30
2 adults
72.8
1
8 children
10.30­11.00
2 adults
70.4
2
9 children
11.00­11.30
2 adults
61.3
1
12 children
Table A.2: Noise measurements in the Green room in Troldhøj daycare institution. Posi­
tioned in the middle of the room. Measured 23rd March.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
8.30­9.00
2 adults
70.5
1
12 children
9.00­9.30
1 adult
74.1
1
12 children
9.30­10.00
1 adult
70.1
1
12 children
10.00­10.30
1 adult
76.7
1
8 children
10.30­11.00
1 adult
63.7
2
8 children
11.00­11.30
0 adults
29.6
1
0 children
76
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:84==
Table A.3: Noise measurements in the kitchen in Troldhøj daycare institution. Positioned
in the middle of the room. Measured 23rd March.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
8.00­8.30
1 adult
58.3
1
0 children
8.30­9.00
2 adults
63.6
1
0 children
9.00­9.30
0 adults
35.8
1
0 children
9.30­10.00
x
x
x
10.00­10.30
1 adults
54.2
1
2 children
10.30­11.00
2 adults
55.4
2
2 children
11.00­11.30
3 adults
64.2
2
17 children
Table A.4: Noise measurements in the Red room in Troldhøj daycare institution. Posi­
tioned in the middle of the room. Measured 18th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
1 adult
68.5
1
5 children
8.00­8.30
3 adults
65.9
2
7 children
8.30­9.00
3 adults
67.2
2
16 children
9.00­9.30
3 adults
59.5
2
17 children
9.30­10.00
0 adults
36.6
2
0 children
10.00­10.30
0 adults
38.7
1
0 children
10.30­11.00
1 adults
60.9
2
2 children
11.00­11.30
3 adults
66.8
1
10 children
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
77
==PAGE:85==
Table A.5: Noise measurements in the Green room in Troldhøj daycare institution. Posi­
tioned in the middle of the room. Measured 18th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
1 adult
76.6
1
10 children
8.00­8.30
0 adults
61.4
2
4 children
8.30­9.00
2 adults
68.1
2
13 children
9.00­9.30
0 adults
30.8
1
0 children
9.30­10.00
0 adults
33.4
1
0 children
10.00­10.30
0 adults
30.6
1
0 children
10.30­11.00
0 adults
31.9
1
0 children
11.00­11.30
3 adults
70.0
1
17 children
Table A.6: Noise measurements in the Blue room in Troldhøj daycare institution. Posi­
tioned in the middle of the room. Measured 18th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
0 adults
29.7
1
0 children
8.00­8.30
0 adults
29.0
1
0 children
8.30­9.00
2 adults
68.1
2
15 children
9.00­9.30
3 adults
70.9
2
21 children
9.30­10.00
3 adults
64.4
1
21 children
10.00­10.30
0 adults
32.7
1
0 children
10.30­11.00
0 adults
34.5
1
0 children
11.00­11.30
0 adults
31.4
1
0 children
78
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:86==
Table A.7: Noise measurements in the kitchen in Troldhøj daycare institution. Positioned
in the middle of the room. Measured 18th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
3 adult
63.3
2
6 children
8.00­8.30
2 adults
64.0
2
6 children
8.30­9.00
4 adults
62.8
2
3 children
9.00­9.30
1 adult
60.3
2
0 children
9.30­10.00
1 adult
52.6
1
0 children
10.00­10.30
1 adult
50.1
2
0 children
10.30­11.00
2 adults
58.0
2
0 children
11.00­11.30
3 adults
70.2
2
17 children
Daycare institution ­ Skjoldungerne, Lejre
Table A.8: Noise measurements in the Aslak institution in Skjoldungerne daycare institu­
tion. Positioned in the middle of the room. Measured 13th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
0 adult
45.1
1
2 children
8.00­8.30
1 adult
68.3
2
8 children
8.30­9.00
2 adults
66.2
1
7 children
9.00­9.30
1 adults
72.2
1
12 children
9.30­10.00
0 adult
31.6
1
0 children
10.00­10.30
0 adult
32.2
1
0 children
10.30­11.00
0 adult
31.8
1
0 children
11.00­11.30
1 adult
64.7
1
7 children
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
79
==PAGE:87==
Table A.9: Noise measurements in the Gæslingerne institution in Skjoldungerne daycare
institution. Positioned in the middle of the room. Measured 13th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
0 adult
36.6
1
0 children
8.00­8.30
1 adult
57.5
1
6 children
8.30­9.00
2 adults
62.8
2
8 children
9.00­9.30
2 adults
60.1
1
11 children
9.30­10.00
1 adult
61.5
1
3 children
10.00­10.30
2 adults
59.5
1
6 children
10.30­11.00
1 adult
59.9
1
6 children
11.00­11.30
2 adults
66.6
1
9 children
Table A.10: Noise measurements in the Svanerne institution in Skjoldungerne daycare
institution. Positioned in the middle of the room. Measured 13th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
2 adult
62.9
2
5 children
8.00­8.30
3 adults
63.9
1
5 children
8.30­9.00
4 adults
70.8
1
15 children
9.00­9.30
0 adults
36.6
1
0 children
9.30­10.00
x
x
0
10.00­10.30
x
x
0
10.30­11.00
x
x
0
11.00­11.30
4 adults
63.0
1
15 children
80
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:88==
Daycare institution ­ Skovmosen, Roskilde
Table A.11: Noise measurements in the Bikuben institution in Skovmosen daycare insti­
tution. Positioned in the middle of the room. Measured 20th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
1 adult
63.9
1
5 children
8.00­8.30
2 adults
68.6
2
9 children
8.30­9.00
4 adults
71.4
2
6 children
9.00­9.30
4 adults
72.6
2
13 children
9.30­10.00
3 adults
70.4
2
7 children
10.00­10.30
1 adult
60.3
2
3 children
10.30­11.00
2 adults
65.8
2
6 children
11.00­11.30
4 adults
66.3
1
15 children
Table A.12: Noise measurements in the Myretuen institution in Skovmosen daycare insti­
tution. Positioned in the middle of the room. Measured 20th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
0 adults
29.6
1
0 children
8.00­8.30
3 adults
67.3
2
8 children
8.30­9.00
2 adults
73.9
2
17 children
9.00­9.30
3 adults
67.1
2
11 children
9.30­10.00
3 adults
68.6
2
7 children
10.00­10.30
2 adults
66.5
2
8 children
10.30­11.00
2 adults
70.2
2
7 children
11.00­11.30
2 adults
61.0
1
10 children
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
81
==PAGE:89==
Table A.13: Noise measurements in the kitchen and common room in Skovmosen daycare
institution. Positioned in the middle of the room. Measured 20th April.
Time, am
People avr.
LAeq
Measurements
avr.
SPL [dB]
of 30 seconds
7.30­8.00
1 adult
63.6
1
4 children
8.00­8.30
2 adults
56.0
2
1 child
8.30­9.00
1 adult
67.8
2
3 children
9.00­9.30
1 adult
61.4
2
2 children
9.30­10.00
1 adult
51.3
2
0 children
10.00­10.30
1 adult
42.4
1
0 children
10.30­11.00
1 adult
58.0
2
1 child
11.00­11.30
1 adult
44.7
1
0 children
82
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:90==
Name of institution
Municipality
Alpha
Working a Age
Years 
working
with 
children
Sex
Number 
of 
children
in charge 
of
Age of children
Hearing 
loss
Tinnitus
Børnehuset Mælkevejen
Roskilde
No
24
39
15 Female
25 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
25
59
34 Female
25 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
38
50
12 Female
0 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
23
45
22 Female
10 [5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
26
39
13 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
22
32
10 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
18
33
15 Female
25 [3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
18
62
44 Female
5 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
22
47
25 Female
25 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
Yes
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
30
53
23 Female
15 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
23
26
3 Female
5 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
26
30
4 Female
25 [3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Roskilde
No
25
29
4 Female
15 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Hyrdehøj
Roskilde
Yes
23
52
29 Female
20 [3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Hyrdehøj
Roskilde
Yes
20
42
22 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Hyrdehøj
Roskilde
Yes
20
50
30 Female
20 [3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Universet
Hedehusene
Yes
21
57
36 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Universet
Hedehusene
Yes
23
44
21 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Universet
Hedehusene
Yes
18
49
31 Female
15 [3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
24
39
15 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
27
39
12 Female
20 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
Yes
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
14
41
27 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
29
41
12 Female
15 0,1,2,3,4
No
No
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
21
21
0 Male
25 [3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
18
41
23 Female
25 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
38
44
6 Female
15 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Roskilde
No
19
52
33 Female
25 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
Yes
Børnehuset Carlshøj
Lyngby-Taarbæk Yes
19
39
20 Female
20 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Carlshøj
Lyngby-Taarbæk Yes
19
36
17 Female
25 [3, 4]
No
Yes
Børnehuset Carlshøj
Lyngby-Taarbæk Yes
21
27
6 Female
15 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Vognmandsparkens BørnehRoskilde
No
20
64
44 Female
10 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Vognmandsparkens BørnehRoskilde
No
25
33
8 Male
25 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] No
No
Vognmandsparkens BørnehRoskilde
No
17
22
5 Female
5 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Alfehuset
Holmegaard
Yes
23
59
36 Other
25 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] No
No
Alfehuset
Holmegaard
Yes
24
29
5 Male
25 [3, 4, 5, 6]
Yes
Yes
Alfehuset
Holmegaard
Yes
18
59
41 Female
25 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehaven Solsikken
Roskilde
No
23
47
24 Female
15 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehaven Solsikken
Roskilde
No
21
32
11 Female
10 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne Lejre
Yes
21
50
29 Female
25 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne Lejre
Yes
17
27
10 Male
25 [3, 4]
No
No
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne Lejre
Yes
30
58
28 Female
25 [5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne Lejre
Yes
23
29
6 Unknown
25 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne Lejre
Yes
23
57
34 Female
25 [3, 4]
Yes
No
Mellerup Naturbørnehus
Randers
No
24
53
29 Female
25 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7No
No
Børnehuset Lindelund
Brøndby
No
13
35
22 Male
25 [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
Yes
Yes
Vuggestuen Lilletop
København
No
28
34
6 Female
5 [0, 1, 2]
Yes
No
Galaxen
Herning
No
17
32
15 Female
10 [0, 1, 2]
No
Yes
Børnehuset Tornby
Hjørring
No
38
42
4 Female
5 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Ellepilen
København
No
20
27
7 Female
10 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Daginstitutionen Rosenåen Glostrup
No
30
55
25 Female
5 [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
No
No
Barndommens land
København
No
55
55
0 Female
10 [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
No
Yes
Børnehuset Baunevangen Hvidovre
No
35
38
3 Female
10 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Storkereden
Vesthimmerland No
27
30
3 Female
15 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Børnehuset Hejls
Kolding
No
26
27
1 Female
25 [3, 4]
No
No
Sorring Børnehus
Silkeborg
No
19
34
15 Female
15 [3, 4]
No
Yes
Unknown
Unknown
No
23
33
10 Female
5 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] No
No
Unknown
Slagelse
No
19
44
25 Female
5 [3, 4]
Yes
No
Unknown
København
No
25
49
24 Female
25 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
Unknown
Kolding
No
15
29
14 Female
20 [0, 1, 2]
No
No
Unknown
Greve
No
21
40
19 Female
25 [6, 7]
Yes
No
Unknown
Helsingør
No
18
61
43 Female
25 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] Yes
No
Unknown
Unknown
No
33
51
18 Female
20 [5, 6]
No
Yes
Unknown
Tårnby
No
23
47
24 Female
15 [0, 1, 2]
No
Yes
Unknown
Viborg
No
17
65
48 Female
15 [5, 6]
No
Yes
Unknown
Horsens
No
25
29
4 Female
20 [3, 4, 5, 6]
No
No
==PAGE:91==
Hyperacu
sis
Voice 
problems
:
Raised 
voice
Voice 
problems
:
Wanting 
not to 
talk
Voice 
problem: 
Hoarsene
ss
Voice 
problems
: Lost 
voice
Voice 
problems
: 
Difficulty 
talking
Age 
noticing 
hearing 
problem
Problems 
hearing 
when 
people 
are 
talking at 
work
Problems 
hearing 
when 
people 
are 
talking in 
free time
Excessive 
noise at 
work
Occuranc
e of 
excessive 
noise at 
work
Hearing 
protectio
n
Changed 
job 
because 
of 
excessive 
noise 
levels
Leisure 
time 
exposure
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
25 Yes
Yes
0.75
        
0.75
        
No
No
Yes
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
-
          
-
          
No
No
No
No
Sometime Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime Sometime Sometime No
Sometime No
No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
Sometime No
No
20 No
Yes
0.25
        
-
          
No
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sometime Sometime Sometime
40 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.50
        
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No 
No
47 Yes
Yes
0.75
        
0.75
        
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
26 Yes
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
23 Yes
Yes
1.00
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
Sometime Sometime No
No
No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
52 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
20 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.50
        
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
Yes
No
No
Sometime Sometime No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
-
          
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime No
Sometime No
No
48 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime Yes
No
No
No
35 Yes
Yes
-
          
-
          
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime Sometime No
No
No
37 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.50
        
Yes
No
No
No
Sometime Sometime Yes
Yes
Sometime No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
30 Yes
No
0.75
        
0.50
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
-
          
No
No
Unknown
No
Sometime Sometime No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime Yes
Sometime No
No
33 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.50
        
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Sometime No
No
25 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.25
        
No
No
Yes
No
Sometime Yes
Sometime Sometime No
30 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime Sometime Sometime Sometime No
45 Yes
Yes
-
          
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
0 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.50
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
Sometime No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
-
          
-
          
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Sometime Sometime No
No
25 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.75
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
40 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.50
        
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
45 Yes
Yes
-
          
-
          
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime No 
Sometime Sometime Sometime No
Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.50
        
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.25
        
-
          
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
-
          
No
No
Yes
Yes
Sometime Sometime Sometime No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
-
          
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
53 Yes
Yes
-
          
-
          
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
43 No
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Sometime No
No
30 No
No
0.50
        
0.50
        
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
27 Yes
Yes
0.75
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime Sometime No
No
No
31 No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
36 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.50
        
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.50
        
0.50
        
No
No
Unknown
No
Yes
Sometime No
No
No
50 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.25
        
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
0.75
        
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Sometime Sometime No
No
36 No
No
0.25
        
0.25
        
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
-
          
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
27 Yes
Yes
0.75
        
0.75
        
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime Sometime Sometime Sometime Sometime
28 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.50
        
No
Yes
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
No
No
No
-
          
-
          
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
Sometime No
No
31 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime Yes
No
No
No
30 Yes
No
0.75
        
0.75
        
No
Yes
No
No
Sometime No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime Sometime No
No
No
35 Yes
Yes
0.75
        
0.75
        
No
No
No
No
Sometime No
Sometime No
No
30 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
Yes
Sometime Sometime No
No
Sometime
42 Yes
Yes
0.50
        
-
          
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Sometime
45 Yes
Yes
0.25
        
0.25
        
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
-
          
-
          
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sometime Sometime No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.75
        
0.50
        
No
No
No
==PAGE:92==
Activities
Hearing 
protectio
n in free 
time
Geneticall
y hearing 
problems
Problems 
with 
earinfecti
ons
Constantl
y stressed Smoking
Exposure 
to music 
in 
headpho
nes
Noise 
level in 
headpho
nes
Sport
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
0.25
        
Concerts
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.50
        
Concerts
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.75
        
Sport
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
1.00
        
None
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
Sport
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
0.50
        
Concerts
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
0.50
        
Sport
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.50
        
Concerts
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.50
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.75
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
Shopping No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
0.50
        
Sport
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
None
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
Concerts
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
GardenwoYes
Yes
No
No
No
No
0.50
        
None
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.50
        
None
No
Unknown No
No
No
No
0.50
        
Sport
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
0.25
        
None
No
Unknown No
Yes
No
No
0.25
        
Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown No
No
Unknown
-
          
None
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.75
        
Concerts
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
None
No
Unknown Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.75
        
Music
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.75
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.75
        
None
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
0.50
        
None
No
Unknown No
No
Yes
Yes
0.75
        
Clubbing
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
1.00
        
Concerts
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
50.00
     
Concerts
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.50
        
None
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
0.75
        
Concerts
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
0.75
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.50
        
Concerts
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
0.50
        
Sport
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
0.75
        
None
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.50
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.75
        
Concerts
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
0.50
        
Concerts
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.50
        
Sport
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.50
        
Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown No
No
Unknown Unknown
Concerts
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
0.75
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
0.50
        
Concerts
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
0.50
        
None
No
Unknown No
No
No
No
0.75
        
Concerts
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
0.25
        
None
No
Unknown No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.25
        
None
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.75
        
Concerts
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
0.50
        
None
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.50
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.25
        
Concerts
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
0.50
        
None
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
0.50
        
Concerts
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
0.25
        
Concerts
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
0.25
        
None
No
No
No
No
No
No
0.50
        
Concerts
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
0.75
        
==PAGE:93==
Name of institution
Name of room
Date of measurement
Volume
Reverberation time
Age of children Number of children Number of adults
Number of all
A-weighted sound pressure level
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
March 23rd
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
14
1
15
61.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
March 23rd
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
16
3
19
62.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
March 23rd
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
16
3
19
62.1
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
March 23rd
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
10
1
11
77.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
March 23rd
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
8
2
10
72.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
March 23rd
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
9
2
11
70.4
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
March 23rd
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
12
2
14
61.3
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
0
0
0
26.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
5
1
6
68.5
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
7
3
10
63
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
7
2
9
67.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
9
2
11
69.1
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
5
3
8
63.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
17
3
20
59.4
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
17
3
20
59.5
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
0
0
0
39
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
0
0
0
31.1
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
0
0
0
38.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
0
1
1
55.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
4
1
5
63.2
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Red
April 18th
90.5
0.34 [2, 3]
10
3
13
66.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
March 23rd
99
0.38 [3, 4]
12
2
14
70.5
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
March 23rd
99
0.38 [3, 4]
12
1
13
74.1
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
March 23rd
99
0.38 [3, 4]
12
1
13
70.1
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
March 23rd
99
0.38 [3, 4]
8
1
9
76.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
March 23rd
99
0.38 [3, 4]
8
1
9
63.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
March 23rd
99
0.38 [3, 4]
0
0
0
29.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
1
0
1
42.5
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
10
1
11
76.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
4
0
4
60.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
4
0
4
62
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
4
1
5
68.4
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
22
2
24
67.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
0
0
0
30.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
0
0
0
33.4
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
0
0
0
30.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
0
0
0
31.9
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Green
April 18th
99
0.38 [3, 4]
17
3
20
70
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
0
0
0
29.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
0
0
0
29
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
12
2
14
71.5
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
18
2
20
70.1
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
21
3
24
73.3
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
21
3
24
68.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
21
3
24
64.4
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
0
0
0
32.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
0
0
0
34.5
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Blue
April 18th
99
0.4 [5, 6]
0
0
0
31.4
==PAGE:94==
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
March 23rd
151.9
0.34    None
0
1
1
58.3
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
March 23rd
151.9
0.34    None
0
2
2
63.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
March 23rd
151.9
0.34    None
0
0
0
35.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
March 23rd
151.9
0.34    None
2
1
3
54.2
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
March 23rd
151.9
0.34    None
2
2
4
55.4
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
March 23rd
151.9
0.34    None
17
3
20
64.2
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
7
3
10
64.9
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
5
2
7
60.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
4
1
5
56.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
7
2
9
66.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
4
4
8
65.2
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
2
3
5
56.8
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
0
1
1
55.1
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
0
1
1
62.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
0
1
1
52.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
0
1
1
47.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
0
1
1
51.6
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
0
1
1
49.4
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
3
2
5
60.7
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
20
3
23
67.9
Børnehuset Troldhøj
Kitchen
April 18th
151.9
0.34    None
20
3
23
71.7
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
0
0
0
45.1
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
6
1
7
67.8
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
9
1
10
68.8
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
7
2
9
66.2
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
12
1
13
72.2
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
0
0
0
31.6
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
0
0
0
32.3
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
0
0
0
31.8
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Aslak
April 13th
125.7
0.33 [4, 5]
7
1
8
64.7
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
0
0
0
36.6
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
6
1
7
57.5
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
6
1
7
60.1
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
9
3
12
64.4
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
11
2
13
60.1
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
3
1
4
61.5
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
6
2
8
59.5
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
6
1
7
59.9
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Gæslingerne
April 13th
94.7
0.37 [2, 3]
9
2
11
66.6
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
April 13th
90.5
0.28 [4, 5, 6]
5
2
7
64.9
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
April 13th
90.5
0.28 [4, 5, 6]
5
2
7
58.9
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
April 13th
90.5
0.28 [4, 5, 6]
5
3
8
63.9
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
April 13th
90.5
0.28 [4, 5, 6]
15
4
19
70.8
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
April 13th
90.5
0.28 [4, 5, 6]
0
0
0
36.6
Børnehuset Skjoldungerne
Svanerne
April 13th
90.5
0.28 [4, 5, 6]
15
4
19
63
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
4
1
5
63.6
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
0
1
1
39.5
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
1
2
3
59
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
3
1
4
64
==PAGE:95==
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
3
1
4
69.8
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
4
1
5
66.4
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
0
1
1
42.2
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
0
1
1
48.5
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
0
1
1
53
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
0
1
1
42.4
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
1
1
2
59
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
0
1
1
56.8
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Common room
April 20th
245.8
0.38    None
0
1
1
44.7
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
5
1
6
63.9
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
10
2
12
70.4
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
7
2
9
65.5
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
6
3
9
71.1
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
6
4
10
71.7
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
11
4
15
73.3
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
15
4
19
71.8
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
10
4
14
72.9
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
3
1
4
63.6
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
3
1
4
58.7
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
3
0
3
61.5
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
3
3
6
59.2
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
9
1
10
68.3
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Bikuben
April 20th
110.8
0.34 [3, 4, 5, 6]
15
4
19
66.3
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
0
0
0
29.6
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
3
2
5
63.8
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
13
3
16
69.2
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
15
2
17
72.7
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
18
2
20
74.9
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
10
2
12
65.5
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
11
3
14
68.2
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
6
3
9
68.3
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
8
2
10
68.8
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
8
1
9
61
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
7
2
9
68.8
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
6
2
8
70.5
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
7
2
9
69.9
Børnehuset Skovmosen
Myretuen
April 20th
116.2
0.32 [3, 4, 5, 6]
10
2
12
61
==PAGE:96==
A.1.1
Correlation Graphs: Rindel’s Formula
Figure A.6: Relationship between people present and measured/predicted noise levels in
Aslak, Gæslingerne, and Svanerne institution of Skjoldungerne daycare ([125.7 m3],[94.7
m3],[90.5 m3]]), with predicted curves for different group sizes (g) in Rindel’s formula [10].
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
89
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.7: Relationship between people present and measured/predicted noise levels in
the kitchen of Troldhøj daycare (151.9 m³), with predicted curves for different group sizes
(g) in Rindel’s formula [10].
90
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:98==
A.1.2
Graphs and Figures from Data
Figure A.8: Distribution of the Current Ages and the Sexes amongst the Respondents
from the Questionnaire
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
91
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.9: Distribution of Municipalities where the Daycare Centers were Located.
Figure A.10: Bilagstabel 2. Alderssammensætning fordelt på alder på udvalgte overen­
skomstgrupper i Roskilde Kommune – nov. 2019[27]
92
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
==PAGE:100==
Occupational Health and Room Acoustic Conditions in Daycare Centers
93
==PAGE:101==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
