==PAGE:1==
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
Master thesis
Benedek Gaál
Spring 2023
Supervised by:
Niels Gregersen, Professor
Battulga Munkhbat, Assistant Professor
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Telephone: +45 45 25 63 52
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Single photons are excellent information carriers for implementing quantum
information processing, due to the ability to integrate quantum computing and com-
munication in the same framework. In optical quantum computing the qubits are
encoded into a stream of highly indistinguishable individual single-photons. The
semiconductor quantum dot (QD) is an excellent platform for implementing reliable
single-photon sources, offering good optical properties combined with the availabil-
ity of mature solid-state nanofabrication methods. In an extensive quantum com-
puting network indistinguishable photons are needed from multiple remote sources.
This poses a challenge due to the inhomogeneous broadening of the self-assembled
QDs’ emission energy, and the charge noise arising from an imperfect solid-state
environment. One solution is to embed the QD in a p-i-n heterostructure that is used
to apply an electric field, thereby tuning the QD emission via the dc Stark effect, and
allowing control of the charge state via the Coulomb blockade. Tunability is crucial
for aligning the QD to a cavity resonance or to tune devices into mutual resonance,
and charge control is paramount for achieving near-unity indistinguishability.
My master thesis project is concerned with the optical spectroscopy of QDs
embedded in externally biased p-i-n heterostructures and the fabrication of metal
contacts to these structures. First, I planned and performed a cleanroom nanofab-
rication process to create metal contacts to a thin (200 nm total) p-i-n membrane
containing In(Ga)As QDs. I made openings to the bottom doped layer by dry etch-
ing with inductively coupled plasma, and I found that a careful calibration of the etch
rate is necessary to create functional devices. I created Cr/Au ohmic contacts to the
p-doped layer through the lift-off of evaporated films. For contacting the n-layer, I
investigated two options: non-alloyed Cr/Au contacts, and annealed Ni/Ge/Au con-
tacts. I performed micro-photoluminescence (μPL) spectroscopy and observed that
the Cr/Au n-contacts are not suitable for charge control and electrical tuning of the
QD emission. For the Ni/Ge/Au contacts, I studied the performance under various
etching and annealing parameters and created ohmic contacts with low contact re-
sistance. The fabricated device exhibits diode behavior with a high current after the
knee voltage, although there is leakage, which must be minimized in the future.
I performed μPL spectroscopy on GaAs QDs embedded in a contacted AlGaAs
p-i-n membrane. I observed discrete charge plateaus corresponding to the neutral
and charged excitons and measured the Stark tuning ranges for the neutral exciton,
the negative, and positive trions to be 3 meV, 2 meV, and 1.1 meV, respectively. I
demonstrated that the power of above-band excitation has a large influence on the
emission by bringing the device toward forward bias.
The processes implemented in this thesis project are important steps in creat-
ing tunable SPSs with near-unity indistinguishability and will serve as a useful basis
for conducting future research in quantum light sources at DTU.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Electrical and Pho-
tonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Physics and Nanotechnology, M.Sc. Eng. The project was done under the supervision
of Professor Niels Gregersen and Assistant Professor Battulga Munkhbat at the Quantum Light
Sources research group.
Benedek Gaál - s184452
Signature
Date
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank many people who have made this project and my time at the QLS
group an enjoyable and fruitful learning experience. First of all, I would like to thank Prof. Niels
Gregersen for all the guidance and encouragement I’ve received during his supervision of my
thesis projects, my student research assistant job, and all the other special projects I’ve had
over the past three years. The opportunities that he gave me allowed me to discover so many
different aspects of quantum optics research. I would like to thank Assistant Prof. Battulga
Munkhbat for the supervision of my master thesis and my previous special projects, and for
introducing me to the wonderful world of experimental quantum optics research. In addition,
I am grateful for the advice and supervision I’ve received over the years from Assistant Prof.
Luca Vannucci and Martin A. Jacobsen.
I want to express my gratitude for all the help I’ve received from Claudia Piccinini, who
performed all the wirebonding in this project, and along with Abdulmalik A. Madigawa helped me
with taking measurements in the optics lab. I would like to also thank all of my other colleagues
at the QLS group for the scientific discussions, camaraderie, and for creating a welcoming
environment.
A sincere thanks goes to Prof. Andreas D. Wieck, Dr. Arne Ludwig, Nikolai Bart, and Hans-
Georg Babin for the epitaxial materials used in this project, and for granting the opportunity for
Claudia and I to observe the fabrication of metal contacts and to learn about MBE in Bochum. I
would like to thank Nadine Viteritti for fabricating the contacts, and for showing us the process.
My heartfelt gratitude goes to my friends Vince, Szilárd, and Krőceus, for their unwavering
support and for all our deep scientific discussions. Finally, I want to express my deepest grati-
tude to my parents and my brother, who have always believed in me unconditionally, no matter
the kilometers between us.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Carrier dynamics in semiconductor heterostructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Semiconductor QDs and excitons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
The QD and its environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Tuning the QD emission wavelength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Single-photon sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods & Materials
14
3.1
Epitaxial materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Device fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Results & Discussion
27
4.1
Sample materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Devices with Cr/Au n-contacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Devices with annealed Ni/Ge/Au n-contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
LDE 780nm GaAs QD device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Perspective
46
5.1
Contacted flip-chip devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Next steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Summary
48
Bibliography
49
Appendix
54
A
Supplementary figures: devices with Cr/Au n-contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B
Supplementary figures: devices with NiGeAu n-contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C
Supplementary figures: LDE GaAs QD device
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
iii
==PAGE:6==
1
|
Introduction
At the start of the 20th century the development of quantum mechanics led to a revolution
in physics with great ramifications in science, technology, and philosophy. The discovery of
the elementary particles, how they form atoms, and how the atoms are organized by chemical
bonds into crystals or compounds explained much of our previous empirical understanding of the
physical world. Perhaps the greatest beneficiary of this scientific landmark was material science,
more specifically semiconductor physics, which has transformed how our society functions: it
has altered the way we communicate, how we organise our society, how we entertain ourselves,
and how we work.
The advent of quantum mechanics was brought on by the study of various light-matter
interactions: the black-body radiation problem and the photoelectric effect. The exchange of
energy between the electromagnetic field and matter leads to diverse quantum phenomena:
electronic energy transitions [1], excitations such as plasmons [2] and excitons [3], spin-flips [4]
or other state changes. The interaction of photons with matter also gives us one of the basic
energy sources for life on Earth, in the form of photosynthesis. The fields of quantum optics
and nanophotonics are mainly concerned with the study of light-matter interaction. These fields
are ripe with potential both for discovering new fundamental physics, as well as for developing
new quantum technologies capable of transforming human society.
Optical quantum computing is an attractive platform for quantum information processing
because it can be readily integrated into a quantum communication network due to the use of
a ”flying” qubit. The fundamental computing unit of optical quantum computing is the single
photon. Quantum information may be encoded in the photon’s polarisation, in its spatial mode,
or even in Schrödinger cat states [5], and can be sent (or teleported [6]) over large distances
in fiber networks. In the KLM protocol [7], which is a proposed scheme for universal quantum
computing, the photon’s state is manipulated using linear optical components such as mirrors,
beam splitters, and phase shifters. For such a protocol to be feasible, reliable and efficient
single-photon sources and detectors are needed. A further challenge towards the scalability
of linear optical quantum computing is the shift to an on-chip implementation of all of these
components.
Single-photon sources (SPS) are devices that emit indistinguishable single photons on-
demand, and are described by three figures of merit: purity, efficiency, and indistinguishability.
Purity quantifies the ratio of photon-packets that actually contain one photon, efficiency spec-
ifies the probability of collecting a photon for each trigger, and indistinguishability gauges how
identical the wave packets are.
Single photons can be obtained through a plethora of diverse optical phenomena. Non-
linear processes include spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC) [8, 9] and four-wave
mixing (FWM) [10]. SPDC is especially useful for creating entangled photon pairs with high-
fidelity. However, these are inherently stochastic processes: we obtain a random number of
photons/photon pairs, therefore they usually have to be operated at low rates.
Two-level systems offer a more deterministic option: when the system relaxes from its
excited state a photon is emitted with frequency corresponding to the exact transition energy.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
1
==PAGE:7==
If the system can be prepared in the excited state in a deterministic manner, then it can be
used as an on-demand source of single photons. Many approaches exist for implementing
a two-level system: single atoms [11], ions [12], and molecules [13], atomic ensembles [14],
nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond [15], and semiconductor quantum dots [16].
The semiconductor QD, with the right environment, can perform excellently with respect
to all three figures of merit. However, QDs embedded in bulk semiconductor material suffer
from poor collection efficiency due to reflection at the semiconductor-air interface, and sub-par
indistinguishability as a result of the fluctuating charge environment. Luckily, mature technolo-
gies exist for processing semiconductor materials, granting enormous freedom in designing the
photonic environment around the QD. It is advantageous to fabricate an optical cavity around
the QD [16] with preferential emission towards the collection optics, thereby enhancing the lo-
cal density of states at the emitter, leading to improved efficiency and indistinguishability. This
introduces the problem of matching the QD emission to the cavity resonance, and the issue of
charge noise also remains. In addition, the QDs are created through a random process, yield-
ing emitters with a range of emission energies. The solution is to apply an electric field: the
emission energy is tuned through the dc Stark effect, the charge environment is stabilized, and
the QD charging is controlled by the Coulomb blockade [17]. The QD is placed inside a p-i-n
structure, and is tunnel-coupled to the n-layer. The electric field is controlled by applying an ex-
ternal bias between the doped layers. Using this approach, the QD and the cavity resonances
can be aligned [18], the charge environment is stabilized [19], and individual sources can be
tuned into mutual resonance [20].
This master thesis project is focused on the implementation and characterization of charge
control and electrical tuning of semiconductor QDs. There are two central themes in the thesis:
cleanroom nanofabrication and photoluminescense (PL) spectroscopy. My goal was to develop
a process for fabricating metal contacts to the doped layers in the p-i-n membrane, and to
perform optical spectroscopy on the QDs under electrical bias.
The structure of the thesis is organized as follows. In the Theory chapter I give an introduc-
tion to semiconductor physics, and then I outline how these materials can be used to harness
quantum confinement and to create single-photon emitters. I then explain how the environment
can affect the emission through deleterious effects, and how to mitigate that with the Stark effect.
In the Methods & Materials chapter I describe how the tuning can be implemented in practice in
SPSs, and explain all of the fabrication and characterization methods I’ve used throughout the
project. In the Results chapter I show the developed fabrication processes and the outcomes,
including characterization by μPL spectroscopy. In the Perspective chapter I give an outlook on
how the attained results can be used to create tunable SPSs, and what the next steps could be
to continue this research. The Summary chapter consists of a summary of the results and the
knowledge gained through the project, and the Appendix contains supplementary figures.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
2
==PAGE:8==
2
|
Theory
In this chapter I explain the fundamental concepts necessary to understand the charge con-
trol and electrical tuning of semiconductor QDs. First, some concepts in semiconductor physics
are introduced: energy bands, band gaps, impurity doping, heterostructures. Understanding
the behaviour of charge carriers in diode structures and at metal-semiconductor junctions was
particuraly vital in this thesis project. Afterwards, I introduce the optical transitions in QDs that
we can harness as quantum emitters, then I present some of the ways that the QD’s environ-
ment can detrimentally influence the emission. Finally, I introduce Stark tuning, a central theme
in the thesis.
2.1
Carrier dynamics in semiconductor heterostructures
The physical and chemical properties of matter come, in large part, from the electronic
structure. The outer electrons of atoms (the valence electrons) interact the most with the envi-
ronment (e.g. with electromagnetic fields) or with the valence electrons of other atoms. Com-
pounds are formed and chemical reactions happen through this interaction, and give rise to the
enormous complexities of the fields of material science, chemistry, and biology. The funda-
mental characteristics of semiconductor materials also originate from the electronic structure
[21].
Waves confined in a spatially finite potential give rise to quantized energy levels - electrons,
behaving as waves in many ways, are prime examples of this. This phenomenon is commonly
illustrated with the ”particle in a box” example, which shows that the energy eigenstates are
standing waves. Standing waves in a box have integer number of nodes, leading to discrete
stationary states. There is still an infinite number of them, but they can be ordered through their
associated energy. The particle will preferentially occupy the lowest energy state, and it will
release energy (if it has the available channels) until it reaches that state.
The example can be expanded to the three dimensional confinement potential of the atomic
nucleus, giving rise to the discrete atomic orbitals. One of the principal properties of electrons is
that the combined wavefunction of several electrons is antisymmetric: |n1, n2⟩= A(|n1⟩|n2⟩−
|n2⟩|n1⟩), where if we have electrons with completely identical states |n1⟩= |n2⟩, the wave-
function is zero, which is not normalisable. Known as the Pauli exclusion principle, this property
forbids electrons from all occupying the same energy level - at most two electrons can be in the
same orbital, and their final quantum number, the spin, must be different. The principle holds
true when electrons’ wavefunctions overlap. When a few atoms form molecules, or when many
atoms form crystalline solids, the wavefunctions of the outer (valence) electrons overlap to a
high degree, so the principle must be satisfied: no two electrons can have exactly the same
state, therefore the energy levels of the atomic orbitals must shift by a small amount in order
to accommodate all electrons with a completely unique state. When there are many atoms, we
can treat the electronic states as a continuum. In semiconductors this continuous energy band
is known as the valence band. Unoccupied, higher energy states must be also considered:
separated from the valence band by the band gap, we can find the conduction band, named
as such because here electrons can move around freely. Electron movement and the band
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
3
==PAGE:9==
structure are closely linked: kinetic energy is also restricted by the band structure, therefore if
all of the states are occupied, the electron cannot attain arbitrary momentum.
Band gaps are ranges of energies between the bands where simply no energy state exists
that electrons may occupy. In metals the outer band is not completely filled, which is the reason
why metals are generally conductive. In semiconductors the valence band is filled, and the
chemical potential (or Fermi level) lies in the band gap.
The band energies also depend on the direction of the electron’s crystal momentum, pc =
ħk. Assuming that electrons don’t interact, due to the translational symmetry of crystals, the
electron’s wavefunction can be written in the eigenbasis with basis functions that are products
of a plane wave (essentially a free electron) and a periodic function with the same periodicity
as the crystal: ψn,k(r) = eikrun(r). Due to the periodicity, we have ψn,k(r) = ψn,k+K(r), where K
is is a reciprocal lattice vector. Thus, it is enough to examine wavevectors within the so-called
Brillouin zone, which contains all unique k vectors. Since the real band structure would be a
4-dimensional graph (E as function of kx, ky, kz), instead the band structure is plotted along
characteristic lines in the Brillouin zone. As with atoms, electrons may jump between energy
levels by absorbing or releasing energy through interactions with the electromagnetic field. In
crystals the electrons have an additional medium to interact with: lattice phonons, which can
exchange momentum with the electrons. Carrier movement through the semiconductor can
involve several of these processes in sequence: first, if the semiconductor absorbs a high-
energy photon an electron is excited into the conduction band. Here, the electron interacts with
phonons until it reaches a local minimum of the conduction band. At any point, the electron
can relax to the valence band by emitting a photon with energy equal to the bandgap at that
momentum, however if lower-energy momentum states are still available, those are energeti-
cally favoured. The optical transitions are most likely to occur if the valence band maximum and
the conduction band minimum occur at the same momentum. These materials are called direct
bandgap semiconductors, and are often used in optical devices. One such material is GaAs,
which has excellent properties to create active photonic devices.
The advantage of semiconductor materials is that their conducting properties may be easily
changed by introducing impurities. These impurities contribute surplus charge carriers to the
crystal, and can be classified based on which type of charge carrier they contribute. N-type dop-
ing introduces excess electrons that occupy energy levels inside the conduction band. P-type
doping results in a shortage of electrons, introducing the ”hole” as a positive charge carrier: if an
atom at the crystal lattice is missing an electron the net charge is positive. Neighbouring atoms
can give an electron to neutralize the hole, thus becoming positively charged themselves, re-
sulting in a positive charge that can move around the crystal lattice. The holes can be thought of
as the unoccupied states in the electron valence band. For the extra electrons or the holes to act
as charge carriers the dopant must be ionized: there must be enough thermal (or other) energy
to detach the electron of the donor to create a free electron, or to detach an electron of an atom
adjacent to the acceptor to create a free hole. At low dopant concentrations, room temperature,
and when the band is approximately parabolic, all dopants are ionized, and both electrons and
holes can be treated as ideal gases, where the particles have an effective mass depending on
the semiconductor material. At cryogenic temperatures, dopant ionization becomes a problem
in such devices, therefore, degenerate doping may be required. In degenerate semiconductors,
the doping concentration is so high that the individual impurity states hybridize into an impurity
band, effectively extending the band edge such that the Fermi energy lies inside the band. This
causes the semiconductor to behave more like a metal, and the doped region stays conductive
even at cryogenic temperatures.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
4
==PAGE:10==
2.1.1
P-n and p-i-n junctions
One of the most important semiconductor device component is the p-n junction. This is
simply a p-type region brought into direct contact with an n-type region. The free electrons in
the n-region and the holes in the p-region move close to the interface, where it is energetically
favoured for them to recombine. One such recombination yields a surplus of energy equal to
the bandgap of the material. Because of this the interface region becomes devoid of carriers,
while the ionized dopant atoms provide a charge imbalance (since the free carriers that ensured
charge neutrality have annihilated). This ”depletion” region acts similarly to a parallel plate
capacitor: there are positive ions localized to the n-region, and negative ions to the p-region,
which create a homogenous electric field pointing from n to p. This built-in potential prevents
the depletion region from growing infinitely, since electrons (holes) must travel along (opposite)
the electric field in order to recombine near the interface, which is energetically unfavourable.
The incredible utility of p-n junctions becomes apparent when an electrical bias is applied. In
forward bias the applied voltage reduces the built-in potential, thus tipping the balance to allow
current to flow. In reverse bias the applied voltage has an opposite effect, and apart from a
small saturation current, there is no net flow of charges. Therefore, the p-n junction only allows
current to flow one way. In a p-i-n structure there is an additional intrinsic (undoped) region
sandwiched between the doped layers. It works very similarly to a p-n junction, except the
capacitance is decreased, since the distance between the space charges is increased. Such
devices are useful because of this wide depleted region: in solar cells, this allows for more
efficient electron-hole generation, and in the present project, allows us to isolate the solid-state
quantum emitter from nearby charges while it experiences an electric field.
2.1.2
Metal-semiconductor junctions
n-type
EF,bulk
EF,surf
Evac
EC
EV
n-type
EF
Evac
EC
EV
Equilibrium:
Disequilibrium:
Figure 2.1: Band bending
due to surface states.
While p-n junctions are the basis of modern computing, they
would not be useful without the ability to connect electrical sig-
nals to the device. Because of this, we must examine the metal-
semiconductor junction.
There are two types of contact between
semiconductors and metal. Ohmic contacts follow ohm’s law, that
is, the relation between applied voltage and induced current is lin-
ear. Schottky contacts have asymmetrical behaviour arising due to
the energy barrier formed at the interface. This can be explained by
looking at the band bending and the Fermi level pinning.
To understand metal-semiconductor junctions, first we must un-
derstand the air-semiconductor interface. As previously discussed,
the bulk energy band properties of semiconductors arise partly from
the translational symmetry of the material. However, the interface
breaks the symmetry: there are semiconductor atoms with dangling
bonds that contribute free electrons, which interact and form a nar-
row surface state band. Since the Fermi level of this surface band and the bulk material must
align, this results in Fermi level pinning (assuming the surface band is half-filled) for doped semi-
conductors [22]. This process is illustrated in fig. 2.1, where Evac, EC, EV, are the vacuum, the
conduction band, and the valence band energy levels, respectively, and EF,surf, is the surface
band, while EF,bulk is the bulk Fermi level. The bottom image illustrates the equilibrium: the
surface band and the bulk Fermi levels must align.
Contact between the semiconductor and metal also results in band bending, stemming
from the difference in work function. This phenomenon is illustrated in fig. 2.2, where EF,m is
the metal, and EF,s is the semiconductor Fermi level. φm, φs, χs are the metal work function, the
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
5
==PAGE:11==
semiconductor work function, and the semiconductor electron affinity, respectively. φSB is the
Schottky barrier height and W is the width of the depletion layer. Just like in the case of surface
states, the Fermi levels of the two mediums must align. Fig. 2.2 explains the situation in the
case of φm > φs for an n-type semiconductor. Here, due to the difference in work function,
electrons flow from the semiconductor to the metal until the Fermi levels are equalized, forming
a depletion (or space charge) layer. Due to this separation of charges, there is a local electric
field, resulting in band bending [22]. In the opposite case of φs > φm the bands bend downwards.
Due to the combination of band bending and Fermi level pinning a barrier forms at the interface
which inhibits the flow of charges. The magnitude of this Schottky barrier can be expressed as
φSB = φm −χs. However, this relation does not give us the full picture, because the surface
states also influence the barrier height.
The barrier’s existence explains the rectifying behaviour of Schottky contacts: if we apply
forward bias (i.e. positive bias on the metal) the band bending is reduced, and there is a flow of
electrons from the semiconductor to the metal. In reverse bias the depletion layer grows, and
there is no current.
The Schottky barrier is still present in ohmic contacts, therefore, we must understand how
carriers can overcome the barrier. There are two extremes: thermionic emission and field emis-
sion. In thermionic emission the carrier is thermally excited over the potential barrier, while in
field emission it tunnels through. The dominant effect at cryogenic temperatures is field emis-
sion, because it is not temperature-dependent [23]. In thermionic-field emission the two effects
are combined: the electron is thermally excited (but not enough to overcome the barrier), which
allows it to tunnel through a thinner barrier.
The behaviour of the metal-semiconductor junction is strongly dependent on the level of
doping in the semiconductor. Degenerate doping is a useful tool because it can make the
creation of ohmic contacts easier by making the space-charge region thinner. This means that
the thickness of the material that the carriers must tunnel through is reduced. This is illustrated
in fig. 2.3.
ϕSB
EF,m
EF,s
Evac
EC
EV
Evac
EC
EV
EF,s
EF,m
χs
χs
ϕm
ϕm
ϕs
W
metal
metal
n-type
n-type
Before contact:
After contact:
Figure 2.2: Formation of Schottky barrier
between the semiconductor and metal.
EF
EF
EC
EV
EC
EV
n-type
p-type
Figure 2.3: Metal contact with degenerate
semiconductors.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
6
==PAGE:12==
2.1.3
Heterostructures
In addition to doping, the other principal semiconductor engineering approach is the design
of heterostructures: devices made of several different types of semiconductors. Here, the inter-
esting physics arise when materials with different band energies and bandgaps are brought into
contact. Using the differences in the band energy levels, we can manipulate carriers to prefer-
entially move to a certain region: for example, the conduction band energy minimum of InAs is
lower than that of GaAs, while the valence band energy maximum is higher. By embedding a
layer of InAs in GaAs, we can confine both electrons and holes. If the layer is sufficiently thin,
this confinement can lead to distinct energy states in the direction of the confinement, while in
the other two axes the carriers can move freely. These quantum wells, when integrated into
a cavity, can serve as active regions in lasers, because the carrier concentration is increased,
facilitating stimulated emission. They may also serve as useful tools to increase the efficiency
of solar cells by extending the absorption into the infrared.
This method of confinement (embedding low bandgap semiconductor in higher bandgap
bulk) can be extended to higher dimensions: quantum wires in 2D, and quantum dots (QDs) in
3D. In QDs, the quantization of energy levels in all directions leads to rich and intriguing quantum
phenomena. QDs possess single atom-like behaviour, combined with the stability and ease of
processing of semiconductor devices. Devices with embedded QDs can be created with well-
established nanofabrication methods.
2.2
Semiconductor QDs and excitons
The recombination of free electrons and holes results in the emission of photons. For bulk
material this photon’s energy is equal to the bandgap of the semiconductor. However, elec-
trons and holes can also interact without immediately recombining: since they have opposite
charge, the Coulomb interaction facilitates the formation of electron-hole bound states, known
as excitons. This is a lower energy state, thus the emission is also red-shifted compared to the
bulk photoluminescence. In most materials the exciton binding energy (the difference between
the exciton emission energy and the bandgap) is small, thus if the thermal energy is higher,
emission will still be dominated by the recombination of free electrons and holes. Notable ex-
ceptions are the transition metal dichalcogenides, which exhibit PL from excitons even at room
temperature. To aid in the creation of excitons, the temperature can be reduced.
As introduced above, semiconductor QDs can be used to trap electrons and holes through
quantum confinement. Most radiative and non-radiative decay dynamics can be explained by
considering the electron and hole movement independently, and the Coulomb interaction may
be included perturbatively [18]. However, the exciton formalism is still useful to explain the
optical transitions. The optical transitions are governed by the selection rules, detailed here in
short (for more in-depth details see the review by Lodahl et al. [18]). We focus on spontaneous
emission, which is the emission of a photon when a two-level system decays, releasing a photon
with energy equal to the transition energy.
The electron wavefunctions in the conduction/valence band can be written as:
|Ψc/v⟩= |Fc/v⟩|uc/v⟩|αc/v⟩,
(2.1)
where |Fc/v⟩is the envelope wavefunction, |uc/v⟩is the Bloch function at the Γ point, and |αc/v⟩
is the spin state. The envelope wavefunction is the solution to Schrödinger’s equation:
−ħ2
2m0
∇·

1
m∗(r)

+ Vc/v(r)Fc/v(r) = (E −Ec/v)Fc/v(r),
(2.2)
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
7
==PAGE:13==
where E is the electron’s eigenenergy, Ec/v is the band edge energy, Vc/v(r) is the confinement
potential, m0 is the electron rest mass, and m∗(r) is the effective mass.
The light-matter interaction is described by the minimal coupling Hamiltonian:
∇· A(r, t) = 0,
(2.3)
H(r0, t) = −q
m0
p · A(r0, t),
(2.4)
where A(r, t) is the vector potential of the electric field taken in the Coulomb gauge, r0 is the
QD’s location, q is the elementary charge, and p is the momentum operator, and we have taken
the dipole approximation (i.e. we assume that the electromagnetic field does not vary over the
volume of the QD). The elementary optical transition is the transition of an electron from the
conduction band to the valence band. The process is characterized by the momentum matrix
element between the two states. Inserting the wavefunctions specified above, we get:
P = ⟨Ψv| p |Ψc⟩= ⟨Fv|Fc⟩⟨uv| p |uc⟩uc ⟨αv|αc⟩,
(2.5)
⟨uv| p |uc⟩uc =
1
Vuc
Z
uc
u∗
v(r)puc(r)d3r,
(2.6)
where the Bloch integral ⟨uv| p |uc⟩uc is a bulk material parameter. The envelope functions
contribute with a wavefunction overlap integral, and the initial and final spin states must match.
In the hole picture, the electron in the valence band is replaced by its conjugate: |Fh⟩= |Fv⟩∗,
|uh⟩= |uv⟩∗, |αh⟩= |αv⟩∗, meaning that for radiative transitions the electron and hole must
have opposite spin states. This selection rule introduces the dark excitons: in this case, the
electron and the hole have the same spin, therefore the optical transition is not allowed. The
dark exciton may transform into a bright exciton through a spin-flip, or decay non-radiatively
through interactions with lattice phonons. The dark and bright excitons are separated by the
dark-bright energy splitting. Furthermore, the bright exciton is also split into two states due to
anisotropy in crystal environment. These are separated by the fine-structure splitting ∆Efss.
In the basis of the pseudo-spin states |↑⟩= |uc⟩|↑e⟩, |↓⟩= |uc⟩|↓e⟩, |⇑⟩= |uh⟩|↑h⟩, and
|⇓⟩= |uh⟩|↓h⟩the allowed dipole transitions can be written as |↑⇓⟩and |↓⇑⟩, while the forbidden
ones are |↑⇑⟩and |↓⇓⟩. Using these, the four excitonic states can be written as:
|Yb⟩=
1
√
2(|↑⇓⟩+ |↓⇑⟩),
(2.7)
|Xb⟩=
1
√
2(|↑⇓⟩−|↓⇑⟩),
(2.8)
|Yd⟩=
1
√
2(|↑⇑⟩+ |↓⇓⟩),
(2.9)
|Xd⟩=
1
√
2(|↑⇑⟩−|↓⇓⟩).
(2.10)
Due to the Bloch function symmetries the dipole moment transitions are linearly polarized and
are orthogonal (Xb is polarized along x, Yb is polarized along y). This effect, combined with
the fine-structure splitting allows us to distinguish the neutral exciton: by polarizing the emitted
light, we are able to select between emission from Xb or Yb.
Additional carriers confined to the QD alter the optical transitions. We refer to these states
as multiexcitonic states. Extra holes create positively charged excitons, while extra electrons
create negatively charged excitons. The singly charged excitons are referred to as the trions.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
8
==PAGE:14==
Due to the presence of the extra carrier, the trion transition is circularly polarized and there is no
fine structure. The biexciton state |⇑⇓↑↓⟩decays to one of the bright excitons first, which then
decays as well, ultimately resulting in the emission of two photons with identical polarizations.
If the fine-structure splitting is minimized (such as by applying an in-plane electric field [24]), the
resulting photons are polarization-entangled.
s
p
WL
p
Conduction
Valence
X0
X1-
X1+
XX
WL
Figure 2.4: The neutral exciton and some multiexcitonic states. For the neutral exciton, above-band
excitation is illustrated: a photon with energy higher than the bulk bandgap excites an electron to the
conduction band, creating a free electron and a hole. These carriers relax through phonon-interactions
to the neutral exciton state bound in the QD. Finally, the neutral exciton spontaneously decays, emitting
a single photon red-shifted w.r.t. the excitation.
In fig. 2.4 some of the excitonic states are illustrated: the neutral exciton, the negative trion,
the positive trion, and the biexciton. The presence of extra carriers introduce many possibilities
for the energy levels and the spin states of the particles in the initial state, leading to complex
photoluminescence spectra [25].
The choice of excitation method has a large influence on which state is initially populated:
with above-band excitation (as shown in fig. 2.4), all possible states will be excited, and at
sufficient excitation power we will see photoluminescence from the wetting layer, the p-shell, the
biexciton, in addition to the exciton/charged excitons. We can decrease the excitation energy by
exciting quasi-resonantly to the wetting layer or the p-shell energies, and the emission becomes
less and less polluted. Finally, by exciting with exactly the exciton transition energy, we can
obtain resonance fluorescence, where the emission linewidth is minimized, and the emitted
photons show excellent quantum-mechanical properties [19, 20, 26, 27, 28].
The performance of the quantum emitter has large influence on the single-photon purity
and the indistinguishability of the single-photon source. Single-photon purity can be quantified
using the Hanbury Brown - Twiss experiment [29]: the light emission from the QD is sent through
a beamsplitter, with two single-photon counters on the output arms. For a stream of single pho-
tons, the number of coincidence counts when the two optical paths are equal should be zero,
meaning that no multi-photon packets arrived at the beamsplitter. This experiment measures
the second order correlation function, i.e. g(2)(0) = 0 for perfectly antibunched emission. The
indistinguishability is measured through similar means by the Hong-Ou-Mandel experiment [30],
however, now the beamsplitter has two incident beams. When two indistinguishable photons ar-
rive at the beamsplitter, they leave through the same arm. Thus, the emitter can be multiplexed
to measure the indistinguishability between consecutive photons.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
9
==PAGE:15==
2.3
The QD and its environment
The pursuit of optimal performance in semiconductor devices necessitates a comprehen-
sive understanding of noise and the implementation of effective strategies to counteract its
detrimental effects. Noise, originating from various sources within the semiconductor, poses
significant challenges to achieving desired performance levels in QD-based devices. The en-
vironment of the QD influences its emission spectrum: the local variation in the electric field
due to fluctuating charges shifts the optical transition energy through the DC Stark effect [26],
variations in the magnetic field due to fluctuating nuclear spins cause spectral changes through
the Zeeman effect [26], and the emission is also changed by phonons altering the lattice. We
refer to these three primary noise sources as charge noise, spin noise, and phonon dephasing,
respectively.
When integrating over longer time-scales than the noise correlation time, noise manifests
as a broadening of the QD emission linewidth. The emission linewidth is limited by the time-
energy uncertainty principle: for a state with finite lifetime, the frequency (energy) cannot be
determined exactly, resulting in a Lorentzian spectrum with FWHM proportional to the decay
rate. As an example, an emitter with 0.473 ns lifetime has 2.11 GHz decay rate, corresponding
to a bandwidth of 336 MHz (equivalent to a 1 pm linewidth for λ = 945 nm emission).
Phonon dephasing is caused by the coupling of the QD to a phonon reservoir [18]. At
cryogenic temperatures, the likelihood of emitting a phonon is higher than that of absorption,
therefore phonon dephasing leads to an asymmetric phonon sideband in the spontaneous emis-
sion spectrum. Instead of emitting exactly at the transition energy, the emission will have slightly
lower energy, the difference arises from the emitted phonon’s energy. Cooling to lower temper-
atures and enhancing the zero-phonon line (e.g. through the Purcell effect) helps in minimizing
phonon dephasing, but this effect cannot be completely negated.
Charge noise can be reduced by working with extremely clean materials: unwanted im-
purities and imperfections in the crystal structure may give rise to charge defect states. The
occupation of states can fluctuate, resulting in charge noise. If these charge traps are close
to the QD, they can have enormous effects on the emission spectrum [31]. Nuclear spin-free
materials can be used to mitigate spin noise, however the ease of band-gap engineering with
the InAlGaAs system makes this option unattractive.
The excitation method also influences the noise spectrum. Even small intensities of non-
resonant excitation lead to significantly increased noise, particularly at low frequencies. As the
non-resonant power is increased, the low-frequency noise is overwhelmed (potentially signifying
that all charge defects have been occupied), but noise emerges at higher frequencies between
10 Hz and 10 kHz. This noise alters the spectrum, resulting in a Lorentzian shape without
scan-to-scan fluctuations but with an increased linewidth. Higher non-resonant laser powers
further increase the noise. Ultimately, non-resonant illumination, although potentially reducing
fluctuations at low frequencies, results in a net increase in noise, highlighting a drawback in the
technique of using non-resonant excitation for detecting photoluminescence. However, due to
the relative ease of implementing it, in this project we used above-band excitation to characterize
the emitters.
2.4
Tuning the QD emission wavelength
Controlling the charge state and emission energy of QDs is crucial both to get a better
understanding of the light-matter interactions, as well as for implementation as a SPS. Here I
discuss considerations in tuning the transition energy.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
10
==PAGE:16==
An easy-to-implement method to tune the QD and the cavity into mutual resonance is by
temperature tuning [32]. With increasing temperature, the QD emission shifts to lower energies
[33]. Unfortunately, the cavity resonance and the temperature shift in the same direction, albeit
at different rates, therefore often the temperature has to be increased until the QD emission
significantly deteriorates. Higher temperatures lead to phonon dephasing, resulting in worse in-
distinguishability. Furthermore, temperature tuning is not practical if we want to operate several
devices on the same chip. While local heating lasers could be used for each device instead of
just warming the cryostat, this significantly complicates the optical setup and alignment.
Strain tuning with piezoelectric materials can be integrated into flip-chip SPS designs [34].
Here, the entire structure is placed atop a substrate which undergoes in-plane biaxial compres-
sion or expansion in response to an electric field. With structured piezoelectric components,
even uniaxial strain can be applied to tune the QD fine structure splitting [35]. The QD and
the cavity resonances shift in the same direction with this approach as well, although with a
broadband cavity like the CBG, this is not an issue.
However, neither of these methods provide control of charge noise and charge state. To
this end, we can use the Stark effect [36] and the Zeeman effect [37], which have been exten-
sively used since the beginning of the 20th century to study the physics of electronic energy
transitions. The Zeeman effect refers to the splitting of emission lines in the presence of a mag-
netic field, caused by the fact that electrons with different spin respond differently to the field.
This is particularly useful for tuning the fine-structure splitting in entangled photon pair sources
[37], but it is also a crucial tool to study spin physics in QDs using trions [38]. However, applying
strong magnetic fields to individual devices is impractical. On the contrary, the Stark effect is
due to electric fields, and can be applied to QDs using p-i-n heterostructres.
As detailed before, the QD optical transitions can be described by modelling the QD as
an electric dipole. Thus, to a high accuracy the transition energy, ES, of an exciton subject
to an electric field can be calculated using the first order (dipole moment) and second order
(polarizability) corrections [39]:
ES = E0 −p · F + βF2,
(2.11)
where E0 is the energy under zero field, p is the permanent dipole moment vector, β is the QD
polarizability (assumed to be isotropic), and F is the electric field vector. As the linear Stark
effect is equal to the dot product of the dipole moment and the field, the orientations are crucial.
In(Ga)As QDs have substantial separation between the electron and hole wavefunctions along
the growth direction [40] due to the In distribution, leading to large permanent dipole moments
in this direction. This is illustrated in fig. 2.5.
As apparent from fig. 2.5 the electron-hole separation changes in response to the electric
field. This changes the wavefunction overlap, resulting in smaller oscillator strength. This, in
combination with changes in the charge state of the QD limits the tuning range. At high field
strength, it could be favourable for the carriers to tunnel out of the QD before the optical transition
can take place. To prevent this, blocking layers can be implemented, resulting in much wider
tuning range [41].
The in-plane asymmetry of QDs lead to a fine-structure in the neutral exciton’s emission.
By using in-plane electric fields, it is possible to tune the neutral exciton doublet such that the
fine-structure splitting is reduced [42].
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
11
==PAGE:17==
E0 ES
F=0
F≠0
F
Figure 2.5: Stark shift in the emission energies of excitons in In(Ga)As QDs. Left: sketch of an
In(Ga)As QD under electrical bias. The hole wavefunction (signified by the red ellipse) is more confined
to the In-rich areas, placing it above the electron wavefunction (blue ellipse), which spreads over the
base of the truncated pyramid-shaped QD. Middle: Sketch of the band diagram of an In(Ga)As QD.
Due to the In distribution, the confinement potential changes throughout the QD. Right: band diagram
under an electric field pointing towards the growth direction. The electron-hole separation is increased.
2.5
Single-photon sources
As detailed in the previous sections, the semiconductor QD is an excellent candidate for the
creation of indistinguishable single photons. However, there is a problem with the emitted pho-
tons from QDs embedded in bulk material: the majority of them are lost into the substrate or are
scattered without ever reaching the collection optics. Increasing the brightness and efficiency
is necessary for use in multi-photon quantum optics experiments.
By structuring the photonic environment around the QD, we can improve all three figures
of merit. Brightness can be increased via the Purcell effect [43], by placing the emitter in an
optical cavity. Due to Fermi’s golden rule, the decay rate of the QD excited state is proportional
to the local density of states of the optical field, which is enhanced by the cavity. With faster
decay, the QD can be put into its excited state sooner, and the repetition rate can be increased.
Efficiency may be improved by elements that guide the photons towards the collection optics:
metal mirrors, Bragg reflectors, waveguides. Indistinguishability is optimized at certain values
of the cavity escape rate and cavity-emitter coupling rate [44], and it is further preserved by
minimising charge noise: in practice, this can be done by ensuring that the QD is far from
charge traps such as interfaces or surfaces, and by implementing electrical contacts to stabilize
the charge environment.
SPSs based on semiconductor QDs are typically created with standard semiconductor
nanofabrication techniques: the material containing QDs is grown using epitaxy, and it is pat-
terned using lithography, wet and dry etching, and thin film deposition. These methods present
two obvious approaches for the photonic geometry: in-plane and out-of-plane emitting sources.
In in-plane emitting devices, emission is coupled to a waveguide. QDs embedded in a
photonic crystal waveguide show promising properties such as near-transform limited linewidths
[28] and near-unity indistinguishability and good source efficiency [27]. Additionally, a cavity can
be implemented that is coupled to the waveguide, such as a photonic crystal cavity [45] or a
ring resonator [46].
Out-of-plane devices are typically designed to be fiber-coupled, and implement reflective
elements below the QD in order to guide the emitted photons upwards. The semiconductor-air
interface above the QD always introduces some reflections as well, therefore there is always a
weak cavity effect. The cavity effects may be increased by implementing DBRs above as well
(with smaller reflectivity than the bottom), resulting in an asymmetric Fabry-Pérot cavity. This so-
called micropillar cavity structure can be used to achieve high indistinguishability and brightness
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
12
==PAGE:18==
simultaneously [16] up to a trade-off [44]. Instead of monolithic devices, a movable top mirror
can combined with a planar structure, giving the ability to select the desired QDs in-situ. This
open-cavity design has been applied to obtain good efficiency, near-unity indistinguishability,
and high repetition rate by Tomm et al [47]. Alternatively, instead of DBRs on the bottom, a metal
mirror can be utilized below the QD, implemented in a flip-chip process. The material above
the mirror can be further structured to improve efficiency: with nanowires [48], nano-posts [49],
circular Bragg gratings (CBGs, or ”bullseyes”) [50], or hole-CBGs [51].
For both in-plane and out-of-plane emission, applying an electric field can be done by plac-
ing the emitter in a diode structure (n-i-Schottky or n-i-p), and operating the device with voltages
below the knee voltage. At these voltages, we can vary the charging of the doped/conductive
layers without current flowing, and the separation of charges induces an electric field. This
gives us a requirement of placing conductive layers above and below the QD, which must be
connected to an outside circuit through electrical contacts. This restriction means that some of
the aforementioned designs must be tweaked.
The Schottky diode structure is useful for studying the phenomena of electrical tuning, sin-
gle electron charging [17, 25], and charge noise [31]. However, such devices are not optimal
for single-photon emission, since the top metal gate severely limits the extraction efficiency.
Instead, n-i-p structures may be readily combined with some of the aforementioned SPS de-
signs: the micropillar [16] and the bullseye [52] can be connected through bridges to ensure
electrical access. For the nanowire and the nanopost, electrical access is difficult, as the con-
necting bridges would need to have comparable width to the diameter of the structure, greatly
reducing the lateral optical confinement. Some of the designs already provide electrical access:
the photonic crystal structures [27, 28], the hole-CBG [51], and the open cavity [47]. For all of
these structures, the doped layers can be created during epitaxy.
In the present work, we aim to implement metal contacts to and characterize the QDs inside
of a planar structure, which is suitable for implementing flip-chip designs later on.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
13
==PAGE:19==
3
|
Methods & Materials
In this chapter I introduce the materials to be used in the project. Specifically, I show
the layer structure of the two samples, and I motivate why these thicknesses were chosen.
Afterwards, I go into detail about the metal contact fabrication process, and introduce all of the
processes I’ve used. Finally, I describe the characterization methods used.
3.1
Epitaxial materials
Successful quantum optics experiments with QDs start at the epitaxial growth: defect-free
materials with QDs possessing excellent optical properties are invaluable. There were two
different sample materials used over the course of the project:
• A thin p-i-n membrane of GaAs that contains In(Ga)As QDs created by Stranski-Krastanov
growth. We designed the layer structure with the goal of creating deterministically placed,
tunable ”bullseye” SPSs.
• An AlGaAs p-i-n membrane that contains GaAs QDs created by local droplet etching, from
the same batch of material as was used by Zhai et al. to demonstrate low noise operation
with high-fidelity spin initialization [19] and quantum interference from remote QDs [20].
3.1.1
Molecular Beam Epitaxy
The materials used in the project were grown with molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), which
is a technique of thin film deposition. Thin film deposition is used create thin layers of mate-
rial atop a substrate. A wide range of materials may be deposited: metals, oxides, polymers,
semiconductors; which can be used to introduce functionality, improve the surface properties,
or serve as structural elements. There are two main types: physical and chemical deposition.
Physical deposition uses mechanical or thermodynamic effects to displace particles from the
target material, which then deposit on the subtrate. In chemical deposition, a material precur-
sor undergoes a chemical reaction with the surface of the substrate, resulting in the deposition
of the material. The various methods are discerned by deposition rate, film quality, anisotropy,
and material. Often, high quality thin film growth requires a low pressure environment in order
to prevent impurities or to preserve anisotropy by increasing the mean free path of particles.
Epitaxy is a special type of thin film deposition, where the deposited crystalline film is formed
with a well-defined orientation with respect to the substrate’s crystal structure [53]. When it is
used to create photonic devices, the goal of epitaxy is to grow high quality single-crystal het-
erostructures, minimizing scattering losses arising from defects or low quality material inter-
faces. Compound semiconductors such as InAlGaAs are highly suited for epitaxy: many of the
device’s functional components can be already defined by changing the deposited material mid-
way through the growth, allowing us to create quantum wells, quantum dots, distributed Bragg
reflectors, carrier blocking layers, doped regions. In MBE, the growth takes place in extremely
high vacuum. The material to be deposited is evaporated in effusion cells with highly specific
temperature control, and the atoms travel in straight lines towards the substrate. The substrate
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
14
==PAGE:20==
temperature is also tightly controlled, because it can be used to regulate the shape of the grown
QDs.
The growth process is monitored in-situ with reflection high-energy electron diffraction
(RHEED), which can be used to gather information about the crystal structure and the sur-
face roughness at the atomic level. With RHEED it is possible to tell how many monolayers
have been grown, because the signal oscillates with the surface roughness.
We make use of two different types of self-assembled QDs in this project: Stranski-Krastanov
(SK) grown InAs QDs [54], and local-droplet etched (LDE) GaAs QDs [55]. Stranski-Krastanov
growth is based on lattice mismatch. First, one or two monolayers of InAs are grown slowly
to form the wetting layer (WL). The lattice constants of InAs and GaAs are different, therefore
as more layers are deposited on the WL, it is energetically favourable for the InAs to cluster
together and to form islands. This is followed by the growth of a GaAs capping layer, until only
a part of the InAs island is exposed. Subsequently, the temperature is increased which evap-
orates this exposed part, leaving truncated pyramid-shaped QDs. This process is referred to
as indium flushing, and it can be used to control the QD emission wavelength. Interdiffusion of
In and Ga results in In-rich areas inside the QD, which induces an offset between the hole and
electron wavefunctions along the growth direction [40].
The growth process of LDE QDs is quite different from the SK mode: it involves no lattice-
mismatch, yielding low-strain QDs with lower fine-structure splitting. Here, the process begins
with the deposition of Al on the AlGaAs surface without low As flux, preventing the formation
of AlAs. The Al atoms do not form a wetting layer, as they are more attracted to each other
than the sample surface, and instead form clusters. Subsequently the As flux is turned back
on, which results in the removal of material under the droplets due to As diffusion. The AlAs
droplet is removed by post-growth annealing, leaving nanoholes on the surface. These holes
are then filled by depositing a thin layer of GaAs, resulting in strain-free GaAs QDs embedded
in AlGaAs.
3.1.2
Material with Stranski-Krastanov InAs QDs
The design of the photonic quantum device starts at the layer structure. Many of the crucial
design decisions are already implemented at MBE growth: DBR mirror, doped layers, QDs,
quantum wells, etc. In this section, I detail the layer structure design of a ”bullseye” photonic
device based on Stranski-Krastanov grown InGaAs QDs in GaAs. This is the material that was
used in the thesis project to develop the contact fabrication process.
In order to tune the QD emission and stabilize the charge environment, the QD is placed
inside the intrinsic region of a p-i-n diode, which is used to apply the electric field. The layers are
doped during the epitaxial growth, the p-dopant used for GaAs is carbon, and the n-dopant is
silicon: C occupies As vacancies, while Si occupies Ga sites. Another approach could be using
an n-i-Schottky structure, however for our purpose a metal layer on top of the emitter would be
highly detrimental to the device’s efficiency. Transparent conductive films as top contacts could
mitigate this issue, but the investigation of this approach is outside the scope of this thesis.
Doped GaAs layers still introduce some optical losses which must be considered in the design.
The MBE growth and later processes place some limitations on the design:
• The p-layer must be grown last, as any layer grown afterwards is highly contaminated by
carbon.
• The doped layers should be thin due to optical losses.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
15
==PAGE:21==
• The bottom doped layer should be sufficiently thick to make processing possible: it may
be difficult to precisely hit the bottom doped layer in an etch step if it is too thin.
• The flip-chip process requires sacrificial layers below the main membrane.
• The distance between the AlGaAs barrier and the QDs must be less than 10 nm.
• The design should include a couple nms of undoped GaAs above and below the main
membrane to act as protection against oxidation and corrosion.
Implementing an AlGaAs blocking layer is beneficial for tuning performance, and vastly
increases the tuning range. Such a blocking layer can be placed on both sides of the emitter
[41], however we elect to go with a tunnel-coupling approach, where there is only a hole blocking
barrier between the QD and the p-layer, and electron tunnelling from the QD to the n-layer is
limited by a thin GaAs layer. This tunnel barrier allows us to load single electrons sequentially
in the forward bias, and prevents the photogenerated electron from tunneling out in the reverse
bias. The inclusion of the AlGaAs blocking layer (and the doped layers) results in a trade-off
between the cavity’s performance and tunability: the reflections at the GaAs-AlGaAs interface
give rise to parasitic cavity effects and interference, and thick doped layers result in more optical
losses.
The design of the layer structure is inspired by the bullseye SPS design by Yao et al. [56].
A sketch of the device is shown in fig. 3.1. In this design, the QD is embedded in the middle of
a 170 nm thick GaAs layer on top of a 250 nm thick SiO2 layer, with a gold mirror beneath the
entire structure. The bullseye structure is created by etching the GaAs layer in concentric rings.
The inner mesa has 360 nm (or 220.25 nm) diameter, the width of the trenches is 108 nm, and
the ring period is 360 nm. With this design, the theoretical extraction efficiency is around 90%,
and the Purcell factor is around 19 (>3 over a 10 nm band) at λ = 950 nm.
F
n-contact
p-contact
Contact etch pit
Etch to
silica
(a)
(b)
W
R0
P
Figure 3.1: Electrically tunable ”bullseye” SPS. (a) Cross-sectional sketch of the device: an inner
mesa contains the QD, with concentric rings etched around it. The structure lies on a metal mirror with
a silica spacer in-between. An electric field is applied between doped layers that are connected to
metal contacts. (b) Sketch of the device from above. The rings are etched down to the silica layer, with
”labyrinth” connections to preserve electrical access [52], and the opening to the bottom contact is
etched to just above the p-layer. The n-contact is deposited on the sample surface.
However, the inclusion of the AlGaAs blocking layer requires us to redesign the cavity
membrane. Al0.34Ga0.66As has refractive index n = 3.25 at 950nm, while GaAs has n = 3.46
[57]. This index contrast creates a reflective interface. The distance between the QDs and the
AlGaAs layer is fixed at 7 nm, but the thickness can be changed (although it must be at least
30 nm). In addition to considering the blocking layer’s placement, the thin membrane must also
contain the doped layers.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
16
==PAGE:22==
The AlGaAs layer thickness was decided based on FEM simulations I performed as part
of my student research assistant responsibilities a couple months before the commencement
of the thesis project. The tunnel’s thickness is fixed at 51 nm, which together with a 30 nm thick
n-doped layer and a 4 nm GaAs protection layer gives us 85 nm for the top half of the cavity
(equal to the original design). In the bottom half, we have the 7 nm GaAs capping layer, then
the AlGaAs blocking layer. We have a 3 nm spacer between the blocking layer and the p-layer,
we fix the p-doped layer’s thickness to 25 nm, and include a 4 nm GaAs protection layer on
the top. For the in-plane parameters, we set R0 = 220.25 nm, P = 360 nm, W = 108 nm. With
these parameters fixed, the only variable is the AlGaAs thickness. The chosen thickness for the
blocking layer is 80.5 nm, as this thickness maximises the Purcell enhancement for a bullseye
structure. With this, we obtain Purcell enhancement around 13, with efficiency around 85%.
The optical losses in the doped layers were not considered in the modelling.
F
de
Figure 3.2: ”Unbonded” structure: the
metal contacts are fabricated to the
as-grown layer stack, and the QDs are
studied without nanostructures.
The flip-chip process requires the inclusion of sac-
rificial layers, which can be selectively etched using wet
chemistry. These are the layers that are grown first on
top of the substrate, followed by the layer structure de-
tailed above. The layer grown after the sacrificial layers
would end up as the surface of the final structure. The
final design for the layer structure of this material with
InGaAs QDs emitting around 950 nm can be seen in
fig. 3.3 on the left.
In this project the focus was to develop the pro-
cess for implementing the metal contacts, therefore
the flip-chip process and deterministic fabrication of
the bullseye structures were not attempted. Instead, I
worked on implementing contacts to the as-grown epi-
taxial structure, as seen in fig. 3.2. This means that the
fabrication process has three important aspects to consider:
• Making an opening to the bottom n-doped layer. The etch depth is crucial for the contact
performance.
• Creation of n-contacts. As I will describe later, this may involve additional steps, such as
annealing.
• Creation of p-contacts.
3.1.3
Design with local droplet etched GaAs QDs
In addition to the material described in the previous section, we also characterized a device
with the contacts already fabricated. The layer structure of this device can be seen in fig. 3.3
on the right. This device is identical to the ones used by Zhai et al. [19, 20] to demonstrate
electrical tuning and quantum interference of emission from remote QDs. The QDs are created
by using local droplet etching [55, 58, 59], and emit between 780-800 nm.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
17
==PAGE:23==
GaAs substrate
AlAs sacrificial
AlAs sacrificial
GaAs sacrificial
GaAs ox. protection
n-doped GaAs
GaAs tunnel
SK InGaAs QDs
GaAs cap
Al0.34Ga0.66As barrier
p-doped GaAs
GaAs
GaAs ox. protection
4 nm
25 nm
3 nm
80.5 nm
7 nm
51 nm
30 nm
4 nm
50 nm
300 nm
400 nm
n-doped Al0.15Ga0.85As
p-doped Al0.15Ga0.85As
p-doped GaAs
Al0.33Ga0.67As
barrier
LDE GaAs QDs
Al0.15Ga0.85As tunnel
Al0.33Ga0.67As tunnel
Al0.15Ga0.85As buffer
10 DBR pairs
SPS
GaAs substrate
5 nm
75 nm
273.6 nm
15 nm
20 nm
150 nm
49 nm
1266.2 nm
123.2 nm
0.28 nm
Figure 3.3: Left: layer structure of samples with Stranski-Krastanov grown In(Ga)As QDs optimized
for fabrication of ”bullseye” SPSs. Right: layer structure of the sample with local-droplet etched GaAs
QDs optimized for characterizing the QDs in bulk. Here, SPS stands for short-preriod superlattice,
which consists of alternating thin layers of AlAs and GaAs.
3.2
Device fabrication
3.2.1
Contact materials
In order to introduce a controlled potential difference between the n and p regions, we
be able to externally bias the structure. Essentially, the diode structure must be inserted into
an electrical circuit, which requires electrical contact to the doped regions. In this section, we
consider two cases: the design of metal contacts to a flip-chip structure, and the design of
contacts to the original sample material without flipping. Since the p-doped region must be
among the last grown layers, this means that in a flip-chip process the n-doped layer would
end up on top. In the other case, the p-doped GaAs remains on top, and the n-doped region
is buried. The sketch of a flip-chip device can be seen in fig. 3.1, while an unbonded planar
device can be seen in fig. 3.2.
In both cases, the metal contact to the top doped layer is deposited directly on top of the
sample’s surface, without an etching step to get direct access. This means that there is a 4 nm
interfacial undoped GaAs layer which influences the electrical contact. In order to mitigate this,
we make use of degenerately doped layers. For the n-doped region, the first 20 nm is highly
doped (which would be layer closest to the top metal contact in a flip-chip process), and in the
p-doped region the last 15 nm is highly doped (which is the layer closest to the top contact in
the unbonded case).
The most common contacting scheme to n-GaAs was reported in 1967 by Braslau et al.
[60]. This design makes use of nickel, germanium, and gold alloyed above 400°C. The ohmic
contact formation between NiGeAu and n-GaAs can be understood through the solid phase
regrowth model. At first, Ni dissociates the GaAs lattice and bonds to both Ga and As forming
both a ternary phase (NiGaAs) and binary phases (NiGa and NiAs). Afterwards, at higher tem-
peratures the Ge and Au react with and dissociate the Ni alloys, resulting in free Ga and As,
allowing for solid-phase regrowth. Due to the presence of Ge, heavily n-doped GaAs is formed.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
18
==PAGE:24==
Overall, the purpose of Ni is to dissociate the GaAs, Ge acts as the n-dopant, and Au assists
in the regrowth. This metal contact design has been successfully implemented for photonic
nanostructures [27, 28, 61, 62].
The flip-chip process is not tolerant of the annealing temperatures necessary for the NiGeAu
contacts. Luckily, some alternatives exist that are processed at lower temperatures. The most
common approach is PdGeAu. Ohmic behaviour was reported after a 225°C anneal for 30 mins
[63], a 175°C anneal for 60 mins [64], and a 140°C anneal for 10 hours [65]. The mechanism
is similar to the case of NiGeAu contacts: Pd dissociates the GaAs lattice and forms a ternary
phase with Ga and As at lower temperatures, which again dissociates at higher temperatures
(helped by the presence of Ge forming PdGe), resulting in solid-phase regrowth of Ge-doped
n-GaAs [64].
3.2.2
Maskless lithography
Optical lithography is a key process used in semiconductor manufacturing to create struc-
tures and patterns [53]. It involves using light to expose a photosensitive material, called a
photoresist, through a patterned mask. The exposed areas of the photoresist undergo chem-
ical changes that allow for selective removal during the development step. Afterwards, the
patterned resist layer can be used for a plethora of applications: to serve as an etch-mask,
to enable lift-off of thin films, as a mask for ion implantation, as a structural component after
hardbaking.
Traditionally, optical lithography has relied on physical masks, which are opaque plates
with patterned features that selectively block or transmit light. The mask is placed between the
light source and the photoresist, and the light passing through the transparent regions of the
mask exposes the corresponding areas of the photoresist. Advancements such as projection
optics, high-NA and immersion lithography, new shorter wavelength light sources, and multi-
ple patterning have been the driving force behind the exponential increase of computational
power. However, this increase in complexity comes with an exponential increase in capital
costs: research laboratories simply do not have the means (and the need) to implement the
high-throughput, high resolution cutting edge technologies of commercial semiconductor fabs.
Instead, a combination of maskless lithography techniques are used for rapid prototyping. At
DTU Nanolab, we have access to maskless optical lithography (MLA systems from Heidelberg
Instruments [66]) for low-resolution needs (1 µm or above) and electron beam lithography (JEOL
JBX-9500FSZ [67]) for high-resolution (8 nm) structures. The fabrication of metal contacts to the
planar unbonded structure does not need high-resolution lithography, therefore in this project
all lithography was done with the MLA systems.
In this type of maskless lithography, the physical mask is replaced by a Spatial Light Mod-
ulator (SLM). The SLM is based on an array of movable micromirrors. Each mirror can be
switched between two positions, in one of them the incident light is reflected to a small spot on
the sample. This way, each micromirror serves as a pixel that can be turned on or off. The pixel
size at the sample surface is 500 nm by 500 nm. The design is broken down into write-fields,
and the machine steps across the sample, exposing one write-field at a time. To minimize
stitching errors, the MLA 150 uses overlapping write-fields, delivering a fraction of the dose at
each exposure.
The MLA systems are equipped with a 365 nm LED (MLA1) and 405nm diode lasers
(MLA3), therefore UV-sensitive resists must be used. AZ 5214E is a resist that is suitable
for all use cases encountered in this project, because it can be used both as positive resist, and
as negative resist in an image reversal process. For etch masks and lift-off masks for thin metal
films, I used 1.5 µm AZ 5214E in a positive process. For lift-off of thicker metal films, I used
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
19
==PAGE:25==
2.2 µm AZ 5214E with image reversal. In the image reversal process, the resist is first exposed
using the MLA with a negative mask (the resist is exposed where we want resist to remain at
the end), which activates two types of photosensitive compounds: one of them is responsible
for making the exposed resist soluble in the developer (enabling the positive process), while
the other for cross-linking. However, the compounds cross-link only at elevated temperatures,
requiring a post-exposure bake step. The cross-linking makes the resist chemically stable and
insoluble in the developer chemical. Afterwards, the previously unexposed regions are exposed
with a high dose in a flood exposure step. After this exposure, there is no post-bake, meaning
these regions do not cross-link and instead become soluble in the developer. After developing
in TMAH-containing AZ 726 MIF, we obtain a cross-linked resist mask with negative sidewalls,
suitable for lift-off.
3.2.3
Dry etching
Etch director
CCD
Detector
LED
Laser
Objective
Coil RF 
source
Platen RF 
source
Sample
Platen electrode
Process 
gas
inlet
Figure 3.4: Sketch of ICP dry
etching with laser end-point
detection system.
In this project the chosen method of etching was dry
etching with inductively coupled plasma (ICP) with BCl3
chemistry. At DTU Nanolab, for III-V materials this can be
done in an SPTS ICP dry etching machine, sketched in fig
3.4. In such a device, the sample is put on a plate elec-
trode, and an RF alternating current is applied between the
plate and the process chamber [68]. This ignites the plasma,
which contains the reactive compounds responsible for the
(isotropic) etching. By also applying a DC bias, the reac-
tive particles are accelerated towards the sample. In an ICP
system, the process chamber is surrounded by a coil elec-
trode connected to a second RF source. This is used to
control the plasma energy and the acceleration bias sepa-
rately. By adding non-reactive gases like Ar, anisotropy can
be increased due to increase in plasma sputtering, although
selectivity will suffer. Optimizing mask material and thick-
ness, the platen and coil powers, and the gas flow rates is
necessary to obtain the desired anisotropy, selectivity, and
etch rate. I elected to use an already-existing recipe for etch-
ing AlGaAs with 20 sccm BCl3, because based on previous
experience, the etch rate would be slow enough to stop at
the adequate depth.
Dry etching was used to create large-area openings to
the bottom doped layer, therefore sidewall geometry was not
a concern. Regular positive photoresist (1.5 µm AZ5214E)
was used as an etch mask. Due to redeposition of the etched resist, there is a positive side-
wall angle. For patterning nanostructures, hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) can be used, which
forms a silica hardmask with excellent selectivity against BCl3 etching.
Precisely characterizing the etch rate is crucial in order to etch sufficiently close to the
bottom doped layer. The III-V ICP is equipped with an Intellevation LEP400 laser end-point
detection system [69]. This system uses laser interferometry to obtain real-time information
about the etch depth. The system (illustrated in fig. 3.4) consists of a confocal microscope setup
with an additional LED and camera for focusing. The sample is illuminated with an LED through
a window directly above the sample, allowing us to see the mask using the CCD camera. The
laser light is directed by two beam splitters, and focused by an objective onto a small spot on the
surface of the wafer. The entire setup can be moved laterally, the objective can be moved up or
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
20
==PAGE:26==
down, and the setup can be slightly tilted in order to tune the angle of incidence, allowing for full
control of where the laser is focused. The laser should be focused on an unmasked area with
at least a few hundred µm side length. The reflected laser intensity can be used to extrapolate
the etch depth in real-time.
The surface of the III-V material is not completely reflective, some light penetrates into
the sample and is instead reflected at later interfaces. These beams interfere destructively or
constructively depending on the optical path length difference. As the etch depth changes, so
does the path length difference, giving rise to oscillations in the reflectivity. As seen in fig. 3.5,
this behaviour can be modelled before etching. By comparing the real-time reflected end-point
signal to the model, we can tell the etch depth, or alternatively we can use the data to better
correlate total etch time to etch depth. The Etch Director software is capable of automatically
stopping the process when a pre-set depth is reached.
0.4
0.3
0.2
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reflectivity
Depth [nm]
Figure 3.5: Laser end-point detection system. Left: illustration of the basic working principle (the
beam is angled for illustrative purposes, in reality it is normal to the surface). Right: reflectivity as
function of etch depth for the SK sample, the model was created by the Etch Director software.
The maxima and minima in the reflectivity model are especially useful to guide us. The fea-
tures of the model shown in fig. 3.5 can be explained by looking at the membrane thicknesses.
Until around 200 nm depth, the signal oscillates uniformly, because here we etch through the
main membrane consisting of mainly GaAs with some AlGaAs. At 204.5 nm we reach the first
AlAs layer, and the minima and maxima change. Later, around 550 nm the signal changes
again, where the final AlAs layer starts etching. The signal abruptly stops changing at 945.5
nm: here, the entire membrane is etched and we start etching the GaAs substrate, with no more
interference.
3.2.4
Metal deposition and lift-off
The deposition and patterning of metals is an important aspect of semiconductor nanofab-
rication, and can be used to create conductive elements or contacts to semiconductor devices.
Pattern transfer to deposited metal can be done in two ways: either by etching, with a litho-
graphic etch mask (not ideal, as these metals can only be etched using sputter etching at DTU
Nanolab, which is a dirty/damaging process), or with lift-off. In a lift-off process, lithography is
done before metal deposition, leaving the deposited metal on the unmasked regions after resist
removal [53].
The most common way to deposit metal before lift-off is evaporation. Evaporation is highly
anisotropic, which is beneficial in lift-off because the sidewalls of the resist mask are not covered
in metal. This leaves more opening for the solvent to attack the resist, and accelerates the
process.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
21
==PAGE:27==
Evaporation is performed in high vacuum (4×10−6 mBar or lower) for two principal reasons:
to minimize contamination in the deposited film, and to increase the mean free path of the
deposited particles, resulting in anisotropy. The sample is fixed upside-down above the source,
with a shutter in-between in order to stop the deposition. There are two types of evaporation:
thermal and e-beam. In thermal evaporation, small chunks of the source material are placed in a
boat made of refractory metal, which is heated up with resistive heating. After the material melts,
it acts as a source of atomic flux due to evaporation from the surface. Alternatively, in e-beam
evaporation the source material is locally heated up by a 10 kV electron beam. The electrons
transfer energy through collisions and scattering events with the electrons of the source material.
The evaporated atoms travel in completely straight lines due to the high vacuum.
The deposition thickness and rate is monitored by a quartz crystal. As material is deposited
on the crystal, its acoustic wave properties are altered, giving feedback to the process controller.
The shutter opens when the material flux stabilizes, and closes when the pre-set thickness has
been deposited. In the case of e-beam evaporation, the sources can be switched without open-
ing the vacuum chamber, allowing for sequential deposition of thin films. For thermal evapora-
tion, the boats must be loaded before the chamber is pumped down. In this project, we used a
Wordentec QCL800 Metal evaporator to thermally evaporate Ge and to e-beam evaporate Cr,
Au, and Ni.
After metal deposition, the sample is placed in Remover 1165 in order to remove the resist
and lift-off the unwanted metal. For Cr/Au films on 1.5 µm positive AZ1514E, the Remover is
heated to 55°C and the process is helped by agitating with a pipette. In this case, lift-off is
typically finished in 20 minutes. For Ni/Ge/Au films on 2.2 µm image-reversed AZ5214E, the
sample must be left overnight in the Remover.
3.2.5
Annealing
Some of the metal contact designs detailed in section 3.2.1 require annealing at specific
temperatures for a set time. All of the annealing in this project was done in a Jipelec Jetfirst 200
Rapid Thermal Processing (RTP) machine [70], which is capable of processing a single 8-inch
wafer. In general, RTP systems are used to rapidly heat a wafer to elevated temperatures to
perform short (few seconds to a couple minutes) processes. The Jetfirst 200 is capable of heat-
ing to 1200°C, although at DTU Nanolab, it is forbidden to process III-V materials above 450°C,
therefore all tested recipes were below 440°C. The machine was newly installed, therefore some
basic parameters were still being optimized by Nanolab staff, and forming gas (mixture of N2
and H2) was still unavailable. The Jipelec RTP system consists of the following features and
components:
• High-intensity infrared lamps directly above the sample as the heat source.
• Temperature control: the lamp’s power is precisely controlled according to the recipe.
There are two ways to create a recipe: one may directly set the lamp’s temperature as a
function of time, or indirectly control the power with a proportional–integral–derivative con-
troller using temperature setpoints. The sample heating depends on the thickness/size,
therefore the first method doesn’t yield reproducible temperatures, but the second method
can cause large fluctuations in the lamp power which is detrimental to the machine. At
the time of this project, the PID paramaeters were still being optimized.
• Pressure control: the machine is equipped with a roughing pump, and is capable to main-
taining rough vacuum. This is necessary to minimize the oxidation of materials during
annealing.
• Gas lines: the RTP can create an Ar or N2 environment. Currently there is no forming
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
22
==PAGE:28==
gas. The choice of gas environment can affect the annealing behaviour of metals by
further reducing oxidation.
• Monitoring: The RTP monitors the temperature through thermocouples and a pyrometer.
At the temperatures used during this project, the pyrometer is not reliable, therefore I used
a thermocouple in direct contact with the carrier wafer. After processing, the temperature
setpoint, the measured temperature, and the lamp power can be all extracted as function
of time.
Purging the chamber with inert gas is important in order to prevent oxidation. At high tem-
peratures, As-oxides are volatile, which can result in the release of toxic gases and degradation
of the GaAs surface [68]. Furthermore, oxygen can react with Ge and Ni, inhibiting the alloying
process and yield a higher contact resistance.
The sample can be placed either on a silicon carrier or a graphite susceptor. We chose to
use a silicon wafer with deep etched regions, so that the thermocouple is as close to the sample
as possible. In addition, the temperature ramping is faster when using a carrier wafer rather
than the susceptor, with the drawback of worse uniformity. At the chip scale, we expect that this
is not a problem. However, neither the silicon or the GaAs absorb infrared well, meaning that
when the sample temperature is measured to be 420°C, the metal may be much hotter [68],
altering the alloying process. We have not observed any problems stemming from this, but the
issue can be prevented by using the infrared-absorbing susceptor.
3.2.6
Packaging and wirebonding
The creation of metal contact pads is necessary in order to make an electrical connection
to the doped layers, but subsequently we also need to make a connection to the contact pads
themselves. This is done with wirebonding.
First, the fabricated chip must be fixed onto a carrier-chip. This chip has to be compatible
with the cryostat: it must be made of a good heat conductor, because the chip itself is not in
contact with the cryostat’s cold finger, thus the heat must be transferred through the carrier. We
typically use conductive silver glue to fix the chip.
Subsequently, we use the K&S 4524 Ball Wire Bonder to connect the fabricated contacts
to metal pads on the carrier chip, some examples can be seen in fig. 3.6. In this machine, a
small gold ball is created at the end of a thin wire by an electrical arc. The gold ball is pressed on
the surface of the metal contact on the sample, and it is fixed there through ultrasonic agitation
and heat. Afterwards, the other end of the wire is fixed at the metal pad on the carrier chip.
3.3
Characterization
3.3.1
Electrical measurements
The electrical measurements were carried out using a Keysight B2902B Source/Measure
Unit (SMU). This device can act as a precise voltage source in order to bias the diode structures,
while simultaneously measuring the current and voltage. Due to its ability to measure current, it
is possible to set a tolerance value above which no more voltage is supplied in order to protect
the device.
We measured electrical properties both at room temperature and cryogenic temperatures.
The electrical characteristics of the fabricated sample can give us a clue about its functionality
even before we place it in the cryostat. While the characteristics of the diode will change at
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
23
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
(c)
b
c
Figure 3.6: Mounting and wirebonding. (a) The cold part of the cryostat, with the sample mounted on
a carrier chip. (b) Wirebonding to the n-contact. (c) Wirebonding to the p-contact.
cryogenic temperature, if there is low leakage, a well-defined threshold voltage, and high current
after the knee voltage at room temperature, it is a good sign.
In addition to measuring between n- and p-contact, the resistance between metal contact
pads of the same type can shed light on the individual contact resistance. The measured value
has two main components: the resistance between the metal contact and the doped layer, and
the resistance in the doped layer in-between the addressed contacts. These components are in
series, therefore when we measure the IV curve between contacts of the same type, we know
that for ohmic contacts the result is at least twice the specific contact resistance. More specific
characterization can be made by transmission line measurements.
θ1
θ2
LPF
605 DC
LPF
650 DC
70:30
50:50
CMOS
camera
Spectrometer
Laser coupling
470 LED
n-contact
1050 LED
xyz
p-contact
NA 0.82
SMU
Closed-cycle
cryostat
Figure 3.7: Schematic of the µPL imaging and spectroscopy system.
3.3.2
Cryogenic µPL spectroscopy
The PL emitted by single QDs is probed with a confocal microscopy setup, sketched in
fig. 3.7. The excitation light (ideally laser, but in this project we use a 470 nm LED) is focused
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
24
==PAGE:30==
on the sample using an objective. Focus is achieved by changing the sample height with a
piezoelectric stage, which can also be used to move the sample in-plane in order to change
the location of the probed spot. The setup is confocal because light is only collected at this
focus height from a small spot. The collection spot is defined by a pinhole, which in practice
arises from coupling the free-space collected light into an optical fiber, which then leads to the
spectrometer (Horiba iHR550). Since the excitation light arrives through the same objective as
where the PL leaves, they must be separated. When using non-resonant excitation, the pump
frequency is different than the emission frequency, therefore spectral filtering can be used. In
our setup, we use dichroic mirrors in order to filter out the LED. In the case of wetting layer
or p-shell excitation, more precise filtering must be used. However, in resonant excitation we
cannot make use of spectral filtering. In this case, cross-polarization is used: the excitation
light is linearly polarized, therefore we can know that the light detected which is orthogonal in
polarization to the excitation comes from the probed sample. At the initial setup, the angles for
the two polarizers (θ1 and θ2) are set such that no light is detected in the spectrometer.
In addition to confocal microscopy, the setup can also be used to image a 60 µm by 60 µm
area, which is necessary to align the collection spot to the desired location. To make certain
structures more visible, we can also illuminate the sample using a 1050 nm LED.
The sample, piezo-stage, and the objective are all contained in the chamber of a 4 K closed-
cycle cryostat. Cryogenic temperatures are needed to measure PL from semiconductor QDs
because otherwise the thermal energy of electrons is higher than the exciton binding energy.
In addition, at higher temperatures the phonon sideband is enhanced, leading to decreased
indistinguishability. The sample can be connected to an electrical interface inside the cryostat,
which in turn can be connected to the SMU outside. This allows us to electrically bias the
sample.
The Results chapter contains spectral data obtained at many different values of excitation
power or electrical bias. Measuring the spectrum at each different value manually would be a
tedious task, thus we opted to use spectral mapping. In this mode, the spectrometer measures
at a pre-set rate for a pre-set integration time: for example, every second it integrates for 0.3 s,
and then spends 0.7 s preparing for the next measurement (it needs at least 0.7 s). Simultane-
ously, the LED excitation power is swept manually, or the electrical bias is varied at the same
rate by the SMU. The approach works, but we cannot be absolutely sure that the instruments
are synced, because the measurements are started manually. Creating a program (e.g. using
LabView) that automatically changes the measurement variable, then takes the spectrum, and
then goes to the next value would be beneficial, but was out of scope for this project.
3.3.3
Scanning electron microscopy
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is a powerful imaging technique used to study the
surface topography and composition of a sample at high resolution. As opposed to optical
microscopy, SEM uses electrons which have much shorter wavelengths (on the order of pi-
cometers), thus the diffraction limit is not a restriction.
The sample is probed by a focused a beam of electrons, which is emitted from an electron
source, typically a heated filament or a field emission gun. The electron beam is accelerated
by an electric field and focused onto the sample using electromagnetic lenses. The beam is
raster scanned over the sample, and the image is formed by detecting the reflected/emitted
electrons or electromagnetic signals. The image resolution, the contrast, and the information
we can obtain strongly depends on what type of reflected electrons we detect. The focused
electron beam interacts with the sample through elastic and inelastic scattering, resulting in the
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
25
==PAGE:31==
emission of secondary, Auger, and backscattered electrons, as well as characteristic x-rays and
cathodoluminescence.
The primary interaction of interest is the secondary electron emission. As the electron
beam strikes the sample, it dislodges secondary electrons from just below the surface. These
secondary electrons are then collected by a detector, forming an image that represents the
topography and composition of the sample surface. Using this, we can obtain valuable infor-
mation about surface features, such as texture, roughness, and topography, at magnifications
ranging from tens to hundreds of thousands of times.
These capabilities make SEM an essential tool in characterizing samples in nanofabrica-
tion. In this project, SEM was used to image the cleaved surfaces of fabricated samples, in
order to look at the results of etching and annealing.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
26
==PAGE:32==
4
|
Results & Discussion
In this chapter I present the results obtained over the course of the thesis project, with
accompanying analysis and discussion. There are two main types of data, obtained from the
two main activities conducted throughout the project: fabrication results (microscope images,
profilometer scans, SEM images, end-point detection traces) and results from measurements
at the optical lab (room-temperature electrical tests and cryogenic μPL spectroscopy with dif-
ferent excitation powers and electrical bias). The results are presented in four sections: a de-
scription of the sample materials, fabrication and characterization of SK QD devices with Cr/Au
n-contacts, SK QD devices with NiGeAu n-contacts, and finally characterization of an LDE QD
device fabricated during my short stay at Ruhr-Universität Bochum (RUB).
4.1
Sample materials
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
D8
D7
D9
D10
D11
D12
D13
75 mm
37.5 mm
Figure 4.1: PL intensity map
of wafer #15564. Dark areas
have higher intensity.
The sample material used in this project was grown using
MBE at RUB. At the beginning of the year, we received a half of a
3 inch wafer (sample #15564) with SK-grown InAs QDs, contain-
ing the doped layers necessary for performing electrical tuning
of QDs. The goal for this material was to be used in a flip-chip
process for creating tunable bullseye SPS structures, however,
this project only concerns the metal contact fabrication and spec-
troscopy of QDs in bulk, without flip-chip. The layer structure can
be seen in Fig. 3.3. Atop the the GaAs substrate there is a set
of alternating AlAs and GaAs layers serving as sacrifical layers.
The device layer is 204.5 nm thick, and from the bottom going up-
wards it contains the n-doped layer, the tunnel barrier, the InAs
wetting layer, the InGaAs QDs, the QD capping layer, the AlGaAs
hole blocking layer, and the p-doped layer. The layer thicknesses
were optimized to obtain good collection efficiency for bullseye
structures with a metal mirror (the schematic can be seen in Fig.
3.1). The QDs have emission wavelengths between 900 nm to
950 nm, with two distinct populations emerging: smaller pre-dots
with emission around 900 nm to 920 nm, and larger dots above
930 nm.
An ensemble PL scan of the half-wafer can be seen in fig.
4.1 (measured by personnel at RUB). The PL intensity varies
greatly over the wafer’s area, pointing to a variation in the QD density, caused by a growth
method developed by Bart et al. [54]. While the GaAs tunnel is grown, the wafer rotation is
stopped, leading to a 10 nm gradient over the surface. This introduces periodic monolayer steps
over the surface. Since the steps are not abrupt, but instead are characterised by a fractional
step-coverage, this gradient results in a surface roughness modulation in the layer immediately
below the QDs. QDs preferentially nucleate on rougher surfaces, therefore there is a modulation
in the QD density. This approach is beneficial, because a larger area of the wafer is suitable for
experiments that require lower QD densities. The half-wafer was cleaved into small chips, also
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
27
==PAGE:33==
seen in Fig. 4.1. The chips D1 and D6 were used as test material to optimize the etching and
annealing processes, as these chips have a high density of QDs, making them unsuitable for
spectroscopy of single QDs. D9 and D4 have lower QD density, and were used as the material
for cryogenic µPL investigation.
In addition to characterising and developing the contacts fabrication process for the sample
with InGaAs QDs, µPL spectroscopy was also conducted on a chip with GaAs QDs embedded
in AlGaAs. This material was also grown at RUB, a detailed description of the growth has been
made by Babin et al. [55]. These QDs are created with the LDE process, and emit around
780 nm to 800 nm. The epitaxial layer stack incorporates 10 pairs of DBRs comprised of AlAs
(lower index) and Al0.33Ga0.67As (higher index) to increase the collection efficiency for QDs in
bulk. The full layer structure can be seen in Fig. 3.3, which is identical to the structure used by
Zhai et al. [19, 20]. The metal contact fabrication was carried out at RUB at the end of May,
during our short visit to learn about their processing.
4.2
Devices with Cr/Au n-contacts
I began the process of developing metal contacts to the SK material by creating devices
that have Cr/Au contacts to both the p- and the n-layer. The advantage of this approach is the
relative simplicity in fabrication: it involves one etch step to make openings to the n-layer, and
then one metal deposition/liftoff step to create contacts to both doped layers. While Cr/Au is
known to form ohmic contact to p-GaAs [61] (albeit with quite high resistance), we were unsure
of how it would work with n-GaAs.
4.2.1
Etching openings to the n-layer
One of the challenges in fabricating functional diode structures that are suitable for applying
an electric field to the QDs with minimal noise is precisely etching an opening to the n-layer. Dry
etching with inductively coupled BCl3 plasma was the chosen method for etching, as we deemed
that it requires the least amount of process development. However, a careful calibration of the
etch rate was still required.
The process to create and characterize an etch test area is as follows:
• Clean the sample in acetone, IPA, then rinse with water.
• Crystalbond the sample to a 100mm Si carrier wafer.
• Spin coat and prebake 1.5 µm AZ 5214 using the automatic spin-coater.
• Expose using the MLA100 or MLA150 with the desired digital mask.
• Develop in AZ 726 MIF, single puddle, 60s to 90s.
• Inspect the resist mask using optical microscopy - if unsatisfactory, develop for longer or
start over after removing the resist.
• Run at least 30 mins of O2 plasma cleaning in the SPTS III-V ICP etcher on a dummy
wafer.
• Pre-condition the machine chamber by running the BCl3 AlGaAs etch recipe on a dummy
wafer for at least a minute: check if reflected power/platen bias is correct.
• Transfer the sample to the processing chamber, clamp the substrate, and focus the end-
point detection laser on the unmasked area of the sample.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
28
==PAGE:34==
• Run the BCl3 AlGaAs etch recipe on the sample for the desired etch duration, record the
laser end-point detection signal.
• Remove the chip from the carrier wafer, then remove the resist by soaking in 1165 Re-
mover with sonication for 10 minutes.
• Clean the sample in acetone, IPA, then rinse with water.
• Take note of the etched area’s color, take images in the optical microscope, and scan
across the etched areas with the Dektak stylus profilometer.
The results of all the dry etching performed in this phase of the project can be seen in fig.
4.2. The etch rate calibration was first carried out on sample D1, the first etch (A1) was used
to test the correspondence between the measured end point signal (fig. 4.2b) and the depth
model (Fig. 3.5). The measured depth of 590 nm right after the 5th minimum corresponds
nicely to the depth model, indicating that the maxima/minima can be used as a useful guide to
estimate the etch rate during the processing. However, the relative magnitudes of the peaks
do not correlate very well to the depth model. I propose that this is because the signal is very
sensitive to the quality of the laser’s focus (as seen in fig. 4.2e the relative height of the peaks
changed compared to A1).
Subsequently, the etch pit D1B was used to test Cr/Au metal deposition and liftoff in an
etched opening. Afterwards, etch pits were created in sample D9 to serve as the openings to
the n-layer in a low QD density device.
D1 A1
D1 A2
D1B
D9A/B
Etch depth [nm]
590
175
160
160
Time [s]
420
110
100
100
Rate [nm/s]
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.6
Table 4.1: Etch rates for devices with Cr/Au n-contacts.
4.2.2
Metal deposition and lift-off
In order to create devices with identical contacts to both doped layers, we need to follow
the process detailed in section 4.2.1 by a lithography, a metal deposition, and then a lift-off step,
and some post-processing.
• Execute the etch process with the desired etch duration.
• Crystalbond the sample to a 100mm Si carrier wafer.
• Spin coat and prebake 1.5 µm AZ 5214 using the automatic spin-coater. We elected to
use regular positive resist because the deposited metal is thin compared to this resist
thickness.
• Expose using the MLA100 or MLA150 with the desired digital mask.
• Develop in AZ 726 MIF, single puddle, 90s.
• Inspect the resist mask using optical microscopy - if unsatisfactory, develop for longer or
start over after removing the resist.
• Remove the chip from the carrier, mount it in the Wordentec metal evaporator, and pump
down to 4e-6 mbar.
• Deposit Cr/Au/Cr/Au, 5/40/40/40 nm using e-beam evaporation.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
29
==PAGE:35==
18
16
14
12
0
100
200
300
400
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
18
16
14
12
10
22
20
18
16
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
EPD signal
EPD signal
Time [s]
Time [s]
EPD signal
EPD signal
Time [s]
Time [s]
(b)
(e)
(h)
(k)
(c)
(f)
(i)
(l)
(a)
(d)
(g)
(j)
Figure 4.2: Etch depth tests. Left column: microscope images, middle: end-point detection signal,
right: Dektak profilometer scans. (a,b,c) D1 A1 with etch depth around 590 nm. This means the bottom
is inside the AlAs sacrificial layer, which underwent some kind of corrosion/oxidation judging from the
texture. (d,e,f) D1 A2 with depth around 175 nm. The grooves seen in the profile scan were already on
the sample material, and are formed during MBE growth. (g,h,i) D1 B with depth around 160 nm, used
as the first test on depositing metal to an etched opening. (j,k,l) D9 A/B, with depth around 160 nm,
used as the first test of Cr/Au contacts to a low QD density chip.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
30
==PAGE:36==
• Liftoff in 55°C 1165 Remover. After agitation with a pipette, the unwanted metal should
come off within 20 mins.
• Clean the sample in acetone, IPA, then rinse with water.
• Attach the sample to a carrier chip. We use conductive silver glue.
• Wire-bond the contacts pads to the appropriate pads on the carrier chip.
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
V [mV]
400
200
0
200
400
I [nA]
1 to 2, R = 2201 
1 to 3, R = 5474 
2 to 3, R = 4038 
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
Bias [V]
50
0
50
100
I [nA]
RT
4.2K, LED on
4.2K, LED off
Figure 4.3: Left: resistivity between 3 p-contacts on D1 with no incident light. Right: IV curve of
sample D9B at room temperature, at cryogenic temperature with LED on, and LED off.
4.2.3
Electrical and optical characterization
In fig. 4.3, we see that the p-contacts created on sample D1 were functional, with the
expected [61] resistance of a couple kΩ. I did not create any sample with multiple n-contacts,
therefore the IV curve between two n-contacts could not be tested. On the right, we can see
the typical IV characteristics of the devices with the same Cr/Au contacts to both doped layers.
During the first tests, we were hopeful after seeing the diode-like IV curve at room temperature,
however, the current was really low. Nevertheless, we proceeded with loading the sample in
the cryostat, and connected the electrodes (see fig. 3.6a). At cryogenic temperatures, the
behaviour changes a lot: when there is no illumination on the sample, there is basically zero
current, except for less than 1 nA noise. With the LED on maximum, there is some generated
photocurrent.
The lack of a diode-like IV curve at cryogenic temperatures reveals that the fabricated Cr/Au
metal pads in the etchpits do not function as ohmic contacts. The behaviour cannot be explained
by carrier freeze-out, as the doped layers are degenerately doped: the carrier concentration is
independent of temperature. Instead, either the openings are not etched to the suitable depth,
or the metals are simply not suitable for ohmic contact to n-GaAs.
Figure 4.4: Typical density variation of D9 chips. The scale bar is 3 μm.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
31
==PAGE:37==
Fig. 4.4 shows the typical QD density variation on the low QD density chips. There is a
large variation even across a small chip due to the QD density modulation arising from the slight
gradient of the QD pattern defining layer [54]. Fig. A.3 shows spectra from the same location
at slightly different LED powers. As the LED power is changed, typically there is substantial
change in the emission spectra: individual lines come and go, and then the emission near 940
nm is saturated by a broad background. In the subsequent results, the LED excitation power
plays a substantial role.
940
942
944
946
 (nm)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Counts
0 V
-2 V
-5 V
3 V
Figure 4.5: D9 QD2 spectra under various
electrical biases (with a 50 counts offset for
better visibility).
We proceeded with testing the response of
the emission spectrum to an electrical bias.
In
fig. 4.5, spectra of a QD emitting above 940 nm
is shown (the design wavelength of the sample)
at different bias voltages. The counts are low be-
cause the LED’s power was fixed just above where
the QD started emitting. There is unfortunately no
discernible change with respect to the bias.
The emission lines have strong dependence
on the excitation power. In fig. 4.6 we can see the
spectrum as a function of LED power, and fig. 4.7
is zoomed in on the QD emission. In this experi-
ment, the LED power was varied with a knob, and
we do not know what is the actual value of the in-
cident power, the x-axis shows the position of the
knob. The collection spot was located over a QD emitting near 910 nm, which means it is one of
the smaller pre-dots. The QD emission abruptly appears around 25% LED power. With increas-
ing LED power, the emission line then shifts to higher energies, and around 75% a new higher
energy line appears. Meanwhile, around 950 nm there is an increase in broadband background
emission.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
LED power [a.u.]
910
920
930
940
950
960
 [nm]
Figure 4.6: D9 QD4 PL spectra as function of
LED power.
The shift in emission energy is not explained
by heating of the sample due to the LED: at higher
temperatures, the emission of InAs QDs shift to
lower energies [33], not higher. Instead, we pro-
pose that this shift is caused by the Stark effect
due to the accumulated charges. Due to the LED,
carriers are generated everywhere by photoexci-
tation, and these carriers exert an electric field on
the emitters. The behaviour is not unique to this
QD, another example of this phenomenon can be
seen in fig. A.4.
Fig. 4.7 also shows the spectra of this dot as a
function of applied voltage. Here, we fixed the LED
power at just a bit higher than when the emission
appears. There is no change in the PL spectra induced by the electrical bias, further proving
that the Cr/Au n-contacts re not functional.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
32
==PAGE:38==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
LED power [a.u.]
911.0
911.5
912.0
912.5
913.0
913.5
914.0
 [nm]
4
2
0
2
4
Bias [V]
911.0
911.5
912.0
912.5
913.0
913.5
914.0
 [nm]
Figure 4.7: Left: D9 QD4 PL spectra as function of LED power, zoomed in on the QD emission. Right:
QD4 emission with varying electrical bias, with the LED power fixed around 30%.
4.3
Devices with annealed Ni/Ge/Au n-contacts
After determining that the devices with Cr/Au contacts to both doped regions are not suit-
able for electrical tuning and charge control of the QDs, I proceeded with implementing Ni/Ge/Au
alloy contacts to the n-layer. As previously discussed, this contact design is the most common
approach to contact n-GaAs.
The fabrication of alloyed contacts adds an additional step of lithography, metal deposition,
lift-off, and annealing. The alloyed contacts must be fabricated first, because the resistivity of
the p-contacts increases from the annealing [62].
I processed three chips during the fabrication steps outlined in this section:
• D9C, the other half of the low QD density chip D9,
• D6, a high QD density chip was used for testing the annealing,
• D4, a low QD density chip.
4.3.1
Etching openings to the n-layer
As with the previous devices, the first step is to create an opening to the bottom doped
layer. The process is identical to the one detailed in section 4.2.1. The fabrication of devices
with annealed contacts took place around 1 month after the first set of processing shown in the
previous sections. Unfortunately, this time was enough for the etch rate to drift significantly.
The first etching of D9C was a failure: the etch rate had increased 50% compared to the etch
rates I observed for the previous samples. Since this resulted in completely etching through
the n-layer, I created another set of vias as well (shown fig. B.1a-c). For D9A/B, the 100 s
etch resulted in roughly 160 nm depth (fig. 4.2j-l, 1.6 nm/s), while for D9C 100 s resulted in
around 240 nm (2.4 nm/s). I linearly scaled back the etch time to 70 s, hoping to obtain a depth
of 168 nm (0.7 × 240 nm), and etched a second set of vias on D9C. However, the result (fig.
B.1a-c) was around 180 nm (2.57 nm/s). Theoretically, the n-layer starts at a depth of 170.5
nm, which means that these openings expose the doped layer. Nevertheless, I proceeded with
implementing annealed contacts on this device.
The reason for the increase in etch rate is unclear: the chip material was the same, and
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
33
==PAGE:39==
the recipe was the same. After looking through the logs, I saw that all parameters were basi-
cally identical: gas flow rates, coil/platen biases and reflected powers, temperature, etc. The
only explanation could be contamination in the processing chamber, which altered the etching
chemistry. All etching before D4 2 was preceded by a 30 min O2 clean. With the start of D4 2,
I ran a 90 min cleaning step instead, with the hopes of stabilizing the chamber condition.
The next sample that underwent etching after D9C was D6. The goal for this was to test
the influence of different annealing temperatures and times on the contact morphology and
performance. The etch holes for the three tests were created in a single step, and the chip
was subsequently cleaved into three. The depth for the annealing test samples D6A/B/C was
around 135 nm (2.32 nm/s).
Afterwards, I created a device (D4) with five different etch depths, in order to test alloyed
n-contacts at different depths. The results of etching D4 1 and D4 2 can be seen in B.1d-i, while
D4 3/4/5 can be seen in fig. 4.8. The first two openings are too deep for creating functional
n-contacts, therefore only the n-contacts at depths 3/4/5 were characterized.
D9C1
D9C2
D6
D4 1
D4 2
D4 3
D4 4
D4 5
Etch depth [nm]
240
180
135
190
190
145
160
150
Time [s]
100
70
58
60.6
82
66
70
63
Rate [nm/s]
2.4
2.6
2.3
3.1
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.4
Table 4.2: Approximate etch rates for devices with NiGeAu contacts.
4.3.2
Metal deposition and lift-off
After etching the opening to the n-doped layer, we continue:
• Execute the etch process with the desired etch duration.
• Crystalbond the sample to a 100mm Si carrier wafer.
• Spin coat and prebake 2.2 µm AZ 5214 using the automatic spin-coater.
• Expose using the MLA100 or MLA150 with the desired (negative) digital mask.
• Perform reversal bake at 110°C for 60s to cross-link exposed regions.
• Expose the entire chip using the MLA100 or MLA150 with 500 mJ/cm2 dose to make
previously unexposed regions soluble in TMAH.
• Develop in AZ 726 MIF, single puddle, 60s, leaving only the cross-linked resist with neg-
ative sidewalls.
• Remove the chip from the carrier, mount it in the Wordentec metal evaporator, load the
germanium pellets in the thermal boat, and pump down to 4e-6 mbar.
• Deposit Ni/Ge/Au/Ni/Au, 5/40/60/27/150 nm [61] using thermal (Ge) and e-beam evapo-
ration.
• Liftoff in room-temperature 1165 Remover.
The metal only comes off after leaving it
overnight.
• Clean the sample in acetone, IPA, then rinse with water.
For this lift-off step, I opted to use thicker and negative resist, as opposed to the process
written in section 4.2.2. The reason for this was mainly that this metal stack is thicker, with a
total thickness of 282 nm. 1.5 µm positive AZ 5214 might not be sufficient for successful lift-off
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
34
==PAGE:40==
because of metal covering the positive sidewalls. The metal deposition process for the NiGeAu
contacts is slightly different from Cr/Au, but only in the technical details: deposition of Ge was
done with thermal evaporation, instead of e-beam evaporation. While Ge would be available as
an e-beam process, that machine was out of use at that time. After deposition, the lift-off takes
several hours, because the cross-linked resist takes longer to remove (as opposed to the not
cross-linked resist used in the Cr/Au process).
28
26
24
22
20
18
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
0
20
40
60
0
20
40
60
0
20
40
60
Time [s]
EPD signal
EPD signal
EPD signal
Time [s]
Time [s]
(a)
(d)
(g)
(b)
(e)
500 μm
(h)
(c)
(f)
(i)
Figure 4.8: Etch depth tests. Left column: microscope images, middle: end-point detection signal,
right: Dektak profilometer scans at the locations indicated by red arrows on the microscope images.
The microscope images also show the deposited (but not annealed) NiGeAu stack. (a,b,c) D4 etch pit
3, with depth around 145 nm. (d,e,f) D4 etch pit 4, with depth around 160 nm. (g,h,i) D4 etch pit 5, with
depth around 150 nm.
4.3.3
Annealing
Following the lift-off, the sample is ready for annealing. Over the course of the project,
annealing was performed five times:
• On sample D9C, as a preliminary test.
• On sample D6A/B/C, three tests were performed at different temperatures/durations: D6A
• On sample D4, to test annealed NiGeAu contacts with different etch depths.
After annealing, the various metal pads can be grouped into three categories:
• the metal pad’s surface becomes rough,
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
35
==PAGE:41==
• the metal pad has both rough and smooth surfaces over it,
• the metal pad stays smooth.
The literature gives conflicting results regarding the surface morphology of properly alloyed
NiGeAu contacts. According to [68], properly alloyed contacts have ”slight texture”, while over-
alloyed contacts are rough, but Pregnalato [61] reports that it depends on the annealing method.
In fig. 4.9 we can see some examples of the contact surface morphologies observed during this
project. Interestingly, all of the contacts in the over-etched openings (D9C 1, D4 1/2) became
rough after annealing, indicating that it may have something to do with interaction with Al from
the nearby AlAs sacrificial layer. The other contacts (D9C 2, D6A/B/C, D4 1/2/3) did not change
(judging from optical microscopy) after annealing. Surprisingly, D9C and D4 had both rough
and smooth annealed contacts, which initially made me thick that the heating is not uniform.
However, the correlation with etch depth may be a better explanation, because heating unifor-
mity problems should only appear at the wafer-scale in the Jetfirst 200, not for chips of few mm
size.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(g)
(d)
(f)
(h)
200 μm
Figure 4.9: Annealing results. (a,b) D9C deep etched. Here, the surface of the metal became
uniformly rough. (c,d) D4 etch pit 1. The metal is rough (although less rough than D9C), and a scratch
is visible which was accidentally created during processing. (e,f) D4 etch pit 2. The metal became
rough at some places, stayed smooth at others, and started delaminating at the top edge. (g,h) D4
etch pit 5. The metal surface did not change significantly during the processing. The scale bar applies
to the top row, the white rectangles show where the bottom row image was taken.
Cross-sectional SEM images can be seen in figs. 4.10 and 4.11. The images were taken
in order to observe whether there is significant change at the metal-semiconductor interface
after annealing, however this was hard to judge due to the resolution. The two main features
we can observe are the AlAs sacrificial layers, which are the darker layers starting just beneath
the bottom of the etch pit. For a full study of the metallurgical and doping changes taking place
due to annealing, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy could be used to check material compo-
sition as a function of depth while the material is sputtered with high energy ions. In addition,
a cross-sectional sample could be prepared using a Focused Ion Beam in order to study us-
ing Transmission Electron Microscopy. As a side-note, after annealing every single sample
was prone to chipping, instead of cleanly cleaving, making it hard to cleave the chips to sizes
appropriate for the carrier chips.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
36
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.10: SEM images of the more shallow etch pit on sample D9C. Left: edge of the etch pit, 0° tilt.
Right: edge of the annealed n-contact, 5° tilt. This contact stayed smooth. Both scale-bars are 400 nm.
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
c
d
e
b
Figure 4.11: SEM images of D4 etch pits 3 and 4. (a) Overview of examined region, with the locations
where the cross-section images were taken highlighted in red. The scale bar is 500 µm. (b) SEM
image of cleaved cross section of the edge of etch pit 3 on sample D4. (c) Edge of annealed n-contact
in etch pit 3. (d) Edge of etch pit 4. (e) Edge of annealed n-contact in etch pit 4. The scale bars in the
SEM images are 600 nm, and all images were taken with 5° tilt.
In fig. 4.12 the surface morphologies of rough versus smooth annealed contacts are com-
pared using SEM. For both, there are grains of metal embedded in a medium of presumably
different material. However, the grains in the rough contacts protrude from the surface, while
for the smooth contacts they do not. These grains could be some type of AuGa binary phases
embedded in Au.
After the annealing, we can execute the process detailed in section 4.2.2 to create the
Cr/Au top contacts.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.12: SEM images of metal contact surfaces on D4. Left: typical surface morphology of the
rough contacts in etch pits 1 and 2. Right: typical surface morphology of the smooth contacts in etch
pits 3,4, and 5. Images taken with 15° tilt, scale bars are 1 μm.
4.3.4
Electrical characterization
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
V [mV]
4
2
0
2
4
I [ A]
30s @ 440°C
1 to 2, R = 194 
1 to 3, R = 298 
2 to 3, R = 215 
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
V [mV]
4
2
0
2
4
I [ A]
30s @ 420°C
1 to 2, R = 189 
1 to 3, R = 258 
2 to 3, R = 200 
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
V [mV]
4
2
0
2
4
I [ A]
90s @ 420°C
1 to 2, R = 240 
1 to 3, R = 343 
2 to 3, R = 231 
Figure 4.13: Electrical characterization of
D6A/B/C at room temperature. Resistivity
between n-contacts.
The goal of fabricating annealed NiGeAu is to
obtain low-resistance ohmic contacts. The first tests
on D9C failed: there was no electrical connection, be-
cause both set of vias were etched too deep (the re-
sults are shown in fig. B.2). Even the contacts in
the 180 nm etch pit on D9C were non-functional, and
there could be several reasons why:
• Exposing the doped layer to air (and the lithog-
raphy, deposition, then liftoff steps after the
etch) corrodes it or oxidises it such that the re-
maining 20 nm is not enough.
• The etching is non-uniform, and is deeper in the
center of the etch pit, meaning that more of the
doped layer was lost there. A 5% difference in
etch depth in the center vs. the side would al-
ready mean an additional 10 nm of etching.
• The Dektak measurements are wrong, and the
etch pit is a little bit deeper.
The next set of n-contacts were created on sam-
ple D6 in order to test the influence of annealing
time/temperature on the resistivity. The results of this
can be seen in fig. 4.13, and in fig. B.3 we can see the
test chips. Finally, the n-contacts seem functional, we
can see that the resistance between adjacent con-
tacts is around 200 Ω). It seems that even 35 nm
distance between the bottom of the etch-pit and the
n-contact is okay.
Furthermore, in sample D4, the shallowest etch
pits seemed to function the best: in fig. 4.14 we can
see that etch 3 and 5 have the lowest resistance. It
seems that the Ge diffusion because of the annealing
is enough to effectively bridge this gap. Based on
these experiences, it seems that its better to err on
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
38
==PAGE:44==
the side of not etching deep enough.
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
V [mV]
10
0
10
I [ A]
Depth 3, R = 90 
Depth 4, R = 236 
Depth 5, R = 66 
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
V [V]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
I [mA]
P2, Depth 3
P2, Depth 4
P2, Depth 5
Figure 4.14: Electrical characterization of D4 at room temperature. Left: conductivity between
n-contacts at the same etch depth. Right: IV curve between p-contact and n-contacts at various depth.
Circuit R
Device R
n
p
Vrev
Figure 4.15: Circuit model of
device in reverse bias
In the reverse bias, an imperfect diode with leakage current
can be modelled as shown in fig. 4.15. The device and circuit
resistances act as a voltage divider: if they are comparable, the
voltage drop over the capacitor is significantly different than the
applied bias:
Vcapacitor =
Rdevice
Rdevice + Rcircuit
Vreverse
(4.1)
Ideally, the circuit resistance is zero, and the device resistance
is infinite. In fig. 4.14, we can see that the IV curve of D4 has a
distinctive ohmic component in the reverse bias, with resistance around 6 kΩ(extracted from
a fit shown in fig. B.5). If we assume that the circuit resistance is zero, that the p-contact
resistance is maximum 2 kΩ(see fig. 4.3) and the n-contact resistance is around 50 Ω(see fig.
4.14), this means that there is a defect in the device which connects the n and p layers with
a couple kΩresistance. The most obvious culprit for this is the wirebonding. While we were
aware that the wirebonding process may be too aggressive for such a thin membrane stack,
the problem with previous devices was mainly not enough current going through, therefore we
continued using the ball-wire bonder. For future devices, a different, gentler way of connecting
the top contact is needed: perhaps by connecting a loose bond-wire with silver glue, or simply
just by pressing without ultrasonic agitation and heat.
Leakage current notwithstanding, the device D4 has high potential for functional electrical
tuning. According to the above formula, there is still a non-zero potential drop between the n-
and p-layer, which we can change by applying the external bias. The high current after the
knee voltage in forward bias signifies that we are successfully injecting carriers into the doped
regions (before, we observed currents in the nanoamper regime). While the leakage current will
introduce additional noise and make it effectively impossible to know the electric field strength,
the emission lines can still change. Additionally, it may be possible to cleave the sample in
a way that breaks off the bonded p-contacts (illustrated in fig. B.6), potentially removing the
leakage pathway. Afterwards, the remaining p-contacts should be connected in a gentle way.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
39
==PAGE:45==
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
V [V]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
I [ A]
Mesa 1 RT
Mesa 2 RT
Mesa 2 4.2K
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
V [V]
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
I [nA]
Mesa 1 RT
Mesa 2 RT
Mesa 2 4.2K
Figure 4.16: IV characteristics of LDE 780nm GaAs QDs sample. Left: IV curve. Right: leakage
current.
4.4
LDE 780nm GaAs QD device
While working on implementing ohmic contacts to the doped layers in the SK QD material,
we got the opportunity to travel to Bochum, learn about MBE growth and contact fabrication, and
receive material containing LDE GaAs QDs emitting around 780-795 nm. As seen in fig. 4.16,
this device has practically zero leakage current before the knee voltage. At room temperature,
the diode turns on just before 1V, while at 4.2 K it turns on just before 1.5 V. This gives us a
lot of room to apply bias before there is any current going through the device, allowing us to
explore QD charging and tuning over a wide range of voltages.
4.4.1
Fabrication
Examining the differences between the fabrication of this device, and the fabrication pro-
cesses I have tested can give a clue as to why we have not observed tuning with the previous
devices. Here is an overview of the fabrication process used in Bochum:
• Expose 1 µm positive s1813 resist in a mask aligner to create an etch mask.
• Etch around 350 nm using 1:1:50 solution of H2O2:H2SO4:H2O to define mesas. This
etches to around 35 nm above the n-layer (see fig. 3.3 for the layer structure).
• Expose double resist layer (150 nm LOL 1000 and 1 µm s1813) in a mask aligner to create
the lift-off mask for the n-metals.
• Remove the native oxide using a quick HCl dip. Immediately deposit Ni/Ge/Au/Ni/Au using
thermal evaporation, lift-off in NMP.
• Expose 1 µm positive s1813 resist in a mask aligner to create the liftoff mask for the top
gate.
• Remove the native oxide using a quick HCl dip. Deposit 30 nm Au using thermal evapo-
ration, lift-off in acetone.
• Wirebond using a wedge-bonder. The n-contacts can be bonded normally, but the p-
contacts are treated differently: the first bond on the carrier chip is made normally, then
the second bond is made with very low power on the bottom of the etch-pit such that it
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
40
==PAGE:46==
doesn’t actually attach. The hanging wire is then pressed mechanically using the bonder’s
wedge onto the p-contact, without any applied heat or ultrasonic power.
The first big difference is that they use wet etching: the etch rate could be potentially easier to
control, and the process is generally quicker (no 90 min O2 of the process chamber is needed, as
in dry etching). However, the solution must be carefully prepared always with the same ratios,
and degradation of the chemicals/temperature could induce a drift in the etch rate. The second
difference is the HCl dip before metal deposition: a useful tool to reduce contact resistance.
The third difference is the top contact, where they only use a thin layer of gold. Finally, the
wire-bonding process is optimized to reduce leakage. Using a similar approach could reduce
the leakage current (figs. 4.14, B.5) I observe in the devices where I managed to create ohmic
contacts to the n-GaAs.
4.4.2
Optical characterization
In fig. 4.17 we can see the emission spectrum’s dependence on the LED power. At the low-
est power, there are two peaks, and the higher energy peak disappears as power is increased.
The intensity of the peak around 788 nm increases, and the center wavelength shifts to higher
energies, mirroring the result we observed with the InAs QDs in figs. 4.7 and A.4.
Figure 4.17: PL spectra from a single spot with different LED powers, power 1 is the lowest, while
power 4 is the highest. There is an offset of 50 counts between the spectra.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
41
==PAGE:47==
Power 1
Power 2
Power 4
Figure 4.18: Blinking over a 100 s period at
various LED powers (corresponding to the
powers in fig. 4.17). Top: less power, bottom:
more power. Bright yellow corresponds to 400
cps, while dark blue is 0 cps.
At shorter integration times, we observed
blinking in the QD emission, shown in fig. 4.18.
The figure shows 100 s time-resolved μPL maps,
where each second we recorded the spectrum with
0.3 s integration time. At each power, we can see
the same peaks as seen in fig. 4.17: the peaks at
Power 1 and 2 are the same spectral emission line
shifted by the LED power (as we also observed for
the SK QDs), while at Power 4, the spectrum trans-
forms completely. Power 1 and 4 are stable, but
at power 2 the QD emission was ”off” 54 times out
of the 101 scans (see also fig. C.1).
It is not clear whether this effect is related to
the LED power or to the sample’s history. Previ-
ously reported blinking in LDE GaAs QDs was lim-
ited to the μs-timescale [71], while this blinking is
on the second timescale. The μs-timescale blink-
ing (also known as telegraph noise) is presumed
to be charging-related: charge traps near the QD
may switch in occupation, leading to the opening
of non-radiative channels that turn off the optical
emission. Checking whether the blinking persists
with other excitation methods could be informative.
The PL spectra vs. time maps shown in fig.
4.18 were taken with no voltage applied on the
SMU. However, when we apply 0 V on the SMU,
the PL at Power 4 showed anomalous behaviour:
the previously visible lines disappear, and new
lines appear near 1.572 eV. This is shown in fig.
C.2. At the other powers the emission lines did not
change when we applied 0 V. It seems that the QD
was oversaturated by nearby charges at Power 4,
but turning on the SMU stabilizes the charge-state, and we recover the same type of lines as
we see at Power 1 and 2.
The average linewidth of the emission was found to be around 70 μeV (shown in fig. C.4),
much wider than the reported 2.44 μeV linewidth attained by Zhai et al. [19]. This difference
mainly stems from the excitation method: the transform-limited linewidth was reached by prob-
ing the QD through resonance fluorescence. Above-band excitation via LED deteriorates the
linewidth through several mechanisms: dephasing due to large photocurrent, population of ex-
cited states (p-shell, wetting layer, etc), population of dark excitons. In any case, such small
linewidths cannot be observed with our spectrometer: with the high-resolution grating, the res-
olution is around 0.017 nm/pixel, corresponding to 34.6 μeV at 780 nm.
We then proceeded with measuring the μPL as a function of external bias. Finally, we can
clearly observe distinct charge plateaus and Stark tuning of the emission lines, as shown in fig.
4.19. We label the positive trion, the neutral exciton, and the negative trion by comparing our
results to the results obtained by Zhai et al. [19]. The behaviour of the carriers can be explained
by looking at how the band diagram changes due to electrical bias. In the reverse bias, we can
observe emission from positively charged excitons, here the excess holes are photogenerated
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
42
==PAGE:48==
[59]. Over a small voltage range (in this case, between -0.5 V and -0.75 V) the QD is neutral,
as both electron and hole tunneling is blocked. Above -0.5 V, electrons tunnel into the QD in
discrete steps, illustrated in fig. 4.19e. Here, the electron s (and later p) shell of the QD is
brought below the Fermi level, but the tunneling is restricted by the Coulomb blockade: the next
electron can only tunnel into the QD once the energy released by doing so is greater than the
energy needed to confine another negative carrier into the small volume. In fig. 4.20 the tuning
ranges of X1+, X0, X1−are highlighted. In general, we obtained a smaller range of tuning than
Zhai et al., who obtained around 5 meV range for X0 using above-band excitation. However,
these ranges vary quite a bit dot-to-dot. Unfortunately, I was not able to calculate the dipole
moment and the polarizability of the probed QD, because we don’t know the actual value of the
electric field inside the device. This is mainly because of the photogenerated carriers due to the
LED illumination, which will be discussed later.
+++++
+++++
+++++
+++++
+++++
+++++
- - - - -
- - - - -
- - - - -
- - - - -
- - - -
-
- - - -
-
F
F
F
Vext = 0
Vext > 0
Vext < 0
Forward bias
Sequential tunneling
of electrons
Reverse bias
Donor
ions
Acceptor
ions
EF
(a)
(b)
X1-
X0
X1+
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.19: Electrical charge control and tuning of GaAs QDs. (a) Photoluminescense collected from
a single QD as a function of external bias. We observe emission lines corresponding to individual
charge plateaus, which shift in energy due to the dc Stark effect. The negative trion, the neutral
exciton, and the positive trion are identified through comparison with results obtained by Zhai et al. [19]
on an identical device. The unlabeled lines in the forward bias correspond to negatively charged
excitons. Bright yellow corresponds to 400 cps, while dark blue is 0 cps. (b) Sketch of the device’s
band diagram in reverse bias: here, the external bias increases the potential drop over the intrinsic
region, resulting in a larger electric field. (c) Sketch of the band diagram without external bias. The
device is in equilibrium: the electron and hole chemical potentials are aligned. (d) Sketch of the band
diagram in forward bias (but before the knee voltage). The potential drop over the device is reduced,
and (e) the electronic levels of the QD are below the chemical potential, resulting in the tunneling of
electrons from the n-layer, thus forming negatively charged excitons. The charging is sequential due to
the Coulomb blockade [17].
It is important to note that labelling the excitons by comparing the μPL maps to the previous
work is mostly to make these explanations more convenient. The best way to be sure of which
exciton is which is by checking the fine-structure splitting. The longest charge plateau that
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
43
==PAGE:49==
X0: 3 meV
X0: 0.47 V
X1-: 2 meV
X1+: 1.1 meV
X1+: 0.16 V
X1-: 0.53 V
Figure 4.20: Electrical tuning ranges of the negative trion, the neutral exciton, and the positive trion.
exhibits fine-structure is the neutral exciton (other charge plateaus can also show splitting [25]).
The splitting can be measured by linearly polarizing the emitted light, and measuring at different
polarizations. With this, we can identify the two orthogonal excitons. The trions will not exhibit
splitting, because the emission is circularly polarized. In these QDs ∆Efss was measured to
be around 4-12 μeV by Zhai et al [19]. This corresponds to less than 1/3 of a pixel on our
spectrometer, and in any case, this would be hard to observe with the 70 μeV wide emission
lines we obtain through above-band excitation. Thus, to identify the neutral exciton resonance
fluorescence is needed.
We measured multiple μPL vs. external bias maps, each at different LED power. These are
shown in fig. 4.21b. Here, the LED powers correspond to the powers shown in fig. 4.17, except
for the fourth bias map from the top, which was taken at the same pwer as the full -1V to 1V scan
shown in fig. 4.19. From these results, it is apparent that the carriers generated by the LED
illumination exert charge tuning on the emitter. The proposed mechanism is illustrated in fig.
4.21d: the carriers are already generated in the AlGaAs layers above the QD (the LED energy
is above the bandgap of AlGaAs). From here, they migrate due to the electric potential across
the device. Electrons move to the n-layer, and holes move to the p-layer, partly neutralizing the
space charge regions responsible for creating the electric field. This is analogous to applying a
forward bias to the device. This mechanism is also responsible to the power-tuning we observe
in figs. 4.7 and 4.17. From table 4.21a, we can see that compared to Power 1, at Power 4
the device is essentially at 0.47 V in the forward bias, without the application of any external
voltage.
In fig. 4.21b, we can see that the PL at Power 4 matches with what we see in fig. C.2, and
not what we see in fig. 4.18, further proving that the voltage control stabilizes the QD emission
even at higher powers.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
44
==PAGE:50==
+++++
+++++
- - - - -
- - - - -
F
Vext = 0
Donor
ions
Acceptor
ions
+++++
+++++
- - - - -
- - - - -
F
Vphoto > 0
With photocurrent at F>0 
Power 1
Power 2
Power 3
1200 grating
Power 4
Right edge of X1− [V]
0.27
0.24
0.11
0.015
-0.2
(a)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.21: (a,b) Photoluminescense collected from a
single QD as a function of external bias, with different
excitation powers (corresponding to the powers in fig.
4.17). Power 1 was the lowest, and Power 4 was the
highest. The edges of the X−1 emission line are
highlighted and written in table (a). Bright yellow
corresponds to 400 cps, while dark blue is 0 cps. (c) The
device’s band diagram without external bias. (d) The
device is subject to strong non-resonant excitation, without
external bias. The incident light generates electron-hole
pairs, which migrate to opposite directions due to the
in-built electric field. The carriers neutralize the charge
separation arising from the donor/acceptor ions, and the
device is essentially brought into forward bias.
Power 1
Power 2
Power 3
Power 4
(b)
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
45
==PAGE:51==
5
|
Perspective
In this chapter, I give my perspective on some of the issues involved in the fabrication of
ohmic contacts to III-V p-i-n heterostructures, in the charge control and tuning of semiconductor
QDs, and in performing spectroscopy under electrical bias. I propose a process flow to fabricate
deterministically placed flip-chip nanostructures with metal contacts. Finally, I discuss the next
steps in order to demonstrate electrical tuning for the SK samples, and give an outlook on how
we can proceed with implementing more advanced excitation schemes to experimentally study
QD-based quantum light sources.
5.1
Contacted flip-chip devices
Unfortunately, the processing detailed in this thesis cannot be completely adapted for flip-
chip devices, mainly due to temperature-sensitivity after the wafer bonding process. Luckily,
low-temperature annealed n-contact designs are available [63, 64, 65], thus the NiGeAu con-
tacts can be substituted. The n- and the p-contacts essentially switch places, because the
C-doped p-layer must always come last in the growth. This means that the p-contact will be at
the bottom of the etch pits. This could cause problems: Cr/Au and Ti/Au contacts have multiple
kΩresistance even when they are placed directly on the doped layer [61], but with imperfect
etch depth the resistance could be even higher.
The contact fabrication process must be integrated into the deterministic fabrication of
nanostructures placed around QDs. Here, I propose a process flow for creating contacted
nanostructures:
• Begin with e-beam lithography to create a mask to define marker structures in order to
align all subsequent lithography steps. Use e-beam evaporation and liftoff to obtain W/Al
markers.
• Perform flip-chip process.
• Perform cryogenic µPL imaging. Localise QDs and choose the best candidates for de-
vices.
• Use EBL/MLA to define a mask for the bottom contact etch pits. Use dry or wet etching
to etch the proper depth.
• Use EBL to define an etch mask for the nanostructures, with the structures positioned
around the desired QDs. Also define areas close to the where the metal contacts will be,
such that an SU-8 spacer can be placed on top of silica. Etch using dry etching down
to the silica layer. Make sure that there is electrical access to the QD (by using e.g. the
labyrinth geometry bullseye).
• Use MLA to create a liftoff mask for the n-metals. Deposit, liftoff, then possibly anneal
n-metals. Use the materials appropriate for low-temperature processing.
• Use MLA to create SU-8 pads for safe wirebonding.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
46
==PAGE:52==
• Use MLA to create a liftoff mask for the p-metals and for metal connectors on top of the
SU-8. Deposit, then liftoff.
• Fix to a carrier chip, and wire-bond.
It is important to note that in this process, the characterization of QDs in bulk takes place
before the contact fabrication. This is due to the fact that at DTU Nanolab, we cannot put sam-
ples with even trace amounts of gold in the machine we use for dry etching of nanostructures.
This means that this etch step must take place before any metal deposition. Creating the con-
tacts and then characterizing the QDs (as it is done at the Niels Bohr Institute [61]) would be
more ideal: we could pre-select QDs based on their behaviour under electrical bias, not just at
zero applied voltage.
5.2
Next steps
Based on the results obtained during the project, we can identify some clear next steps that
will allow us to implement electrical tuning for the 950 nm SK QDs. From figs. 4.13 and 4.14, it
seems that the implementation of low-resistance annealed NiGeAu n-contacts was successful.
This device is ready to be characterized using μPL spectroscopy. However, the discussion
about leakage current in section 4.3.4 applies: it may be beneficial to cleave the sample, and
redo the wirebonding in a different way. While there should still be an electric field across the
diode structure, the presence of high leakage makes this field hard to characterize, and in any
case this issue must be solved in the future.
As seen in the results obtained from the LDE 780 nm sample, above-band excitation with
an LED is sufficient in order to demonstrate Stark tuning of the emission lines. However, this
excitation method is not optimal for realizing a bright source of indistinguishable photons: all
emission pathways are excited (wetting layer, p-shell, potentially several different charged ex-
citons) making spectral filtering necessary. Even with the use of spectral filtering, the emission
lines are significantly widened: the lifetime limited bandwidth for the same type of QDs in the
same structure has been measured to be around 2.44 [19] (which is clearly far below the res-
olution limit of a spectrometer), while in our above-band experiments we see . In addition, the
large-area illumination of the LED causes a high amount of electrons to excite to the conduction
band everywhere, which then migrate due to the potential drop across the device. This results
in high photocurrent, leading to additional charge noise.
First, switching to laser excitation instead of LED should drastically reduce the photocur-
rent, reducing noise. More advanced excitation schemes can be used to prepare the QD in its
excited state more efficiently, although require more sophisticated filtering. Quasi-resonant p-
shell excitation allows for much more selective excitation of individual QDs, and the pump laser
can be filtered with a short-pass filter. S-shell resonant excitation can be used to achieve single-
photon count rates as high as 122 MHz [28] with transform-limited linewidth. With complex two-
color schemes [72], the efficiency trade-off stemming from the cross-polarization necessary for
resonant excitation may be overcome.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
47
==PAGE:53==
6
|
Summary
To summarise, this master thesis project focused on developing a process for fabricating
metal contacts to the doped layers in a p-i-n membrane containing QDs, with the goal of har-
nessing the Stark effect and the Coulomb blockade to electrically tune the emission and stabilize
the charge environment. Electrical control of the QD emission and charge state is necessary
for three main reasons:
• First, to tune the emission energy into resonance with a cavity mode. Photonic nanocavi-
ties can be used to increase the brightness of SPSs by enhancing the spontaneous emis-
sion rate, and can guide the emitted photons toward the collection optics.
• Second, to enable extensive optical quantum networks with multiple sources. Scalable
optical quantum computing requires a high throughput of indistinguishable photons, there-
fore individual devices must be tuned to the same emission wavelength.
• Third, to stabilize the charge state and to minimize charge noise. Charge noise in the
imperfect semiconductor environment can detrimentally affect indistingusihability.
I used cleanroom nanofabrication processes to create metal contacts to the planar, as-
grown epitaxial layer structure that contains In(Ga)As QDs. The fabrication process has four
important steps: (i) the creation of an opening to the buried n-doped layer, (ii) deposition and
liftoff of n-contact metals, (iii) annealing to create ohmic n-contacts, and (iv) deposition and liftoff
of p-contact metals. For all lithography steps, I used maskless UV-lithography. For etching, I
used inductively coupled plasma dry etching, and found that obtaining the optimal etch depth
is important for minimizing the contact resistance of the n-contacts. I observed that Cr/Au con-
tacts are not suitable for creating ohmic contact to n-GaAs, but for p-GaAs they yield contacts
with a few kΩresistance. I successfully created ohmic contacts to n-GaAs with less than 100 Ω
resistance by annealing Ni/Ge/Au/Ni/Au stacks. To characterize the fabricated devices I used
three approaches: (i) cleanroom characterization methods, such as optical microscopy, SEM,
and stylus profilometry, (ii) room-temperature electrical measurements to gauge whether I suc-
cessfully made ohmic contacts to the diode, and (iii) cryogenic μPL spectroscopy to study the
optical emission from QDs under electrical bias and different excitation powers. The final fab-
ricated device shows diode behaviour with high current in the forward bias. There is leakage,
but I theorize that this could be mitigated by an alternative wirebonding approach.
We also performed cryogenic μPL spectroscopy on a device containing LDE GaAs QDs.
We observed discrete emission lines appear at various voltages, corresponding to charging
events at the QD. This allows us to select the neutral exciton or charged excitons by setting
the external bias. The individual emission lines shifted due to the Stark effect, which can be
harnessed in the future to create tunable SPSs. Finally, we observed an interesting effect
of using an above-band LED for excitation: the photogenerated carriers bring the device to
forward bias, meaning that as we increase the LED power we start to see emission from more
negatively-charged excitons even at zero external bias.
The work carried out during this project will serve as a useful starting point to fabricate
and experimentally characterize tunable SPSs at DTU. These devices will be integral compo-
nents of optical quantum computing networks, which have the potential to transform information
science.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
48
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1] H. J. Kimble, M. Dagenais, and L. Mandel, “Photon Antibunching in Resonance Fluorescence,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 39, pp. 691–695, Sep 1977.
[2] R. H. Ritchie, “Plasma Losses by Fast Electrons in Thin Films,” Phys. Rev., vol. 106, pp. 874–881,
Jun 1957.
[3] G. H. Wannier, “The Structure of Electronic Excitation Levels in Insulating Crystals,” Phys. Rev.,
vol. 52, pp. 191–197, Aug 1937.
[4] H. I. Ewen and E. M. Purcell, “Observation of a Line in the Galactic Radio Spectrum: Radiation from
Galactic Hydrogen at 1,420 Mc./sec.,” Nature, vol. 168, pp. 356–356, Sep 1951.
[5] P. Kok, W. J. Munro, K. Nemoto, T. C. Ralph, J. P. Dowling, and G. J. Milburn, “Linear optical
quantum computing with photonic qubits,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 79, pp. 135–174, Jan 2007.
[6] D. Bouwmeester, J.-W. Pan, K. Mattle, M. Eibl, H. Weinfurter, and A. Zeilinger, “Experimental quan-
tum teleportation,” Nature, vol. 390, pp. 575–579, Dec 1997.
[7] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and G. J. Milburn, “A scheme for efficient quantum computation with linear
optics,” Nature, vol. 409, pp. 46–52, Jan 2001.
[8] E. Waks, E. Diamanti, and Y. Yamamoto, “Generation of photon number states,” New Journal of
Physics, vol. 8, p. 4, jan 2006.
[9] A. B. U’Ren, C. Silberhorn, K. Banaszek, and I. A. Walmsley, “Efficient conditional preparation
of high-fidelity single photon states for fiber-optic quantum networks,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 93,
p. 093601, Aug 2004.
[10] S. Paesani, M. Borghi, S. Signorini, A. Maïnos, L. Pavesi, and A. Laing, “Near-ideal spontaneous
photon sources in silicon quantum photonics,” Nature Communications, vol. 11, p. 2505, May 2020.
[11] M. Hennrich, T. Legero, A. Kuhn, and G. Rempe, “Photon statistics of a non-stationary periodically
driven single-photon source,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 6, p. 86, jul 2004.
[12] C. Maurer, C. Becher, C. Russo, J. Eschner, and R. Blatt, “A single-photon source based on a single
Ca+ ion,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 6, p. 94, jul 2004.
[13] M. Steiner, A. Hartschuh, R. Korlacki, and A. J. Meixner, “Highly efficient, tunable single photon
source based on single molecules,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 90, 05 2007. 183122.
[14] S. Chen, Y.-A. Chen, T. Strassel, Z.-S. Yuan, B. Zhao, J. Schmiedmayer, and J.-W. Pan, “Determin-
istic and Storable Single-Photon Source Based on a Quantum Memory,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 97,
p. 173004, Oct 2006.
[15] R. Alléaume, F. Treussart, G. Messin, Y. Dumeige, J.-F. Roch, A. Beveratos, R. Brouri-Tualle, J.-
P. Poizat, and P. Grangier, “Experimental open-air quantum key distribution with a single-photon
source,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 6, p. 92, jul 2004.
[16] N. Somaschi, V. Giesz, L. De Santis, J. C. Loredo, M. P. Almeida, G. Hornecker, S. L. Portalupi,
T. Grange, C. Antón, J. Demory, C. Gómez, I. Sagnes, N. D. Lanzillotti-Kimura, A. Lemaítre, A. Auf-
feves, A. G. White, L. Lanco, and P. Senellart, “Near-optimal single-photon sources in the solid
state,” Nature Photonics, vol. 10, pp. 340–345, May 2016.
[17] R. J. Warburton, C. Schäflein, D. Haft, F. Bickel, A. Lorke, K. Karrai, J. M. Garcia, W. Schoen-
feld, and P. M. Petroff, “Optical emission from a charge-tunable quantum ring,” Nature, vol. 405,
pp. 926–929, Jun 2000.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
49
==PAGE:55==
[18] P. Lodahl, S. Mahmoodian, and S. Stobbe, “Interfacing single photons and single quantum dots
with photonic nanostructures,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 87, pp. 347–400, May 2015.
[19] L. Zhai, M. C. Löbl, G. N. Nguyen, J. Ritzmann, A. Javadi, C. Spinnler, A. D. Wieck, A. Ludwig, and
R. J. Warburton, “Low-noise GaAs quantum dots for quantum photonics,” Nature Communications,
vol. 11, p. 4745, Sep 2020.
[20] L. Zhai, G. N. Nguyen, C. Spinnler, J. Ritzmann, M. C. Löbl, A. D. Wieck, A. Ludwig, A. Javadi,
and R. J. Warburton, “Quantum interference of identical photons from remote GaAs quantum dots,”
Nature Nanotechnology, vol. 17, pp. 829–833, Aug 2022.
[21] D. A. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics and Devices. McGraw-Hill, 4th ed., 2012.
[22] Z. Zhang and J. T. J. Yates, “Band bending in semiconductors: Chemical and physical conse-
quences at surfaces and interfaces,” Chemical Reviews, vol. 112, no. 10, pp. 5520–5551, 2012.
PMID: 22783915.
[23] T.-J. Kim and P. H. Holloway, “Ohmic contacts to GaAs epitaxial layers,” Critical Reviews in Solid
State and Materials Sciences, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 239–273, 1997.
[24] A. J. Bennett, M. A. Pooley, R. M. Stevenson, M. B. Ward, R. B. Patel, A. B. de la Giroday, N. Sköld,
I. Farrer, C. A. Nicoll, D. A. Ritchie, and A. J. Shields, “Electric-field-induced coherent coupling of
the exciton states in a single quantum dot,” Nature Physics, vol. 6, pp. 947–950, Dec 2010.
[25] M. Ediger, G. Bester, A. Badolato, P. M. Petroff, K. Karrai, A. Zunger, and R. J. Warburton, “Peculiar
many-body effects revealed in the spectroscopy of highly charged quantum dots,” Nature Physics,
vol. 3, pp. 774–779, Nov 2007.
[26] A. V. Kuhlmann, J. Houel, A. Ludwig, L. Greuter, D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, M. Poggio, and R. J.
Warburton, “Charge noise and spin noise in a semiconductor quantum device,” Nature Physics,
vol. 9, pp. 570–575, Sep 2013.
[27] F. T. Pedersen, Y. Wang, C. T. Olesen, S. Scholz, A. D. Wieck, A. Ludwig, M. C. Löbl, R. J. War-
burton, L. Midolo, R. Uppu, and P. Lodahl, “Near Transform-Limited Quantum Dot Linewidths in a
Broadband Photonic Crystal Waveguide,” ACS Photonics, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 2343–2349, 2020.
[28] R. Uppu, F. T. Pedersen, Y. Wang, C. T. Olesen, C. Papon, X. Zhou, L. Midolo, S. Scholz, A. D.
Wieck, A. Ludwig, and P. Lodahl, “Scalable integrated single-photon source,” Science Advances,
vol. 6, no. 50, p. eabc8268, 2020.
[29] R. Hanbury Brown and R. Q. Twiss, “A Test of a New Type of Stellar Interferometer on Sirius,”
Nature, vol. 178, pp. 1046–1048, Nov 1956.
[30] C. K. Hong, Z. Y. Ou, and L. Mandel, “Measurement of subpicosecond time intervals between two
photons by interference,” Phys Rev Lett, vol. 59, pp. 2044–2046, Nov. 1987.
[31] J. Houel, A. V. Kuhlmann, L. Greuter, F. Xue, M. Poggio, B. D. Gerardot, P. A. Dalgarno,
A. Badolato, P. M. Petroff, A. Ludwig, D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, and R. J. Warburton, “Probing Single-
Charge Fluctuations at a GaAs/AlAs Interface Using Laser Spectroscopy on a Nearby InGaAs
Quantum Dot,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 108, p. 107401, Mar 2012.
[32] D. Englund, A. Faraon, I. Fushman, N. Stoltz, P. Petroff, and J. Vučković, “Controlling cavity reflec-
tivity with a single quantum dot,” Nature, vol. 450, pp. 857–861, Dec 2007.
[33] M. Bayer and A. Forchel, “Temperature dependence of the exciton homogeneous linewidth in
In0.60Ga0.40As/GaAs self-assembled quantum dots,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 65, p. 041308, Jan 2002.
[34] M. Moczała-Dusanowska,  Dusanowski, O. Iff, T. Huber, S. Kuhn, T. Czyszanowski, C. Schneider,
and S. Höfling, “Strain-tunable single-photon source based on a circular bragg grating cavity with
embedded quantum dots,” ACS Photonics, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 3474–3480, 2020.
[35] X. Yuan, F. Weyhausen-Brinkmann, J. Martín-Sánchez, G. Piredda, V. Křápek, Y. Huo, H. Huang,
C. Schimpf, O. G. Schmidt, J. Edlinger, G. Bester, R. Trotta, and A. Rastelli, “Uniaxial stress flips
the natural quantization axis of a quantum dot for integrated quantum photonics,” Nature Commu-
nications, vol. 9, p. 3058, Aug 2018.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
50
==PAGE:56==
[36] D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, T. H. Wood, and C. A.
Burrus, “Band-Edge Electroabsorption in Quantum Well Structures: The Quantum-Confined Stark
Effect,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 53, pp. 2173–2176, Nov 1984.
[37] R. M. Stevenson, R. J. Young, P. Atkinson, K. Cooper, D. A. Ritchie, and A. J. Shields, “A semi-
conductor source of triggered entangled photon pairs,” Nature, vol. 439, pp. 179–182, Jan 2006.
[38] R. J. Warburton, “Single spins in self-assembled quantum dots,” Nature Materials, vol. 12,
pp. 483–493, Jun 2013.
[39] R. J. Warburton, C. Schulhauser, D. Haft, C. Schäflein, K. Karrai, J. M. Garcia, W. Schoenfeld,
and P. M. Petroff, “Giant permanent dipole moments of excitons in semiconductor nanostructures,”
Phys. Rev. B, vol. 65, p. 113303, Feb 2002.
[40] P. W. Fry, I. E. Itskevich, D. J. Mowbray, M. S. Skolnick, J. J. Finley, J. A. Barker, E. P. O’Reilly,
L. R. Wilson, I. A. Larkin, P. A. Maksym, M. Hopkinson, M. Al-Khafaji, J. P. R. David, A. G. Cullis,
G. Hill, and J. C. Clark, “Inverted electron-hole alignment in inas-gaas self-assembled quantum
dots,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 84, pp. 733–736, Jan 2000.
[41] A. J. Bennett, R. B. Patel, J. Skiba-Szymanska, C. A. Nicoll, I. Farrer, D. A. Ritchie, and A. J. Shields,
“Giant Stark effect in the emission of single semiconductor quantum dots,” Applied Physics Letters,
vol. 97, 07 2010. 031104.
[42] H. Ollivier, P. Priya, A. Harouri, I. Sagnes, A. Lemaître, O. Krebs, L. Lanco, N. D. Lanzillotti-Kimura,
M. Esmann, and P. Senellart, “Three-dimensional electrical control of the excitonic fine structure for
a quantum dot in a cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 129, p. 057401, Jul 2022.
[43] E. M. Purcell, “Proceedings of the American Physical Society,” Phys. Rev., vol. 69, pp. 674–674,
Jun 1946.
[44] J. Iles-Smith, D. P. S. McCutcheon, A. Nazir, and J. Mørk, “Phonon scattering inhibits simultane-
ous near-unity efficiency and indistinguishability in semiconductor single-photon sources,” Nature
Photonics, vol. 11, pp. 521–526, Aug 2017.
[45] A. Schwagmann, S. Kalliakos, D. J. P. Ellis, I. Farrer, J. P. Griffiths, G. A. C. Jones, D. A. Ritchie,
and A. J. Shields, “In-plane single-photon emission from a L3 cavity coupled to a photonic crystal
waveguide,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, pp. 28614–28624, Dec 2012.
[46] Ł. Dusanowski, D. Köck, E. Shin, S.-H. Kwon, C. Schneider, and S. Höfling, “Purcell-Enhanced and
Indistinguishable Single-Photon Generation from Quantum Dots Coupled to On-Chip Integrated
Ring Resonators,” Nano Letters, vol. 20, pp. 6357–6363, Sep 2020.
[47] N. Tomm, A. Javadi, N. O. Antoniadis, D. Najer, M. C. Löbl, A. R. Korsch, R. Schott, S. R. Valentin,
A. D. Wieck, A. Ludwig, and R. J. Warburton, “A bright and fast source of coherent single photons,”
Nature Nanotechnology, vol. 16, pp. 399–403, Apr 2021.
[48] J. Claudon, J. Bleuse, N. S. Malik, M. Bazin, P. Jaffrennou, N. Gregersen, C. Sauvan, P. Lalanne,
and J.-M. Gérard, “A highly efficient single-photon source based on a quantum dot in a photonic
nanowire,” Nature Photonics, vol. 4, pp. 174–177, Mar 2010.
[49] S. Kotal, A. Artioli, Y. Wang, A. D. Osterkryger, M. Finazzer, R. Fons, Y. Genuist, J. Bleuse, J.-M.
Gérard, N. Gregersen, and J. Claudon, “A nanowire optical nanocavity for broadband enhancement
of spontaneous emission,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 118, 05 2021. 194002.
[50] J. Liu, R. Su, Y. Wei, B. Yao, S. F. C. d. Silva, Y. Yu, J. Iles-Smith, K. Srinivasan, A. Rastelli, J. Li,
and X. Wang, “A solid-state source of strongly entangled photon pairs with high brightness and
indistinguishability,” Nature Nanotechnology, vol. 14, pp. 586–593, Jun 2019.
[51] W. B. Jeon, J. S. Moon, K.-Y. Kim, Y.-H. Ko, C. J. K. Richardson, E. Waks, and J.-H. Kim, “Plug-
and-Play Single-Photon Devices with Efficient Fiber-Quantum Dot Interface,” Advanced Quantum
Technologies, vol. 5, no. 10, p. 2200022, 2022.
[52] Q. Buchinger, S. Betzold, S. Höfling, and T. Huber-Loyola, “Optical properties of circular Bragg
gratings with labyrinth geometry to enable electrical contacts,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 122, 03
2023. 111110.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
51
==PAGE:57==
[53] S. A. Campbell, Fabrication Engineering at the Micro- and Nanoscale. The Oxford Series in Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering, Oxford University Press, 3rd ed., 2008.
[54] N. Bart, C. Dangel, P. Zajac, N. Spitzer, J. Ritzmann, M. Schmidt, H. G. Babin, R. Schott, S. R.
Valentin, S. Scholz, Y. Wang, R. Uppu, D. Najer, M. C. Löbl, N. Tomm, A. Javadi, N. O. Antoniadis,
L. Midolo, K. Müller, R. J. Warburton, P. Lodahl, A. D. Wieck, J. J. Finley, and A. Ludwig, “Wafer-
scale epitaxial modulation of quantum dot density,” Nature Communications, vol. 13, p. 1633, Mar
2022.
[55] H. G. Babin, J. Ritzmann, N. Bart, M. Schmidt, T. Kruck, L. Zhai, M. C. Löbl, G. N. Nguyen,
C. Spinnler, L. Ranasinghe, R. J. Warburton, C. Heyn, A. D. Wieck, and A. Ludwig, “Charge Tunable
GaAs Quantum Dots in a Photonic n-i-p Diode,” Nanomaterials, vol. 11, no. 10, 2021.
[56] B. Yao, R. Su, Y. Wei, Z. Liu, T. Zhao, and J. Liu, “Design for hybrid circular bragg gratings for a
highly efficient quantum-dot single-photon source,” Journal of the Korean Physical Society, vol. 73,
pp. 1502–1505, Nov 2018.
[57] S. Gehrsitz, F. K. Reinhart, C. Gourgon, N. Herres, A. Vonlanthen, and H. Sigg, “The refractive
index of AlxGa1−xAs below the band gap: Accurate determination and empirical modeling,” Journal
of Applied Physics, vol. 87, pp. 7825–7837, 06 2000.
[58] F. Langer, D. Plischke, M. Kamp, and S. Höfling, “Single photon emission of a charge-tunable
GaAs/Al0.25Ga0.75As droplet quantum dot device,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 105, 08 2014.
081111.
[59] L. Bouet, M. Vidal, T. Mano, N. Ha, T. Kuroda, M. V. Durnev, M. M. Glazov, E. L. Ivchenko, X. Marie,
T. Amand, K. Sakoda, G. Wang, and B. Urbaszek, “Charge tuning in [111] grown GaAs droplet
quantum dots,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 105, 08 2014. 082111.
[60] N. Braslau, J. Gunn, and J. Staples, “Metal-semiconductor contacts for GaAs bulk effect devices,”
Solid-State Electronics, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 381–383, 1967.
[61] T. Pregnalato, Deterministic quantum photonic devices based on self-assembled quantum dots.
PhD thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2019.
[62] G. Kiršanskė, Electrical control of excitons in semiconductor nanostructures: from quantum dots
in photonic-crystal devices to the exciton Mott transition in coupled quantum wells. PhD thesis,
University of Copenhagen, 2016.
[63] M. L. Lovejoy, A. J. Howard, K. R. Zavadil, D. J. Rieger, R. J. Shul, and P. A. Barnes, “Low resistivity
ohmic contacts to moderately doped n-GaAs with low-temperature processing,” Journal of Vacuum
Science Technology A, vol. 13, pp. 758–762, 05 1995.
[64] M. G. Wood, C. P. Hains, P. S. Finnegan, C. A. Stephenson, J. F. Klem, and Q. Looker, “Formation
of Ohmic Contacts to n-GaAs at Temperatures Compatible with Indium Flip-Chip Bonding,” ECS
Meeting Abstracts, vol. MA2019-02, p. 881, sep 2019.
[65] L. C. Wang, P. H. Hao, J. Y. Cheng, F. Deng, and S. S. Lau, “Ohmic contact formation mecha-
nism of the Au/Ge/Pd/n-GaAs system formed below 200 °C,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 79,
pp. 4216–4220, 04 1996.
[66] “Heidelberg Instruments MLA 150.” https://heidelberg-instruments.com/product/mla150/.
Accessed: 17 June, 2023.
[67] “JEOL
JBX-9500FSZ
electron
beam
lithography.”
https://www.jeol.com/products/
semiconductor/ebx/JBX-9500FS.php. Accessed: 17 June, 2023.
[68] A. Baca and C. Ashby, Fabrication of GaAs Devices. Materials, Circuits & Devices, Institution of
Engineering and Technology, 2005.
[69] “Intellemetrics
Laser
End
Point
Detection
System.”
https://intellemetrics.com/
lep500-overview/. Accessed: 17 June, 2023.
[70] “Jipelec Jetfirst 200.” https://ecmlabsolutions.com/products/rtp-furnace-jetfirst/.
Ac-
cessed: 17 June, 2023.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
52
==PAGE:58==
[71] J.-P. Jahn, M. Munsch, L. Béguin, A. V. Kuhlmann, M. Renggli, Y. Huo, F. Ding, R. Trotta, M. Reindl,
O. G. Schmidt, A. Rastelli, P. Treutlein, and R. J. Warburton, “An artificial rb atom in a semiconductor
with lifetime-limited linewidth,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 92, p. 245439, Dec 2015.
[72] L. Vannucci and N. Gregersen, “Highly efficient and indistinguishable single-photon sources via
phonon-decoupled two-color excitation,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 107, p. 195306, May 2023.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
53
==PAGE:59==
Appendix
A
Supplementary figures: devices with Cr/Au n-contacts
Figure A.1: True color photo of test chip D1. The chip was used to test the etch rate (A1, A2, and B in
fig. 4.2) and the metal deposition/liftoff.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
V [mV]
1500
1000
500
0
I [nA]
1 to 2, R = 2093 
1 to 3, R = 7191 
2 to 3, R = 4368 
Figure A.2: Resistivity between 3 p-contacts on sample D1, with the room light on. There is a
photocurrent that displaces the line w.r.t. to when the light is off in fig. 4.3.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
54
==PAGE:60==
945
950
955
960
965
970
 (nm)
0
1000
2000
3000
Counts
LED high
LED higher
Figure A.3: Emission from sample D9B with the LED at high power. As the power is increased, the
lines quickly shift, disappear, and new lines appear.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
LED power [a.u.]
910
920
930
940
950
960
 [nm]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
LED power [a.u.]
913
914
915
916
917
918
 [nm]
Figure A.4: D9 QD3 power map. Left: the LED power is swept from zero to maximum. Around 25%
narrow lines appear, and subsequently shift to higher energies. After 60% a broad background
emission appears around 950 nm. Right: zoomed image of the narrow emission lines.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
55
==PAGE:61==
B
Supplementary figures: devices with NiGeAu n-contacts
30
28
26
24
22
20
0
20
40
60
EPD signal
Time [s]
(b)
(c)
(a)
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
0
20
40
60
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
0
50
100
150
200
250
EPD signal
EPD signal
Time [s]
Time [s]
(d)
(g)
(e)
(h)
(f)
(i)
Figure B.1: Etch depth tests. Left column: microscope images, middle: end-point detection signal,
right: Dektak profilometer scans at the locations indicated by red arrows on the microscope images.
The microscope images also show the deposited (but not annealed) NiGeAu stack. (a,b,c) D9C etch
pit 2, with depth around 180 nm. (d,e,f) D4 etch pit 1, with depth around 190 nm. The measured depth
of this opening does not really correspond to the end-point signal: at this point in the signal , the depth
should be less than 190 according to the depth model (fig. 3.5). (g,h,i) D4 etch pit 2 with depth around
190 nm. Presumably, the etch mask for this opening was not properly developed, leading to roughness
and inhomogeneity in the depth. Also, the etching of this was done solely based on the end-point signal
as a test, which is why it has flat parts, where the etching was stopped. The abrupt jumps are when the
substrate is declamped/clamped, changing the focus of the laser.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
56
==PAGE:62==
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
V [mV]
0.0
0.2
0.4
I [nA]
Depth 1
Depth 2
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
V [V]
10
5
0
5
10
I [nA]
Depth 1
Depth 2
Figure B.2: Electrical characterization of D9C. Left: IV curve between n-contacts at the same depth.
Neither of them show ohmic behaviour (or any substantial conduction at all). Right: Room temperature
IV curve between p-contact and n-contacts at different depths. No diode behaviour.
Figure B.3: True color photo of D6 test chips. The etch depth is around 135 nm. Left: D6A, annealed
at 440°C for 30s. Middle: D6B, annealed at 420°C for 30s. Right: D6C, annealed at 420°C for 90s.
The patterns are skewed because of misalignment during the first exposure.
Figure B.4: True color photo of D4, taken just before the annealing. The difference in etch depth
across the different pits are indicated by the color.
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
V [V]
20
10
0
10
20
I [ A]
Depth 1, R = 5954 
Depth 2, R = 6116 
Depth 3, R = 6056 
Figure B.5: Room temperature IV curve of D4 zoomed in near 0V, showing a highly ohmic component
indicating that there is some electrical connection between n and p inside the device.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
57
==PAGE:63==
P1
P2
Etch 1
Etch 2
Etch 3
Etch 5
Etch 4
Figure B.6: Photo of wirebonded D4. The red arrows indicate where the chip could be cleaved to
mitigate leakage from the wirebonding at P1 and P2, and re-bond to the pads in the upper part.
C
Supplementary figures: LDE GaAs QD device
0
20
40
60
80
100
t [s]
0
100
200
300
400
Intensity [cps]
Figure C.1: Intensity at the emission wavelength with LED power 2 over a 100s scan. Each second, a
spectrum is taken with 0.3 integration time. The QD emission was ”off” for 54 of the 101 scans.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
58
==PAGE:64==
Figure C.2: Abrupt change in PL when applying 0V on the SMU at power 4.
Figure C.3: 100 s PL map with 0.3 s integration for each scan, taken with the high-resolution grating.
1.5736
1.5738
1.5740
1.5742
E [eV]
0
1000
2000
3000
Cps
0
20
40
60
80
100
t [s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
E [ eV]
Zhai et al.: ERF=2.44 eV
Figure C.4: Linewidth characterization of the probed GaAs QD. Left: lorentzian fit of every 10th scan
taken in the PL map shown in fig. C.3. Right: FWHM of the lorentzian fits to each scan. The linewidth
is around 70 μeV on average, compared to the 2.44 μeV resonance fluorescence transform-limited
linewidth attained by Zhai et al [19] for QDs from the same wafer.
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
59
==PAGE:65==
Figure C.5: Voltage scans of QD1. First, the spectral map is started, and it runs for 100s. After 12
seconds, the voltage sweep is started, which scans the voltage at 1 s steps from 0 V to -0.5 V (left) or
0.5 V (right).
Optical spectroscopy of quantum dots under electrical bias
60
