==PAGE:1==
Creating a pleasant music experience for
cochlear implant users using generative deep
learning models
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative
deep learning models
Master’s Thesis
July, 2023
By
Cem Rizalar
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads Bygning 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Hearing Technology,
Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Autonomous Systems Engineering, MSc
Eng. Autonomous Systems, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Cem Rizalar ­ s212383
Signature
Date
ii
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The idea of computer­generated music is a topic of discussion since the first computers
were made. With the recent development of machine learning techniques, it is now much
easier to program a computer to produce meaningful music. Neural networks are widely
used for learning complex song structures, extracting features, and generating similar
outputs, thus participating actively in the creative music­making process. Since the time­
based natural dynamics of music data makes it different from image or tabular data, a
variety of different data processing and machine learning approaches are suggested for
these tasks. This thesis project is focused on the implementation of generative deep­
learning networks for music creation. Two methods are implemented and their results
are investigated in this study. These models are variational autoencoders and generative
adversarial networks. The musical perception of cochlear implant users is another as­
pect of this project. This topic has been researched for many years, and cochlear implant
users reported a less pleasant experience when listening to music than normal hearing
listeners. Different approaches were suggested for creating a more pleasant music expe­
rience for cochlear implant users This project also sets light on this issue and discusses
how these methods can be combined with the implemented neural networks for further
developments.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Cem Rizalar, MSc in Autonomous Systems Engineering, Department of Applied Mathe­
matics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
Creator of this thesis report.
Jeremy Marozeau, Associate Professor, Department of Health Technology, , Technical
University of Denmark
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor for their invaluable guidance
and support. Their expertise and encouragement helped me to complete this research
and write this thesis. I appreciate them sharing my excitement throughout this project.
Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathe­
matics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to my co­supervisor for their invalu­
able help and support throughout this project. Their positive attitude, suggestions, and
constructive feedback allowed me to complete this project and its implementations with
satisfying results.
Cumhur Erkut,Associate Professor, Department of Architecture, Design and Media Tech­
nology, Aalborg University
I would like to thank my censor for serving on my thesis committee and providing help­
ful feedback and suggestions. I am grateful to him for discussing my project ideas and
providing valuable help, recommendations, and useful contacts before starting my thesis
project to put me on the right track.
Selda Rizalar, Riza Rizalar, Sila Rizalar, Zeynep Rizalar
I would like to show my gratitude to my beloved family members for always supporting
me. Thank you for always being there for me, giving me strength and love, and making
this Master’s degree possible. Love you all.
My Dearest Friends
I would also like to thank all my great friends who were always there for me. Some of
them always showed their support even from thousands of miles away, while others were
here with me to have amazing experiences together at DTU. I am lucky to have you all.
My Professors
I would like to thank all my professors who contributed to my learning and development
throughout my Master’s education at DTU.
Survey Participants
Finally, I would like to thank all of the participants in my study for their time and willing­
ness to share their experiences. This work would not have been possible without their
contribution.
iv Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose and Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Brief Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Music and artificial intelligence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Cochlear implants and their limitations in music perception
. . . . . . . . .
7
3
Literature Review
11
3.1
Previous research on cochlear implant users and music perception . . . . .
11
3.2
Generative deep learning models and their applications in music . . . . . . 13
3.3
Overview of the methodology and techniques used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Dataset and Musical Encoding Strategies
17
4.1
Description of the dataset used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Musical encoding strategies to prepare the data for deep learning models . 18
5
Theory
25
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Variational Autoencoder(VAE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Generative Adversarial Network(GAN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Results and Comparison
45
6.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Application for Cochlear Implant Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
v
==PAGE:8==
vi Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This chapter provides a general overview of the thesis project by describing the purpose
and objectives. The content of the project is summarized briefly.
1.1
Purpose and Objective
The main purposes of this thesis project are, to learn deeper about generative deep learn­
ing applications, experiment with different models and discuss the insights about the out­
comes. Therefore, this study mainly focuses on providing comprehensive research on
generative deep learning applications in the field of music. It explores the possibilities
of using these generative models to teach them complex musical structures including
melodies, tempo, rhythm, and harmony. Two of the recent neural network approaches in
the field are implemented, which are a variational autoencoder and a generative adversar­
ial network. These networks will be further discussed and compared in their performances
regarding learning and the generation of new audio samples.
Another question to be investigated in this study is about cochlear implant users and their
perception of music. Cochlear implant users report lower levels of a pleasant experience
when they listen to music, compared to normal hearing listeners. After the model imple­
mentations are completed and audio samples are generated, the research is furthered on
how these generative models can be used for creating a pleasant music experience for
cochlear implant users. There is no implementation or programming made for this topic,
but it is presented as a discussion.
There are several learning objectives that are aimed to be achieved during this thesis work
for the author student. These objectives are discussed and determined together with the
project supervisors before starting the project. These learning objectives of the student
are listed below:
• Discuss recent AI applications in the field of music.
• Use generative deep­learning models for music generation.
• Apply MIDI data pre­processing for machine learning.
• Understand how cochlear implant users perceive music and discuss the aspects of
a pleasant music experience.
• Design an experiment to test the system and the hypothesis.
1.2
Brief Summary
Musical composition is the process of creating a piece of music by arranging and orga­
nizing musical sounds and elements such as melody, harmony, rhythm, and texture. It
involves the use of musical notation or other means of recording the musical ideas to
be shared with performers or listeners. The composer must make decisions about the
structure, form, and style of the music, as well as the instrumentation and other technical
details that shape the final work.
Over the years, computers and algorithms started to become strong candidates to take
part in these kinds of decision­making processes, and even sometimes created better
outcomes for some applications. Although the creativity factor is a topic of debate for
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
1
==PAGE:10==
machines and AI tools when performing musical production, it is undeniable that the out­
comes of some of the recent projects in the field are fascinating.
This has always been a very interesting topic to dig further into, and this thesis project
opportunity provides the author to learn more about these applications, try to experiment
with some neural network architectures that are widely used in the field, and compare
their performances.
While discussing these opportunities that AI brings to the table for musical composi­
tion, another interesting question popped up to be researched during the project: Can
these generative models be helpful for cochlear implant users? Recent studies show that
cochlear implant users reported a less pleasant musical experience than normal hearing
listeners. Several factors affected their levels of pleasure, such as complexity, tempo,
rhythm, harmony, sound mixing, and melodies. Since these deep learning models can
learn from data, then they could be trained on some type of data that would fit better for
cochlear implant users’ needs and expectations regarding musical taste. And thanks to
this idea, after finishing all the implementations and experimentations, there is an oppor­
tunity to find useful applications or insights that could benefit cochlear implant users and
their perception of music.
While there are many different ways to handle and represent music, the most used and
known way is using it in sound form. This is also how we, as humans, consume music
in our daily lives using our headphones or speakers. This project aims to build and train
generative deep learning networks to create music, and the most suitable way to do it
would be using sound data under normal circumstances. But it is important for the reader
to understand data sound form is a huge amount of data. There are 44100 data points
in just one second of audio. The complexity of traditional deep learning networks where
the models are trained using simple images consisting of pixels that are extremely lower
when compared to this number of sound data. Also one could remember that to be able
to train these models with sound data and produce meaningful results, two things need
to be satisfied before the implementation phase: A huge computational power, and many
months of training time. One of the limitations of this project, being a Master’s thesis
created by a student, made it difficult to work with sound data, and alternative options
were investigated.
There are various musical encoding strategies, which help us understand the same mean­
ing with the sound form, but in a simpler notation. One of the very popular methods of
these musical encoding strategies is the MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) for­
mat. More information about the MIDI format is provided in the related chapter, but in
short, this format provides information about the musical features of the piece, such as
the name of the played notes, their duration, and velocity. Deciding on using the MIDI
format for this project was the realistic choice, increasing the chances for our networks to
produce meaningful outputs.
Deep neural networks are a type of machine learning algorithm that is based on artificial
neural networks, which are inspired by the structure and function of the human brain. They
are composed of multiple layers of interconnected nodes, or neurons, that process input
data and generate output predictions. The nodes in each layer of the network are con­
nected to the nodes in the next layer, forming a hierarchy of feature representations that
allow the network to learn increasingly abstract and complex representations of the input
data. Deep neural networks have shown great success in a wide range of applications, in­
cluding computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition. However,
their success often depends on the availability of large amounts of training data and com­
2
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:11==
putational resources. Therefore, understanding the architecture and training methods of
deep neural networks is crucial for researchers and practitioners in machine learning and
related fields. [1]
Generative deep learning is a sub­field of deep learning where the aim is to generate new,
similar samples from the dataset that the model is trained with. This is a good fit for this
project and the mentioned purposes, since the desired outputs should be generated by the
AI model built. There are various architectures for generative deep learning applications,
and two different types of these neural network architectures are going to be implemented
and compared in this project.
The first type of network is a variational autoencoder. Variational autoencoders are a
type of generative model in machine learning that can learn to generate new data sam­
ples similar to the ones they were trained on. They are a type of neural network that
learns a compressed representation, or latent space, of the input data. This compressed
representation can then be used to generate new data samples that are similar to the orig­
inal data. They differentiate from traditional autoencoder models due to their probabilistic
generation mechanism, which gives a variation to the resulting outputs.
The second type of network is a generative adversarial network. Generative adversarial
networks are a type of deep neural network used in unsupervised learning that can gen­
erate new data samples that are similar to the ones they were trained on, which makes
it a perfect fit for our problem. This type of network consists of two neural networks: a
generator and a discriminator. The generator takes random noise as input and generates
new data samples, while the discriminator takes a data sample as input and outputs a
probability indicating whether the sample could be an element of the training dataset, or
a fake sample that is generated by the generator. The two networks are trained in an
adversarial way, where the generator tries to produce data samples that can fool the dis­
criminator into thinking they are real, while the discriminator tries to distinguish between
real and fake samples.
The implementation and the training of these networks are followed by an assessment and
comparison of network performances, to be deeply discussed in the Results and Compar­
ison section. The assessment of the generated sounds is tested by human listeners, from
a mixture of the real samples from the dataset and the generated sounds, asking them
if the piece they listen to is generated by a computer or not. This way, the generated
sounds will be assessed by an independent audience and this will be an indication of the
successes of our networks.
Another interesting topic to be discussed is the possible applications of these networks
for creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users. There have been
several approaches to increase the level of the pleasing experience when listening to mu­
sic for cochlear implant users, but using generative deep learning models to achieve this
is considerably new in the field. Generative deep learning models learn to generate new
samples depending on the data that they trained on, and these models could theoretically
be fed with inputs that are already adjusted and liked by cochlear implant users so that
they produce new, similar samples. Different approaches could also be proposed and dis­
cussed at this point, such as using supervised learning algorithms, and expecting input
from the cochlear implant users, such as a ’score’ indicating how much they liked a par­
ticular song. Theoretically, the perfect songs regarding their taste could be obtained with
this methodology, but there are some limitations in the real world. The biggest limitation
is obviously the lack of annotated data, and the impossibility of collecting that much data
in a short amount of time. Thus, this project will only focus on the possible adjustments
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
3
==PAGE:12==
to the implemented generative models, and try to understand how these adjustments can
help cochlear implant users and discuss if the models can adapt easily to these changes.
4
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
Music and artificial intelligence
Music has been involved in human lives for thousands of years. Using sound as the main
production tool, people created various harmonies, invented different instruments, and
eventually composed complex pieces to satisfy human hearing. Just like many other tra­
ditional human tasks, artificial intelligence had become a powerful candidate to overtake
the role of humans in music creation. Despite still having its inadequacies, music creation
with artificial intelligence has been a rapidly growing field in recent years, with the potential
to revolutionize the way we compose and produce music.
The idea of using machines to generate music has been around since the early days of
computing, but it was not until the 21st century that significant advances were made in
the field. In 1957, Lejaren Hiller and Leonard Isaacson stunned the world of music by
presenting the first composition constructed by an AI system, called Illiac Suite (Hiller and
Isaacson 1959). [2]. It was a very simple heuristic search paradigm, where the computer
was making guesses regarding the possible next note, and only the notes that were a
good fit to the canonical rules of composition remained. The computer with very limited
computing capabilities was a massive machine that weighed five tons. A picture of Lejaren
Hiller working on the Illiac Suite is given in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Lejaren Hiller, 1960. Photo courtesy of the University of Illinois Archives.
Early experiments with algorithmic composition and computer­generated music paved
the way for more complex and sophisticated artificial intelligence systems that can now
generate original and compelling music. Today there are many incredible outcomes of
deep learning architectures in the field of music, making musicians and all humankind very
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
5
==PAGE:14==
excited about the field and its possibilities. Some of the recent state­of­the­art examples
in this field include Jukebox AI and GoogleLM projects.
Jukebox AI is a research project developed by OpenAI. It is a neural network model that
generates music with singing in the raw audio domain[3]. It enables users to select an
artist and a musical style, and it generates a new song using those inputs. A nice output of
the project is an example of a classification problem, where different artists are classified
by their musical styles. This is also a popular application that is widely used in artificial
intelligence in music, and the example is given in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2:
Classification of artists depending on musical styles by Jukebox
AI,https://openai.com/research/jukebox
Another very recent example is the GoogleLM project. The results obtained from the
GoogleLM model are definitely outstanding. GoogleLM is a model generating high­fidelity
music from text descriptions such as ”a calming violin melody backed by a distorted guitar
riff”[4].
Current developments in this field include the use of generative models such as neural
networks and deep learning algorithms, which can learn from existing musical patterns
and generate new music that is both original and stylistically consistent. Applications
of this technology include music production, sound design, and even interactive music
experiences in video games and virtual reality environments. While there is still much to
be explored and improved in this field, the potential for artificial intelligence to contribute
to the world of music creation is undeniable.
A big question that is quite relevant for the content of this project is: Can AI tools make
creative productions? Can they be considered as replacements for human creativity?
While the short answer for this is considered as a ”no” in today’s AI tools and the litera­
ture, it is undebatable that AI tools are a huge booster for human creativity. To have a
better understanding of this question, one should emphasize the meaning of creativity on
a deeper level.
Creativity is a defining human feature that sets us apart from other species. It is the
ability to think outside the box, generate original ideas, and come up with new solutions
6
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:15==
to problems. While machines powered by artificial intelligence have made great strides
in recent years, they still have their limitations when it comes to creativity. AI may be able
to mimic human behavior and generate ideas based on patterns and data, but it lacks the
ability to think abstractly or to make connections that are not explicitly programmed into
it. Human creativity is fueled by emotion, intuition, and personal experience, which are
all difficult for AI to replicate. Therefore, despite the rapid advancements in AI, we still
need humans for the creative factor, as we are capable of producing truly innovative and
unique works of art, music, literature, and much more.[5]
While today’s AI had became a tool that is capable of generating similar and original sam­
ples given a set of input, one must understand its limitations when it comes to creativity.
With this knowledge, we can emphasize that AI in music is primarily a tool for coopera­
tion, and an agent to extend human capabilities in music making and creative production
process, rather than replacing the human factor and creativity in the process. There are
various fields where machine learning algorithms come in handy for music makers, such
as multimedia systems, interactive music design, musical composition, and sound opti­
mization. But just by itself, the current status of AI today is not enough to produce some­
thing meaningful and creative on a human level. These limitations will be discussed more
in­depth during this project, while it will also focus on what AI tools and machine learning
algorithms can provide musicians in the process of computer­aided music production.
2.2
Cochlear implants and their limitations in music
perception
A cochlear implant is a medical device that is surgically implanted in the inner ear of a
person with severe to profound hearing loss. The device works by bypassing the damaged
parts of the ear and directly stimulating the auditory nerve with electrical signals. The
implant consists of two main parts: an internal component that is implanted under the
skin behind the ear, and an external component that is worn on the outside of the ear
and transmits sound to the internal component. Cochlear implants are designed to help
people with severe to profound hearing loss who are unable to benefit from conventional
hearing aids. The device does not restore normal hearing, but it can provide a significant
improvement in a person’s ability to understand speech and communicate with others.
Today, it is commonly used by people who experienced various degrees of hearing loss.
[6]
A descriptive diagram as an example of a cochlear implant is given in Figure 2.3.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Cochlear Implant Diagram, https://rnid.org.uk/
Since the cochlear implant does not provide fully functional hearing, the users, unfor­
tunately, can not have the best experience possible for music perception. There have
been several studies to support this claim, where cochlear implant users were expected
to report their level of satisfaction, compared to normal hearing listeners. Detailed sum­
maries of these researches are provided in the next chapter, but in short, the device is
not satisfactory enough for musical perception as it is in listening to someone speaking.
Cochlear implant users reported their music experience to be less pleasant in cases such
as pieces with high complexity in melodies and rhythm, minor pitch differences among
notes, pieces without singing, pieces with a less sense of rhythm and bass, and very loud
or low sounds.
There are many different cases of cochlear implant users and their perception of music,
regarding whether they enjoy it or not. Even though they generally reported lower pleasant
experiences compared to normal hearing listeners, in some studies they also provided
insights on how their experience could be better while listening to music, depending on
adjusting different musical features. But as it is today, it is known that they have significant
limitations on musical perception, and having a pleasant experience while listening to
music is a big topic to debate for these users.
Using generative deep learning models is a new idea in this sense, but it is quite a simple
idea to be further discussed. Generative deep learning models are used to sample new
data based on the input data that the model is trained on. The question to be answered af­
ter this research is that, if we use these strong networks and feed them with what cochlear
implant users prefer and enjoy to listen, can we provide a higher pleasant experience, as
well as a unique music production that is just the best fit for their taste. Of course, it is a
fact that if we feed these networks with any kind of data, it will produce similar outputs.
So one could think, how is this system special for cochlear implant users? The answer
is simple, just like all the other machine learning models, the techniques used behind it
are not unique to this application, whereas the results definitely are. And the reason for
this is the traditional behavior of all machine learning models, more specifically that the
model fits the dataset it was trained on and learns the patterns. Extending this research
to create a pleasant music experience for cochlear implants is an idea of using a suitable,
adjusted dataset together with robust deep learning models that were specifically built for
8
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:17==
music production.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
9
==PAGE:18==
10 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:19==
3
Literature Review
This chapter will investigate the previous research and studies that were done in the field
and are directly related to this thesis study. The findings will be presented in the first two
sections.
The first section will inform the reader about the previous research and studies that had
been done about cochlear implant users, their hearing properties, how it differs from nor­
mal hearing listeners, and their perception of music. This is quite an important topic for this
project to investigate, since one of the main purposes of the project is to find new insights
into using generative deep learning models for a better music experience for cochlear
implant users. To achieve this, the study should find out what exactly is the meaning of
a better music experience for cochlear implant users, what the existing methods used for
this are, and what aspects of music are strictly relevant to this issue.
The second section will focus on the research that had been done about machine learn­
ing applications in the field of music. Since this is quite a general topic of discussion
and research, which was summarized in the previous chapter, the information is tried
to be more specific depending on the methods and the purpose of this specific project.
This being said, this section will provide more information about the existing research on
generative deep learning models and using them to create music. The necessary prepro­
cessing steps, different possibilities for model architectures, and the methods obtained
will be found out.
The final section is to provide the reader with a better overview of the methodology and
techniques that were chosen and used for this specific project. In this section, an intro­
duction to the data preprocessing techniques and the neural network architectures used
are discussed, and the reasons behind these selections are summarized.
3.1
Previous research on cochlear implant users and music
perception
The music perception of cochlear implant users has been a topic of discussion since they
were first started to be used. Due to the functionalities and working principles of the
device, it is not possible for cochlear implant users to perceive music in the same way as
normal hearing listeners. Several research has been made on the music perception of
cochlear implant users, and especially on how to enhance it with existing technologies.
Leal et al. studied the topic in their paper named ”Music Perception in Adult Cochlear
Implant Recipients”[7]. In this paper, the researchers stated that the cochlear implant
is a device that is primarily designed for speech enhancement and when it comes to
music perception, the cochlear implant user may not be able to perceive the same when
compared with a normal hearing listener. They also continued this research and studied
the different features of music and how each of them is perceived by cochlear implant
users. More specifically, they designed experiments about the musical timbre, pitch, and
rhythm and the perception of these specific features in music.
The results showed that cochlear implant users had a hard time distinguishing timbre.
Similarly, some tonal tests were made and the results were not very high. However, the
scores of the performances were much higher and promising for the rhythm tests. This
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 11
==PAGE:20==
showed that the cochlear implant users were much more confident and pleased with the
rhythmic aspect of music when compared to tonalities and harmonic features.
Another finding of the study was about the perception of pitch in music by cochlear implant
users. The study showed that, for cochlear implant users, wider ranges of pitch results in
better understanding and perception of music. Due to the design of the cochlear implant,
the limited number of electrodes included in the device makes it difficult to distinguish
when the participant hears two different notes which are in a very narrow range, such as
a semitone change.
Finally, this study showed that speech can be an enhancer for the musical perception
and joy of the cochlear implant user. Again, due to the inner mechanisms of the cochlear
implant, its main purpose is to make speech understandable for the user. When listening
to different songs, the users reported better understanding and perception when there
was singing included in the song.
Marozeau et al. studied the music perception in cochlear implant users in their paper
called ”Music for the cochlear implant: Audience response to six commissioned ”[8]. In this
paper, the ’pleasant’ music experience is introduced to the reader, as well as why music
might not be an as pleasant experience as it is to a normal hearing listener. Two different
groups of concertgoers were matched in similar groups regarding their age and musical
taste. One group consisted of cochlear implant users, while the other group consisted
of normal­hearing listeners. 6 different specially­commissioned works were presented to
both groups and their experience was noted.
There were not any significant differences for the measures of interest, enjoyment and
musicality. But the ratings of understanding and perceiving instrument localization and
recognition were significantly lower from CI users.
It is also worth noting that, the highest satisfaction happened for cochlear implant users
when there were percussion instruments present in the piece. This also supports the
previous paper, making rhythm an important aspect of music for cochlear implant users.
The cochlear implant users also reported lower levels of satisfaction when there was a
need to understand a better perception of the pitch, timbre, and segregation. The musical
complexity was a factor that decreased their enjoyment of music, whereas simple musical
structures and clear rhythm enhanced musical enjoyment for cochlear implant subjects.
Buyens et al. published another very interesting study, which also influenced the methods
and techniques used in this project. The study is called ”Music mixing preferences of
cochlear implant recipients: A pilot study” [9]. This is specifically interesting since it directly
gives insights into how a cochlear implant user would prefer any kind of music to be.
This study investigated the personal preferences for modified relative instrument levels in
music with normal­hearing and cochlear implant subjects. Two different experiments were
designed. For the first experiment, the subjects were given an audio mixer while listening
to a song, so that they can decide to increase the sound they want to hear higher, such
as the singer or the bass. And for the second experiment, a preference rating was made
based on the selections in the first experiment.
After the re­mixing tests were applied to cochlear implant users, it was seen that the
preferred vocal level was significantly higher than normal hearing listeners. This can also
be interpreted as the device being designed for speech, the users are more comfortable
following the musical meaning when the singing, which is a kind of musical speech, is
more significant.
12 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:21==
Another preference of the cochlear implant users was to increase the volume of the chan­
nel including the bass and the drum, especially when compared to the volume of the
channel including guitar and piano. This outcome of the study showed that being able
to follow the rhythm is an important aspect of a pleasant music experience for cochlear
implant users.
Another point that the results of the experiments showed was that, when the complexity
of the piece increased, the satisfaction level decreased for cochlear implant users, which
is an expected result when compared to the other studies.
When complexity increased, the satisfaction level also decreased for cochlear implant
users.
3.2
Generative deep learning models and their applications
in music
Today, thanks to the high computing power and data storage capabilities available with
recent technologies, it is possible to train complex machine learning models using enor­
mous amounts of data. These improvements directly led to dramatic changes in machine­
learning applications and their capabilities. A popular sub­category of these applications
is using generative deep learning methods for music creation, and it is one of the most
recent and trending topics in the field. There are many studies and research made about
the machine learning applications that are used in the field of music, specifically about
generative applications regarding the content of this thesis. Some of these applications,
like GoogleLM and JubekoxAI, were introduced to the reader in the first chapter. In this
section, some of the academic research done in the field are summarized.
Goodfellow et al. published the deep learning book, which also followed during my Deep
Learning course. This book was always my first guide during learning about and imple­
menting neural networks for this project, which will be explained later in detail in this thesis
report[1].
Miranda et al. published the book called ”Handbook of Artificial Intelligence for Music[2]”,
which had been a very informative guide for me to learn more in the field and teach myself.
I followed this book as a guide throughout my thesis work. Even though not all the chapters
were relevant, this book provided me with very valuable information about my project and
about topics that were pretty interesting to study. It gives information about the history,
present, and future of artificial intelligence applications in the field of music, and also talks
about musical encoding strategies and deep learning applications for music generation,
which are closely related to the content of this thesis.
Briot et al. created and shared this masterpiece called ”Deep Learning Techniques for
Music Generation – A Survey [10]”, especially considering the content of my project.
which helped me a lot during deciding on my development strategies as well as the im­
plementation phase. The paper is a simplified version of the book called ”Deep Learning
Techniques for Music Generation, Computational Synthesis and Creative Systems”. This
paper was a perfect simplification and summary of what I needed for this project and even
more.
In this paper, they open a discussion and make an analysis of different ways of using deep
artificial neural networks to generate musical content. The topic is discussed under five
different dimensions: The objective, the representation, the architecture, the challenge,
and the strategy. This architecture of the paper helped me create my outline and make a
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 13
==PAGE:22==
good strategy before implementation, critically thinking about what I want to do, and what
kind of conditions I need to satisfy to achieve that goal.
This paper also provides a good theoretical background on two specific applications,
which consist of a big part of this thesis work, music generation by using deep learn­
ing models: The variational encoder and the generative adversarial network. According
to this study, together with RNN networks with LSTM cells, these three methods are today
the most popular methods for music generation with deep learning.
Another comprehensive study in this field was made by Sturm et al. They published a
paper called ”Machine learning research that matters for music creation: A case study
[11]”. This study focuses on the application areas of machine learning in music creation
and tries to question and analyze its usefulness for and impact on real­world practition­
ers. It is possible to use machine learning for a lot of different applications in theory, but
how efficient and useful would it be? Or, what are the correct methods for doing this?
This paper draws attention to these topics while giving some popular examples of these
applications, such as Folk­RNN models, and then builds on the outcomes to inform the
development and application of machine learning.
The study states that some of the concrete impacts of machine learning in music creation
are: creating something that would be impossible to exist otherwise; the offering of a
‘musical other’ that could be poked to produce interesting results, a way to break habits,
challenge oneself with something new, and inspire ideas; a way to engage with particular
idioms, a way of creating arrangements or variations in a short amount of time and with
limited expertise.
Some of the recent, state­of­the­art studies that have been made in the field include Juke­
boxAI, WaveNet, and GoogleLM. These are very advanced projects in raw audio process­
ing and music generation with deep learning architectures.
Jukebox AI is a neural network that generates music, including rudimentary singing, as
raw audio in a variety of genres and artist styles. It uses a VQ­VAE architecture, which
is an advanced version of a variational autoencoder model. It uses vector quantization to
obtain a discrete latent representation[3].
WaveNet is another advanced audio­generative model developed by Deepmind. In order
to deal with long­range temporal dependencies needed for raw audio generation, archi­
tectures are developed based on dilated causal convolutions, which exhibit very large
receptive fields. Apart from the raw audio processing, it is able to generate speech that
mimics human voices and sounds more natural than the best existing text­to­speech sys­
tems by turning texts into speech, in audio form[12].
GoogleLM is the most recent study published among all three. Similar to WaveNet, it is
designed to create music in audio form using a text input, so basically the purpose of
this study is doing a text­to­music conversion. It can be defined as a model generating
high­fidelity music from text descriptions such as ”a calming violin melody backed by a
distorted guitar riff”. The study shows that it outperformed existing systems, both in audio
quality and adherence to the text description[4].
3.3
Overview of the methodology and techniques used
There had been several approaches applied when it comes to music generation with ma­
chine learning applications. Various models are proposed to be used for different appli­
cations[10].
14 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:23==
The first topic of discussion for these kinds of tasks is the type of generation to decide on
the correct methods.
3.3.1
Types of Music Generation
Mainly, there are three different versions of these applications, where the inputs are differ­
ent and are the decisive factor in the type of generation. These are automatic generation,
continuing generation and generation regarding a piece of input information.
Automatic generation is where the model only has information about the data that is
trained on, but is not given any specific information about how to start, proceed or create
the new sample. This project focuses on automatic music generation using deep learning
models. As it will be explained in detail later, generative deep learning models come in
handy for these kinds of tasks. Also being used in this study, variational autoencoders
and generative adversarial networks are suitable and widely used for automatic music
generation tasks.
Continuing generation is where there is a musical piece started, but not completed, and
the model is asked to predict how to piece could be continued from that point onwards.
The different dynamics of this type of generation require different approaches than the
automatic music generation, since the predicted notes and sequences strictly depend
on the previous notes that were already provided. Recurrent neural networks with long
short­term memory (LSTM) cells are widely used in these types of applications. It is also
possible to see a combination of these networks and cells, depending on the purpose of
the application.
The third type of generation is, where there is a piece of information given to provide an
insight on how the desired output should look like. A good example of that is found in
Jukebox AI project, where users can ask for requests such as ”an indie­style song from
the voice of Freddie Mercury”, and the model acts accordingly to create its output.
3.3.2
Automatic Music Generation with Deep Learning
This project focuses on building two different deep neural network models for automatic
music generation. Both of these models are powerful generation tools, widely used for
image and sound generation tasks. The performances of these state­of­the­art models
will be compared and discussed at the end of this project.
The first network that is decided to be implemented is a variational autoencoder model. A
variational autoencoder is a generative deep learning model, where the input data, which
the model is trained on, enables the model to find a latent representation of the dataset.
Then, using this latent representation, it has the ability to sample new data points from the
latent space, making it produce original data, which is a suitable element for the dataset,
but with some variation factor added.
An interesting property of the variational autoencoder model architecture for generation
purposes – therefore often considered as one type of a class of models named generative
models – is the meaningful exploration of the latent space, as a variational autoencoder
has the ability to learn and understand a smooth latent space mapping to realistic exam­
ples[10].
For the second network, a more recent application in the field is researched and imple­
mented. Goodfellow et al. introduced the concept of generative adversarial networks with
the paper having the same name, and this improvement dramatically changed what gen­
erative models are capable of, and how realistic their outputs can actually become[13].
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 15
==PAGE:24==
The deep neural network is a generative adversarial network architecture, and it is a state­
of­the­art model in today’s generative models in deep learning. In generative adversarial
networks, there are two different models which are implemented in a way so that they
are competing against each other. One of the networks is the generator, which generates
new data starting from random noise. The second network is the discriminator, where the
network is trying to discriminate the generated sample from the dataset, in other words,
guessing if that sample is a part of the dataset or not. Iterating this process for several
times, both networks are improving themselves and their performances every time they
are wrong, which in the end provides a powerful generator that creates samples that are
even hard to discriminate by a powerful discriminator.
16 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:25==
4
Dataset and Musical Encoding
Strategies
This chapter will inform the reader about the selected dataset that was used for training the
neural network models and achieving the desired results for this thesis work. The dataset
and the available information will be presented, During the search for a suitable dataset
for the project various open­source datasets available online had been discovered, in
different formats regarding the encoding of music and musical meaning. Since raw audio
consists of large amounts of data and is difficult to work with, the musical generation on
this project is limited to the MIDI format, which will also be explained later in this chapter.
Next, the musical encoding and data preparation steps will be further explained and dis­
cussed. Information will be provided about the MIDI format and its benefits and limitations
in music generation. The piano roll format will be introduced, and all the data preprocess­
ing steps will be presented to the reader, including all the steps while preparing the raw
data so that it is ready to be fed into the implemented neural networks. It is worth men­
tioning that, although this thesis report provides sequential sections for this preprocessing
part and the theory part which includes the neural network implementations, this had been
an iterative process, going back and forth and adjusting the preprocessing and encoding
strategies depending on the needs of the networks. The strategies used for the final im­
plementation will be reported in this section.
4.1
Description of the dataset used
For the generation of new musical samples, the first task to do is to find a suitable dataset
which can be used in a deep learning model, and get meaningful outputs. The final dataset
is decided to be on MIDI format, and the reasoning will later be explained in the section
about the musical encoding strategies. The selected dataset is called the Lakh MIDI
dataset[14].
The Lakh MIDI Dataset is a large­scale collection of musical MIDI files, which have been
widely used for research in music information retrieval and machine learning. The dataset
was created by the Music and Audio Research Lab at New York University and consists of
over 176,000 unique MIDI files, which were collected from various sources on the internet,
including online repositories, personal websites, and online communities.
Lakh MIDI Dataset is the PhD thesis project of Collin Raffel. It has been obtained as a re­
sult of an audio­to­MIDI alignment project. More information about the project is available
here[14]. The origin of this dataset is obtained from The Million Songs Dataset, which is
a collection of audio features and metadata for one million contemporary popular music
tracks. It was created by The Echo Nest, a music intelligence company that was acquired
by Spotify in 2014. The dataset includes information such as artist name, song title, dura­
tion, year of release, genre, and a variety of audio features extracted from each track such
as loudness, tempo, and key. It is commonly used in music research, machine learning,
and data mining applications. [15]
Coming back to Lakh MIDI dataset, some valuable musical information is provided in this
dataset, in MIDI format. Each MIDI file in the dataset represents a musical composition,
and contains a series of instructions that describe the notes, timing, and other musical
features of the piece, as it is in the definition of a MIDI format. The files cover a wide
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 17
==PAGE:26==
range of musical genres, including classical, jazz, pop, and rock, and are annotated with
metadata such as artist, title, and genre.
There were no constraints applied in the genre for this project, using a random subset
of these musical pieces. This also had its advantages as well as disadvantages. Since
musical genres provide a good classification in music, in a project such as ”blues music
generation” more similar samples with the input data would be expected to be generated,
due to the similar dynamics of the inputs. On the other hand, this approach would limit the
musical features learned by the model that would only be available in a variety of musical
genres. Therefore, in this project, it is not expected for the model to generate ”monotype”
outputs, such as a blues piece in the pentatonic style, but to have more variety in learning
the basic melodies, rhythm, and harmonics.
The Lakh MIDI Dataset has been used in a variety of research applications, including
music analysis, melody extraction, chord recognition, and automatic composition. The
dataset has also been used to train machine learning models for music generation and
style transfer, among other applications.
4.2
Musical encoding strategies to prepare the data for deep
learning models
To be able to train any machine learning model with data, there needs to be a proper
encoding and preprocessing phase for that machine learning model to be successful and
serve its purpose. Musical encoding is a very critical aspect of this project, since poor
encoding techniques may result in undesired results.
In this project, we refer to encoding as the process of representing musical data in a
specific format or representation. In the context of musical data, encoding can involve
representing music in a specific format, such as MIDI or MP3, which allows for efficient
storage, transmission, and processing of music. This involves transforming the original
audio signal into a digital representation that can be manipulated by computers.
The need for these encoding strategies derives from the difficulties of working with audio
data directly, due to the size of the data. 1 second of a music piece in raw audio format
can have 44100 data points, whereas with MIDI format one could represent the same,
intended meaning of that raw audio file with even just hundreds of data points. It is a
fact that audio processing and machine learning applications had recently become a very
big, developing field; but this project has its limitations in terms of time and hardware re­
sources. At this point, as a solid example, it is worth mentioning that the machine learning
models in Jukebox AI project were trained for almost a year to obtain those amazing re­
sults, and many years of research and studies done before that. Therefore, for the sake
of feasibility, suitable musical encoding strategies were considered for this project.
4.2.1
Difficulties with Raw Audio
With machine learning applications, there are many fascinating projects done in the raw
audio domain, but still, the biggest challenge lies below the amount of data that needs to
be processed, even for shorter pieces. Working with raw audio in machine learning can
be challenging due to several factors. These factors include the large size of the audio
data, the high dimensionality of the data, and the variability and complexity of the audio
signals.
The first difficulty, which also shaped the direction of this project, is the large size of the
raw audio data. A good example is that, a single minute of CD­quality audio at 44.1 kHz
18 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:27==
and 16­bit resolution can take up over 5 megabytes of storage, meaning that even the
shortest pieces of music would be very demanding in terms of processing and storage.
The second difficulty is its high dimensionality. Audio signals are generally represented as
waveforms, or spectrograms, which are continuous signals that vary over time. Therefore,
audio data is typically represented as a time­series of amplitude values, which again can
result in very high­dimensional data when considering longer audio recordings.
Third, the audio signals have high variability and complexity. These signals may include
a lot of different instruments or singing with different voices. Even though the two notes
might have the same frequency, the timber would be different, making this a very complex
system for machine learning models to understand and process. As a result of this com­
plexity, a generative model would require many examples to learn the musical meaning
from raw audio data.
With the correct encoding techniques, it is possible to protect the musical meaning, while
reducing the data size and dimension dramatically. Some of these encoding techniques
include tokenization of the musical data, and MIDI format. Tokenization is a very similar
application as it is widely used in Natural Language Processing. It is using the notes,
their length and some other musical features to create a token representation and train
machine­learning models accordingly.
Another very commonly used encoding technique in music is the MIDI format. This en­
coding technique and data storage format will be explained in the following section.
4.2.2
MIDI format
Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) is a technical standard that describes a com­
munications protocol, digital interface, and electrical connectors that connect a wide va­
riety of electronic musical instruments, computers, and related audio devices for playing,
editing, and recording music. A single MIDI link through a MIDI cable can carry up to
sixteen channels of information, each of which can be routed to a separate device or
instrument. This could be sixteen different digital instruments, for example. [16]
More specifically, MIDI carries event messages, the tye of data that specifies the instruc­
tions for creating music. These messages include a note’s notation, pitch, velocity (which
is heard typically as loudness or softness of volume), vibrato, panning to the right or left of
stereo, and clock signals (which set tempo). When a musician plays a MIDI instrument,
all of the key presses, button presses, knob turns and slider changes are converted into
MIDI data.
It is important to know that a MIDI file is not the same as an audio recording. Rather, it is
a set of instructions – for example, for pitch or tempo – and it can use a thousand times
less disk space than the equivalent recorded audio. This is also the main reason for the
MIDI format being selected for this project in terms of musical encoding.
To process these MIDI files in Python, the Pretty Midi library is used.
4.2.3
Pretty Midi library
The implementation phase and coding practices done for this project are developed using
Python programming language. After deciding on the encoding technique and the dataset
itself, the next step is to find a suitable Python package to process these MIDI files so that
data preprocessing can be applied before the model implementations. In this regard, the
Python package called ”pretty_midi” is selected.
Shortly, pretty_midi is a Python library for working with MIDI files. With pretty_midi, one
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 19
==PAGE:28==
can read a MIDI file and access its contents, such as the notes, their timing and velocity,
and other MIDI messages like the control change and pitch bend. New MIDI files can also
be created from scratch or modified to existing ones[17].
It provides built­in functions to read and manipulate MIDI files.
Once the file is read
using the package, a PrettyMIDI object is created. Then several functions such as es­
timate_tempo(), get_beats() and get_pitch_class_histogram() can be applied on these
PrettyMIDI objects. Among all these interesting functions, two of them were critically im­
portant to have and widely used in this project.
The first of these functions is the get_piano_roll() function. Using this function, it is possi­
ble to compute a piano roll matrix of the MIDI data. This is very useful for the purpose of
this project, since these piano roll matrices can be treated as images to represent a mu­
sical structure and are very suitable for training convolutional neural networks. Moreover,
it is possible to obtain a nice visual representation of the musical piece. More information
about the piano roll represantation will be provided in the next section. To display these
piano roll images, another popular audio processing library in Python is used, named
”librosa”.
Librosa is a Python library for analyzing and processing audio signals. It provides a wide
range of functions for tasks such as loading audio files, extracting features from audio sig­
nals, and manipulating audio signals. Librosa is often used in music information retrieval
and audio signal processing research. Although librosa is very widely used in audio signal
processing applications in Pyhton, because of the mentioned limitations of this project, it
is not used as a primary tool in this project, but it is worth noting that this library has many
features for completing data preparation task to prepare raw audio for machine learning
applications.
The second aforementioned function in the pretty_midi library is the synthesize() function.
This function allows one to create audio samples using a PrettyMIDI object. This func­
tion creates possibilities to convert the generated MIDI files to audio files, and listen to
them. This way, it is easier to assess the performance of the generative models from a
perspective of a listener.
4.2.4
Piano Roll Representation
The original word ”piano roll” comes from an actual, physical piano roll, which is a type of
music storage method used to operate mechanical pianos and other automatic musical
instruments. The roll consists of a long strip of paper with holes punched into it, repre­
senting the notes and timing of a musical piece. When the roll is fed into the instrument,
the holes trigger various mechanisms that play the notes on the instrument.
Regarding the context of this project, a piano roll is referred to a visual representation
of musical information. Piano rolls are used in modern music software, where they can
be used to program MIDI sequences or to visualize MIDI data. In this context, a piano
roll typically refers to a graphical representation of a MIDI sequence, with horizontal bars
representing the timing and pitch of each note.
An example image of a piano roll matrix that is obtained randomly from the dataset, using
the pretty_midi and librosa libraries is given in Figure 4.1.
20 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.1: An example of a piano roll image from LAKH MIDI dataset. The image is
binarized so that the velocities and different instruments are omitted.
The rows of the piano roll matrix represent the musical notes. Having a total of 128 rows,
the very first row represents G9, the highest note available in the matrix, where the last row
represents C0. These numbers and notes are obtained because of the built­in function
of the library, but also as seen in the example image, there are many unnecessary rows,
as in music, these very low and very high notes are generally not used. This provides a
chance for simplification of data, which will be discussed later.
The columns of the piano roll represent the time factor in music, given in seconds in this
specific example and continuing from here onwards. Using the library, the time factor of
the piece can also be modulated, fastening or slowing down the piece.
In this binary matrix, if a point has the value 1, meaning that it is represented as a white box
in the visual representation, then at that specific time (the column number), that specific
note(the row number) is active, or being played. Consecutive values of 1s in the same
rows represent if the note is being played without being stopped, representing continuous
playing. This is similar to the scenario if a piano player was pressing a key and kept
pressing it for a period of time.
4.2.5
Data Pre­processing
The previous sections of this chapter provided an introductory explanation of the MIDI
format, the pretty_midi library and the piano roll representation. This background infor­
mation was critical for the reader to understand the data pre­processing steps applied for
this project.
Before implementing the neural networks, it is crucial to prepare the raw data ready so that
the networks can be trained on these data. Different processing techniques are applied to
the dataset for this purpose. Some of these steps include sub­selection of the data for size
reduction, cropping the piano rolls for removing unnecessary data points and applying
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 21
==PAGE:30==
time adjustments, and binarization of the matrix values for simplification assumptions.
This section will provide further information about these data pre­processing steps.
Before telling more about those steps, it is once again worth noting at this point that, this
had all been an iterative process with the model implementation and model training, and
all these data pre­processing steps were applied regarding the necessary adjustments
after checking the models and implementations. This section of the report includes the
processing techniques applied for satisfying the final version of the whole system.
Sub­Selection
The LAKH Midi dataset originally consists of 176,581 different MIDI files. There are also a
variety of sub­datasets available, but still, the number is as high as 45,129. The selected
dataset is the last one mentioned, but this much data would be very difficult to process. To
achieve better results and an efficient training process for the network, the very first step
for the data pre­processing phase was to select a subset of this dataset. This process is
done randomly to avoid any kind of possible bias. Finally, 8,000 of these MIDI files were
read and stored in a NumPy array. NumPy is a Python library used for working with large,
multi­dimensional arrays and matrices, as well as a collection of mathematical functions
to operate on these arrays. After reading these data with NumPy randomly, the size of the
array obtained had been 8000, 128, n; where 8000 is the number of selected data points,
128 is the number of notes, and n represents a variable of time for the different lengths of
the pieces.
Cropping
One of the main challenges of using machine learning in music derives from the different
lengths of pieces. A traditional machine learning algorithm generally expects to be trained
on an equally sized dataset. Also in generative deep learning models, with most model
architectures, the output to be generated is usually the same size of the input. While
there are some approaches to handle this, this issue of the variety in length limits the
generative processes aimed at this project. Therefore, for the sake of the context of this
project, the different musical pieces were adjusted to be in a fixed size. To achieve this, all
the pieces in the dataset were cropped in the time dimension, so that the new size of the
dataset array had become 8000, 128, 1024. The last dimension, representing the length of
the piece, corresponds to eleven seconds of a musical piece.
Other important points to take into consideration during the cropping were being careful
not to lose the musical meaning, and also not losing the randomness of the dataset among
the available data. It is a fact that, for most of the musical pieces, the beginning or the
ending of the piece might not provide a good musical meaning, for example, it could start
or end silently, or just play a few notes as an introduction. Thus, to satisfy the desired
outcome, cropping was applied to all the data points so that it crops the very middle of
the piece. This way, the randomness remained and the chances of protecting the musical
meaning, more specifically the harmony, notes, and rhythm, increased.
Finally, the unnecessary notes with a lot of zero values are removed, by cropping the
matrix with 30 rows from the top and 34 rows from the bottom. These numbers were
selected specifically after experimenting with different examples, so that the pieces would
not lose any meaningful information. After this final cropping, a total of 64 rows were
removed, leaving 64 notes in total. The final size of the dataset had become 8000, 64, 1024.
Binarization
Some of the data points in the original data included some other values than just zeroes
and ones. This information was a representation of the velocities of the related note,
which is also presented in the MIDI format, but considering the output audios of the used
synthesizing techniques and the desired model learning, this information was not valuable
22 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:31==
for us. Instead, using the piano roll as a full binary image, where the ones represent if the
note is pressed in that given time period, and zeroes otherwise, made things much easier
and gave the opportunity to build robust networks and generate better outputs.
To achieve this, all the values in the matrix were binarized, meaning that if a value was
bigger than zero, a value of one is assigned to it, otherwise it remained as zero. This way,
the final version of our dataset was reached, and the dataset is fully ready for being fed
into the neural networks for model training.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 23
==PAGE:32==
24 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:33==
5
Theory
The theory chapter of this report consists of two main sections and each of these sections
will be describing a deep neural network model, that was built for generating musical
pieces using unsupervised learning methods. The sections will provide detailed informa­
tion about the underlying mathematical backgrounds of the models, early implementa­
tions, final model architectures, and finally, training and parameter setup for the models.
5.1
Introduction
To have a better understanding of the problem of interest, and the solving methods, it
makes sense to take a look at the purpose of this project once more at this point. The
aim is to use a dataset containing thousands of short musical pieces, and generate new
musical samples which are similar to the dataset, but contains variety, thus the output
pieces are not desired to be repetitions or copies of the pieces from the original dataset.
To achieve this goal, an artificial intelligence model must be designed and implemented,
such that it has the ability to learn in a human fashion. It also makes a lot of sense to think
of our model as a very beginner composer, maybe even a child, who listened to many dif­
ferent pieces and tried to create reasoning or find patterns among the pieces, so that he
can create a brand new, original piece, which will sound ”meaningful” and ”pleasant”, be­
cause this composer would now know what these terms represent in music language and
taste. As present in our example, humans start their learning journey with limited knowl­
edge, and gradually acquire expertise by processing a vast amount of data or examples,
just like deep learning models. Additionally, both human learning and deep learning can
benefit from feedback. Humans may receive feedback in the form of guidance, correc­
tions, or reinforcement, which helps refine their understanding. Similarly, deep learning
models optimize their performance through feedback mechanisms, adjusting their internal
parameters to minimize errors.
Before going deeper into explaining the deep learning methods, another important point
is to provide the reader a better picture of the terms that are frequently used in this report,
but often confused by readers. learning These terms are artificial intelligence, machine
learning and deep learning. An experienced reader, who is familiar with these terms can
skip this part and continue reading from 5.2 directly. It is widely seen that sometimes these
terms do not represent the same meaning, or in other words, serve the same purpose,
in literature and real life. These terms can be expanded by also explaining data science,
computer science, data mining, etc. But to keep things simpler and not go out of the scope
of this project, we will just explain and point out the differences between these three terms.
Figure 5.1 provides a Venn diagram to show the hierarchy among these three terms, and
is given below.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.1: Venn diagram for artificial intelligence, machine learning and deep learning,
https://www.smart­digital.de/
As seen in the Venn diagram in Figure 5.1, artificial intelligence is the largest circle, rep­
resenting the broad field of artificial intelligence. The circle of machine learning is entirely
contained within the artificial intelligence circle, indicating that machine learning is a sub­
set of artificial intelligence. Similarly, the circle of deep learning is entirely contained within
the machine learning circle, indicating that deep learning is a subset of machine learning.
Artificial intelligence is a broad field that aims to create intelligent machines that can per­
form tasks that typically require human intelligence. It encompasses a wide range of
techniques, methodologies, and approaches to simulate intelligent behavior in machines.
There are examples of intelligent machines, or applications of artificial intelligence that do
not contain any machine learning. A very good example of this was explained in Chapter
2 and an illustration was provided in 2.1. The Iliac suite was the first intelligent machine
to compose its own music, but it did not use any kind of machine learning methods for
that. Instead, it was only using a simple Monte Carlo search method for predicting a note
sequence.
Machine learning, on the other hand, is a subset of artificial intelligence, that focuses on
algorithms and models that allow computers to learn from data and make predictions or
take actions without being explicitly programmed. Machine learning algorithms learn pat­
terns, relationships, and insights from data through training processes and use them to
make decisions or generate outputs. As seen in the Venn diagram, there are some appli­
cations of machine learning which are different from deep learning, and some examples
of these are regression techniques, decision trees, support vector machines etc.
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning that specifically utilizes artificial neural
networks with multiple layers to learn and extract hierarchical representations from data.
Deep learning architectures, such as deep neural networks, are capable of automatically
learning complex patterns and features directly from raw data, leading to state­of­the­art
performance in various tasks such as image recognition, natural language processing,
and speech recognition.
Thus, the two models to be described in the following sections can be defined as artificial
26 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:35==
intelligence models, machine learning models and deep learning models, but they will
mostly be referred to as deep learning models, or deep neural networks, due to their
specific architectures and implementation techniques.
Finally, machine learning models are often grouped regarding their supervision features.
Machine learning models learn from datasets, and there are two possibilities for these
datasets. They could either be labeled or not. A machine learning method, that uses a la­
beled dataset for learning is called a supervised learning method. Supervised learning is
commonly used for tasks such as image classification, sentiment analysis, speech recog­
nition, etc. On the other hand, several machine learning models can also be trained with
a dataset with no labels present. The methods used for these models are called unsuper­
vised learning methods. Some examples of unsupervised machine learning applications
are clustering, anomaly detection, dimensionality reduction, etc. This being said, look­
ing at the nature of our problem and dataset, since the dataset used in this report has
no labels, the problem of interest should be solved using unsupervised machine learning
methods, and the selected models satisfy this need.
To create new samples from an unlabeled dataset, two commonly used state­of­the­art
deep learning models are implemented. The first network is a variational autoencoder
model, and it learns to encode high­dimensional data to a lower dimension, and to de­
codes it to create a new piece. The second network is a generative adversarial network,
where a generator and a discriminator network are trained and compete against each
other. A more detailed explanation for each of these models will be provided in the fol­
lowing sections.
Python programming environment is selected for the implementation phase of this project.
For the deep learning models implementations and algorithms, PyTorch library is selected.
5.2
Variational Autoencoder(VAE)
5.2.1
Brief Explanation
The first one of the two implemented models is called a variational autoencoder in litera­
ture. Variational autoencoders are a type of traditional autoencoders.
Autoencoders are widely used for reducing dimensons of complex and high­dimensional
data, to find a lower dimensional latent representation of each data point, and then use
these latent representations to generate new samples from the dataset. Autoencoders
typically consist of two main blocks, which are the decoder and the encoder. As the name
suggests, the decoder is responsible for decoding the high­dimensional data to a lower­
dimensional latent representation. This way, any data point can be encoded using less
features and a common representation ground for all the dataset can be obtained. The
decoder block of the model is responsible for decoding the latent representation so that
a meaningful output can be obtained, which has the same dimensions as the elements
of the initial dataset. This approach can be used to find an encoding strategy for a high­
dimensional dataset, so that the decoder creates almost the same outputs of the initial
dataset with a low error rate. Then, some random points can be selected from the latent
space, and by decoding these random points, we can obtain new samples which are a
part of the dataset, but different from the original samples.
Figure 5.2 provides an example of a basic autoencoder architecture.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.2: Example autoencoder architecture, https://tikz.net/autoencoder/
Figure 5.2 is a good visual example of how the autoencoder is used for dimensionality re­
duction using neurons. The yellow neurons represent the input layer, where each of the
neurons represents a feature of a specific data from the dataset. Then, these features
are mapped to new neurons in the second layer, or the first hidden layer, which are repre­
sented with the purple layers. The number of hidden layers can change depending on the
size of the features, or the task. In the middle of the network, there is a bottleneck, and
it represents the latent representation of the input data. This bottleneck is obtained after
the encoding process, and it is also the exact point where the random sample generation
starts. On the right­hand side, the output layer can be found, shown with blue neurons.
The output layer represents the final product of the network, and this is obtained after the
decoding process of the latent representation. The output layer can either represent a
reconstruction of an existing sample or a newly generated sample.
The variational autoencoder is an improved, probabilistic version of the autoencoder ar­
chitecture. Figure 5.3 provides an example of a variational autoencoder architecture.
28 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:37==
Figure
5.3:
Example
variational
autoencoder
architecture,
https://tikz.net/variationalautoencoder/
As seen in Figure 5.3, the variational autoencoder differs from the traditional autoencoder
by its latent representation. To further elaborate on specific features of the variational
autoencoder, compared to the regular autoencoder, there are three main points that need
to be considered. The first point is the objective of the task. As recently discussed, the
primary objective of an autoencoder is to learn a compact representation of the input
data by compressing it into a lower­dimensional latent space, and then reconstructing
the original input from this latent representation. It is important to understand that there
is no variance involved in any of the processes, encoding or decoding. On the other
hand, in addition to reconstructing the input data, variational autoencoders also learn a
probabilistic model of the latent space. The main goal of a variational autoencoder is to
generate new data samples that resemble the training data. It learns a distribution over
the latent space and tries to map each input data point to a point in this latent space such
that it can be sampled to generate new data points.
The second point is the latent space representation. Autoencoders only learn a deter­
ministic mapping, meaning that the input data is encoded into a fixed point in the latent
space, which is then used by the decoder to reconstruct the input. An important aspect of
the variational autoencoders is that they can learn a probabilistic mapping from the input
space to the latent space. The encoder outputs the parameters of a probability distribu­
tion, which is usually Gaussian as used in this specific project, in the latent space. This
output typically consists of a mean and a variance. This stochasticity introduces a regu­
larization effect and allows the variational autoencoder to explore and generate new data
samples.
The third point is the training of the networks. Autoencoders are generally trained using
the mean squared error or binary cross­entropy loss, where autoencoders are trained by
maximizing the ELBO, consisting of two components, which are the reconstruction loss
and the Kullback­Leibler (KL) divergence between the learned latent distribution and a
prior distribution. The KL divergence term encourages the latent distribution to be close to
the prior distribution and helps regularize the model, so that the model can create outputs
that are not very different than the samples from the dataset. The training strategies of
the network will later be discussed in the following sections.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 29
==PAGE:38==
5.2.2
First Implementation
The results and outputs in this subsection are not related to the main purpose of this thesis.
It is only added in this report to show how variational autoencoders produce outputs in
simple cases, and how the early implementation is done for this project. The reader may
skip to 5.2.3 to continue reading in the scope of this project.
In machine learning tasks, the first step in building a complex model which performs suc­
cessfully is to have a very simple model that works and creates expected outputs. Once
we have this model, then it can be used to be a foundation of the complex model to be
built. It has crucial importance to improve the model step by step, and making sure ev­
ery implemented step works as expected. To achieve this, and familiarize myself more
with the autoencoder and the variational autoencoder, a simple implementation for both
models is completed.
A very commonly used dataset example in machine learning literature is the MNIST
dataset[18]. This dataset consists of thousands of images containing numbers, and it is
especially used in building, learning, and testing simple, early machine­learning models.
Some of the samples available in the dataset are provided in Figure 5.4
Figure 5.4: Samples from MNIST dataset, https://datasets.activeloop.ai/docs/ml/datasets/mnist/
A variational autoencoder model is built and tested on the MNIST dataset. The output
images of the variational autoencoder model can be seen in Figure 5.5.
30 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.5: Genereated number samples from the variational autoencoder model
From analyzing the results obtained, it can be seen that the newly generated samples
show similarities with the available numbers from the dataset. The factor of variation is
also introduced, generating a new variety of samples from the obtained latent represen­
tation.
5.2.3
Final Architecture
The main purpose of this thesis project is to generate original music samples, by building
a network to learn from a dataset containing various music samples. A final variational
autoencoder model is built to achieve this purpose, and this section will provide more
information about the model, its architecture, and building components.
The variational autoencoder model consists of two main parts: The encoder and the de­
coder. Both of these networks are comprised of convolutional layers. The encoder is the
part of the network where the input image, which is the piano roll of a selected sample
for our example, is fed into the network so that its dimension is drastically reduced, and
it is finally converted to its latent representation. On the other hand, the decoder is the
part of the network where the exact opposite of this operation is aimed to be done. The
decoder is fed with a latent representation, and it tries to decode this representation to
form a sample, by using convolutional layers. A well­working variational autoencoder is
expected to create a similar output with the input, when the input is fed to the network
to be encoded and decoded respectively. This means that there is a meaningful latent
representation obtained after the encoding process, which is desired for the network to
be successful.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 31
==PAGE:40==
The architecture of the final variational autoencoder model is provided in Figure 5.6, and
it is obtained using the model.eval() function provided in the PyTorch library.
Figure 5.6: The architecture of the final variational autoencoder model
Encoder
The first part of the variational autoencoder is the encoder part of the network. The aim
of the encoder is to reduce the dimension of the input image and then pass it to a linear
layer so that it can be converted into a latent representation. Figure 5.6 demonstrates the
features of the encoder part of the variational autoencoder network, in between the num­
bered cells of 0 to 16. As seen in the network, the encoder consists of four convolutional
layers. These layers are the main building blocks of the encoder, where the shape reduc­
tion is happening. After each convolutional layer, batch normalization is added so that
the learning process is stabilized and its speed is increased by standardizing the inputs
to a layer for each mini­batch. As the activation function of the network, a rectified linear
unit (ReLU) activation function is selected. The output of the ReLU activation function is
given in equation 5.1.
ReLU(z) = max(0, z).
(5.1)
Finally, the dropout technique is used after the activation function.
The aim of using
dropout between the layers is to prevent overfitting. As the name suggests, this is achieved
32 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:41==
by dropping out some of the nodes, so that the network learns how to generalize the input
dataset better. The resulting output is then flattened to be passed to the linear layer. It is
important for the reader to note that the selected parameters and the methods used in the
architecture are finalized after a long experimentation process. The reported architecture
is the final architecture of the variational autoencoder model.
Another interesting aspect to be investigated is the change of the shape of the input image,
until it is passed to the linear layer from the encoder. It has crucial importance for neural
networks to be aware of the shapes of the tensors that are processed in the network, so
that the network can work properly. In our case, it was previously discussed in Chapter 4,
that the pre­processed dataset resulted in images with shapes 64, 1024. Considering the
batch size, which will be explained in training parameters, the input tensor which is fed
to the network has a shape of 32, 64, 1024 After being fed into the network and processed
only by the encoder, the resulting tensor now has a shape of 1024. Note that this is the
flattened tensor. Here, we can see that the encoder reduces the dimension of the input
211 times.
Linear Layer
In the variational autoencoder models, between the encoder and the decoder network,
there is generally a linear layer where the output of the encoder is mapped to the desired
latent representation. This is also the case for the variational autoencoder of interest,
and this layer is used to map the output of our encoder, which is a tensor of shape 1024,
to the latent representation, which is desired to have the shape 128. An important point
to mention here is that, in the normal autoencoder models, where there is no variation
involved, this connection is only made once to achieve the explained mapping. But in the
variational autoencoder, the latent representation involves a distribution, which is a Gaus­
sian distribution in our case, and in most cases. In the variational autoencoder, the latent
representation consists of the two parameters of the Gaussian distribution, which are µ
and σ, which denote the mean and the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution,
respectively. In to model architecture in 5.6, fc1 and fc2 represent the fully connected
layers where the output of the encoder is mapped to the mean and the standard deviation
separately. This point of the network, where the input is encoded and the linear layer
maps it to a latent representation, is also called the bottleneck of the network.
There is also another fully connected layer, named fc3. This layer is used for the oppo­
site operation, meaning that when we have a latent representation, and that needs to be
decoded, it is first passed into this linear layer, so that it can be processed in the decoder.
There is only one layer for this purpose, since we can use a reparametrization trick on our
latent representation, before passing it to this layer. The reparameterization trick is done
by solving equation 5.2.
z = µ + ϵ ∗σ
(5.2)
where ϵ denotes the Gaussian noise. Using this equation, we can find the latent repre­
sentation z, and pass it to our fully connected layer before being decoded.
Decoder
The decoder is where the network forms a sample as the final output of the whole network.
The architecture and the building blocks are very similar to the encoder, although it is do­
ing the exact opposite operations of the encoder, meaning that considering the encoder
is trying to reduce the dimension and divide the input into pieces, the decoder tries to fill in
these pieces by increasing the dimension. To achieve this, four convolutional transpose
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 33
==PAGE:42==
layers are used in the architecture of the decoder. The important task here is to main­
tain the original shape with the input data. Similar to the encoder, batch normalization
is added for a stabilized and faster learning process, and dropout layers are introduced
for preventing overfitting of the network. ReLU activation function is used between the
layers, with an exception for the very end of the network. A sigmoid activation function
is used for deciding the output of the network. The sigmoid activation function is given in
equation 5.3
ϕ(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(5.3)
The reasoning behind this selection is the output properties of the sigmoid function. The
outputs of the sigmoid activation function always lie between the range [0, 1]. Since the
final output of the decoder is going to be our new sample, this is a property we would
like to have. Because for the generated samples, the desired outcome is to have binary
images, similar to the input data.
5.2.4
Training strategies and parameter settings
The variational autoencoder is trained with the 8000 pre­processed piano roll images
from the input dataset. As mentioned before, it is important for the reader to understand
that building the architecture, deciding on the hyperparameters for the network and the
training processes were consisted of a lot of experimentation, and happened iteratively, by
adjusting them one by one after each result to determine improvements for the network.
The training strategies and parameters include the loss function of, the optimizer, the
batch size, and the decided number of epochs for the training process.
Loss Function
The loss function is a function to calculate the difference between the desired and the real
outcome. The purpose of a neural network is to minimize the loss throughout the training
stages. During the training process, the neural network adjusts its internal parameters
based on the feedback provided by the loss function. The objective is to minimize the
value of the loss function, as a lower loss indicates better performance and a closer ap­
proximation to the desired output. For our example, the loss function can be perceived
as how our variational autoencoder performs and creates realistic outputs. After creating
a latent representation, the decoder forms a sample using that latent representation. The
outcome of the decoding of the encoded input should be as close as possible to the input
piano roll image.
There are two main components for the loss function of the variational autoencoder net­
work built and these are binary cross entropy (BCE) loss and Kullback–Leibler divergence
(KLD) loss. While BCE loss is a common loss function which can be used as a loss func­
tion and calculated for various machine learning models, KLD loss is specially used for
variational autoencoders, so that the outcomes match the real inputs with a higher prob­
ability. These loss functions will be explained in detail in the following paragraphs.
BCE loss is a commonly used loss function in machine learning, particularly in binary
classification tasks. It is widely used for variational autoencoders, and since our problem
is also a binary classification task, as if classifying the notes as played or not played, it
provides a good fit for our model. BCE loss measures the difference between predicted
probabilities and the true binary labels of a dataset. Equation 5.4 shows how BCE loss is
calculated.
34 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:43==
BCE = −(y log(ˆy) + (1 −y) log(1 −ˆy))
(5.4)
where y denotes the real samples and ˆa denotes the predicted samples.
While in most neural networks, BCE loss itself is enough for the loss function, generative
networks such as variational autoencoders can benefit from a second loss term, so that
the generated outputs actually make sense from a human perspective. KLD loss is used
as a loss function that quantifies the difference between two probability distributions. It is
used to regularize the latent space distribution, by measuring the divergence between the
learned distribution in the latent space, and a predefined prior distribution, which is usually
a standard Gaussian distribution. The KLD loss encourages the learned distribution to
resemble the prior distribution, enabling the model to generate diverse and meaningful
samples during the decoding process. The KLD loss is calculated using equation 5.5.
KLD(ˆy||y) =
M
∑
c=1
ˆyc log ˆyc
yc
(5.5)
And finally, the total loss function of the model is the summation of the two losses, given
in equation 5.6.
Loss = BCE + KLD
(5.6)
Optimizer
Optimizer selection is crucial for training neural networks since it impacts the training
speed and convergence of a neural network. The optimizers are the algorithms that are
used for updating the model parameters in order to minimize the loss function and improve
the performance of the neural network.
Adam optimizer is one of the popular optimizers used for neural networks, and it is se­
lected for training the variational autoencoder network. Some benefits of using an Adam
optimizer are the adaptive learning rate, introduced momentum, and bias correction. It
is computationally efficient and generally converges faster compared to other optimizer
algorithms.
It’s worth noting that while Adam is a popular choice, the performance of different opti­
mizers can vary depending on the specific task, network architecture, and dataset. Ex­
perimentation with different optimizers is often necessary to find the one that works best
for a particular scenario. –learning rate
Batch Size
Neural networks are often trained in batches. This is useful for achieving a faster training
process and having a more generalized understanding of the dataset for the network.
Several experiments were conducted with batch sizes of 8, 16,32,64, and 128. The final
batch size for the network, which resulted in the most realistic outcomes with the lowest
validation errors were obtained with the batch size of 32.
Epochs
The final network was trained for 100 epochs. The network is also trained with 50, 100,
150, 200, 250, and 300 epochs. The training loss can bee sen in Figure 5.7, while the
validation loss can be seen in Figure 5.8. For both figures, the x axis denotes the number
of epochs, and the y axis denotes the total loss. Although the training loss was decreasing
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 35
==PAGE:44==
slowly after 100 epochs, there was no improvement in the validation loss after 100 epochs.
This is a sign of overfitting for the network, and early stopping is a common method that
is used to prevent overfitting. Because of this, the epochs were limited to the number of
100.
Figure 5.7: Training loss for the final variational autoencoder model. The x axis denotes
the number of epochs and the y axis denotes the total training loss of the network
Figure 5.8: Validation loss for the final variational autoencoder model. The x axis denotes
the number of epochs and the y axis denotes the total validation loss of the network
36 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:45==
5.3
Generative Adversarial Network(GAN)
5.3.1
Brief Explanation
The second model of interest in the scope of this project is called a generative adversarial
network, shortly referred as GAN. Generative adversarial networks are a special type of
deep neural networks, and as the name implies, they are mostly used for generative tasks,
which makes them a good fit for the objective of this project. The main idea of generative
adversarial networks is to build and train two models at the same time. These networks
consist of a generator network and a discriminator network. Each of the networks has a
specific task, and their relative parameters are updated regarding these tasks. The objec­
tive of the generator network is to learn how to create realistic samples, that are similar to
the samples from the dataset, This generation process starts from a random noise, and
more specifically a Gaussian noise, in the scope of this project. The generated samples
must have the same shape with the samples from the dataset. The discriminator network
is responsible for making a binary classification. More specifically, it tries to learn how
to correctly classify the outputs of the generator and the real samples as fake or real.
These networks are generally trained together, one step of each at a time. The generator
tries to generate more powerful, realistic samples, so that it can trick the discriminator;
while the discriminator tries to identify both fake and real samples and classify them cor­
rectly. The training process of the generative adversarial network is generally referred as
a competition, between the generator and the discriminator networks.
Figure 5.9 provides an example of a basic generative adversarial network.
Figure
5.9:
Example
generative
adversarial
network
architecture,
https://sthalles.github.io/intro­to­gans/
Figure 5.9 demonstrates how the generative adversarial networks work in general. The
blue rectangle represents the generator network, which is generally a convolutional neural
network which is used for creating the fake samples, starting from a random noise. Then,
these generated fake samples are shuffled with samples from the training set and fed
into a discriminator network, which is denoted with the pink rectangle in the image. The
discriminator network then tries to find out if the sample of interest is real or fake. If
the discriminator fails the task, then the generator learns that it is on a good learning
path, otherwise, in the case where the discriminator correctly labels the sample, then the
discriminator knows that it learns correctly how to distinguish real and fake samples. This
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 37
==PAGE:46==
way, the networks are updated accordingly, so that the generator can learn how to create
realistic samples, which can eventually learn to trick a powerful discriminator.
5.3.2
First Implementation
The results and outputs in this subsection are not related to the main purpose of this thesis.
It is only added in this report to show how generative adversarial networks produce outputs
in simple cases, and how the early implementation is done for this project. The reader
may skip to 5.3.3 to continue reading in the scope of this project.
In the previous section, for the variational autoencoder, the importance of building a sim­
ple, early model is discussed. In a similar manner, the first desired thing to achieve for the
sake of obtaining a successful, complex model, is to build a simple model that works. To
build this simple model and test it, the celeba dataset is used. Celeba is a dataset contain­
ing thousands of images of celebrity faces. It is quite suitable to be used for an unsuper­
vised learning and sample generation task, where the aim is to create fake celebrity faces
which are similar to the existing celebrity faces from the dataset. Some of the samples
from the celeba dataset can be seen in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Samples from the celeba dataset
38 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:47==
A very first generator and discriminator networks are implemented and the training pa­
rameters were adjusted, and the first results for the generative adversarial network are
obtained. The outputs of this network, consisting of generated fake celebrity faces parallel
to the task on hand, can be seen in Figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Generated fake celebrity images
The results show us that generative adversarial networks can be used to generate new
samples, that resemble the original dataset but contains a variety and fresh samples when
compared to the original dataset, thus is not redundant of the existing samples. The
results also show that the process can produce noisy outputs.
5.3.3
Final Architecture
After a long experimentation phase, the final architecture of the generative adversarial
network is completed and will be presented in this section. The network consists of two
different networks, which are the generator and the discriminator. The aim of the generator
network is to generate new samples from random noise, and the aim of the discriminator is
to guess if a sample is real or fake. These two networks will be investigated separately in
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 39
==PAGE:48==
the following subsections to provide a clearer picture of the whole generative adversarial
network.
Generator
The generator network is a part of the generative adversarial network where the gener­
ative process takes place and the new samples are obtained. The generator network
creates these samples by starting from random noise, and uses transposed convolutional
layers to form a sample from that. The architecture of the generative network is provided
in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12: The architecture of the final generator network
The architecture contains transposed convolutional layers, in a similar manner to the de­
coder part of the variational autoencoder. In the generative adversarial network, instead
of starting from a latent representation, the network starts the generation task from ran­
dom noise. The similar part with the encoded input of the variational autoencoder is that
this random noise is where the lowest dimensional representation happens in the gener­
ative adversarial network, and the randomness of the noise is the factor that creates the
variation for the output samples for these types of networks.
After each of the convolutional layers, a batch normalization layer can be seen in the
architecture. It was previously discussed in the sections for the variational autoencoder,
that batch normalization is commonly used in neural networks to help improve the training
process. For the generator network, a batch normalization layer is added between the
layers.
The activation functions between the layers are selected as rectified linear units, and
the mathematical notation for the ReLU activation can be found in equation 5.1. The
interesting point here is the last activation function. As seen in the last row of Figure
5.12, the last element of the network architecture is a tanh activation function. tanh is
widely used in generator networks, and is also recommended in DCGAN paper[19], which
provides very useful tricks on how to build and train GANs efficiently. The mathematical
formula for calculating the tanh activation function is given in equation 5.7.
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(5.7)
An important aspect to consider here is the output of the tanh activation function. The
output of the tanh function lies between the range −1, 1. If we think about the problem
of interest, this is different than the desired outcome. Since the generator network is
40 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:49==
expected to produce outcomes of a binary piano roll image, we only want to obtain an
interval between 0 and 1, which can later be used as a probability of the output being
equal to 0 or 1. To satisfy this, the output of the generator network can be adjusted with
a little trick, and this trick is given in equation 5.8.
y = (y + 1)/2
(5.8)
Equation 5.8 is applied to the output of the generator network, resulting in normalizing
the output and creating desired samples containing elements between 0 and 1, before
passing them to the discriminator network for training.
Discriminator
The second sub­network of the generative adversarial network is the discriminator net­
work. The discriminator network can be thought of as a quality assessment network. It is
responsible for assessing the generated samples and providing feedback to the generator
network, so that the generator network can understand if it is on a good or bad track, and
update its parameters accordingly. The discriminator network is a classification network.
It accepts samples as inputs, and tries to predict the probability of whether an input be­
longs to the original dataset or not. In other words, it tries to understand if a sample is
real or fake.
The architecture of the discriminator network is given in Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: The architecture of the final discriminator network
Just like a classic image classification task, the discriminator network uses convolutional
layers for learning from the various images in the dataset. Batch normalization is applied
between the layers, as similar to the previous networks described. What’s more interest­
ing about the discriminator network is the selected activation functions, and the Gaussian
noise added between the layers.
The selected activation function between the layers is leaky ReLU. It is a variant of the
traditional ReLU function and is the recommended activation function for the discrimina­
tor network in the DCGAN paper[19]. A problem with ReLU activation function is ”dying
ReLU.” This occurs when a neuron gets stuck in a state where it outputs zero for all in­
puts and becomes non­responsive to gradients during training. This can happen when
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 41
==PAGE:50==
the weighted sum of inputs to the ReLU function results in a negative value. To overcome
the issue, the leaky ReLU was introduced. In the leaky ReLU function, instead of setting
negative inputs to zero, a small, non­zero slope is assigned to negative values. The leaky
ReLU activation function is calculated using equation 5.9.
LeakyReLU(z) = max(αz, z).
(5.9)
The final layer is the sigmoid activation function, and the mathematical notation can be
found in equation 5.3. It is a good fit before reaching the outputs of the discriminator
network since the desired outputs of the networks are probabilities for labels, which are 0
and 1, denoting if a sample is fake or real.
Another important layer of the discriminator is the Gaussian noise. Although it is not
mandatory to have a discriminator network, it can completely change the outcomes and
help the training process of the network, as it exactly happened in the case of this project.
As it will be explained more in detail in training strategies, one common problem for the
generative adversarial networks is that the discriminator may become too confident or
sensitive because of the nature of the dynamic training process of the two networks. To
overcome this issue, Gaussian noise is added to the inputs of the discriminator during
training, and again after each convolutional layer. The noise is typically drawn from a
Gaussian distribution with a mean of zero and a small variance. This noise injection
disrupts the discriminator’s decision­making process and introduces randomness. The
introduction of noise acts as a form of regularization. It is used for preventing the discrimi­
nator from becoming too specialized or overfitting to specific features of real or generated
samples.
5.3.4
Training strategies and parameter settings
For training generative adversarial networks, the generator and the discriminator are
trained together, at the same time. Both of them are expected to improve over time. The
discriminator predicts samples among real and generated samples, to find their correct
label, and the network parameters are updated if it does the prediction correctly. The gen­
erator network on the other hand, completely relies on the feedback from the discriminator
network to update its parameters. After generating a random sample, if it gets success­
ful at tricking the generator so that it thinks the generated sample is real, the generator
updates its parameters.
Training a generative adversarial network can be very tricky and it requires lots of experi­
mentation and parameter adjustment. The discriminator can easily be overfitted and this
prevents the generator from improving and creating desired, realistic samples. As dis­
cussed before, adding Gaussian noise to the discriminator is a solution for preventing the
discriminator from overfitting, and it created successful results and an improved network
for this project.
Label smoothing is also an important concept to prevent generative adversarial networks,
specifically the discriminator, from overfitting. It is a regularization technique commonly
used in generative adversarial networks to improve the training stability and performance
of the discriminator. Normally, the discriminator tries to guess if a sample is fake or real,
and the classification labels for these are denoted with 0 and 1, respectively. The label
smoothing process involves modifying the target labels used for training the discriminator
by replacing the binary labels (0 and 1) with smoothed values. The training process of the
generative adversarial network built for this thesis project drastically improved after label
smoothing and adding Gaussian noise.
42 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:51==
One final trick that was applied was manually adjusting the frequency of the training steps
for each network. As discussed previously, it is very common for the discriminator network
to get too powerful, so that the generator never tricks the discriminator, and never gets
the chance to improve itself. This came as a big issue during the training phase. The
discriminator was getting too powerful too quickly. Apart from label smoothing and adding
Gaussian noise, setting up the training frequency also helped. This was done by reducing
the parameter adjustment frequency of the discriminator to half. So for each iteration,
the generator was updating once; while the discriminator was only updating once in two
iterations.
After many experiments held, the hyperparameters were determined for the final genera­
tor and discriminator networks.
Loss Function
BCE loss is selected to train both of the networks. As explained in the previous sections,
the BCE loss is calculated as in equation 5.4.
The loss values for the generator and the discriminator networks are given in Figure 5.14.
Note that there is no validation error for the generative adversarial network since the
traditional way of validating the model is not applicable to this type of network. Instead,
to determine if the model is overfitting, the discriminator network and its performance are
tracked. As mentioned before, if the discriminator network easily beats the generator all
the time, this may be a sign of overfitting of the discriminator network.
Figure 5.14: Training loss for the generator adversarial network. The blue points repre­
sent the loss of the generator network and the orange points represent the loss of the
discriminator network. The network is trained for 100 epochs,
Optimizer
Adam optimizer is selected to train both of the networks. The optimizer is explained in
detail in the previous sections.
Batch Size
A batch size of 16 is used for training the generative adversarial network, including both
the generator and the discriminator networks.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 43
==PAGE:52==
Epochs
The network was trained for 100 epochs. The network is also trained with 50, 100, 150,
200, 250, and 300 epochs during other experiments. Although tested with these numbers
mentioned, there were no improvements for the generator after this number. The loss
values during training for the generator and the discriminator networks can be seen in
Figure 5.14
44 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:53==
6
Results and Comparison
This chapter will present the sample outcomes obtained from each of the networks. First,
these outcomes will be evaluated visually from piano rolls and auditorily by listening. What
kind of musical features are captured by the neural networks? What kind of aspects were
neglected? What else could be done to improve the outcomes, and make them more
’realistic’?
Secondly, the outcomes will be evaluated using the results of a survey. This survey was
created to evaluate how people perceive these generated samples, in other words, to
understand how realistic they were. Here, by saying realistic, the underlying meaning is,
how easy it is to distinguish an AI­generated sample from a real sample. Another aspect
this survey will try to get information about is how likeable are these outcomes. Do people
enjoy listening to them, and how are the results compared to real samples? More detail
about the survey and the questions that it contains will be provided in the results section.
After evaluating the outcomes of both models separately in a section for each, a com­
parison will be made between the outcomes of the two models. As before, the visual
evaluation and the auditory evaluation will be followed by the comparison of the survey
results for each of the models.
In the final section, the project will be covered with an important point: how can these
generative approaches help cochlear implant users with their perception of music? The
section will discuss the proposed methods and possibilities within the problem of interest.
This is also important for the future directions and suggestions of this project.
6.1
Results
6.1.1
Evaluation Methods
Before starting to the display and the analysis of the results, to understand the context
better, it is worth providing the reader with information about how the evaluations are
done.
The first type of evaluation will be made visually and auditorily. This means that, from
a musical perspective, the generated piano roll images will be compared with the ones
from the dataset to determine similarities and outlier features. The piano roll images will
be investigated to see what kind of musical aspects were captured by the neural networks.
In a similar manner, the generated sound samples will also be assessed.
The second type of evaluation will be made by using the results of a custom­created
survey. The survey is mainly created to obtain an answer to the following two questions:
1. From a human perspective, how realistic are the generated samples? How difficult
it is to distinguish an AI­generated sample from a real sample?
2. How likeable are the AI­generated samples? How much do the participants enjoy
listening to them, when compared to the real samples?
To be able to evaluate the generated samples and answer these questions, the mentioned
survey is created. The survey included ten audio samples. Four of these audio samples
were randomly selected from the training dataset, and they were labeled as the ’real sam­
ples’. The remaining six audio samples were randomly generated using the variational
autoencoder and the generative adversarial network. Three samples were generated from
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 45
==PAGE:54==
each of the networks, and a total number of six samples were labeled as ’AI­generated
samples’. The AI­generated samples are then quantized to give them a better musical
form. Finally, the ten samples were shuffled and uploaded to the survey. The survey con­
sisted of two questions to be answered for each of the samples, making a total of twenty
questions for each participant to answer. The participants are expected to listen to each
of the audio samples, and answer the following two questions for each piece:
1. Guess if the piece is AI(artificial intelligence) generated or real, and provide a rating
depending on your guess on a scale of 1 to 6. For this question, choosing the ratings
1, 2 or 3 means that you think the sample is an AI­generated sample, while choosing
the ratings 4, 5 or 6 means that you think the sample is a real sample. Choosing
a 1 means that you strongly think it is an AI­generated sample, and choosing a 6
means that you strongly think it is a real sample.
2. Provide a rating for how much you enjoyed listening to the sample, or in other words,
how much you liked the sample, on a scale of 1 to 6.
This test was applied to 30 participants and the results were recorded and analyzed. The
test contained ten audio samples, and four of these audio samples were real samples.
The remaining six audio samples were randomly generated by the neural networks. Three
of these six samples were generated by the variational autoencoder, while the remaining
three were generated by the generative adversarial network. About the test setup, one
question that could arise is about the selection of the pieces that were generated by the
networks, but selected specially so that they fit better for human taste. The reader could
think that, maybe, it could be a better evaluation for the model, if the generated samples
were changed for all participants. Although this is a good point worth mentioning at this
point, it is important to understand what we are trying to evaluate here. The evaluation is
done on the outputs of the models, but not the models themselves. If we think from a mu­
sical perspective, we can say that the networks represent musicians, and when musicians
produce music, they only present their best effort as their musical output. The listeners
do not evaluate their random efforts, but a carefully selected and presented effort. This
being said about the generated samples, the same discussion might also happen for the
real samples. As the author of this thesis report, I agree with the fact that it would be a
better setup for the survey, if the real samples could be randomly selected, each time the
survey is done by a new person. With the current setup, although the real samples were
randomly selected, there might be a bias because of the fixed selection of the real sam­
ples. Because of the limitations with the surveying methods, this approach is selected
instead to provide an idea of the comparison and evaluation of the model outputs with
respect to the real samples.
As mentioned before, the test contained ten audio samples, and four of the samples
among all were real samples, meaning that they were actually obtained from the train­
ing set. Figure 6.1 shows the piano roll images of these four real samples.
6.1.2
Results and Evaluation of the Variational Autoencoder
The variational autoencoder model was trained with a dataset containing 8000 piano roll
images obtained from sections of various musical pieces. After the model is trained and
saved, new samples were generated using a random Gaussian distribution and decoding
the obtained tensor using the decoder part of the network. Three of the randomly gener­
ated outputs of the variational autoencoder network, after morphologically opened[20], are
displayed in Figure 6.2. These three samples are also used in the survey as AI­generated
samples.
46 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.1: Four real samples that are randomly selected from the training dataset. These
samples are used as real samples in the survey.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.2: Three AI­generated samples that are randomly generated using the variational
autoencoder. These samples are used as AI­generated samples in the survey after being
quantized. The outputs are morphologically opened to remove noise and obtained their
final shapes.
48 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.3: Two examples of the output piano roll images obtained from the variational
autoencoder model. The images on the left are the raw model outputs, and the images
on the right are their morphologically opened conjugates. The images were opened with
a 1, 15 sized kernel.
One important note related to the outputs is that, as expected, some of them were gener­
ated from the model with some undesired noise. To overcome this issue, morphological
opening is applied to the output piano roll images. Morphological opening is an image
processing technique that involves two morphological operations, that are erosion and
dilation. Erosion is used for shrinking and removing small details or structures from an
image by using a structuring element, which is a small binary shape or kernel. It makes
the remaining features thinner. Dilation is used for expanding the remaining features by
using the same structuring element. It helps restore the size and shape of the features
to some extent. Morphological opening combines erosion and dilation in sequence. It
is commonly used to eliminate noise, remove small objects, and smooth the contours of
larger objects in an image. For the variational autoencoder, there was not a big amount
of noise, but to have a better picture of the piano roll images and a clearer sound for
the outcome, a morphological opening is applied. Figure 6.3 shows the noise removal
process with morphological opening, with two examples for the outputs of the variational
autoencoder model.
Output Evaluation
The final outputs of the variational autoencoder model were a huge success. The piano
roll images looked very reasonable and the audio samples sounded quite good. Although
there are some deficiencies as expected, I believe it makes sense to conclude the outputs
of the model as successes. There are several factors leading to this conclusion, and some
of them are discussed further in the following paragraphs.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 49
==PAGE:58==
The first and most important thing is that the model learned harmony. This is a very big
claim to suggest, so I believe it is important to further elaborate on what is meant by that.
Of course, it is not expected from the variational autoencoder model to learn harmony like
a music professor, but the results show that the selected notes in the outputs follow the
musical rules and use the notes that create harmony together. This can be explained by
the clustering feature of the variational autoencoder, going back to the MNIST example
from Figure 5.5. In that example, we observed that the generated examples looked like
one of the ten numbers available in the dataset, but not ”something in between”. Since
our musical dataset had different songs, all of which were on various musical scales, the
variational autoencoder model could group the inputs in scales, or basically with the notes
who are used together often. This might result in nice, harmonic melodies generated by
the variational autoencoder model.
The second positive point about the variational autoencoder is that it has very little noise
in the output. Figure 6.3 shows that even before opening the images, the raw outputs
have very low noise. For the variational autoencoder, these results support a very clear
encoding process and quite an accurate latent representation of the inputs.
The third, and final point that is worth mentioning for the success of the model is the
variety of the outputs. Among the final outputs, it is possible to observe many different
pieces generated in various scales, both in major and minor keys. This can have two
explanations: The first one is using a higher dimensional latent representation so that the
various scales and harmonies can be encoded in the latent representation better. And
the second explanation is that the strategies used for preventing overfitting helped and
the model actually learned the music generation process and generalized the input data
even better, instead of just copying it.
Before going into the analysis of the survey results, we should also consider how this is
still different than a human­composed musical piece, and what it is lacking in terms of
that. The most noticeable point here is the timing of the pieces. When we look at the
raw outputs, the timing of the notes is aligned in a nice way to satisfy the human listener.
The reason for the problem in timing can be explained by the huge variety of different
time signatures in the musical pieces from the training set. At this point, one may also
ask, if the notes, scales, and harmonies are nicely encoded in the latent space, why the
timing could not be? The answer to this question is the huge difference in dimensions.
In Chapter 4, the dimensions of the input piano roll images were discussed and the final
dimensions were noted as 64, 1024. Here, 64 represents the notes and 1024 represents
the timing. Due to its dimension limits, the latent space of the variational autoencoder
can encode the variables for the lower dimensional notes, but it is not easy to encode
the timing when its dimension is that big. To achieve that, a more complex model with a
higher dimensional latent space should be used.
Another point for the outputs is lacking a human touch in the sequence of the notes and
chords. Although this is quite an ambiguous statement, it is easy to understand what is
meant by human readers after listening to the samples. It can be an unusual way of using
a note sequence, not resolving the chord sequence, or a timing issue, but these kinds of
minor details can make these outputs less satisfying for a human listener. It is important
to remember that, one of the most important aspects for successful outputs in machine
learning is to use a big dataset. The models in this project are only trained with a dataset
containing 8000 pieces due to computational limits. And even after training with 4000
pieces, changing to 8000 created a huge difference. Thus, computational limitations are
a big factor for the poorer features of the results, and it is always possible to improve these
50 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:59==
results by using more complex networks and feeding them with more amount of data.
Survey Analysis
As explained in the previous sections, the survey was applied to the participants and
some statistics were obtained. To better evaluate the results using these statistics, the
box charts of the results for each question are presented. For the first question in the
survey, Figure 6.4 shows the average scores for the pieces presented in the survey, for
different types of options.
Figure 6.4: The average scores for question 1 from the survey, for the real samples, VAE
samples and GAN samples respectively. A low score for this question means that the
participants thought the samples were AI­generated, while a higher score for this question
means that the participants thought the samples were real.
For this question, the participants were expected to listen to the sample and guess if the
piece is AI­generated or real. The ratings were done on a range between 1 to 6, where a
low score represented a selection of an AI­generated song, and a high score represented
a selection of a real sample. The results for the variational autoencoder were proof of our
successful evaluation from the previous section. The variational autoencoder samples
had an average rating of 3.69. Considering the minimum and maximum ratings are 1 and
6, this score means that an average person was slightly thinking that these samples were
real, but not AI­generated. Also, comparing them with the results of the real samples,
which had a score of 3.71 in total, it can definitely be said that the participants thought that
the samples obtained from the variational autoencoder are as real as the selected real
samples. Also here, it’s worth mentioning that a lot of participants who filled out the survey
gave feedback about how hard it was to differentiate the real and AI samples, and that
they were not sure if they were correct or not. As the author of this thesis, these results
and feedbacks, especially about the variational autoencoder model, are truly fascinating.
It shows that even with very limited capabilities, realistic musical samples can be obtained.
It also shows how variational autoencoders are successful in encoding complex data and
generating similar but original samples.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 51
==PAGE:60==
The second question of the survey asked the participants about their enjoyment rate for
each of the pieces. Figure 6.5 shows the average enjoyment scores for the pieces pre­
sented in the survey, for different types of options.
Figure 6.5: The average scores for question 2 from the survey, for the real samples, VAE
samples and GAN samples respectively. A low score for this question means that the
participants did not like the samples, while a higher score for this question means that the
participants liked the samples.
The results showed that the enjoyment scores had appeared to be correlated with the
scores from question one, where the selection of interest was the ’realness’ of the piece.
For the variational autoencoder model, it can be observed that the participants had a score
in the middle of the scale, making them almost 0.5 point lower than the real samples. This
difference can be explained by the discussion from the previous subsection, where the
outputs of the variational autoencoder were evaluated. In that discussion, it was men­
tioned that the pieces were nice and harmonic, but lacked a human touch. This could
be a resolution of the chords, a sequence that humans are used to hearing, or an arpeg­
giated chord. Although the average ratings were slightly lower than the real samples, still,
it is an excellent outcome to see that they had an average score of 3.47, which is just in
the middle of our scale from 1 to 6. This shows that generative AI and more specifically,
variational autoencoders are a useful method to create musical pieces that are pleasant
for human listeners.
6.1.3
Results and Evaluation of the Generative Adversarial Network
The generative adversarial network model was trained with a dataset containing 8000
piano roll images obtained from sections of various musical pieces. After the model is
trained and saved, new samples were generated starting from a random noise and using
the generator network to obtain a new sample. Three of the randomly generated outputs of
the generative adversarial network, after morphologically opened, are displayed in Figure
6.6. These three samples are also used in the survey as AI­generated samples.
52 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.6: Three AI­generated samples that are randomly generated using the genera­
tive adversarial network. These samples are used as AI­generated samples in the survey
after being quantized. The outputs are morphologically opened to remove noise and ob­
tained their final shapes.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.7: Two examples of the output piano roll images obtained from the generative
adversarial network. The images on the left are the raw model outputs, and the images
on the right are their morphologically opened conjugates. The images were opened with
a 1, 10 sized kernel.
The same note for the variational autoencoder outputs should be repeated here, that
the outputs are morphologically opened so that the noise is removed. The outputs of
the generative adversarial network were much noisier than the variational autoencoder
network, and this can easily be observed in Figure 6.7, where the reader can see the raw
and noise­removed versions of the outputs after opening the outputs.
Output Evaluation
At first glance, the first easily noticeable point of the outputs obtained from the generator
adversarial network was the noise in the outputs. They showed signs of harmonic learning
and a variety of scales, but there was a lot of noise in the raw outputs and they were
transformed into better pieces after opening them with a relatively smaller kernel.
The first successful aspect of the generative adversarial network outputs is the harmonic
learning of the network. Even though the outputs sometimes sounded ’chaotic’, the chords
formed and the notes used sequentially definitely produced harmonies.
Knowing the
dataset it was trained on contains these harmonic features, it is an expected result for
the network to learn this. Although we observe the harmonic features, in Figure 6.7, it can
be seen that the raw outputs, on the left side, are easily distinguishable from a human per­
spective. Even though the network was trained until there were no longer improvements,
it is still lacking some clarity in the outputs.
Another good point about the results was that when they were listened to after being con­
verted to audio files, they created unique­sounding melodies. Although these melodies
54 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:63==
were not pretty close to ’realistic’ samples, they can be denoted as experimental trials.
The outputs of the generative adversarial network showed that there was a lot of room
for improvement in the network. The biggest evidence for this conclusion is the noisy
outputs. There are several possible reasons for this to be happening and recommenda­
tions for improving the network for further studies. In generative adversarial networks,
the generator tries to create new, realistic samples that can trick the discriminator, so the
discriminator fails to understand that they are fake. As mentioned in Chapter 5, the tricky
part here is the simultaneous training process. Due to the nature of generative adversar­
ial networks, the two networks, which are the GANs components, the generator, and the
discriminator network, are trained simultaneously. This simultaneous training makes it
difficult to regularize the training, and a lot of times makes the discriminator too powerful,
so the generator can not have the positive feedback it needs to update its parameters
and generate better samples. As explained in detail in Chapter 5, during the training of
the generative adversarial network, since the discriminator was beating the generator too
easily, the step frequencies were adjusted, where the two separate networks adjust their
relative parameters. This resulted in a less frequent update in the discriminator network
parameters, with the idea of allowing the generator to improve itself before the network is
overfitted because of the discriminator. Although this approach, with many others, helped
for obtaining meaningful results, was not enough to obtain clear outputs. Looking at the
raw outputs of the network, since they are easily distinguishable by the human eye, but
apparently not the discriminator network, maybe the frequency of the discriminator up­
dates was set to too low than needed. This is one reason for the poorer outputs, another
very important point is, once again, lacking more training inputs to feed the network. Com­
putational limitations had constrained us to use only 8000 input data elements, and it is
obvious that the model performance would go higher with a bigger training set. A solid
proof of this is the first implementation with celeba dataset, where the dataset had more
than 200,000 elements.
Other relatively poor features of the outputs of the generative adversarial network are the
timing and being ’robotic’. These aspects are very similar as they were discussed in the
variational autoencoder. The outputs did not show an adjusted alignment on the x­axis,
which denotes timing. Again, the high dimensionality of the timing can be one big reason
for this. The audio samples were quantized before using them for the survey, so they
sounded more human. And secondly, the output melodies were easily distinguished from
any element from the dataset. The output samples had a robotic vibe in terms of melodies,
note sequences, and frequencies. Although it is difficult to explain this aspect in words, it
is easily understood and agreed upon by most human listeners.
Survey Analysis
The survey results also provided various insights about the generative adversarial network
and its outputs, and their comparison with the real samples from a human perspective.
Figure 6.4 gives information about how the samples were perceived in terms of being ”real”
or ”AI­generated”. From looking at the bar chart, it can be seen that the GAN samples
had a relatively lower score when compared to the real samples. The average score
for the GAN samples was 2.35, showing that the participants had a strong opinion of
those samples being AI­generated. This might have happened because of the unique
outputs of the generative adversarial network. As discussed before, the raw outputs of
the generative adversarial network were too noisy. During the noise­removal process,
it was a difficult call to decide on how big the morphological opening kernel should be,
because if the kernel is too small, then the outputs would be very noisy, but if the kernel
is too big, then the characteristics of the output are sacrificed. This resulted in trying to
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 55
==PAGE:64==
find a balance, but since the sensitivity for this was very high, keeping the characteristics
resulted in having a complex, chaotic output. Humans tend to seek order in everything,
including musical pieces. From a human perspective, these relatively good­sounding but
chaotic pieces were a big sign of non­human­created music. The results of this question
for the generative adversarial network showed that they were quite easily distinguishable
from the real samples, as rated by the participants.
The rating results of the second question for the GAN samples can be seen in Figure 6.5.
This question provided information about how much the participants enjoyed listening to
the samples. Although the score got a bit better when compared to the ”realness” of the
pieces, the enjoyment levels for the GAN samples were reported lower. This can also be
explained by the noisy, chaotic outputs while the real samples and VAE samples provided
a piece of better­ordered, sequential music.
6.1.4
Comparison of the VAE and GAN model outputs
In the previous sections, the outputs of the variational autoencoder and the generative
adversarial network were discussed separately. This section will provide a comparison
of the models and their outputs, and try to examine if one model is superior to another,
especially for music generation tasks.
In Chapter 4, the details of both the models and their training strategies are discussed.
In regards to the convolutional architecture blocks, both models shared similar proper­
ties. The main difference starts from the training strategies of the two different networks.
The variational autoencoder model consists of the encoder and the decoder, but these
elements form only one neural network to be trained. On the other hand, the generative
adversarial network is a combination of two different neural networks, which are the gen­
erator and the discriminator networks, and they need to be trained simultaneously. This
makes the GAN very difficult to train, which is also known from the literature, that GANs
are quite difficult to train and they easily overfit. This was also the experience for this
project. It had been difficult to find an optimal training strategy to balance the generator
and the discriminator networks of the GAN and prevent it from overfitting. VAEs, when
compared to GANs, are more easily trained and provided better results.
When the outputs of the two networks are compared, it can easily be seen from Figure
6.3, which shows the raw outputs of the VAE on the left side, and from Figure 6.7, which
shows the raw outputs of the GAN on the left side, that the piano roll output images of the
GAN are much noisier than the outputs of the variational autoencoder model. The VAE
model had been more successful in creating meaningful samples, after being evaluated
visually and auditorially.
Finally, the survey results also provided some insights into the comparison of the outputs
from each of the models. The results were not far from expected. The average score
for the first question of the survey was almost 1.5 points lower for the GAN outputs when
compared to the VAE outputs. This meant that the VAE outputs were much closer to the
”realistic” outputs, than the GAN outputs. The ”robotic” and ”chaotic” sounding features
of the GAN outputs was one of the biggest reason for this difference, and as explained
before, these features were mostly occurred because of the noisy outputs of the GAN
model. The same reasoning applies to the results of the second question from the survey
as well. When the participants were asked about their enjoyment ratings when listening to
the outputs for each model, the average score was 1 point higher for the VAE outputs. This
can also be a sign that, even if the participants strongly thought that the GAN outputs were
not realistic, their rating for the enjoyment was higher, and the opposite situation applies
to the VAE outputs. This shows that the participants were not biased on not liking a piece,
56 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:65==
if they think that the piece is AI­generated.
Overall, the comparison of the outputs of the two networks shows that the VAE outputs
were superior to the GAN outputs for the specific task and evaluation methods of this
project.
6.2
Application for Cochlear Implant Users
When this project was first started planning, during the discussions, the main topic of
the agenda became combining two ideas together: Generative music applications and
cochlear implant users. Generative music applications are used for various different pur­
poses, such as original music creation, overcoming copyright issues, background music
creation, text­to­music applications, and so on. Cochlear implant users can not perceive
music as normal hearing listeners do. As an original idea to take this project further, we
started discussing if these generative deep learning methods could help cochlear implant
users have a more pleasing music experience. Because of the high­intensity contents of
the project, the project period and timeline did not allow for actually making the implemen­
tations and testing them, but only having literature research that is available in Chapter 3,
and discussing the suggested methods as a further research part of the report. This sec­
tion is to elaborate more on these points, and how the generative deep learning methods
can be used for this specific purpose.
6.2.1
Suggested Methods
As mentioned, for further research purposes, the possible methods on how the imple­
mented generative neural network models can be applied to improve music perception
for cochlear implant users are presented in this section. These methods are not imple­
mented in the scope and timeline restrictions of this project, but it’s worth going over and
explaining these suggested methods in detail, verbally.
The first idea is adjusting the input dataset based on user the mixing preferences of the
cochlear implant users. The cochlear implant users do not perceive musical features as
normal hearing listeners do, so their enjoyment levels of the music depending on differ­
ent aspects of the mixing of different components of the piece. As discussed in­depth in
Chapter 3, one study showed that cochlear implant users preferred increasing the volume
of the singing, and the rhythmic components such as drums, and bass.[9] Although this
project only experimented with building models and obtaining outputs with melodies cre­
ated by single mix channels, and thus single instruments, it can be expanded in a higher
domain to include many instruments as it is in the real world, and these mixing prefer­
ences can be adjusted depending on these features so that the created music is more
pleasing for cochlear implant users.
The second idea for the desired adaptation of the project is to use supervised methods.
A supervised learning method is applicable when the training dataset has labels. For our
problem, a rating task could be defined for the cochlear implant users so that they can
rate the songs from the input dataset so that the network can learn what kind of music
they like, and what kind of aspects the music they like include. This is not only applicable
to cochlear users, but in general, this approach could be used for any type of user. This
is, very basically, how the personalized recommender systems work in music platforms
such as Spotify and Youtube. Although this is a very useful way to obtain ”likeable”, or
good outputs, there is a limitation of this method that needs to be considered. Neural net­
works require huge amounts of data to be successfully trained and to generate meaningful
outputs. It can be a challenging and very time­consuming task to obtain these rated and
labeled training datasets in real­life conditions, especially for a student project of this kind.
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 57
==PAGE:66==
It is more suitable for big projects and companies that were mentioned just before, since
they automatically receive these labels during their users’ consumptions of their services,
such as listening to the songs and liking them.
The scope of this project did not include a focus on the technical aspects of the cochlear
implant, such as the electronic architecture of the device, and it was not a purpose to
do so. But after doing the literature research, it came to light that there might be many
methods for creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users, by combin­
ing machine learning and the cochlear implant in a technical way. More specifically, with
generative deep learning techniques, another approach could be proposed in this sense.
The cochlear implant has several electronic receivers which turn various frequencies into
a form that the cochlear implant user can perceive. But the variety of these frequencies
is limited for cochlear implant users, when compared to normal hearing listeners. This
means that, for specific notes and frequency differences, the cochlear implant users might
not have the same sensitivity. Also, it is known that it is not possible for them to perceive
below and above significant frequencies. When neural networks are trained to produce
specific outputs, these outputs can be constrained to create only specific values. Bound­
ing the generated notes to the available frequencies from the cochlear implant device can
also be used as a strategy to generate better music for cochlear implant users.
58 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:67==
7
Conclusion
Generative methods and applications in artificial intelligence are evolving and improving
day by day. Even today, the capabilities of these models are pretty impressive. These
models can generate very realistic, original samples such as images, sounds, and videos.
Deep neural networks are commonly used for these generative tasks and in literature it
is shown that they produce reliable results.
Artificial intelligence and generative approaches in the domain of sound and music, had
been the main drive to implement this Master’s thesis project. The recent developments
in the field had been extraordinary, with the releases of projects such as JukeboxAI[3],
GoogleLM[4] and WaveNet[12]. These are state­of­the­art deep neural network models
that are created and trained for different purposes. Their common point is to generate
music using neural networks, which is also the common point with this project.
In the scope of this project, generative machine­learning approaches for music generation
are researched in the literature. The aim was to be inspired by these methods and the
projects mentioned above, and build and implement some examples of these deep neural
networks to generate new, original musical samples, and compare their performances for
this specific task.
To achieve the desired result, two networks are selected to be implemented among var­
ious deep neural network architectures. These networks were a variational autoencoder
and a generative adversarial network. A suitable MIDI dataset was selected and the mu­
sical pieces were pre­processed so that they became ready to be fed into the respective
networks. For training the neural networks, piano roll images of the MIDI samples are
used as the training images. Then, the networks were implemented and trained after
a long and iterative process. The models were successfully used to generate new au­
dio samples, by learning from the dataset. The results and the generated samples were
promising, and they were evaluated with a custom­made survey.
The results showed that the variational autoencoder generated better and more likeble
audio samples from a perspective of a human listener. The samples generated from the
generative adversarial network were noisy, and even after reducing the noise of the sam­
ples, they sounded ”chaotic”, since it was difficult to reduce all the noise without affecting
the samples’ characteristics. There were many aspects affecting this situation, but one
main finding that created this significant difference had been the difficult training process
of the generative adversarial network. The variational autoencoder, on the other hand,
had been quite successful in encoding the dataset into a lower dimensional latent space.
It can be concluded that artificial intelligence, and more specifically generative deep learn­
ing methods, are very powerful tools for creating new and original, humanlike samples and
the results of this study supports this claim. Considering the smaller­sized scope of this
project, it is true that there are many advanced musical projects available, and improving
day by day, which are very powerful tools in music creation. However, using these AI
tools and generative methods as a complete replacement for human creativity in music
production and composition is not possible with today’s technologies. Generative meth­
ods in music can be used for generating copyright­free music, inspiring musicians and
boosting their creativity; but one should not forget that these generated musical pieces
are some kind of variety of the dataset they are trained with. It is also important to under­
stand that this might create an undesired bias in music creation, hence tomorrow’s music
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 59
==PAGE:68==
might lose the huge variety, which is coming from every single human musician and their
creativity.
Another point of discussion, which later remained as a further research topic of this project,
was about cochlear implant users and their perception of music. Cochlear implant users
reported a lower pleasant experience when listening to music, when compared to hu­
man listeners. Using these generative models to create a pleasant music experience for
cochlear implant users had been discussed and several implementation methods were
suggested for further development of this project. These recommendations included ad­
justing the input dataset regarding their taste, bounding the outputs of the network to be
suitable for the cochlear implant device, and creating a rating task for the cochlear implant
users.
60 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[2]
Eduardo Reck Miranda. Handbook of Artificial Intelligence for Music. Springer, 2021.
URL: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-030-72116-9.
[3]
Prafulla Dhariwal et al. Jukebox: A Generative Model for Music. 2020. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2005.00341.
[4]
Andrea Agostinelli et al. MusicLM: Generating Music From Text. 2023. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2301.11325.
[5]
Margaret A. Boden. Creativity and artificial intelligence. 1998. URL: https://philpapers.
org/rec/BODCAA-6.
[6]
NIHDCD. Cochlear Implants. 2016. URL: https : / / www . nidcd . nih . gov / health /
cochlear-implants.
[7]
Mariana C. Leal et al. Music Perception in Adult Cochlear Implant Recipients. 2003.
URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00016480310000386.
[8]
Agnes Au et al. Music for the Cochlear Implant: Audience Response to Six Com­
missioned Compositions. 2012. URL: https://www.thieme-connect.com/products/
ejournals/abstract/10.1055/s-0032-1329223.
[9]
Wim Buyens et al. Music mixing preferences of cochlear implant recipients: A pilot
study. 2014. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.3109/14992027.2013.
873955.
[10]
Jean­Pierre Briot, Gae ￿tan Hadjeres, and Francois­David Pachet. Deep Learning
Techniques for Music Generation. 2020. URL: https://link.springer.com/book/10.
1007/978-3-319-70163-9.
[11]
Bob L. Sturm et al. Machine learning research that matters for music creation: A
case study. 2019. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09298215.
2018.1515233.
[12]
Aaron van den Oord et al. WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio. 2016.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.03499.
[13]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2020. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1406.2661.
[14]
Colin Raffel. Learning­Based Methods for Comparing Sequences, with Applications
to Audio­to­MIDI Alignment and Matching. 2016. URL: https : / / colinraffel . com /
projects/lmd/.
[15]
Thierry Bertin­Mahieux et al. The Million Song Dataset. 2011. URL: http://millionsongdataset.
com/.
[16]
Swift Andrew. A Brief Introduction to MIDI. 1997. URL: https://web.archive.org/web/
20120830211425/http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~nd/surprise_97/journal/vol1/aps2/.
[17]
Colin Raffel and Daniel P. W. Ellis. Intuitive Analysis, Creation and Manipulation of
MIDI Data with pretty­midi. 2014. URL: https://craffel.github.io/pretty-midi/.
[18]
Li Deng. “The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning re­
search”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 29.6 (2012), pp. 141–142.
[19]
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. “Unsupervised representation learn­
ing with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434
(2015).
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 61
==PAGE:70==
[20]
Rafael C. Gonzalez and Paul A Wintz. Digital image processing / Rafael C. Gonza­
lez, Paul Wintz. English. Addison­Wesley Pub. Co., Advanced Book Program Read­
ing, Mass, 1977, xvi, 431 p., [3] leaves of plates : ISBN: 0201025965 0201025973.
62 Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models
==PAGE:71==
Creating a pleasant music experience for cochlear implant users using generative deep learning models 63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads Bygning 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
