==PAGE:1==
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of
alternative production chemicals in
off-shore oil and gas production
Master Thesis
MSc Environmental Engineering
Chloé S. Fleuret - s212425
==PAGE:2==
Title
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of alternative production chemicals in
off-shore oil and gas production
Type
Master Thesis
Credits
30 ECTS
Period
23/01/2023 - 23/06/2023
University
Technical University of Denmark
Department Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Student
Chloé Fleuret - s212425
Supervisors Dr. Anders Baun
Lars Michael Skjolding
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is submitted to finalise the degree in Master of Environmental Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark. This thesis was carried out from January 23rd to June 23rd 2023,
at the Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering at DTU Sustain for a total of 30
ECTS.
Acknowledgments
The final thesis is a product of many people’s help and guidance. I want to give a special thanks
to my supervisors Dr. Anders Baun and Lars Michael Skjolding from the Technical University of
Denmark. Not only did they provide continuous support and guidance throughout the process,
but they also provided a welcoming and collaborative environment. Their open-mindedness and
willingness to listen to my ideas and perspectives have made this research experience exceptionally
rewarding. Their constructive feedback and teaching helped create a learning experience that makes
me excited for future work in this field.
I would also like to thank Jonas Tiedjen Bang for his help and guidance for laboratory tests,
and of course, always providing a fun Danish radio station. In addition, I would like to thank Ann
Flemming Nielson for her help with the biodegradation testing.
Mange tak!
Chloe Fleuret
s212425
June 13th 2023
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The offshore oil and gas industry generates a significant amount of produced water, which is a
complex waste stream comprising various organic and inorganic compounds in dissolved and partic-
ulate forms in addition to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, alkylphenols, metals and many other
constituents. To address operational challenges and risks, treatment chemicals, known as production
chemicals, are applied to the waste stream. Following treatment, the produced water is discharged
into the marine environment. However, given its complexity, the environmental implications associ-
ated with these chemicals are difficult to assess, highlighting the need for the exploration of safe and
sustainable alternatives. This thesis aimed to assess the biodegradability and examine the ecotox-
icological effects of alternative chemical compounds in the marine environment, with the potential
application as production chemicals. The test chemicals included a suspended/unsuspended feed
solution from a reactor installation in the North Sea, three triazine-based H2S scavengers, and four
halophyte-based biocides. To assess the environmental impact, acute toxicity tests were conducted
on Vibrio Fischeri, Raphidocelis subcapitata, and Daphnia magna. Additionally, an OECD 301F
manometric respirometry test was used to evaluate chemical persistence in aquatic media. The
tested concentrations for the H2S scavengers ranged from 0.0625 to 1 g/L, but no acute toxicity
was observed on all tested species, suggesting a low immediate risk to the organisms, not yielding
an acute toxicity CLP classification. However, the absence of acute toxicity at these concentrations
does not necessarily imply non-toxicity of these compounds; it simply suggests that no effects occur
at/below the tested concentration of 1 g/L. Similarly, no definitive concentration-response relation-
ships were observed for the biocides across any of the test species with concentrations ranging from
2 to 10 mL/L. However, acute effects were observed for the suspended/unsuspended feed compound
in all test species, with a concentration range of 1.075 - 17.2 mL/L. The EC50 value for Vibrio
Fischeri was determined to be 0.031 [0.022, 0.040] mL/L, while Raphidocelis subcapitata had an
EC50 value of 3.96 [2.13, 5.78] mL/L. Daphnia magna exhibited a range of effects, with immobility
ranging from 20% to 80% within the concentration range of 0.1075 to 0.215 mL/L. Despite these ef-
fects, the data indicate that this compound does not pose a significant environmental risk according
to the ECHA CLP classification. The biodegradation rates of the H2S scavengers and biocides did
not meet the criteria for readily biodegradable. Final oxygen consumption values ranged from 41 to
48 mg O2/L for H2S scavenger compounds, and 49 to 57 mg O2/L for biocides. This highlights the
need for further investigation into the potential biodegradation of these compounds by conducting
a Level 1 inherent biodegradability test. Moreover, limited available research on the toxicity and
persistence of current production chemicals hinders definitive conclusions for comparative analysis.
However, literature shows that the suspended/unsuspended feed compound was found to be readily
biodegradable. This research enhances the understanding of the environmental considerations asso-
ciated with alternative H2S scavengers and biocides, thereby promoting environmentally responsible
practices in the offshore oil and gas sector. The findings underscore the importance of developing
safer and more sustainable chemical alternatives to protect the marine environment. Nevertheless,
the limitations of this study emphasize the need for subsequent testing to accurately quantify the
risks associated with potential replacement chemicals for biocides and H2S scavengers used in the
industry. Long-term chronic testing should be conducted to assess the effects of prolonged exposure
to these alternative chemical compounds in order to ensure their safety and sustainability in the
marine environment.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Background and Aim
1
2
Introduction
3
2.1
EU framework for safe and sustainable chemical use and production . . . . .
3
2.2
The oil and gas extraction process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Overview and composition of produced water
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Production chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.1
Hydrogen sulfide scavenging in the oil and gas industry . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.2
Biocidal products and applications in the oil and gas industry . . . .
7
2.5
Fate and effect concerns regarding produced water discharge . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.1
Ecotoxicity of production chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
OSPAR regulations for North-East Atlantic region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
Ecotoxicity testing and regulations for produced water
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Materials and Methods
14
3.1
Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Stock solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Test organisms and culturing conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Reference substance for short-term toxicity tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Biotox™luminescence inhibition test with marine bacteria
. . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Freshwater algal growth inhibition test of 72h
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Daphnia magna 48h immobility test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8
OECD 301F - Ready Biodegradability Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.9
Data treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.9.1
Biotox calculations for V. fischeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.9.2
Algal inhibition calculations for R. subcapitata . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9.3
Immobility calculations for D. magna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9.4
Ready biodegradability calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results and Discussion
23
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
. . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Biotox™luminescence inhibition test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Freshwater algal growth inhibition test of 72h
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3
D. magna 48h immobility test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.4
Biodegradability of AR2, AR3, and AR50
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.5
Preliminary hazard identification and assessment of HHT, AR2, AR3,
and AR50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4 . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
Biotox™luminescence inhibition test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
Freshwater algal growth inhibition test of 72h
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.3
Daphnia magna 48h immobility test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.4
Biodegradability of B1, B2, B3, and B4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
4.2.5
Preliminary hazard identification and assessment of B1, B2, B3, B4 .
40
4.3
Outlook on safe and sustainable alternative chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusion
43
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
Nomenclature
IV
References
VI
Appendix
XIV
A
ISO 11348 stock solution composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIV
B
ISO 8692 mineral medium compositions for stock solutions 1-4 . . . . . . . . XIV
C
Composition of stock solution I, II, macronutrients and vitamin for M7 medium
preparation for ISO 6341 D. magna immobilization test . . . . . . . . . . . .
XV
C.1
Composition of solutions I and II used to prepare M7 medium for ISO
6341 D. magna immobilization test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XV
C.2
Composition of vitamin stock solution used for M7 medium
. . . . . XVI
C.3
Preparation of the M7 medium using stock solution II, the macro-
nutrients and vitamins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVI
D
Range-finding concentrations for HHT 48h D. magna immobility test . . . . XVI
E
OECF 301-A mineral medium compositions for solutions A-D
. . . . . . . .XVII
F
Potassium Dichromate as reference compound for short-term toxicity tests on
R. subcapitata and D. magna
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XVIII
G
Classification of validity criteria for Biotox™test with V. Fischeri for all
compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
H
Relative inhibition EC10 and EC50 (t = 10) for Biotox™test with V. Fischeri XIX
I
Validity criteria for freshwater algal growth inhibition test with R. subcapitata
(72h) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XX
J
R. subcapitata growth rate for AR2 and AR3 exposure (72h) . . . . . . . . .
XX
K
Validity criteria for Daphnia magna 48h immobility test
. . . . . . . . . . . XXI
L
Biodegradation following addition of NaOAc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XXII
M
CLP classification flow chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XXIV
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Background and Aim
The offshore extraction of oil and gas has become a global industry. Like most pro-
duction activities, however, this industry generates large volumes of liquid waste which can
result in marine pollution (Kark et al., 2015). During oil drilling, a waste stream known as
produced water (PW) is generated. PW results from two processes in the industry. The
first of which, results from the initial extraction where a mixture of oil and water is brought
to the surface. The second occurs when water is injected into the oilfield to bring the deep
oil to the surface (Kelland, 2014). Both processes lead to the production of PW, which is
quantified as the largest stream of wastewater in the industry. In 2019 alone, it is estimated
that 300 million standard cubic meters were discharged in the North-East Atlantic region
(OSPAR, 2023).
Following extraction, oil and gas is separated from that of the PW where the latter
is discharged back into the sea (Beyer et al., 2020). However, the chemical composition of
the PW waste stream is often a complex mixture containing both organic and inorganic
compounds in dissolved and particulate forms (Beyer et al., 2020; Cordes et al., 2016; Al-
Ghouti et al., 2019). This complexity can lead to operational issues on the oil platform.
To mitigate these issues, PW is treated using production chemicals (PCs) which can be
used to inhibit issues such as corrosion, scale deposition and bacterial growth (Bento and
Campos, 2020; Kelland, 2014). Biocides, one type of PC, are often used to control microbial
growth in oil reservoirs and on industrial equipment. Moreover, hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is
a naturally occurring gas that can be found in petroleum reservoirs and is often generated
through natural processes. However, its presence in PW can still pose significant threats to
both human health and the environment due to its toxic, corrosive, and flammable nature
(Bento and Campos, 2020). To lessen the concentration of H2S, the produced fluids are
treated with triazine-based chemical absorbents/adsorbents that chemically convert or bind
the H2S into that of a less harmful substance (Agbroko et al., 2017). These are known as
H2S-scavengers.
Although PCs such as biocides and H2S-scavengers are effective in serving their intended
purposes, they are often complex chemical substances that pose an environmental risk. The
associated environmental effects of PCs currently in use in the oil and gas industry neces-
sitate the development of safe and sustainable alternatives. Regulatory frameworks employ
different methods for production, use and discharge of these chemicals in the marine envi-
ronment. Different types of tests are conducted including acute and chronic toxicity testing,
bioaccumulation, and degradation testing, which are part of the PBT classifications (Kel-
land, 2014). Such testing provides an understanding of the potential impacts chemicals and
other substances have on the environment, safeguarding both the environment and human
health.
The objective of this thesis will be to investigate and characterize the environmental
fate and potential ecotoxicological effects of alternatively produced chemical compounds.
The results of this study will work to develop a comparative assessment to PCs currently in
use. This will focus on triazine-based H2S scavengers and halophyte-based biocides. In order
to perform an evaluation of the environmental risks associated with their exposure to the
Page 1 of 43
==PAGE:8==
marine environment, the acute toxicity of three different trophic levels will be assessed, this
will be done with bacteria, algae, and crustaceans. Additionally, an OECD 301F manometric
respirometry test will be conducted to evaluate chemical persistence in aquatic media. The
culmination of these results will allow for a comparasion between the tested alternative
chemicals to those currently in use. This report will serve as a preliminary hazard assessment
for alternatively produced H2S scavengers and biocides.
Page 2 of 43
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
2.1
EU framework for safe and sustainable chemical use and pro-
duction
In the pursuit of a more sustainable future, the European Union (EU) has introduced the
Green Deal as a crucial component of its comprehensive climate policy plan. This initiative
serves as the foundation within the broader EU framework, connecting various environmental
goals and policies aimed at achieving environmental sustainability. One of the key pillars
of the Green Deal is the preservation of the natural environment, which encompasses the
objective of reducing pollution from all sources by 2050 (European Commission, 2021). To
effectively achieve this goal, the EU acknowledges the imperative of continuous development
and implementation of protective regulatory frameworks. While the EU already has some
of the most stringent regulations in the world, further progress is essential to pave the way
towards a sustainable and eco-friendly society (European Commission, 2021; Kelland, 2014).
The Green Deal places significant emphasis on addressing the safety, sustainability, and
zero-impact aspects of new chemicals. Aligned with the goals outlined in the Green Deal,
the production and usage of chemicals and materials must prioritize methods that avoid
harm to the planet throughout their lifecycle. This transition also requires the adoption
of new production processes and technologies that enable the chemical industry to achieve
climate neutrality (Kelland, 2014). Central to this transition is the concept of "green chem-
istry," which is the foundation of the Green Deal’s approach.
By promoting alternative
production and usage methods of chemicals, green chemistry minimizes adverse impacts on
human and environmental health.
In line with this philosophy, the Green Deal aims to
phase out chemicals with the most harmful effects, such as those exhibiting environmental
toxicity, persistency, mobility, and bioaccumulative properties. Moreover, this comprehen-
sive framework encourages innovation in the development of safe and sustainable chemicals,
materials, production processes, technologies, and risk assessment practices. By paving such
advancements, the EU propels its commitment to environmental preservation and sustain-
able practices (European Commission, 2021).
This comprehensive approach extends to the oil industry, where an intrinsic relationship
exists between the oil and gas industry and the chemical industry. Chemicals are essential in
enhancing the extraction, processing, treatment, and transportation of oil and gas, establish-
ing a significant reliance on the capabilities of the chemical industry as both a supplier and
customer. Through research and development activities, the chemical industry actively con-
tributes to advancing new processes and technologies for oil and gas operations Jessop et al.
(2015). This mutual collaboration ensures that both industries thrive and evolve together,
driving progress and effectively addressing sustainability challenges.
2.2
The oil and gas extraction process
The oil and gas industry has shaped the modern era, accounting for a major source
of energy and revenue for countries around the world.
The world daily consumption of
Page 3 of 43
==PAGE:10==
2.3
Overview and composition of produced water
petroleum is estimated to increase from 85 million barrels in 2006 to 106.6 million barrels
by 2030 (EIA, 2021). Despite its importance, petroleum production generates a significant
amount of waste, with wastewater making up more than 80% of liquid waste (EIA, 2021).
Offshore oil drilling is the process of locating, drilling, and extracting crude oil and
natural gas from underground reservoirs (Kark et al., 2015). The exploration of deep sea
oil drilling often involves several steps beginning with acoustic remote sensing to locate
and understand subsurface geology and potential reservoir architecture (Cordes et al., 2016;
Kark et al., 2015). Following the identification of hydrocarbon reserves, the site may move
forward for production (Hyne, 2001). This process involves drilling of the well(s) as well as
the installation of varying surface materials and infrastructure such as offloading vessels and
floating production storage to enable the extraction process (Veil, 2011). The off-shore oil
drilling process can have environmental impacts (Figure 1) such as air and water pollution,
habitat disruption, chemical spills and greenhouse gas emissions (Cordes et al., 2016).
Figure 1: Off-shore oil and gas extraction process, and sources of potential environmental
effects that may occur from drilling operations (DTI, 2001).
2.3
Overview and composition of produced water
Formation water (FW) is naturally occurring water trapped in underground rock for-
mations below oil and gas deposits (Figure 2). Considering that this water can be trapped
underground for hundreds of years, FW is often composed of a wide variety of geological
contaminants such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gases, carbon monoxide, calcium, bicarbonate,
and barium ions, naturally occurring radioactive material (NORMs), sodium chloride and
more (Kelland, 2014). During the oil and gas extraction process, the reservoir pressure de-
creases and therefore additional water, known as injection water (IW), is injected to improve
Page 4 of 43
==PAGE:11==
2.3
Overview and composition of produced water
oil recovery yield (Figure 2). When oil recovery is low, FW frequently makes its way to the
production well, where it starts to be extracted along with the hydrocarbons. This waste
stream accounts for the largest volume of waste in the oil and gas sector (Igunnu and Chen,
2014). Following extraction, FW is treated with production chemicals (PCs) to mitigate
operational challenges on the oil platform. This mixture, known as produced water (PW),
is then separated into oil, gas, and PW, where the latter is then discharged into the ocean.
Figure 2: Off-shore oil and gas production platform for PW discharge and geological reservoir
formation for offshore oil and gas extraction (Nielsen, 2021).
PW is composed of a wide range of complex components such as FW, residual oil
from incomplete phase separation, organic, inorganic, dissolved and particulate compounds,
dissolved gases (including CO2 and H2S), PCs and more (Cordes et al., 2016; Al-Ghouti et al.,
2019; Kabyl et al., 2020). Moreover, there is often a wide variation in its components due
to the geological formation, lifetime of the reservoir and the type of hydrocarbon produced
(Igunnu and Chen, 2014). Figure 3 shows the relative distribution of PW constituents from
the offshore oil and gas industry in the North-East Atlantic region.
Page 5 of 43
==PAGE:12==
2.4
Production chemicals
Figure 3: Relative distribution of produced water constituents from offshore oil and gas
platform within the OSPAR region (North-East Atlantic) in 2020 (Nielsen et al., 2022).
2.4
Production chemicals
During the offshore extraction of oil and gas, PCs are added to mitigate operational
challenges. PCs can be used to inhibit corrosion, scale deposition, hydrate formation, wax
deposition, bacterial growth, foam production and gas dehydration in industrial equipment
(Igunnu and Chen, 2014; Agbroko et al., 2017; Bento and Campos, 2020; Kelland, 2014).
Among the different types of PCs, some of the most notable in use are H2S-scavengers,
corrosion-inhibitors, and biocides (Beyer et al., 2020).
2.4.1
Hydrogen sulfide scavenging in the oil and gas industry
During the extraction process of oil and/or gas, a wide variety of contaminants are
present, posing potential ecotoxicological and human-health effects (Bento and Campos,
2020). These contaminants can originate from various sources, including drilling fluids, PCs,
and naturally occurring gases. Among the compounds of concern, H2S has been extensively
studied. H2S is formed in petroleum reservoirs through natural processes and, although it
is not the only sulfur compound found in crude oil, it is typically the predominant sulfur
compound in natural gas. It exhibits high toxicity at low levels, is corrosive, and flammable
(Agbroko et al., 2017; Montesantos et al., 2022; Turkiewicz and Brzeszcz, 2019).
These
chemical characteristics contribute to the corrosion and fouling of industrial equipment, as
well as pose a significant risk to personnel, underscoring the necessity for effective treatment
(Agbroko et al., 2017; Montesantos et al., 2022).
In order for natural gas to be sold, it typically needs to have an H2S concentration
of less than 4 mg/L (Ramachandran, 2023; Turkiewicz and Brzeszcz, 2019).
To achieve
lower levels of H2S in produced fluids (oil and gas), a chemical absorbent/adsorbent called
an H2S-scavenger is employed. This scavenger chemically binds or converts H2S into a less
harmful substance (Agbroko et al., 2017).
Scavengers can exist in either solid or liquid
Page 6 of 43
==PAGE:13==
2.4
Production chemicals
forms, depending on their mechanism of action, whether it involves binding or dissolving
(Montesantos et al., 2022; Agbroko et al., 2017).
There are two types of scavenging methods in the oil and gas industry. The first of
which is known as the regenerative method in which the absorption of H2S is reversible and
can be reused after regeneration. The second is classified as non-regenerative (Montesantos
et al., 2022; Agbroko et al., 2017).
This method can be further divided into categories
such as oxidizing chemicals, metal carboxylates and chelates, aldehydes, ethers, amines, and
triazines. Typically, when removing high volumes of H2S, regenerable amines are employed,
while low-volume removal is primarily based on non-regenerable scavengers (Agbroko et al.,
2017; Amosa et al., 2010).
Depending on the type of H2S in the system, gas volume, and process conditions, a
specific type of scavenger will be chosen in order to treat the system of concern (Turkiewicz
and Brzeszcz, 2019). The most widely used type of H2S scavenger for water soluble mixtures
are 1,3,5-hexahydrotriazines, more commonly known as triazines. Tiazines are aslo effective
antimicrobial substances. Three variations of triazines exist, based on the location of the
substitution of nitrogen atoms (Figure 4). Triazines are manufactured most often as reaction
products. Those formulated from monoethanolamide (MEA) react more proficiently in the
liquid phase and are practical for immediate reduction of H2S (Montesantos et al., 2022;
Agbroko et al., 2017). Similar compounds such as diethanolamine (DEA), triethanolamine
(TEA), and N-methyl diethanolamine (MDEA) can be employed as well. However, they are
more often used in sour gas sweetening (Yuhai, 2020; Kelland, 2014).
Figure 4: Triazine derivatives used for H2S-Scavenging. a) 1,2,3-triazine; b) 1,2,3-triazine;
c) 1,3,5-triazine (Turkiewicz and Brzeszcz, 2019).
The best treatment plan will be chosen based on a number of variables, including the
H2S content, gas volume, and process parameters.
Operating conditions will also affect
the final application sites and treatment strategy choices. Overall, the use of scavengers is
an important step in treating H2S in oil and gas production. Proper selection and use of
scavengers can help prevent operational issues and ensure the safety of personnel and the
environment (Agbroko et al., 2017).
2.4.2
Biocidal products and applications in the oil and gas industry
The marine environment is accompanied with mass quantities of bacteria, fungi, algae,
protozoa, and other microorganisms. Oil and gas deposits often contain compounds such as
Carbon, Nitrogen, and Phosphorus, which can be used by microorganisms to sustain growth
Page 7 of 43
==PAGE:14==
2.4
Production chemicals
(Morris and Van Der Kraan, 2017). Consequently, microorganisms are commonly found
in oil field regions (Kelland, 2014). The metabolic activity of microorganisms can lead to
issues in various phases of the oil and gas extraction processes such as corrosion via the
production of organic and inorganic acids and blockages due to fouling from biomass and
microbial growth (Bejarano et al., 2022; Morris and Van Der Kraan, 2017). Furthermore,
microorganismal growth can lead to the degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons which can
ultimately alter physical properties such as oil density and viscosity, impacting both the oil
quality and value (Bejarano et al., 2022). Microorganisms can also produce H2S as well as
other compounds that may pose environmental and occupational health hazards (Bejarano
et al., 2022).
Chemical agents known as biocides, which eliminate or control microbial growth, are
therefore used in the oil and gas industry to mitigate the potential consequences posed by
microorganismal growth (Kelland, 2014; Fakhru’l-Razi et al., 2009). The use of biocides
aims to maximize operational efficiency while ensuring worker health and safety.
These
products can be classified as biocides or corrosion inhibitors, often serving a dual function
(Morris and Van Der Kraan, 2017). Factors such as temperature, pressure, and salinity
of the surrounding environment influence the activity of microorganisms. Therefore, these
factors are thoroughly evaluated when determining the optimal type and quantity of biocide
to be employed (Bejarano et al., 2022).
The selection of both the biocide type and amount can vary due to a multitude of
factors such as temperature, pressure, and salinity of the surrounding environment as such
factors influence microorganismal activity (Bejarano et al., 2022). Depending on the differ-
ing functions, mechanism of action and overall purpose of the biocide, their compositions
can vary from a single ingredient to complex chemical mixtures. In the oil and gas industry,
biocides can be categorized as either oxidizing or non-oxidizing (Morris and Van Der Kraan,
2017). Some examples of oxidizing biocides include chlorine, bromine, and hydrogen perox-
ide, which involve an oxidative mode of action. Oxidizing biocides, although more corrosive
than non-oxidizing biocides, are not compatible with hydrocarbon products and therefore are
less-commonly used in the oil and gas industry (Morris and Van Der Kraan, 2017; Turkiewicz
et al., 2013). The more commonly used non-oxidizing biocides have two types based on their
mode of action. The first of which disrupts microbial cellular processes, known as metabolic
inhibition (Morris and Van Der Kraan, 2017; Turkiewicz et al., 2013).
These metabolic
inhibitors often contain aldehydes, organophosphorus compounds or sulfur-based chemicals
(Kelland, 2014; Turkiewicz et al., 2013). While the second disrupts the cell membrane of mi-
croorganisms via surface-active ingredients. These generally contain amines or surfactants.
Surface-active ingredients are generally weaker, and therefore often accompanied by other
chemicals to increase biocidal activity (Bejarano et al., 2022).
The use of biocides to limit and/or control microbial growth is one of the most pop-
ular and effective methods in the oil and gas industry. Considering this, when employing
biocides, there are varying requirements that must be met (Turkiewicz and Brzeszcz, 2019).
The anti-microbial effectiveness, stability, applicable effective concentration, environmental
safety, economic factors, and characteristics of the environment are some examples of the
parameters taken into consideration when choosing the biocide type (Russell and Ayliffe’s,
2004). Following proper assessment of factors such as these, the biocide type is chosen and
Page 8 of 43
==PAGE:15==
2.5
Fate and effect concerns regarding produced water discharge
application may move forward (Turkiewicz and Brzeszcz, 2019).
2.5
Fate and effect concerns regarding produced water discharge
PW is a significant waste stream with an annual global discharge of 2,157 million m3 into
the oceans (Produced Water Society, 2020). The estimated global production ratio of PW
to oil is 3:1 (Khatib and Verbeek, 2002; Frid, 2003; Fakhru’l-Razi et al., 2009). For decades,
non-polar oil in water (OIW) was the only discharge that was regulated by the government,
while little attention was given to dissolved organics and other PW components (Nature
Technology Group, 2005). However, in recent years, the consequences of discharging PW
into the marine environment has spearheaded the research sector as the fate and effects of
its components aren’t fully documented and understood (Nature Technology Group, 2005;
Bakke et al., 2013; Kabyl et al., 2020).
Considering the wide range of components that make up PW, the fate and effects on
marine habitats and human health raises concerns as it is composed of toxic substances such
as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) (Beyer et al., 2020; Bakke et al., 2013), metals
(Hansen and Davies, 1994), naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORMs) and PCs, all
of which have been documented to have ecotoxicological effects (Cordes et al., 2016; Nielsen,
2021). The presence and persistence of PW components such as PAHs, metals, NORMs, and
PCs in the aquatic environment is a major concern. It is well-documented that exposure to
PAH s leads to DNA structural damage (Kabyl et al., 2020; Smit et al., 2008; Aas et al.,
2000). Metals can accumulate in blood and tissue, causing long-term effects on kidneys
and the brain (Tarrago and Brown, 2017). Moreover, NORMs are of high concern in that
the exposure of radioactive material is linked to cancer (Kabyl et al., 2020; Smit et al.,
2008). Finally, the exposure to PCs in the aquatic environment is relatively unknown as
they are frequently composed of complex components, each of which may have their own
environmental impact (Beyer et al., 2020; Bejarano et al., 2022). Some of them have been
identified to be toxic to marine organisms, thus enlarging the toxicity of PW in the dilution
and degradation process.
Upon discharge, the PW mixture will begin to dilute. This process will vary based
on a multitude of factors such as the composition of the discharged waste stream, the flow
rate, depth, ocean currents and tidal winds (Beyer et al., 2020). Differences in temperature,
density and salinity between the PW plume and the seawater will also affect the rate of
transport (Beyer et al., 2020). As the dilution process takes place, other mechanisms such
as volatilization, microbial and photo-degradation will transform and/or reduce the PW
mixture. Environmental effects of PW can impact species, populations, and ecosystems,
affecting biodiversity, biomass, and productivity. The bioaccumulation exposure and uptake
routes of components originating from the PW plume will vary for differing marine biota
(Beyer et al., 2020). Moreover, characteristics such as the properties of the discharge mixture,
and the organisms play a key role in the bioaccumulation process. Following exposure, the
uptake of hydrophobic organic contaminants is most commonly associated with gill surfaces;
however, passive and active digestive routes are common exposure sites as well.
Other
exposure routes include the digestion of contaminated food sources.
The treatment and discharge of PW is a major environmental and regulatory concern
Page 9 of 43
==PAGE:16==
2.5
Fate and effect concerns regarding produced water discharge
in the oil and gas industry. The exposure of PW to the marine environment is a complex
process that coincides with a wide range of impacts from contamination to fate and transport
on the marine system. Therefore, it is critical to ensure that the PW discharged into the
ecosystem is in compliance with regulatory measures to minimize ecological risk.
Figure 5: The mechanism of aquatic marine ecosystems’ exposure to produced water (PW)
discharge is influenced by various environmental and system factors as shown above, includ-
ing salinity, volatilization, dilution potential, precipitation, and degradation. The spread of
PW is facilitated by ocean currents, resulting in the continuous formation of a plume that
exposes downstream ecosystems and species, such as fish (Beyer et al., 2020).
2.5.1
Ecotoxicity of production chemicals
PCs such as H2S scavengers and biocides are a potential source of PW toxicity, however,
there are still few studies that quantify their individual effects and fate in the environment
(Bento and Campos, 2020). Often, these chemicals have complex compositions, which may
contribute different levels of toxicity following discharge to the marine environment. These
PCs can also lead to health and safety risks, regulatory compliance issues, and corrosion/-
damage on equipment (Amosa et al., 2010). Evaluations of offshore water discharges fre-
quently flag PCs, including biocides and H2S scavengers, due to concerns for the marine
environment (Craddock, 2018; La Vèdrine et al., 2015; Veil et al., 2004).
While research on the effects of PCs is limited, some studies have evaluated different
PCs found in PW and their contributions to overall PW toxicity.
For instance, Bento
and Campos (2020) examined the acute toxicity of synthetic PW using the rapid biological
screening test, Microtox®, on the marine luminescent bacteria Vibrio fisheri (V. fischeri).
The aim of the study was to analyze the toxicity of PW by examining nine different PCs
and their potential influence on PW toxicity. Among the nine chemicals, both a biocide
and an H2S scavenger were tested. The results indicated that prior to PC addition, the
PW was moderately toxic (EC50=63.77%) to V. fischeri. However, following the addition
of PCs, the toxicity significantly increased. Among the nine PCs, the biocide ranked most
Page 10 of 43
==PAGE:17==
2.5
Fate and effect concerns regarding produced water discharge
toxic, with an EC50 of 0.14%. The third most toxic compound was the H2S scavenger, with
an EC50 of 10.42%. The acute toxicity of the glycol derivative H2S scavenger exhibited in
Bento and Campos (2020) is also observed in Tornambè et al. (2012) when combined with
PW (EC50=67%).
Bento and Campos (2020) also evaluated a commonly-used surfactant, which is based on
a quaternary ammonium compound (QAC), dodecyl trimethylammonium bromide. It ranked
as the second most toxic of the nine tested PCs. Dodecyl trimethylammonium bromide, one
of the most detected QACs in the natural environment (Zhang et al., 2015), was used as
a surfactant in this study. However, QACs can also be implemented as biocides (Zhang
et al., 2015; Christen et al., 2017), where their mechanism of action involves the disruption
of cell membranes by their long alkyl chains (Xia and Onyuksel, 2000). The acute toxicity
of QACs has been observed on a variety of marine organisms such as microorganisms, algae,
daphnids, and fish (García et al., 2001; Ge et al., 2010; Kreuzinger et al., 2007; Sandbacka
et al., 2000; Zhu et al., 2010). Such toxicity was observed in Chen et al. (2014) for algae
(Chlorella vulgaris) (EC50: 5.8 mg/L), crustaceans Daphnia magna (D. magna) (EC50:
0.054 mg/L) and fish (rainbow trout gill) (EC50: 1.1 mg/L). Despite these results, their
interaction with other chemicals is relatively unknown (Zhang et al., 2015; Christen et al.,
2017). Similarly, García et al. (2001) investigated the aquatic toxicity of common QAC-based
surfactants. High acute toxicities were observed for alkyl trimethyl ammonium halides and
alkyl benzyl dimethyl ammonium halides on V. fischeri and D. magna. The EC50 for both V.
fischeri and D. magna ranged from 0.1 to 1.0 mg/L. Moreover, information on the toxicity
of glutaraldehyde, the most commonly used biocide in the oil and gas industry, to aquatic
organisms is scarce (Christen et al., 2017).
Similarly to Bento and Campos (2020), Henderson et al. (1999) evaluated the contri-
bution of toxicity certain PCs may have on that of PW using Microtox® on V. fischeri.
Eleven PCs were investigated, including corrosion inhibitors, demulsifiers, antifoamers and
a biocide.
A majority of the test chemicals exhibited toxic effects within 5-15 minutes.
The biocide had an EC50 of 33.7 mg/L, but no clear conclusions were drawn regarding its
contribution to PW toxicity (Henderson et al., 1999).
The most widely used triazine-based scavenger is 1,3,5-tris(2-dydroxyethyl)hexahydro-
s-trizine (HET). However, research on the aquatic toxicity of HET and other triazine-based
scavengers is limited, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) has
not classified them as posing little to no risk to the environment (Montesantos et al., 2022;
EPA, 2023). The most notable issue with triazine-based H2S scavengers is their detrimental
effects on industrial equipment (Agbroko et al., 2017). When the scavenger-injection does not
yield a full reaction of H2S conversion, the corrosion and fouling of industrial material is more
advanced due to the buildup of insoluble residues inside downstream equipment. Because
of this, often, the chemical injection is largely overshot compared to the stoichiometric
requirement to ensure complete conversion of H2S. Montesantos et al. (2022) conducted a
study evaluating the waste stream of spent and unspent (SUS) H2S scavengers downstream
of the injection point. It was detected that HET and MEA were present in downstream
samples, due to over-injection of triazine-based scavengers.
Due to the relatively small
volume of this stream compared to the total PW volume in the offshore oil and gas industry,
the SUS waste stream is typically discharged into the marine environment. However, this
Page 11 of 43
==PAGE:18==
2.6
OSPAR regulations for North-East Atlantic region
increased volume of discharge entering the aquatic environment has highlighted a series of
environmental risks and concerns regarding the potential ecotoxicity of these PCs (Bejarano
et al., 2022; Montesantos et al., 2022).
While discharge is generally permitted under surveillance, according to The Convention
for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR), triazine-
based H2S scavengers are not included in the list of chemicals posing little or no risk to
the environment (OSPAR, 2023; Montesantos et al., 2022).
Additionally, the European
Chemicals Agency (ECHA), has defined MEA as harmful to aquatic life with long lasting
effects (Montesantos et al., 2022; ECHA, 2023). Libralato et al. (2008) conducted a study
evaluating the ecotoxicity of the H2S scavengers MEA, DEA and TEA. Slight acute toxicity
on the algal species Phaeodactylum tricornutum was observed for MEA and TEA, being 25
and 87 mg/L, respectively. TEA did not exhibit acute toxicity (EC50 = 204 mg/L), this
is observed in a similar study by Eide-Haugmo et al. (2012). These observations highlight
the need for risk-based assessments for H2S scavengers, most notably the triazine-based
H2S scavengers, focusing on their potential toxicity, fate and transport within the marine
ecosystem.
2.6
OSPAR regulations for North-East Atlantic region
Regulations governing the use, handling, and discharge of PW differ from region to
region (Kelland, 2014; Amakiri et al., 2022). These regulations are typically based on the
quality of discharged PW in regards to the oil and gas concentration, with specific limitations
set in place. For instance, in the United States, the regulatory framework is governed by
the US EPA, which sets a concentration limitation of 29 mg/L for monthly average PW
discharge (Amakiri et al., 2022; EPA, 2023). Similarly, Canada and the UK both impose
a concentration limit of 42 mg/L for PW discharge (Amakiri et al., 2022). However, an
increase in environmental concerns has led to more stringent discharge regulation for PW.
For example OSPAR has set a limitation of 40 mg/L per year (OSPAR, 2023; Fakhru’l-Razi
et al., 2009). As the world moves towards zero-discharge goals, regulations regarding PW
contaminants will likely reflect these objectives.
OSPAR plays a significant role in regulating the protection and conservation of the
marine environment in the North-East Atlantic region. OSPAR outlines the required eco-
toxicological tests for all components of PCs in a Harmonized Mandatory Control Scheme
implemented in 2001 (OSPAR, 2023). The evaluation of the PCs involves assessing their indi-
vidual properties via three test requirements. The first of which is the determination of acute
toxicity to investigate potential ecotoxicological effects on marine ecosystems. These tests
typically include evaluating the acute toxicity of PCs to marine algae (Skeletonema costa-
tum), marine copepods (Acartia tonsa), marine amphipods (Corophium volutator), and ma-
rine fish larvae (Scophthalmus maximus) (Kelland, 2014). Following acute toxicity, OSPAR
requires an evaluation for bioaccumulation and biodegradation.
By requiring these three categories of tests, OSPAR ensures a comprehensive assess-
ment of the environmental properties of PCs. The hazards associated with chemicals are
then classified based on their persistence, bioaccumulation potential, and toxicity (PBT) in
accordance with the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization, and Restriction of Chemicals
Page 12 of 43
==PAGE:19==
2.7
Ecotoxicity testing and regulations for produced water
(REACH) and Classification, Labeling, and Packaging (CLP) regulations. The outcomes of
the hazard assessment and hazard identification results are then integrated into the evalua-
tion process, providing a better understanding into the potential risks and impacts of PCs
on marine organisms and ecosystems. The results play a crucial role in regulatory decision-
making, as they inform the approval or restriction of the use of specific PCs in offshore
operations within the North-East Atlantic region.
2.7
Ecotoxicity testing and regulations for produced water
The development of safe and sustainable chemicals is linked to the regulatory frame-
works governing environmental protection. Ecotoxicity tests form an integral part of these
frameworks, providing insight into the potential risks posed by chemical substances to the
environment. The results from these tests, along with hazard assessment and hazard identi-
fication, play a crucial role in informing regulatory decisions related to the use, production,
and disposal of chemicals. By comparing hazard assessments with exposure assessments,
the potential risk of adverse impacts can be determined (Kelland, 2014). Ecotoxicity testing
typically involves evaluating the effects of chemicals on a range of species including aquatic
plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates (Kelland, 2014). In laboratory tests, a chemical’s tox-
icity is evaluated by measuring parameters such as organism mortality, reduced growth rate,
and impaired reproductive capacity.
Different types of ecotoxicity tests are conducted, including acute toxicity, chronic toxic-
ity, bioaccumulation, and persistence testing (Kelland, 2014). Acute toxicity testing assesses
the lethal effects of a substance on organisms within a short period in relation to the lifecycle
of the organism. Chronic toxicity testing measures sublethal effects over a longer duration
in relation to the lifespan of the organism. Bioaccumulation testing measures the extent to
which chemicals can accumulate in the tissues of organisms over time. Furthermore, test-
ing for biodegradation investigates the ability of chemicals to break down naturally in the
aquatic environment.
Such testing is critical for the assessment of potential bioaccumulation and the subse-
quent transfer of chemicals, including PCs, through the food chain. This helps to provide an
understanding of the potential impacts chemicals and other substances have on the environ-
ment, safeguarding both environmental and human health (Kelland, 2014) (Kelland, 2014;
OSPAR, 2023; Igunnu and Chen, 2014).
Page 13 of 43
==PAGE:20==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Chemicals
The test chemicals used in this study consisted of triazine-based H2S scavengers AR2,
AR3, AR50, and a suspended/unsuspended feed solution obtained from an oil and gas
platform, 2,2’,2"-(hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine-1,3,5-triyl)triethanol (HHT)(CAS No. 4719-04-
4).
Additionally, four halophyte-based biocides referred to as B1, B2, B3, and B4 were
included.
HHT was obtained from an offshore oil and gas processing installation in the
North Sea, provided by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The triazine-based
scavengers AR2, AR3, and AR50 were synthesized by the University of Copenhagen (KU)
using a synthesis process involving a glycose base and sidechain modifications. The remain-
ing chemicals, B1-B4, were provided by Aalborg University Department of Energy, Denmark
(AAU). The biocides are water-based biocides that were produced from lignified halophytes
from four different plant species.
3.2
Stock solutions
This study conducted experiments using four different standard media.
A medium
containing 2% NaCl and NaHCO3 with a pH of 8.2 ± 0.2 was prepared in accordance with
ISO 11348 standards (ISO, 2008). An algal medium with a pH of 8.2 ± 0.2 was prepared
in accordance with ISO 8692 standards (ISO, 2012b). Additionally, a D. magna Elendt M7
medium was prepared weekly (ISO, 2012a). The pH was stabilized at 7.9 ± 0.2. The full
compositions of these media can be found in Appendices A, B,C and E.
3.3
Test organisms and culturing conditions
The bioluminescent bacteria V. fischeri used for the bioluminescence inhibition assay
was purchased from environmental bio-detection products inc. (EBPI, Ontario, Canada).
V. fischeri were freeze-dried samples stored at -20 ◦C and thawed prior to test start by
adding 12mL of 2% NaCl reagent diluent (EBPI, Ontario, Canada) stored at 4 ◦C. Bacterial
suspension was thoroughly mixed and left at room temperature for test start.
Raphidocelis subcapitata (R. subcapitata), the laboratory cultured unicellular freshwa-
ter green alga, used for short-term algal inhibition testing was purchased from the Norwe-
gian Institute for Water Research (NIVA, Oslo, Norway). Algae cultures were cultivated
in medium following ISO 8692 (ISO, 2012b) standards and cultivated in LEVITATT setup
(Skjolding et al., 2020). The LEVITATT system ensured constant conditions for the follow-
ing parameters: pH, CO2 content, temperature, and light intensity. To maintain appropriate
atmospheric CO2 exposure and a stable pH, the algae were grown in 20-mL scintillation glass
vials (Thermo Scientific™Sterilin™Scintillation Vial) capped with pierced lids. The vials
were placed on an orbital shaker at 250 rpm within the LEVITATT system. A constant
light exposure of 92 ± 14 µE m-2 s-1 with a wavelength of 400-700nm was provided from
underneath the vials. The temperature was held constant at (23 ± 2 ◦C) throughout the
experiment.
Page 14 of 43
==PAGE:21==
3.4
Reference substance for short-term toxicity tests
The freshwater crustacean species D. magna were used for the crustacean immobilization
test. The culture of D. magna has been maintained in the DTU laboratory since 1978,
following the guidelines outlined in OECD 202 (OECD, 2004). The cultures of D. magna
were grown in 1L glass beakers with a 16h + 8h light and dark period of artificial light at
a temperature of 20 ± 2 ◦C. Each one liter beaker of culture contained approximately 25
animals. The culture of D. magna was maintained in 700-800 mL of Elendt M7 medium
prepared following OECD guidelines (OECD, 2004). The temperature of the culture was
maintained at 20 ± 2 ◦C, with a pH of 8.2 ± 0.3 and O2 levels of 9.0 ± 0.6 mg/L. Twice a
week, the medium was renewed by replacing 300-400mL of old medium with new medium.
Beakers are emptied and cleaned 24h prior to test day, where all D. magna are removed
aside from the adults using a sieve. This process ensures only neonates ≤24h old are used
on test day. The D. magna were fed daily (excluding weekends) with 1-2 mg C L-1 per day
of the alga R. subcapitata, and the alga feeding solution was stored at 4 ◦C.
3.4
Reference substance for short-term toxicity tests
The reference substance used for the growth inhibition test on R. subcapitata and the
immobility test on D. magna was K2Cr2O7. This compound is recommended by ECHA for
conducting these tests. ISO 6341 (ISO, 2012a) and ISO 8692 (ISO, 2012b) provide results
from inter-laboratory tests using K2Cr2O7 on R. subcapitata and D. magna, respectively,
which yielded an EC50 of 1.19 mg/L for algal inhibition and 1.12 mg/L for D. magna im-
mobility.
The data points obtained from these tests were used to determine the concentration
series for the reference tests. For R. subcapitata, the concentrations ranged from 0.25 to 4.0
mg/L, while for D. magna, they ranged from 0.375 to 6.0 mg/L. Both concentration series
had a two-fold increase between each value. See Appendix F for details on reference tests.
3.5
Biotox™luminescence inhibition test with marine bacteria
The Biotox™assay was performed with the high performance luminescence system (Ju-
nior LB 9509 Portable Luminator), which was equipped with an array of wells and a pho-
tometer for measuring the light output. The assay used reconstituted freeze-dried Biotox™
V. fischeri (EBPI, Ontario, Canada). The methods used for the assay were modified from
ISO 11348 (ISO, 2008).
A water medium containing 2% NaCl and NaHCO3 was prepared following the guidelines
outlined in ISO 11348 (ISO, 2008) (Appendix A). To prepare the medium, 20 g of NaCl
was dissolved in 1000 mL of MilliQ-water. Stock solutions for each test compound were
then prepared in the medium according to ISO 11348, with the concentration in the stock
solution being twice as high as the desired test concentration to account for dilution with
the bacterial suspension during testing. For AR2 and AR3, a concentration of 2 g/L was
prepared in the medium to yield a test concentration of 1 g/L. The pH of all stock solutions
was measured and adjusted using 1M NaOH and/or 1M HCl to achieve a pH of 8.1 ± 0.2.
The pH meter was calibrated prior to measurement. No stock solution was created for HHT
and B1-B4, as serial dilution chemical additions were conducted instead.
Page 15 of 43
==PAGE:22==
3.6
Freshwater algal growth inhibition test of 72h
To prepare the test solutions, a concentration gradient was established while maintain-
ing a consistent factor of two between each concentration value. For each compound, five
different concentrations were selected, and 25 mL flasks were prepared for each concentra-
tion. After dilution, the concentrations of AR2 and AR3 ranged from 0.0625 to 1 g/L. For
HHT, it ranged from 0.0175 to 0.172 mL/L, and for B1-4, it ranged from 0.25 to 4 mL/L.
Each flask was properly labeled to indicate the specific concentration and the corresponding
test substance utilized.
One vial of freeze-dried Biotox™V. fischeri was removed from the freezer and thawed
by adding 12mL of Biotox™2% NaCl reagent diluent at room temperature. This was done
30 minutes prior to test start. Twelve 2mL snap top vials (Type 1 borosilicate glass, Agi-
lent Technologies) were arranged for each test chemical, with two vials designated for each
concentration and two for the control. A 100uL aliquot of V. fischeri bacterial suspension
medium was dispensed into each vial, starting with the control samples and progressing in
increasing order of concentration. The vials were inserted into the Junior LB 9509 Portable
Luminator, and luminescent values were recorded (t=0). Subsequently, 100 uL of each test
concentration (medium was used for the control samples) was dispensed into the correspond-
ing vials. A timer was set for t=10 and t=20, after which the luminescence was measured
at each time point.
3.6
Freshwater algal growth inhibition test of 72h
This test was used to determine the toxic effects chemicals have on the growth inhibition
of the freshwater green algae R. subcapitata. The following methods were modified from the
OECD 201 (OECD, 2006) protocol.
Preparation of ecotoxicological test mediums were
prepared following the standards laid out in ISO 8692 (ISO, 2012b) (Appendix B). Algal
culture for R. subcapitata was cultivated following the OECD 201 methodology (OECD,
2006).
Algal medium was prepared following ISO 8692 methodology in which 10 mL of solution
1, and 1mL of solutions 2-4 was diluted to 1000mL of MiliQ-water (ISO, 2012b) (Appendix B,
Table 2). The pH of all stock solutions was measured and adjusted using 1M NaOH and/or
1M HCl accordingly, in order to yield a pH of 8.1 ± 0.2. The pH meter was calibrated
prior to measurement. Following ISO 8692, a pre-culture for R. subcapitata was started 2-4
days prior to start of experiment. The growth culture is inoculated at a cell density of 5.0
* 104 cells/mL in order to ensure exponential growth occurs throughout test time. The cell
density was measured at t=0 using a Multisizer Coulter Counter (Beckmann Coulter Life
Sciences). This value was then utilized to calculate the required amount of algal pre-culture
needed for 25mL of test solution.
Five test concentrations were chosen to prepare 25mL flasks of test solution. For AR2
and AR3, a stock solution was prepared using the algal medium, while chemical additions
were prepared for HHT and B1-B4. The concentration sets for AR2, AR3, and HHT ex-
hibited a consistent factor of 2 increase over the five concentrations.
The concentration
range for AR2 and AR3 ranged from 0.0625 to 1 g/L, while HHT ranged from 1.075 to
17.2 mL/L. The concentration series for B1-B4 ranged from 2 to 10 mL/L. Each of the five
flasks were appropriately labeled to indicate the specific concentrations and test substances
Page 16 of 43
==PAGE:23==
3.7
Daphnia magna 48h immobility test
used. Additionally, a control flask containing only algal medium and growth culture was
included. For each test, six 25 mL flasks were set up, one for each concentration, with the
sixth being for the control. The corresponding amounts of stock solution for AR2 and AR3
was then added to the appropriate flasks for each concentration. Chemical additions for the
corresponding concentrations were conducted for HHT and B1-B4 using volumetric glass-
ware. The appropriate volumes of algal medium and growth culture was added to obtain the
desired concentrations. Algal medium was not completely filled as the as the algal culture
still needed to be added. The calculated amount of algal culture was then added to each
flask. Flasks were filled to the line with algal medium and inverted to ensure the samples
were properly mixed. Three replicates per concentration, and five control 20 mL scintillation
vials (Thermo Scientific™Sterilin™Scintillation Vial) were set up for test compound. Each
vial contained 4 mL of the corresponding test solution (with algal medium). Vials were
capped with pierced lids and incubated in LEVITATT setup thus ensuring the following
optimal growth conditions: continuous white light within the range of 60 umol/(m2*s) to
120 umol/(m2*s), (color temperature of 4300 K) and 23 ± 2 ◦C. Samples for fluorescence
measurement were prepared by setting up six test tubes and aliquoting 0.4 mL from each
test concentration into corresponding tubes. Test tubes were then treated with Acetone
(saturated with MgCO3) by adding 1.6 mL. The sixth test tube was a blind sample, con-
taining medium and Acetone (saturated with MgCO3). Vials were covered and stored in a
dark cabinet for 72h at 20 ± 2 ◦C.
After 24h, sample vials were removed from the LEVITATT shaker, and 0.4 mL of
each sample was transferred into new test tubes with 1.6 mL of Acetone (saturated with
MgCO3).
Sample vials were then put back into the LEVITATT shaker.
Aliquoted test
tube samples were then placed in a dark cabinet at 20 ± 2 ◦C. The fluorescence of all
samples were measured at t=0, t=24, and t=72h using a fluorometer (Hitatchi Fluorescence
Spectrophotometer F-7000) at 420nm.
3.7
Daphnia magna 48h immobility test
This method was used to determine the toxic effects chemicals have on D. magna based
on immobility.
This methodology was based off of the OECD Guidelines Test No.
202
(OECD, 2004). Preparation of ecotoxicological test mediums and D. magna medium were
prepared following the standards laid out in ISO 6341 (ISO, 2012a) (Appendix C). The test
organisms were D. magna neonates. Following ISO 202 guidelines, D. magna neonates shall
be no more than 24h old, and must show signs of healthy stock. This can be assessed by
ensuring no signs of stress are present such as mortality (must be > 20% in 2 days), no
presence of males, epiphia or discolored animals. Hand filtering and counting was preformed
using 1.0mm mesh material to separate young daphnids (24h old) from adults. Neonates
were transferred to a 100mL glass beaker containing medium for test use. A pre-prepared D.
magna Elendt M7 medium was made following ISO 6341 (ISO, 2012a) standards. Solution
II, the vitamin solution and macronutrient solution were combined to prepare the Elendt
M7 medium (Appendices C.1, C.2 and C.3).
Five test concentrations were made for each test chemical. The stock solutions for AR2
and AR3 were prepared by dissolving 1g of each test compound into 1000mL of Elendt
Page 17 of 43
==PAGE:24==
3.8
OECD 301F - Ready Biodegradability Test
M7 medium, the concentration range was from 0.0625 to 1 g/L. Serial dilution chemical
additions were performed for B1-B4 and HHT. The concentration range for HHT ranged
from 0.0268 to 0.43 mL/L and 0.8 to 4 mL/L for B1-B4.
An initial test for the HHT
compound was conducted with concentrations ranging from 4.3 mL/L to 68.8 mL/L, but
no neonates were mobile after 24 hours for all concentrations. Therefore, two range-finding
tests were conducted. In the first range-finding test, a factor of 10 was chosen between
concentrations from the previous test, with concentrations ranging from 0.43 mL/L to 6.88
mL/L. However, no neonates were mobile after 24 hours. Based on this information, a second
range-finding test was conducted using a factor of 10 between each concentration, and the
concentrations were set at 0.43, 0.043, 0.0043, 0.00043, and 0.000043 mL/L. All neonates
were mobile aside from the strongest concentration where immobility was observed at 0.43
mL/L, which was therefore used as the highest concentration for the final test on the HHT
compound. See Appendix D for range-finding concentrations for HHT.
A total of twenty-five beakers were set up per test chemical; four for each of the five
concentrations in addition to four for the control. For test chemicals AR2, and AR3 each
beaker was filled with 25mL of diluent (Elendt M7 medium) prepared following OECD
guidelines. The corresponding amount of liquid necessary for each concentration was then
removed from the appropriate samples to allow space for chemical stock solution addition.
Increasing volumes of the test solution was then added to obtain the correct test concentra-
tions. For B1-B4 and the HHT, serial dilutions were prepared to yield final volumes of at
least 100mL using volumetric glassware. Following concentration series preparation, 25 mL
of each concentration was transferred to the appropriate beakers. Using a plastic, one-time
use pipette and a 0.1mm mesh, five neonates were added to each beaker. Each beaker was
double checked to ensure all neonates were accounted for and mobile. Beakers were covered
with glass caps and stored in dark at 20 ± 2 ◦C for 24 and 48h. After 24 and 48h, mobility
of daphnids in each beaker was recorded. Daphnids that took 15 seconds or more to swim
after gentle agitation were recorded as immobile.
3.8
OECD 301F - Ready Biodegradability Test
The closed bottle ready biodegradability test was preformed using the automated OxiTop®
- IDS system (Xylem Analytics Inc. Weilheim, Germany) which allows for continuous and
automated monitoring of oxygen consumption in test samples. This method is based on the
OECD 301F (OECD, 1992) test guidelines. For the duration of the inoculation period, the
oxygen consumption was traced by measuring the change in partial pressure in each bottle.
NaOH pellets were added to each bottle to ensure a decrease in pressure would occur. An 80
mgThOD/L substrate concentration was used following Oxitop ® protocol. Test mediums
were prepared following OECD 301F test guidelines (OECD, 1992) (Appendix E).
A mineral medium of 1000mL was prepared by diluting 10mL of solution A and 1mL
of solutions B-D in Milli-Q water (Appendix E). Solutions A-D were prepared 24h prior
to experiment set up and stored at 4 ◦C. Composition medium was prepared the day of
experiment and left at 20 ◦C. The mass of test compound added to each Oxitop® bottle in
order to achieve 80 mgThOD/L was calculated using the chemical structure. This method
applied to chemicals AR2, AR3, AR50, as well as NaOAc. The chemical structures for B1-
Page 18 of 43
==PAGE:25==
3.8
OECD 301F - Ready Biodegradability Test
B4 are unknown, and therefore this did not apply. Alternatively, the EC10 values (t = 20)
identified in the Biotox™test were used to calculate chemical addition amount. Addition
amounts are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Corresponding Ec10 values for B1-B4 can be found in
Section 4.1.1.
Table 1: Addition amounts to Oxitop® bottles (mg) for NaOAc, AR2, AR3 and AR50 for
OECD 301 biodegradation test.
Chemical
Addition to Oxitop® bottle
NaOAc
37.70
AR2
21.00
AR3
21.80
AR50
18.50
Table 2: Addition amounts to Oxitop® bottles (mL) for B1-B4 for OECD 301 biodegradation
test.
Chemical
Addition to Oxitop® bottle
B1
0.657
B2
0.456
B3
0.788
B4
0.824
Inoculum may be obtained from a variety of sources such as activated sludge, sewage
effluents or surface waters. Activated slduge was used in this study. 500 mL of activated
sludge was collected from an aerated tank from Mølleåværket Waste Water Treatment Plant
in a glass pyrex bottle. Sludge was then filtered through a 500 µm sieve and aerated for
24h. Three microfiber filters were primed by filtering 20mL of Milli-Q water using a 0.45 µm
filter. Filters were then placed in oven for 1h at 104 ◦C. After 1h the filters were weighed
(including metal tray). Five mL of sludge was then filtered through each filter and put in
the oven for an additional hour at 104 ◦C. After 1h, the new weight of the filters was used
to calculate the total suspended solids (TSS) of the sludge.
Following 301F guidelines, the TSS should be ≤30 mgTSS/L, therefore a volume was
calculated to acquire a concentration of 25 mgTSS/L. The final volume added to each
Oxitop® bottle depends on the substrate concentration measured in ThOD. According to
Oxitop® guidelines, 80 mgThOD/L substrate concentration corresponds to 365mL total vol-
ume to each bottle, this was used for this experiment (Xylem Analytics, 2022). See Section
3.9.4 for calculation details.
The experiment was conducted in two phases. In the first phase, AR2, AR3, and an
additional H2S scavenger named AR50 were tested using a total of nine Oxitop® bottles. The
experimental setup included two inoculum blanks, one positive control, and two replicates for
each test compound, as detailed in Table 3. The inoculum blanks enabled quantification of
inoculum oxygen consumption. The positive control was prepared to ensure the inoculum was
Page 19 of 43
==PAGE:26==
3.9
Data treatment
active. The procedure involved adding the sludge followed by the test or control compound
to each bottle, followed by filling the bottles to a total volume of 365 mL with the mineral
medium. A stirring magnet was added to each bottle, followed by a rubber cap containing a
NaOH pellet, and then capped with Oxitop® heads. The experiment was initiated using the
Oxitop® system remote, and the bottles were stored in a dark space at 20 ◦C throughout the
experiment. In the second phase, B1-B4 were tested using a total of 11 bottles. At the end
of the 28-day test period, the biodegradation of the substance was measured by determining
the amount of oxygen consumed during the test period. This was done by extracting the
data from the Oxitop® system.
Table 3: Description of components in Oxitop® bottles for inoculum blanks, positive control,
and test bottles (Xylem Analytics, 2022)
Test Bottle Type
Contents
Inoculum Blanks
Inoculum: Volume depends on the TSS of collected sludge
Mineral medium: 365 mL - sludge volume
Positive Control
Inoculum: Volume depends on the TSS of collected sludge
NaAC: Substrate mass equivalent to 80 mgThOD/L
Mineral medium: 365 mL - sludge volume
Test Bottles
Inoculum: Volume depends on the TSS of the collected sludge
Mineral Medium: 365 mL - sludge volume - volume of substrate if it’s added as a stock solution
3.9
Data treatment
3.9.1
Biotox calculations for V. fischeri
The correction factor for each measuring time (t = 0, 10, 20 minutes) was calculated
using Equation 1:
KFx = ICx
IC0
(1)
KFx = Average luminescence of control samples after contact time (x minutes)
ICx = Average luminescence of control samples after contact time (x minutes)
IC0 = Average luminescence of control samples after contact time (0 minutes)
The relative inhibition (REL) for each measuring time (t = 0, 10, 20 minutes) was
calculated using Equation 2:
RELx min =
IT x min
IT x min ∗IT 0 min
(2)
RELx = Average luminescence of control samples after contact time (x minutes)
ITx = Luminescence intensity of test sample after contact time (x minutes)
IT0 = Luminescence intensity of test sample after contact time (0 minutes)
Relative response curves for 10 and 20 minutes with 95% confidence intervals were
generated using RStudio® (Ritz et al., 2015).
Page 20 of 43
==PAGE:27==
3.9
Data treatment
3.9.2
Algal inhibition calculations for R. subcapitata
Algal growth rate was calculated using Equation 3:
µ = lnnf −lnn0
td
(3)
nf = Measured fluorescence at the end
n0 = Measured fluorescence at start
td = length of the test period in days
Relative algal growth inhibition was calculated using Equation 4:
Iµi = 1 −µi
µ0
(4)
µi = Concentration mean growth rate
µc = Control mean growth rate
Concentration-response curves for relative algal inhibition were generated using RStudio®,
including 95% confidence intervals (Ritz et al., 2015).
3.9.3
Immobility calculations for D. magna
RStudio® was used to generate concentration-response curves for D. magna, calculating
the effect concentrations at 10% (EC10) and 50% (EC50) for 24 and 48h intervals. These
included 95% confidence intervals (Ritz et al., 2015).
3.9.4
Ready biodegradability calculations
Equation 5 was utilized to calculate the Total Suspended Solids (TSS) of the activated
sludge for a filtration volume of 5 mL. This TSS value was subsequently employed to deter-
mine the final volume of inoculum added to the Oxitop® bottles, aiming for a TSS value of
≤30.
TSS (g/L) = [weight after oven (g) - weight before oven (g)]*200
(5)
Equation 6 was used to calculate substratetheoretical for NaOAc, AR2, AR3, and AR50.
ThOD values were quantified based on chemical structure. Structures are unknown for B1-
B4, therefore Equation 6 did not apply. For a final volume of 365 mL, an 80 mgThOD/L
substrate concentration is used according to Oxitop system protocol (Xylem Analytics, 2022)
Substrate (theoretical) = mg of chemical
mg COD
∗80 mg ThOD
L
∗Volume of test flask (0.365L) (6)
Page 21 of 43
==PAGE:28==
3.9
Data treatment
Equation 7 was used to calculate ThOD where substrate(actual) was the amount of test sub-
stance weighed out on the scale.
Substrate(theoretical) was the calculated amount needed
per bottle based on the ThOD per bottle and ThOD per mg substrate (based on chemical
structure).
ThOD (actual) =
Substrate actual (mg)
Substrate theoretical (mg) ∗ThOD Theoretical (mg)
(7)
Page 22 of 43
==PAGE:29==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
4.1.1
Biotox™luminescence inhibition test
The Biotox™tests were conducted following the guidelines outlined in ISO 11348 (ISO,
2008). At t=10, the validity criteria were met for all test compounds, as detailed in Appendix
G and Table 8. However, at t=20, while AR3 and HHT fulfilled the validity requirements
for the minimum KF, AR2 fell short by 0.08 below the required minimum KF of 0.50, as
shown in Appendix G and Table 9.
Figure 6: Fitted concentration-response curves of luminescence output for V. Fischeri for
AR2, AR3, and HHT at t=20. Grey space represents 95% confidence intervals. Results for
AR2 and AR3 are presented as average inhibition as a function of concentration.
To evaluate the toxicity of the H2S scavenger-based compounds (AR2, AR3, and HHT)
on V. fischeri at t=20, a non-linear model was fitted to the data using RStudio® (Figure
6). The grey space represents the 95% confidence intervals. The resulting EC10 and EC50
values with confidence intervals (C.I) are presented in Table 4.
HHT exhibited the highest level of toxicity after 20 minutes of exposure, with an EC10
of 0.014 C.I[0.007, 0.020] mL/L and an EC50 of 0.031 C.I[0.022, 0.040] mL/L. Inhibition
is initially observed at approximately 0.025 mL/L, followed by a gradual increase.
The
Page 23 of 43
==PAGE:30==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
sigmoidal shape of the dose-response curve persists as the concentrations approach both the
EC10 and EC50 values, and the highest tested concentration of 0.172 mL/L is estimated to
reach the EC100. These findings align with a recent study conducted by Montesantos et al.
(2023), where toxicity was observed (EC50) of SUS compounds at very low concentrations
in a bioassay test using V. fischeri. Furthermore, Montesantos et al. (2023) indicated that
bacterial luminescence inhibition persists even after diluting the SUS compounds by factors
higher than the average dilution requirements for PW discharge streams (x4167 and 23256).
These results raise concerns regarding the ecotoxicity associated with increased volumes of
SUS H2S scavengers entering the environment (Montesantos et al., 2022; Bejarano et al.,
2022). The results of this study as well as Montesantos et al. (2023) emphasize the ecotoxic
potential of SUS compounds, even at extremely low concentrations.
In contrast, no inhibitory trends were observed for AR2 and AR3 (Figure 6), indicating
that toxicity does not occur at the tested concentration of 1 g/L. As a result, it was not possi-
ble to establish a concentration-response relationship for AR2 and AR3. Therefore, data for
AR2 and AR3 was not fitted with a non-linear regression to determine a full concentration-
response relationship within the tested concentration range. Instead, the average inhibition
was presented as a function of concentration, providing an overview of the overall response
pattern.
While no toxicity was observed for AR2 and AR3 on V. fischeri in this study, it has
been reported that the discharge associated with H2S scavengers contributes up to 20%
of the overall environmental impact factor in the North Sea region (Montesantos et al.,
2023). Furthermore, in a study conducted by Bento and Campos (2020), which evaluated the
toxicity of different components contributing to overall PW toxicity, an H2S scavenger ranked
among the top three most toxic compounds (EC50), alongside a biocide and a corrosion
inhibitor, in terms of their effect on luminescence inhibition of V. fischeri. Similar studies
investigating the contribution of PW toxicity have raised concerns specifically regarding
triazine-based H2S scavengers (Tornambè et al., 2012; Craddock, 2018; Veil et al., 2004).
These findings underscore the importance of assessing the potential environmental impact
associated with the use and discharge of H2S scavengers. Additionally, ECHA defines MEA
as a chemical that is harmful to aquatic life with long-lasting effects (Montesantos et al., 2022;
ECHA, 2023), while both the US EPA and OSPAR have not classified triazine-based H2S
compounds in the list of chemicals that pose little to no risk to the environment (Montesantos
et al., 2022; OSPAR, 2023; EPA, 2023). Given the increasing rate of PW discharge, these
classifications and the culmination of ecotoxicity results, additional testing investigating the
ecotoxicity of H2S scavengers is necessary, especially considering their use in the oil and gas
industry.
Page 24 of 43
==PAGE:31==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
Table 4: Toxicity responses of luminescence output for V. Fischeri for test chemicals AR2,
AR3, and HHT at t=20. Shown as EC10 and EC50 with 95% confidence intervals. AR2 and
AR3 (g/L), HHT (mL/L).
Chemical Compound
20-min EC10 and
95% confidence interval
20-min EC50 and
95% confidence interval
AR2
> 1*
> 1*
AR3
> 1*
> 1*
HHT
0.014 [0.007, 0.020]
0.031 [0.022, 0.040]
* No toxic effects observed at tested concentration of 1 g/L
4.1.2
Freshwater algal growth inhibition test of 72h
Algal growth inhibition tests on R. subcapitata were conducted following ISO 8692 (ISO,
2012b) guidelines. The validity data points are presented in Table 12 in Appendix I. Among
the tested compounds, AR2 and HHT did not meet the requirements for average growth
rate (µ ≤0.9), while the pH requirement was satisfied as it remained within the ±1.5 range
during the 72-hour test period for all compounds. The initial pH was 8.2 ± 0.2. However,
according to OECD 202 validity criteria, the coefficient of variation (CV) of the average
specific growth rates of the replicate control cultures should not exceed 7%, which was not
met by any of the test compounds (refer to Appendix I for CV values).
Page 25 of 43
==PAGE:32==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
Figure 7: Concentration-response curves for growth inhibition of R. subcapitata at t=72h
for AR2, AR3, and HHT. Grey space represents 95% confidence interval. Results for AR2
and AR3 are presented as average inhibition as a function of concentration.
The EC10 and EC50 values were determined by fitting a non-linear regression curve us-
ing RStudio® (Figure 7). Table 5 presents these values for H2S-based compounds (AR2,
AR3, and HHT) on R. subcapitata at t = 72h. Minimal to no inhibition was observed until
approximately 3.10 mL/L, after which the EC10 for HHT was identified at 3.15 C.I[-, 8.13]
mL/L, followed by the EC50 at 3.96 C.I [2.13, 5.78] mL/L. Limited data is available regard-
ing the algal toxicity of this compound, but ECHA reported an OECD 201 test conducted
on Desmodesmus subspicatus, a freshwater algae, which identified an EC10 of 3.4 mg/L and
EC50 of 6.66 mg/L (ECHA, 2023). Additionally, it was observed that SUS-based H2S com-
pounds had significant effects on algal growth, even at concentrations below PW discharge
requirements, similar to the findings for V. fischeri (Montesantos et al., 2023).
In contrast to the effects observed for HHT, no EC10 or EC50 values were identified
for AR2 and AR3, indicating that effects do not occur at the tested concentration (1 g/L).
Average inhibition presented as a function of concentration is presented using Microsoft
Excel (Table 7). The growth rate curve depicted in Figure 2 (Appendix J) reflects these
observations, with a general decrease in growth rate but no consistent trend of decreasing
Page 26 of 43
==PAGE:33==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
growth. For instance, the growth rate of AR2 initially decreased at the low concentration
of 0.125 g/L but exhibited a spike at the third concentration of 0.25 g/L. Subsequently, the
curve decreased again and showed a steady increase until reaching the highest concentration
of 1 g/L. The fluctuations in the graph make it challenging to establish a clear inhibition
trend. Similarly, no clear trend was identified for AR3, with the inhibition curve showing
some inhibition at 0.25 g/L, followed by an upward fluctuation at 0.5 g/L, and a subsequent
decrease at 1 g/L. These data points do not demonstrate clear signs of inhibition, which is
consistent with the growth rate curve shown in Figure 2.
The results for AR2 and AR3 do not indicate that these compounds are non-toxic but
rather suggest that they do not exhibit acute toxic effects at the tested concentration of 1 g/L.
Conducting tests at concentrations exceeding 1 g/L would offer insights into the occurrence
of toxicity at elevated levels. Although some data is provided in the ECHA database for the
HHT compound, suggesting that this compound poses little risk, further testing is needed
to evaluate the long-term chronic effects in the environment, as these results provide data
only for acute toxicity. This would help to evaluate the classifications as put forward by the
US EPA, ECHA, and OSPAR, assessing whether or not these classifications are appropriate
(Section 4.1.1).
Table 5: Toxicity responses of growth inhibition of R. subcapitata for test chemicals AR2,
AR3, and HHT at t=72h. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (g/L and mL/L) with 95% confidence
intervals.
Chemical compound
EC10
EC50
Unit
AR2
>1*
>1*
g/L
AR3
>1*
>1*
g/L
HHT
3.15 [-, 8.13]
3.96 [2.13, 5.78]
mL/L
* No toxic effects observed at tested concentration of 1 g/L
4.1.3
D. magna 48h immobility test
All tests were conducted following ISO 6341 (ISO, 2012a) standards. All tests conducted
fulfilled validity criteria laid out in ISO 6341 in which less than 10% of control neonates were
immobile, and the oxygen concentrations was ≥3 mg/L (Appendix K).
Page 27 of 43
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
Figure 8: Concentration-response curves for D. magna immobility after 48h of exposure for
test chemicals AR2, AR3 and HHT. Grey space represents 95% confidence interval. Results
for AR2 and AR3 are presented as average immobility as a function of concentration.
Aligning with the bacterial and algal inhibition tests, HHT was observed to be the
most toxic compound of the three. Figure 8 presents the concentration-response curve for
the immobility of D. magna exposed to H2S-based compounds AR2, AR3, and HHT for 48
hours. For HHT, it can be observed that at lower concentrations (0 - 0.05375 mL/L), no
immobility of D. magna was recorded. However, as the concentration of HHT increased,
the immobility of the organisms began to occur. At a concentration of 0.1075 mL/L, a
moderate immobility rate of 20% was observed, which increased to 80% at a concentration of
0.215 mL/L. The highest tested concentration of 0.43 mL/L resulted in complete immobility,
indicating that the EC100, falls within the range of concentrations tested, specifically between
0.215 and 0.43 mL/L. These findings suggest that HHT exhibits concentration-dependent
toxicity towards D. magna, with higher concentrations leading to increased immobility and
ultimately complete immobilization of the organisms. Literature regarding the ecotoxicity to
crustaceans is lacking, however the results of an OECD 202 test on D. magna was reported
by ECHA, yielding similar levels of toxicity than those of this study with an EC50 of 11.9
mg/L.
No concentration-response relationship was observed for AR2 and AR3 at the tested
concentration of 1 g/L. Therefore, the data were not fitted with a non-linear regression but
Page 28 of 43
==PAGE:35==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
rather presented as the average inhibition as a function of concentration. Figure 8 illustrates
the results, showing that the immobility for both AR2 and AR3 was less than 30% in total.
These data points yield inconclusive results, similarly to the bacterial and algal results, it can
be assumed that toxic effects do not occur at the tested concentration of 1 g/L, indicating
a low immediate risk.
However, additional testing at higher concentrations of the H2S
scavenger-based compounds to crustaceans would help to evaluate potential environmental
implications.
4.1.4
Biodegradability of AR2, AR3, and AR50
To investigate the biodegradability of AR2, AR3, and AR50, an OECD manometric
respirometric test was conducted in accordance with OECD 301F (OECD, 1992). All tests
were valid according to the OECD protocol and satisfactory reproducibility of the method
was achieved. A bottle containing 80 mg TOC/L of NaOH was used as positive control
in each experimental cycle to check the activity of the inoculum OECD (1992).
In all
experiments, NaOAc was ultimately biodegraded, indicating that the microbial biomass
used in the manometric respirometric tests was viable.
Page 29 of 43
==PAGE:36==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
Figure 9: Average oxygen consumption (mg O2/L) for AR2, AR3, and AR50 over 14 days
for OECD 301F manometric respirometric test.
Figure 9 presents the oxygen consumption (mg O2/L) over time (days) for the four
compounds, along with the positive control (NaOAc). It can be observed that all three test
chemicals showed a steady increase at the beginning of the test, with their values falling
within a similar range. Among the three chemicals, AR50 consumed the largest amount of
oxygen, reaching a final value of 47.9 mg O2/L. AR2 closely followed with an oxygen con-
sumption of 47.65 mg O2/L, while AR3 exhibited the lowest amount of oxygen consumption
at 41.65 mg O2/L. The positive control reacted as expected, steadily increasing over time
until it plateaued after approximately 10 days, with a final oxygen consumption of 55.7 mg
O2/L.
Comparing the oxygen consumption of AR2, AR3, and AR50 to that of the test with
NaOAc, it is evident that the compounds exhibited lower oxygen consumption throughout
the test (Appendix L, Table 3). These results indicate that the biodegradation of AR2, AR3
and AR50 was slow, and potentially limited at times, aligning with the calculated ThOD
values based on the associated chemical structures. The ThOD values for NaOAc, AR2,
AR3, and AR50 were 80.57 mg O2/L, 81.68 mg O2/L, 80.96 mg O2/L, and 81.10 mg O2/L,
respectively. The oxygen consumption values for these compounds fell below their respective
Page 30 of 43
==PAGE:37==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
ThOD values. This suggests that the biodegradation process was not effectively utilizing all
of the available oxygen, indicating that the tested chemicals exhibited slower biodegradation
rates. This may be due to potentially lower biodegradability or environmental persistence.
The low oxygen consumption rates imply that a longer timeframe may be required for these
compounds to degrade under natural conditions.
However, the results of the biodegradation assessment highlight the need for further
investigation of AR2, AR3, and AR50 through an inherent biodegradability test. Under-
standing their degradation potential is necessary for assessing their fate and potential impact
in the environment. Additional studies are necessary to further solidify the understanding
of the environmental risks associated with these compounds.
This will enable informed
decision-making regarding their use, disposal, and potential environmental impacts.
Although no degradation test for HHT was conducted in this study, the ECHA database
provides insight to the biodegradability of HHT. Three freshwater studies were conducted
following OECD 301A, 301C and 310 E. In one study following OECD 301A, using activated
sludge as inoculum, the test substance demonstrated a degradation rate of 90-100% after
8 days, indicating it is readily biodegradable. In the remaining tests conducted according
to OECD guidelines 301C and 310, the test substances exhibited degradation rates of 89.0-
95.0% after 10 days and 84% at the end of the test, respectively. These finding indicate that
HHT presents little risk in terms of persisting in the natural environment. Supporting liter-
ature regarding the biodegradation of triazine-based H2S scavengers is scarce, highlighting
the importance of conducting biodegradation assessments for compounds such as AR2, AR3,
and AR50. The results of these experiments from this study emphasize the need for further
investigation into the biodegradability and environmental implications of these compounds
and related compounds such as the relationship between the low oxygen consumption rates
and degradation potential. Understanding their degradation potential is necessary to assess
their potential environmental fate in the marine system.
4.1.5
Preliminary hazard identification and assessment of HHT, AR2, AR3,
and AR50
Hazard and risk assessment is a fundamental process in determining the safety of sub-
stances and their potential for safe use. Risk assessment comprises two key components:
hazard identification and hazard assessment. Ultimately, the outcomes of the hazard iden-
tification and hazard assessment are compared, allowing for the derivation of a Hazard
Quotient (HQ), thus quantifying the risk.
The culmination of results obtained from this study, as well as those reported by ECHA,
are sufficient for preliminary hazard identification and assessment for HHT. The physical-
chemical properties of HHT, provided by ECHA, indicate no significant hazards such as
flammability or explosiveness. Additionally, it demonstrates stability under normal usage
and storage conditions. All of which indicate low hazard. Regarding degradation, although
the biodegradability of HHT was not evaluated in this study, ECHA reports the results of
four OECD readily biodegradable studies. These studies, conducted in both freshwater and
saltwater environments, showed an average degradation rate of 84-100% (ECHA, 2015). As a
result, HHT is classified as readily biodegradable. This classification supports the assumption
Page 31 of 43
==PAGE:38==
4.1
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of AR2, AR3, AR50 and HHT
that HHT poses little risk for persistency. However, it has been reported that HHT can
rapidly hydrolyze which may lead to the formation of other compounds. These secondary
compounds could exhibit different environmental behavior and toxicity profiles. Therefore,
the hydrolysis of HHT should be considered when assessing its overall environmental fate and
potential hazards. An inherent biodegradability test could provide insight into the potential
persistency and assess the formation of degradation products.
As for bioaccumulation, there are currently no available aquatic or terrestrial studies
specific to HHT. However, considering its low octanol/water partition coefficient value (-2)
(ECHA, 2015), significant bioaccumulation is not expected. Regarding ecotoxicity, this study
conducted tests on bacteria, algae, and crustaceans, all of which exhibited effects (EC50).
However, due to the unknown composition of the tested HHT sample in the laboratory, the
results were reported in mL/L, making it difficult to convert these units to mg/L for proper
comparison. Therefore, for data consistency purposes, the results reported by ECHA will be
utilized for the ecotoxicity evaluation of the hazard identification. According to these studies,
HHT exhibits low acute toxicity to algae, invertebrates, and fish, with no significant adverse
effects observed at the tested concentrations.
The lowest reported EC50 value was 6.66
mg/L, and the lowest EC10 value was 3.4 mg/L, both for algae (ECHA, 2015). Conversely,
the approximate unit translation for the algal results of this thesis yield a value of 39.8 mg/L,
a value that is significantly higher than that of ECHA. However, the algal species are not
the same, and therefore may exhibit different levels of sensitivity, so a direct comparison
is not possible. In regards to the hazard assessment, a Predicted No Effect Concentration
(PNEC) of 0.066 mg/L, employing an assessment factor of 1000, was calculated (Equation 8).
Following this, typically the HQ would now be calculated to quantify the environmental risk
associated with HHT. However, due to the lack of a clear literature Predicted Environmental
Concentration (PEC) value, the HQ was not established.
PNEC = (Lowest Available LC50 or EC50 or NOEC)
Assessment Factor
(8)
The culmination of the ecotoxicity results, both from ECHA and the findings of this
study, strongly suggest minimal toxicity following environmental exposure to HHT. Further-
more, the lack of persistence and potential bioaccumulation of HHT indicates a relatively low
environmental risk; yielding no acute toxicity classification in the CLP regulation (Appendix
M). Although this classification signifies low toxicity and exempts HHT from being catego-
rized as persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic (PBT) or very persistent and very bioac-
cumulative (vPvB) compound, it does not guarantee the absence of effects on the aquatic
marine environment. Specifically, concerns have been raised regarding the persistence of SUS
H2S scavengers in downstream environments resulting from offshore oil and gas operations,
highlighting potential risks beyond acute toxicity (Montesantos et al., 2023). Additionally,
while some triazine-based compounds have been proposed as more sustainable alternatives
to other scavengers used in the industry, concerns still remain about their environmental
effects and potential scaling on industrial equipment (Kelland, 2014). The fact that HET, a
triazine-based scavenger is still not on the US EPA’s list of little to no risk emphasizes the
lack of understanding in regards to environmental risk.
For the chemicals AR2, AR3, and AR50 examined in this study, the lack of existing data
Page 32 of 43
==PAGE:39==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
limits the comprehensiveness of the hazard identification process as the chemical properties
of these compounds remain unknown.
However, valuable insights can still be gathered
from the assessment of biodegradation and ecotoxicity, shedding light on the potential risks
associated with these substances. Regarding ecotoxicity, the results indicate that both AR2
and AR3 are not acutely toxic, as no adverse effects were observed for bacteria, algae, and
crustaceans at the tested concentration of 1 g/L. According to the guidelines outlined by the
CLP Regulation provided by ECHA, these compounds do not meet the criteria for aquatic
acute toxicity, as no toxicity was observed at concentrations below 100 mg/L (Appendix
M). However, it is important to note that this evaluation is based on limited data, focusing
solely on acute toxicity. Therefore, conducting further investigations to assess the chronic
toxicity potential of these compounds would provide a more comprehensive understanding
and enable a chronic CLP classification.
Due to the absence of an EC50 value for AR2 and AR3, the calculation of a PNEC is
not possible. However, by comparing the results obtained for HHT, which indicate minimal
toxicity, with the hypothetical scenario of an EC50 value identified at 1.1 g/L (1100 mg/L),
the PNEC of AR2 and AR3 would be determined as 1.1. This value suggests that the toxicity
of both AR2 and AR3 is significantly lower than that of HHT but still not negligible. While
the findings of this study suggest that HHT has minimal toxicity and low environmental risk,
concerns remain regarding the persistence of H2S scavengers in downstream environments
resulting from offshore oil and gas operations. Furthermore, the lack of comprehensive hazard
data for alternative scavengers, including AR2, AR3, and AR50, underscores the need for
further research to assess their chronic toxicity potential and address the concerns raised in
the literature regarding triazine-based scavengers like HET and MEA. Recognizing the need
for environmentally friendly and effective alternatives, several options have been investigated.
These include zinc-based compounds, aldehydes (such as glutaraldehyde and glyoxal), caustic
tower systems, and novel oxidized sugar derivatives (Kelland, 2014; Schuber et al., 2020).
However, these alternatives have limitations, such as slow reactivity, fluid loss, instability at
high temperatures, and high toxicity (Schuber et al., 2020). Some studies have explored the
use of peroxide as an effective and environmentally friendly sulfide scavenger, but challenges
with hydrogen peroxide destabilization at high pH have hindered its widespread application
(Kelland, 2014; Knudsen et al., 2002). Consequently, finding environmentally friendly and
effective solutions that overcome these challenges remains an ongoing endeavor.
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
4.2.1
Biotox™luminescence inhibition test
The Biotox™tests conducted in this study followed the guidelines outlined in ISO 11348
(ISO, 2008). The validity criteria were met for all test compounds at both t=10 and t=20,
as detailed in Appendix G and Table 8.
Page 33 of 43
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
Figure 10: Concentration-response of luminescence output for V. Fischeri for B1-B4 at t=20.
The Y-axis scale >1 for B2 and B4, precluding direct comparison. Grey space represents
95% confidence intervals.
To determine the EC10 and EC50 values, a non-linear model was fitted to the data using
regression analysis in RStudio® (Figure 10). These values are presented in Table 6. Among
the biocides, it can be concluded that B2 exhibited the highest level of toxicity for EC50
endpoints at both t=10 and t=20. B2 had EC50 values of 1.34 C.I[-, 4.80] and 1.25 C.I[-,
2.67] at t=10 and t=20, respectively. On the other hand, B1 exhibited higher toxicity at
lower concentrations, with the lowest EC10 value (0.40 C.I[-, 0.97] mL/L).
The inhibition values for all four biocides were relatively low or negative at lower con-
centrations (0.25 - 0.5 mL/L), indicating no toxic effects. As the concentration increased,
the inhibition for B1 was lower than that of B2. The concentration-response relationship
for B1 did not show a strong trend, particularly at concentrations below 3 mL/L, while
B2 exhibited a steady increase in inhibition with concentration, eventually plateauing at
complete inhibition. B3 and B4 were observed to be less toxic than B1 and B2 at both
time points, with B4 being the least toxic. The concentration-response curve for B3 showed
a clear relationship, but the relative inhibition remained low at low concentrations (≤3
mL/L). The concentration-response relationship for B4 remained consistently low across
all concentrations, suggesting a lower toxic effect compared to B1 and B2. Based on the
concentration-response relationships, the toxicity of the biocides can be ranked as follows:
Page 34 of 43
==PAGE:41==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
B2 > B1 > B3 > B4.
Although there is limited research available specifically on the direct toxicity of biocides
from offshore PW discharge, studies have been conducted to evaluate the overall toxicity of
PW components providing some insights into the potential ecotoxicological effects (Crad-
dock, 2018; La Vèdrine et al., 2015; Veil et al., 2004). Bento and Campos (2020) conducted
a study in which the addition of a biocide to PW resulted in a significant increase in toxicity.
Particularly, a QAC-based surfactant, widely used as a biocide due to its bacteria-inhibiting
properties, was identified as the second-most toxic compound to V. fischeri in a bioassay
test (EC50 of 33.7 mg/L). Similarly, García et al. (2001) another study evaluated the toxicity
of six different QAC-based surfactants on marine luminescent bacteria P. phosphoreum, and
identified considerably lower toxicities than both this study as well as Bento and Campos
(2020) ranging between 0.15 and 0.63 mg/L (EC50).
Despite these findings, the fate of biocides in the marine environment and their presence
in offshore water discharges have not been extensively studied or reported in the scientific
literature. Glutaraldehyde, one of the most commonly used biocides in the oil and gas indus-
try, has received limited research attention regarding its direct effects (Christen et al., 2017).
However, one study evaluated the toxicity of various PCs, including anti-foamers, biocides,
corrosion inhibitors, and demulsifiers, on V. fischeri luminescent inhibition.
Among the
tested biocides, two glutaraldehyde-based compounds exhibited EC50 values of 5.2 C.I[4.8,
5.6] and 22.6 C.I[21.4, 23.8], respectively. The results indicated complete toxicity for these
biocides in their aqueous phase, which can be attributed to their high water solubilities. The
EC50 values were observed within 5-15 minutes of exposure (Henderson et al., 1999).
Despite the available literature on the toxicity of individual biocides, quantifying the
fate of biocides in the marine environment, particularly in offshore PW discharges, remains
a challenge. The complex interactions between biocides, other PW components, and the
marine ecosystem require further investigation. Additionally, the long-term effects of chronic
exposure to low concentrations of biocides on marine organisms and ecosystems are still not
well understood.
Considering this, the minimal toxic effects observed for B1-B4 show a
promising shift towards halophyte-based compounds, however, long-term and chronic effects
are unknown.
Table 6: Toxicity responses of luminescence output for V. Fischeri for biocides B1-B4 at
t=20. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L) with 95% confidence intervals.
Chemical Compound
20-min EC10 and
95% confidence interval
20-min EC50 and
95% confidence interval
B1
0.40 [-, 0.97]
1.80 [0.89, 2.73]
B2
0.99 [0.80, 1.18]
1.25 [-, 2.67]
B3
0.97 [0.66, 1.28]
2.16 [1.81, 2.51]
B4
1.65 [0.67, 2.63]
2.26 [1.44, 3.09]
Page 35 of 43
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
4.2.2
Freshwater algal growth inhibition test of 72h
All tests were conducted following ISO 8692 (ISO, 2012b). Validity data points are laid
out in Appendix I, Table 12. B1-B3 met the requirements for average growth rate (µ ≤0.9),
while B4 did not. However, the pH requirement was met as it did not increase or decrease
by more than ± 1.5 within the 72h test period for all test compounds. The initial pH was
8.2 ± 0.2. According to OECD 202 validity criteria, the coefficient of variation (CV) of the
average specific growth rates of the replicate control cultures should not exceed 7%. The CV
values for all test chemicals can be found in Appendix I. All test compounds failed to meet
this criteria.
Figure 11: Concentration-response curves for growth inhibition of R. subcapitata at t=72h
for B1-B4.
Grey space represents 95% confidence interval.
Results for B1 and B2 are
presented as average inhibition as a function of concentration.
The EC10 and EC50 values for B1-B4 on R. subcapita, determined through the fitting of a
non-linear regression curve using RStudio® (Figure 11), are presented in Table 7. Although
overall minimal toxicity was observed for the biocides, it can be concluded that among the
tested biocides, B4 exhibited the highest level of toxicity. This is evident from its EC10
value (6.97 C.I[5.56, 8.40] mL/L), which is the lowest among B1-B4. Figure 11 displays the
concentration-response curves for B1-B4. While no EC50 value was identified, the leftward
Page 36 of 43
==PAGE:43==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
shift of the sigmoid curve indicates that B4 has higher toxicity compared to B1-B3, suggesting
that the EC50 value would also be lower. Following B4, B3 demonstrated the second highest
level of toxicity, with an EC10 value of 9.97 [8.96, 10.99] mL/L. Figure 11 illustrates the
inhibition curves for B1 and B2, where no inhibition is observed, indicating that toxicity
occurs at concentrations higher than the tested 10 mL/L.
Quantifying the fate in the marine environment of biocides present in offshore water
discharges has yet to be extensively tested and reported in the scientific literature in regards
to algae, among other organisms. However, similarly to bacterial tests, previous studies have
been conducted on QAC-based compounds for inhibition of algal growth. Chen et al. (2014)
tested six of the more commonly used QAC on the freshwater algae, the study observed that,
in comparison to aromatic hydrocarbons, the toxicity from QACs was much higher. More-
over, Chen et al. (2014) identified an EC50 of 5.8 mg/L following a 72h algal inhibition test
(Chorella vulgaris) for QACs. Additionally, 2,2-dibromo-2-nitrilopropionamide (DBNPA), a
fast-acting non-oxidizing biocide, has been identified to be toxic to all aquatic life, it has
also shown to have toxic hydrolysis products (Kahrilas et al., 2015).
Table 7: Toxicity responses of growth inhibition of R. subcapitata for B1-B4 at t=72h. Shown
as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L) with 95% confidence intervals.
Chemical compound
EC10
EC50
B1
>10 *
>10 *
B2
>10*
>10 *
B3
9.97 [8.96, 10.99]
12.43 [3.78, 21.08]
B4
6.97 [5.56, 8.40]
10.76 [9.06, 12.46]
* No toxic effects observed at tested concentration 10 mL/L
4.2.3
Daphnia magna 48h immobility test
All tests were conducted following ISO 6341 (ISO, 2012a) standards. All tests conducted
fulfilled validity criteria laid out in ISO 6341 in which less than 10% of control neonates were
immobile, and the oxygen concentrations was ≥3 mg/L (Appendix K).
Page 37 of 43
==PAGE:44==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
Figure 12: Concentration-response curves for D. magna immobility after 48h of exposure for
test chemicals B1-B4. Grey space represents 95% confidence interval.
Figure 12 illustrates the concentration-response curves for B1-B4 as generated using
non-linear regression in RStudio®. Low levels of immobility were observed following the
exposure of D. magna to B1-B4. Among these compounds, B2 demonstrated the highest
level of toxicity, as it induced immobility in D. magna at relatively lower concentrations
compared to the other biocides. B1 also exhibited moderate toxicity, causing immobility
at higher concentrations.
In contrast, chemicals B3 and B4 showed lower toxicity, with
immobility observed only at the highest tested concentration of 4 mL/L. Notably, at the
lowest concentration of 0.8 mL/L, B2 was the only compound to exhibit effects, resulting in
approximately 20% immobilization of neonates. As the concentration increased, at around
3.2 mL/L, varying degrees of immobility were observed for B1, B3, and B4, ranging from
20% to 40%, while no immobility was observed for B2. Finally, at the highest concentration
of 4 mL/L, all four chemicals caused some level of immobility. B1 and B4 induced 20%
immobility, whereas B2 and B3 exhibited higher rates of 40% and 20%, respectively.
However, it is important to note that these results do not allow for any definitive con-
clusions to be drawn due to the absence of a significant trend between concentration and
immobility. The determination of an EC50 value, which would provide further insight into
the relative toxicity of B1- B4, was unsuccessful at the tested concentrations. Current liter-
ature regarding crustacean ecotoxicity following the exposure of biocides is limited, however
Page 38 of 43
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
as reported by the US EPA, DBNPA was found to be toxic to all aquatic life with the low-
est reported C50 D. magna observed at 0.66 mg/L (48 h) and 1.0 mg/L for rainbow trout
(96 h) (EPA, 2023). In addition, shellfish were observed to showed acute toxicity effects at
0.053 mg/L, thus highlighting the need for a more comprehensive assessment regarding the
environmental implications of complex biocides.
4.2.4
Biodegradability of B1, B2, B3, and B4
The manometric respirometric tests were conducted in accordance with OECD 301F
(OECD, 1992). All tests were valid according to the OECD protocol and satisfactory re-
producibility of the method was achieved. A bottle containing 80 mg TOC/L of NaOH was
used as positive control in each experimental cycle to check the activity of the inoculum
(OECD, 1992). In all experiments, NaOAc was ultimately biodegraded, indicating that the
microbial biomass used in the manometric respirometric tests was viable.
Figure 13: Average oxygen consumption (mg O2/L) for B1-B4over 16 days for OECD 301F
manometric respirometric test.
Figure 13 presents the oxygen consumption (mg O2/L) over time (days) for B1-B4 for
the manometric respirometric tests. The biodegradation test for B1, B2, B3 and B4 showed
varying results for degradation patterns among the chemicals. As seen in Figure 13, there
is an immediate increase for B1, B2, and B4 from day 0 to 3, showing an exponential-like
Page 39 of 43
==PAGE:46==
4.2
Ecotoxicity and biodegradability of B1, B2, B3 and B4
curve, after which, B3 and B4 show varying fluctuations at day 7 ranging from 49.1 to 56.7
mg O2/L until ultimately plateauing at day 10. Alternatively, B1 shows a steady, more
linear-like increase in degradation ranging from 11.6 to 57.95 mg O2/L over the duration of
the test. These trends may suggest lower levels of biodegradation or more persistency than
that of B1 and B2.
Furthermore, the results from the inhibition test following the addition of NaOAc showed
inhibition effects on the biodegradation process, as seen by the lower oxygen consumption
values, suggesting that the fate of these chemicals in the environment may be inhibited.
Chemical structure and composition of B1-B4 are unknown, and therefore, ThOD was not
calculated. ThOD values provide an estimate of the oxygen demand assuming the compound
is fully degraded, and therefore is beneficial for environmental assessments as it provides in-
sights on potential biodegradation in aquatic systems. To better understand the biodegrad-
ability and fate of B1-B4 in the environment, additional testing investigating the persistence
and degradation pathways would be beneficial.
4.2.5
Preliminary hazard identification and assessment of B1, B2, B3, B4
The results of the study provide valuable information on the EC50 values for bacterial
and algal responses to compounds B1, B2, B3, and B4.
However, due to the unknown
chemical composition and production methods of these compounds, a comprehensive analysis
of their physical and chemical characteristics is not feasible, similar to AR2, AR3, and AR50.
Despite these limitations, some comparative insights can be drawn from the available data.
Regarding biodegradability, the results of the OECD 301F manometric test indicate
that the compounds are not readily biodegradable, as slow oxygen consumption values were
observed. Although B1 and B2 demonstrated more favorable degradation patterns com-
pared to B3 and B4, an inherent biodegradability test would help to determine the extent of
biodegradation in the environment. In terms of ecotoxicity, although an EC50 was observed
for B3 and B4 for algal inhibition, these results do not allow for any definitive conclusions
to be drawn due to the absence of a significant trend between concentration and response.
Moreover, minimal levels of toxicity on bacterial luminescence and crustacean immobility
were observed indicating that these compounds do not qualify for acute toxicity in the CLP
classification (Appendix M). However, detailed information about the compounds, including
their chemical structures, properties, and behavior in the marine environment via degrada-
tion would yield a more comprehensive assessment. The culmination of these would also
allow for the calculation of a PNEC and HQ, thus yielding a better understanding on the
potential environmental risk associated.
Considering the concerns associated with the intrinsic hazardous properties and use pat-
terns of biocides, it is essential to address potential risks to the environment. The findings
regarding B1-B4 suggest low environmental toxicity, indicating a limited immediate im-
pact on trophic levels following environmental exposure. However, the persistence of these
compounds raises concerns about their long-term effects. This observation highlights the im-
portance of comparison between low ecotoxicity and potential persistence. Although within
the trophic levels, it is understood that little impact may occur following environmental ex-
posure, it is possible that the persistency of these compounds could yield a long-term effect.
Page 40 of 43
==PAGE:47==
4.3
Outlook on safe and sustainable alternative chemicals
The potential of persistence could risk the accumulation in organisms as well as long-term
environmental contamination which may lead to remedial difficulties. Therefore, additional
chronic testing could be beneficial to evaluate any potential effects. Moreover, this would
yield a chronic classification in the CLP.
Limited research has been conducted on biocides used in the oil and gas industry, high-
lighting the need for more comprehensive studies (Ashraf et al., 2014). This, in turn, makes it
difficult to draw comparative conclusions. Nevertheless, studies on traditional biocides used
in the industry, such as glutaraldehyde, DBNPA, and bronopol, have shown varying levels
of toxicity towards aquatic organisms (Kelland, 2014). Glutaraldehyde generally exhibits
low to moderate toxicity but demonstrates higher toxicity towards oysters (Kahrilas et al.,
2015). DBNPA, even at relatively low concentrations, is highly toxic to aquatic life, affecting
organisms like D. magna, rainbow trout, and shellfish (Kahrilas et al., 2015). Bronopol has
been identified as highly toxic to marine invertebrates, particularly oysters (Ashraf et al.,
2014). These findings highlight the need for further extensive testing and reporting in the
scientific literature to accurately quantify the fate of biocides in the marine environment,
specifically in offshore water discharges.
The culmination of these results highlight the need for alternative, environmentally-
friendly biocides. The results for B1-B4 indicate that halophyte-based biocides and other
naturally-produced compounds may yield lower immediate impacts on trophic levels. How-
ever, to solidify this understanding, additional research involving chronic testing and in-
vestigation of their environmental fate is necessary.
Such studies will contribute to the
development of safer and more sustainable options in the field of biocides.
4.3
Outlook on safe and sustainable alternative chemicals
Environmental risk assessment plays a crucial role in determining the safety of sub-
stances and their potential impact on the environment. The assessment of the substances
HHT, AR2, AR3, AR50, B1, B2, B3, and B4 revealed varying conclusive remarks. For HHT,
the data suggested low hazards and minimal toxicity following environmental exposure. In
addition, although there is a lack in data for bioaccumulation, given the low logkow value,
bioaccumulation is not expected and therefore HHT is not classified in the CLP classifica-
tion for aquatic acute toxicity. Although there is a potential for formation of degradation
products via hydrolysis, a secondary OECD biodegradation test (inherent biodegradability)
test may be beneficial. Limited data availability posed challenges for the hazard identifica-
tion and assessment of AR2, AR3, AR50, B1, B2, B3, and B4. The biodegradation tests
indicated that these compounds are not readily biodegradable, warranting further studies
to understand their persistence in the environment.
On another hand, ecotoxicity tests
showed no acute toxicity at tested concentrations, yielding no classification in the CLP reg-
ulation. However, acquiring more specific compound information and conducting additional
tests including chronic toxicity tests, is necessary to assess their long-term effects on aquatic
organisms accurately.
In the context of hazard classification, the CLP Regulation provided by ECHA is crucial
to implement the use of such replacement chemicals. Compliance with CLP classification
is essential to ensure proper handling, storage, and use of substances. However, the classi-
Page 41 of 43
==PAGE:48==
4.3
Outlook on safe and sustainable alternative chemicals
fication process heavily relies on the availability of reliable and comprehensive data, which
can be a challenge when dealing with emerging compounds or compounds with limited in-
formation, such as some of those in this thesis. In line with environmental sustainability
efforts, initiatives such as the Green Deal and REACH have gained significance. The Green
Deal aims to transition to a sustainable, low-carbon, and circular economy. This transition
includes promoting the use of green chemicals that exhibit lower toxicity and environmental
impact compared to traditional chemical substances. REACH is a comprehensive regulatory
framework in the EU that addresses the production, use, and safety of chemical substances.
REACH emphasizes the importance of information sharing, risk assessment, and promoting
the use of safer alternatives.
The reduction of environmental risk associated with PCs relies heavily on the transi-
tion to green chemistry and the development of ecofriendly alternatives. Although, com-
pounds such as natural sources, biosurfactants and some triazine-based scavengers have
shown promise as green biocides/alternatives to traditional PCs, challenges remain in terms
of understanding their fate in the marine environment. Further research in regard to their
effectiveness, economic feasibility and environmental risk will continue to solidify the transi-
tion to green chemistry application ultimately helping to reach the goals laid out by the EU
in the Green Deal for a pollutant-free environment.
Page 42 of 43
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusion
This thesis examined the ecotoxicity and persistency of alternatively produced PCs for
the oil and gas industry. The assessment revealed varying degrees of environmental effects
within three trophic levels for HHT, AR2, AR3, AR50, B1, B2, B3, and B4. HHT exhibited
low hazards, high degradation, and minimal toxicity, complying with OSPAR regulations
and being a viable option. However, further research assessing its hydrolysis, degradation
products, and bioaccumulation potential would solidify environmental risk assessment. Lim-
ited data availability for the remaining compounds posed challenges in hazard identification
and assessment. These compounds were not readily biodegradable, warranting investigation
into their fate in the environment. While acute toxicity was not observed, indicating min-
imal immediate effects, their chronic toxicity potential remains unknown, requiring specific
compound information and additional research.
The study indicates a positive shift towards using these compounds (or similar) in the
oil and gas industry. However, it’s important to note the environmental persistency and
effects of triazine-based compounds on bacterial luminescence and algal growth, even at
concentrations below discharge requirements have been observed. Further research is needed
to evaluate the persistency and ecotoxicity of similar compounds and H2S-based scavengers.
Understanding the fate and impact of biocides in the marine environment, particularly on
marine ecosystems and algae, is imperative as research is scarce. However, commonly-used
biocides like Glutalderhyde, QAC-based compounds, and DBNPA have shown high toxicity,
highlighting the need for natural-based alternatives. The results of B1-B4 suggest potential
application using halophyte-based biocides due to their non-toxic nature.
Initiatives like the Green Deal and REACH are paramount for environmental sustain-
ability, promoting the use of green chemicals with lower toxicity and environmental impact.
Transitioning to green chemicals and ecofriendly alternatives is foundational to mitigate
environmental risks. Natural sources and biosurfactants offer promising options as green
biocides and substitutes for traditional chemical biocides. However, challenges remain in
understanding the fate of biocides and H2S scavengers in the marine environment. Con-
ducting more comprehensive research, and ensuring effectiveness, economic feasibility, low
toxicity, and environmental friendliness of green solutions is needed. This study emphasizes
the need for continued research and comprehensive assessment to support the transition to-
wards alternative chemistry in the oil and gas industry. Policy measures such as the Green
Deal, REACH, and OSPAR play a pivotal role in driving this transition and promoting the
use of safer and more sustainable chemical substances.
Page 43 of 43
==PAGE:50==
List of Figures
1
Off-shore oil and gas extraction process, and sources of potential environmen-
tal effects that may occur from drilling operations (DTI, 2001).
. . . . . . .
4
2
Off-shore oil and gas production platform for PW discharge and geological
reservoir formation for offshore oil and gas extraction (Nielsen, 2021). . . . .
5
3
Relative distribution of produced water constituents from offshore oil and gas
platform within the OSPAR region (North-East Atlantic) in 2020 (Nielsen
et al., 2022). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Triazine derivatives used for H2S-Scavenging. a) 1,2,3-triazine; b) 1,2,3-triazine;
c) 1,3,5-triazine (Turkiewicz and Brzeszcz, 2019).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
The mechanism of aquatic marine ecosystems’ exposure to produced water
(PW) discharge is influenced by various environmental and system factors as
shown above, including salinity, volatilization, dilution potential, precipita-
tion, and degradation. The spread of PW is facilitated by ocean currents,
resulting in the continuous formation of a plume that exposes downstream
ecosystems and species, such as fish (Beyer et al., 2020).
. . . . . . . . . . .
10
6
Fitted concentration-response curves of luminescence output for V. Fischeri
for AR2, AR3, and HHT at t=20.
Grey space represents 95% confidence
intervals. Results for AR2 and AR3 are presented as average inhibition as a
function of concentration.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Concentration-response curves for growth inhibition of R. subcapitata at t=72h
for AR2, AR3, and HHT. Grey space represents 95% confidence interval. Re-
sults for AR2 and AR3 are presented as average inhibition as a function of
concentration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
8
Concentration-response curves for D. magna immobility after 48h of exposure
for test chemicals AR2, AR3 and HHT. Grey space represents 95% confidence
interval. Results for AR2 and AR3 are presented as average immobility as a
function of concentration.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
9
Average oxygen consumption (mg O2/L) for AR2, AR3, and AR50 over 14
days for OECD 301F manometric respirometric test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
10
Concentration-response of luminescence output for V. Fischeri for B1-B4 at
t=20. The Y-axis scale >1 for B2 and B4, precluding direct comparison. Grey
space represents 95% confidence intervals.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
11
Concentration-response curves for growth inhibition of R. subcapitata at t=72h
for B1-B4. Grey space represents 95% confidence interval. Results for B1 and
B2 are presented as average inhibition as a function of concentration. . . . .
36
12
Concentration-response curves for D. magna immobility after 48h of exposure
for test chemicals B1-B4. Grey space represents 95% confidence interval.
. .
38
13
Average oxygen consumption (mg O2/L) for B1-B4over 16 days for OECD
301F manometric respirometric test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
1
(left) 72h concentration-response curve for K2Cr2O7 for R. subcapitata inhi-
bition. (right) 48h concentration-response curve for K2Cr2O7 for D. magna
immobility.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XVIII
I
==PAGE:51==
List of Figures
2
Growth rate for R. subcapitata following exposure to AR2 and AR3 for 72h
freshwater algal inhibition test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XX
3
Average oxygen consumption (mg/L) for AR2, AR3, and AR50 over 10 days
for OECD 301 open bottle test following the addition of NaOAc. . . . . . . .XXII
4
Average oxygen consumption (mg/L) for B1-B4 over 9 days for OECD 301
open bottle test following the addition of NaOAc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XXIII
5
Flow chart for the EU CLP classification system for chronic environmental
hazards (Agency, 2023; Baun et al., 2017). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XXIV
Page II of XXIV
==PAGE:52==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Addition amounts to Oxitop® bottles (mg) for NaOAc, AR2, AR3 and AR50
for OECD 301 biodegradation test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Addition amounts to Oxitop® bottles (mL) for B1-B4 for OECD 301 biodegra-
dation test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Description of components in Oxitop® bottles for inoculum blanks, positive
control, and test bottles (Xylem Analytics, 2022)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Toxicity responses of luminescence output for V. Fischeri for test chemicals
AR2, AR3, and HHT at t=20. Shown as EC10 and EC50 with 95% confidence
intervals. AR2 and AR3 (g/L), HHT (mL/L). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Toxicity responses of growth inhibition of R. subcapitata for test chemicals
AR2, AR3, and HHT at t=72h. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (g/L and mL/L)
with 95% confidence intervals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Toxicity responses of luminescence output for V. Fischeri for biocides B1-B4
at t=20. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L) with 95% confidence intervals. . .
35
7
Toxicity responses of growth inhibition of R. subcapitata for B1-B4 at t=72h.
Shown as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L) with 95% confidence intervals. . . . . . . .
37
1
Mass concentration for stock solution for bacterial inhibition test on V. fischeri
(ISO, 2008)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIV
2
Mass concentrations of nutrients used for stock solution for freshwater algal
inhibition on R. subcapitata (ISO, 2012b).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIV
3
Compositions of solutions I and II used to prepare the Elendt M7 medium for
ISO 6341 D. magna immobilization test (ISO, 2012a). . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XV
4
Composition of vitamin stock solution used to prepare M7 medium for ISO
6341 D. magna immobilization test(ISO, 2012a). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVI
5
Preparation of the M7 medium using stock solution II, the macro-nutrients
and vitamins (ISO, 2012a). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVI
6
Range-finding test concentrations conducted on D. magna (48h) for HHT.
The highest concentration from range-finding test 3 was selected to determine
the final tested concentrations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVI
7
Stock solution compositions used to prepare final stock solution used for
OECD 301F ready biodegradability test (OECD, 1992).
. . . . . . . . . . .XVII
8
Validity criteria KF values for V. fischeri inhibition test (t=10) following ISO
11348 guidelines.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
9
Classification of validity KF values for V. fischeri inhibition test (t=20) fol-
lowing ISO 11348 guidelines for all compounds.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
10
Toxicity responses of test chemicals AR2, AR3, and HHT on luminescence
output of V. fischeri at t=10. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L). . . . . . . . XIX
11
Toxicity responses of test chemicals B1-B4 on luminescence output of V. fis-
cheri at t=10. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XX
12
Validity criteria for freshwater algal growth inhibition test with R. subcapitata
following ISO 8692. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XX
13
Percent of D. magna immobile in control set for each test chemical after 48h. XXI
Page III of XXIV
==PAGE:53==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
DBNPA 2,2-dibromo-2-nitrilopropionamide
DEA Diethanolamin
DTU Technical University of Denmark
ECHA European Chemicals Agency
EU
European Union
FW
Formation water
H2S
Hydrogen sulfide
HET 1,3,5-tris(2-dydroxyethyl)hexahydro-s-trizine
HHT 2,2’,2"-(hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine-1,3,5-triyl)triethanol
HQ
Hazard Quotient
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
IW
Injection water
KU
University of Copenhagen
MDEA N-methyl diethanolamine
MEA Monoethanolamide
NORM’s Naturally occurring radioactive materials
OECD Economic Co-operation and Development
OIW Oil in water
OSPAR The Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East
Atlantic
PAH
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
PBT Persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic
PC’s
Production chemicals
PEC
Predicted Effect Concentration
PNEC Predicted No Effect Concentration
Page IV of XXIV
==PAGE:54==
Nomenclature
PW
Produced water
QAC Quaternary ammonium compound
SUS
Spent/unspent
TEA Triethanolamine
ThOD Theoretical oxygen demand
TSS
Total suspended solids
US EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
vPvB Very persistent, very bioaccumulative
Page V of XXIV
==PAGE:55==
References
References
Endre Aas, Thierry Baussant, Lennart Balk, Birgitta Liewenborg, and Odd Ketil An-
dersen.
Pah metabolites in bile, cytochrome p4501a and dna adducts as environmen-
tal risk parameters for chronic oil exposure:
a laboratory experiment with atlantic
cod.
Aquatic Toxicology, 51(2):241–258, 2000.
ISSN 0166-445X.
doi:
https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0166-445X(00)00108-9. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0166445X00001089.
Obakore W. Agbroko, Karishma Piler, and Tracy J. Benson.
A Comprehensive Review
of H2S Scavenger Technologies from Oil and Gas Streams. ChemBioEng Reviews, 4(6):
339–359, 2017. ISSN 21969744. doi: 10.1002/cben.201600026.
European Chemicals Agency.
Guidance on CLP - ECHA.
https://echa.europa.eu/
guidance-documents/guidance-on-clp, 2023. (Accessed on 06/14/2023).
Mohammad A. Al-Ghouti, Maryam A. Al-Kaabi, Mohammad Y. Ashfaq, and Dana Adel
Da’na. Produced water characteristics, treatment and reuse: A review. Journal of Water
Process Engineering, 28:222–239, 2019. ISSN 22147144. doi: 10.1016/j.jwpe.2019.02.001.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2019.02.001.
Kingsley Tamunokuro Amakiri, Anyela Ramirez Canon, Marco Molinari, and Athanasios
Angelis-Dimakis. Review of oilfield produced water treatment technologies. Chemosphere,
298(November 2021):134064, 2022.
ISSN 18791298.
doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2022.
134064. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2022.134064.
M K Amosa, I A Mohammed, and S A Yaro. Sulphide Scavengers in Oil and Gas Industry
- A Review. Nafta, (May), 2010.
Muhammad Aqeel Ashraf, Saleem Ullah, Irshad Ahmad, Ahmad Kaleem Qureshi, Khaled S.
Balkhair, and Muhammad Abdur Rehman. Green biocides, a promising technology: Cur-
rent and future applications to industry and industrial processes. Journal of the Science
of Food and Agriculture, 94(3):388–403, 2014. ISSN 00225142. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.6371.
Torgeir Bakke, Jarle Klungsøyr, and Steinar Sanni. Environmental impacts of produced wa-
ter and drilling waste discharges from the Norwegian offshore petroleum industry. Marine
Environmental Research, 92:154–169, 2013. ISSN 18790291. doi: 10.1016/j.marenvres.
2013.09.012. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2013.09.012.
Anders Baun, Niels Nyholm, and K. Ole Kusk. Environmental risk assessment of chemicals.
(July), 2017.
Adriana C. Bejarano, Sarah A. Hughes, and David Saunders. Hazard assessment of chem-
ical constituents in biocide formulations used in offshore oil and gas operations. Marine
Pollution Bulletin, 183(January):114076, 2022. ISSN 18793363. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2022.114076. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2022.114076.
Page VI of XXIV
==PAGE:56==
References
Maria Isabel F.C. Bento and Juacyara C. Campos. Evaluation of the acute effects of chemical
additives on the toxicity of a synthetic oilfield produced water. Journal of Environmental
Science and Health - Part A Toxic/Hazardous Substances and Environmental Engineering,
56(1):89–96, 2020. ISSN 15324117. doi: 10.1080/10934529.2020.1840228. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1080/10934529.2020.1840228.
Jonny Beyer, Anders Goks, Ø Dag, and Jarle Klungs. Environmental effects of offshore
produced water discharges : A review focused on the Norwegian continental shelf. Marine
Environmental Research, 162(September), 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.marenvres.2020.105155.
Yi Chen, Marc Geurts, Sascha B. Sjollema, Nynke I. Kramer, Joop L.M. Hermens, and
Steven T.J. Droge. Acute toxicity of the cationic surfactant C12-benzalkonium in different
bioassays: How test design affects bioavailability and effect concentrations. Environmental
Toxicology and Chemistry, 33(3):606–615, 2014. ISSN 07307268. doi: 10.1002/etc.2465.
Verena Christen, Susanne Faltermann, Nadja Rebecca Brun, Petra Y. Kunz, and Karl
Fent.
Cytotoxicity and molecular effects of biocidal disinfectants (quaternary ammo-
nia, glutaraldehyde, poly(hexamethylene biguanide) hydrochloride PHMB) and their
mixtures in vitro and in zebrafish eleuthero-embryos.
Science of the Total Environ-
ment, 586:1204–1218, 2017. ISSN 18791026. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.02.114. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.02.114.
Erik E. Cordes, Daniel O.B. Jones, Thomas A. Schlacher, Diva J. Amon, Angelo F.
Bernardino, Sandra Brooke, Robert Carney, Danielle M. DeLeo, Katherine M. Dunlop,
Elva G. Escobar-Briones, Andrew R. Gates, Luciana Génio, Judith Gobin, Lea Anne
Henry, Santiago Herrera, Sarah Hoyt, Mandy Joye, Salit Kark, Nélia C. Mestre, Anna
Metaxas, Simone Pfeifer, Kerry Sink, Andrew K. Sweetman, and Ursula Witte. Environ-
mental impacts of the deep-water oil and gas industry: A review to guide management
strategies.
Frontiers in Environmental Science, 4(SEP), 2016.
ISSN 2296665X.
doi:
10.3389/fenvs.2016.00058.
Henry A Craddock. Oilfield chemistry and its environmental impact. John Wiley & Sons,
2018.
DTI. Department of Trade and Industry: An overview of offshore oil and has explorationand
production activities. (August), 2001.
ECHA.
Registration dossier 2,2’,2"-(hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine-1,3,5-triyl)triethanol- echa.
https://echa.europa.eu/registration-dossier/-/registered-dossier/15014/6/
1, 2015. (Accessed on 06/14/2023).
ECHA. https://echa.europa.eu/substance-information/-/substanceinfo/100.208.
078, 2023. (Accessed on 06/01/2023).
EIA. International Energy Outlook 2021, 2021. URL https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/
ieo/index.php.
Page VII of XXIV
==PAGE:57==
References
Ingvild Eide-Haugmo, Odd Gunnar Brakstad, Karl Anders Hoff, Eirik Falck da Silva, and
Hallvard F. Svendsen.
Marine biodegradability and ecotoxicity of solvents for CO2-
capture of natural gas.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 9:184–192,
2012. ISSN 17505836. doi: 10.1016/j.ijggc.2012.03.006. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijggc.2012.03.006.
US EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. https://www.epa.gov/, 2023. (Accessed
on 06/04/2023).
European Commission. The EU chemical strategy for sustainability towards a toxic-free
environment. 39(1):40–41, 2021. ISSN 19738250.
Ahmadun Fakhru’l-Razi, Alireza Pendashteh, Luqman Chuah Abdullah, Dayang Ra-
diah Awang Biak, Sayed Siavash Madaeni, and Zurina Zainal Abidin. Review of tech-
nologies for oil and gas produced water treatment.
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
170(2-3):530–551, oct 2009. ISSN 03043894. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.05.044. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S030438940900778X.
Chris Frid. Bioaccumulation in marine organisms. effect of contaminants from oil well pro-
duced water: J.m. neff; elsevier science, oxford, 2002, 452 pages, hardback, isbn 0-08-
043716-8.
Organic Geochemistry, 34(1):149, 2003.
ISSN 0146-6380.
doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0146-6380(02)00213-9. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0146638002002139.
M. T. García, I. Ribosa, T. Guindulain, J. Sánchez-Leal, and J. Vives-Rego. Fate and effect of
monoalkyl quaternary ammonium surfactants in the aquatic environment. Environmental
Pollution, 111(1):169–175, 2001. ISSN 02697491. doi: 10.1016/S0269-7491(99)00322-X.
Fei Ge, Yin Xu, Runliang Zhu, Fangqin Yu, Menjun Zhu, and Minghung Wong.
Joint
action of binary mixtures of cetyltrimethyl ammonium chloride and aromatic hydrocarbons
on Chlorella vulgaris. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 73(7):1689–1695, 2010.
ISSN 01476513. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2010.06.003. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.ecoenv.2010.06.003.
B R Hansen and S R.H. Davies. Review of potential technologies for the removal of dissolved
components from produced water, Mar 1994.
S. B. Henderson, S. J.W. Grigson, P. Johnson, and B. D. Roddie.
Potential impact of
production chemicals on the toxicity of produced water discharges from North Sea oil
platforms.
Marine Pollution Bulletin, 38(12):1141–1151, 1999.
ISSN 0025326X.
doi:
10.1016/S0025-326X(99)00144-7.
Norman J Hyne. Nontechnical guide to petroleum geology, exploration, drilling, and produc-
tion. Penn Well Corporation Tulsa, OK, 2001.
Ebenezer T. Igunnu and George Z. Chen. Produced water treatment technologies. Inter-
national Journal of Low-Carbon Technologies, 9(3):157–177, 2014. ISSN 17481325. doi:
10.1093/ijlct/cts049.
Page VIII of XXIV
==PAGE:58==
References
ISO.
Test No. 11348 Water quality - Determination of the inhiitory effect of
water
samples
on
the
light
emission
of
Vibrio
fischeri
(Luminescent
bacte-
ria
test)
-
Part
1:
Method
using freshly prepared
bacteria -
Amendment 1.
pages
1–23,
2008.
URL
https://www.iso.org/standard/40516.html#:$\sim$:
text=ISO11348describesthreemethodsfordeterminingthe,isapplicableto%
3Asinglesubstances%2Cdilutedinwater.
ISO.
Test No. 6341 Water quality - Determination of the inhibition of the mobility of
Daphnia magna Straus (Cladocera, Crustacea) - Acute toxicity test. pages 1–22, 2012a.
URL https://www.iso.org/standard/54614.html.
ISO. Test No. 8692 Water quality - Fresh water algal growth inhibition test with unicellular
green algae. pages 1–21, 2012b. URL https://www.iso.org/standard/54150.html.
Philip G. Jessop, F. Ahmadpour, M. A. Buczynski, T. J. Burns, N. B. Green, R. Korwin,
D. Long, S. K. Massad, J. B. Manley, N. Omidbakhsh, R. Pearl, S. Pereira, R. A. Predale,
P. G. Sliva, H. Vanderbilt, S. Weller, and M. H. Wolf. Opportunities for greener alterna-
tives in chemical formulations. Green Chemistry, 17(5):2664–2678, 2015. ISSN 14639270.
doi: 10.1039/c4gc02261k.
Almat Kabyl, Ming Yang, Rouzbeh Abbassi, and Shihan Li.
A risk-based approach to
produced water management in offshore oil and gas operations. Process Safety and Envi-
ronmental Protection, 139:341–361, 2020. ISSN 09575820. doi: 10.1016/j.psep.2020.04.021.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2020.04.021.
Genevieve A Kahrilas, Jens Blotevogel, Philip S Stewart, and Thomas Borch. Biocides in
hydraulic fracturing fluids: a critical review of their usage, mobility, degradation, and
toxicity. Environmental science & technology, 49(1):16–32, 2015.
Salit Kark, Eran Brokovich, Tessa Mazor, and Noam Levin. Emerging conservation chal-
lenges and prospects in an era of offshore hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation. Con-
servation Biology, 29(6):1573–1585, 2015. ISSN 15231739. doi: 10.1111/cobi.12562.
Malcolm A. Kelland.
Production Chemicals for the Oil and Gas Industry.
CRC Press,
First edition. I Boca Raton, Florida : CRC Press/Balkema is an, mar 2014.
ISBN
9780429195945. doi: 10.1201/b16648. URL https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/
9781351681629/chapters/10.4324/9781315166988-18https://www.taylorfrancis.
com/books/9781439873816.
Z. I. Khatib and P. R. H. Verbeek.
Water to value - produced water management for
sustainable field development of mature and green fields. Journal of Petroleum Technology,
55:26–28, 2002.
B Knudsen, S Tjelle, and H Linga. A new approach towards environmentally friendly desul-
furization. In SPE International Conference on Health, Safety and Environment in Oil
and Gas Exploration and Production. OnePetro, 2002.
Page IX of XXIV
==PAGE:59==
References
Norbert Kreuzinger, Maria Fuerhacker, Sigrid Scharf, Maria Uhl, Oliver Gans, and Britta
Grillitsch.
Methodological approach towards the environmental significance of un-
characterized substances â quaternary ammonium compounds as an example.
De-
salination, 215(1):209–222, 2007.
ISSN 0011-9164.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.desal.2006.10.036.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0011916407004122.
MEDAWATER International Conference on Sustainable Water
Management, Rational Water Use, Wastewater Treatment and Reuse.
Maximillian A.G. La Vèdrine, David A. Sheahan, Rosalinda Gioia, Bob Rowles, Silke
Kroeger, Claire Phillips, and Mark F. Kirby. Substitution of hazardous offshore chem-
icals in uk waters: an evaluation of their use and discharge from 2000 to 2012. Jour-
nal of Cleaner Production, 87:675–682, 2015. ISSN 0959-6526. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2014.09.053. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0959652614009834.
G. Libralato, A. Volpi Ghirardini, and F. Avezzù. Evaporation and air-stripping to assess
and reduce ethanolamines toxicity in oily wastewater. Journal of Hazardous Materials,
153(3):928–936, 2008. ISSN 03043894. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.09.042.
Nikolaos Montesantos, Mahdi Nikbakht Fini, Jens Muff, and Marco Maschietti. Proof of
concept of hydrothermal oxidation for treatment of triazine-based spent and unspent H
2 S scavengers from offshore oil and gas production. Chemical Engineering Journal, 427
(May 2021):131020, 2022. ISSN 1385-8947. doi: 10.1016/j.cej.2021.131020. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.131020.
Nikolaos Montesantos, Lars M. Skjolding, Anders Baun, Jens Muff, and Marco Maschi-
etti. Reducing the environmental impact of offshore H2S scavenging wastewater via hy-
drothermal oxidation. Water Research, 230(December 2022):119507, 2023. ISSN 18792448.
doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2022.119507.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2022.
119507.
B Morris and GM Van Der Kraan.
Application of biocides and chemical treatments to
combat both microorganisms and reduce (bio) corrosion, p 230–251. Microbiologically
influenced corrosion in the upstream oil and gas industry. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
2017.
Nature Technology Group.
Introduction to produced water treatment.
Nature Tech-
nology Solution, pages 2–18, 2005.
URL https://www.scribd.com/doc/119188791/
Introduction-to-produced-water-treatment#download.
Ann F. Nielsen. Environmental Hazards and Risks of Produced Water from Offshore Hy-
drocarbon Extraction. DTU, (July), 2021.
Ann F. Nielsen, Anders Baun, Simon I. Andersen, and Lars M. Skjolding. Critical review
of the OSPAR risk-based approach for offshore-produced water discharges.
Integrated
Environmental Assessment and Management, 00(00):1–16, 2022. ISSN 15513793. doi:
10.1002/ieam.4715.
Page X of XXIV
==PAGE:60==
References
OECD.
Test No. 301:
Ready Biodegradability.
pages 1–62, 1992.
URL https://
www.oecd-ilibrary.org/fr/environment/test-no-301-ready-biodegradability_
9789264070349-en#:$\sim$:text=TestNo.301%3AReadyBiodegradability.
ThisTestGuideline,TradeandIndustry%2CJapan%29%2CtheClosedBottle%2C.
OECD.
Test
No.
202:
Daphnia
sp.,
Acute
Immobilisation
Test.
pages
1–12,
2004.
URL
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/fr/environment/
test-no-202-daphnia-sp-acute-immobilisation-test_9789264069947-en.
OECD. Test No. 201: Freshwater Alga and Cyanobacteria, Growth Inhbition Test. (March):
1–12, 2006.
doi: 10.1145/1294046.1294048.
URL https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/
content/publication/9789264069923-en.
OSPAR. Ospar. https://www.ospar.org/work-areas/oic/chemicals, 2023. (Accessed
on 06/01/2023).
Produced Water Society. The best forum on earth to discuss the technological advancements
of produced water management and treatment! https://producedwatersociety.com/,
2020. (Accessed on 06/14/2023).
Sunder Ramachandran. Chemical scavenging of hydrogen sulfide and mercaptans. INC, 2023.
ISBN 9780128238912. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-823891-2.00004-1. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-823891-2.00004-1.
C. Ritz, F. Baty, J. C. Streibig, and D. Gerhard. Dose-response analysis using r. PLOS
ONE, 10(e0146021), 2015. URL http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.
1371/journal.pone.0146021.
Hugo Russell and Ayliffe’s. Principles and Practice of Disinfection, Preservation Steriliza-
tion. page 689, 2004.
M Sandbacka, I Christianson, and B Isomaa.
The acute toxicity of surfactants on fish
cells, daphnia magna and fishâa comparative study.
Toxicology in Vitro, 14(1):61–68,
2000. ISSN 0887-2333. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0887-2333(99)00083-1. URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0887233399000831.
Paul Schuber, Jun Su An, Chris Arceo, Toni Lee, Jason Helander, Tom Swanson, Ko-
rry Huddleston, Gaurab Chakrabarti, Sean Hunt, Frederyk Ngantung, and Abdul
Siraj.
Novel Oxidized Sugar Compounds:
A Cheap, Low Dose, Environmentally
Friendly, Replacement for Triazine.
In Proceedings of the 8th Unconventional Re-
sources Technology Conference,
Tulsa,
OK, USA, 2020. American Association of
Petroleum Geologists.
ISBN 978-0-9912144-7-1.
doi:
10.15530/urtec-2020-2727.
URL
https://land.copernicus.eu/pan-european/corine-land-coverhttp:
//archives.datapages.com/data/doi/10.15530/urtec-2020-2727.
Lars Michael; Skjolding, Susanne; Kruse, Rune; Sørensen, Sara Nørgaard; Hjorth, and An-
ders Baun. A small-scale setup for algal toxicity testing of nanomaterials and other difficult
substances. Journal of Visualized Experiments, 2020(164):1–14, 2020.
Page XI of XXIV
==PAGE:61==
References
Mathijs G.D. Smit, Robbert G. Jak, Henrik Rye, Tone Karin Frost, Ivar Singsaas, and
Chris C. Karman. Assessment of environmental risks from toxic and nontoxic stressors; A
proposed concept for a risk-based management tool for offshore drilling discharges. Inte-
grated Environmental Assessment and Management, 4(2):177–183, 2008. ISSN 15513793.
doi: 10.1897/IEAM_2007-036.1.
Oscar Tarrago and MJ Brown. Case studies in environmental medicine (csem) lead toxicity.
Agency for toxic substances and disease registry, 2017.
Andrea Tornambè, Loredana Manfra, Livia Mariani, Olga Faraponova, Fulvio Onorati, Fed-
erica Savorelli, Anna Maria Cicero, Claudia Virno Lamberti, and Erika Magaletti. Toxicity
evaluation of diethylene glycol and its combined effects with produced waters of off-shore
gas platforms in the Adriatic Sea (Italy): Bioassays with marine/estuarine species. Ma-
rine Environmental Research, 77:141–149, 2012. ISSN 01411136. doi: 10.1016/j.marenvres.
2011.12.006. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2011.12.006.
Anna Turkiewicz and Joanna Brzeszcz.
The role of biocides and H2S scavengers in ex-
ploration of hydrocarbon reservoirs and laboratory tests in the field of hydrogen sulfide
scavenging. Agh drilling, oil, gas, 36(1):61–73, 2019. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.7494/drill.
2019.36.1.61.
Anna Turkiewicz, Joanna Brzeszcz, and Piotr Kapusta. The application of biocides in the
oil and gas industry. Nafta-Gaz, 69(2):103–11, 2013.
John A. Veil.
Produced Water Management Options and Technologies.
2011.
ISBN
9781461400455. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0046-2_29.
John A Veil, Markus G Puder, and Deborah Elcock. A white paper describing produced
water from production of crude oil, natural gas, and coal bed methane. Technical report,
Argonne National Lab., IL (US), 2004.
Wei J Xia and Hayat Onyuksel. Mechanistic studies on surfactant-induced membrane per-
meability enhancement. Pharmaceutical research, 17:612–618, 2000.
Xylem
Analytics.
Oxitop
bod
self
check
and
aerobic
degradation
manual.
https://www.xylemanalytics.com/en/general-product/id-1569/OxiTop%C2%
AE-IDS-Set-6-BOD-Self-Check-and-Aerobic-Degradation---WTW, 2022.
(Accessed
on 06/14/2023).
Steven Yuhai. Formaldehyde-MEA Triazine Based Hydrogen Sulfide Scavenger Behavior
Study and Applications in the Oil and Gas Industry. 2020.
Chang Zhang, Fang Cui, Guang ming Zeng, Min Jiang, Zhong zhu Yang, Zhi gang Yu, Meng
ying Zhu, and Liu qing Shen. Quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs): A review on
occurrence, fate and toxicity in the environment. Science of the Total Environment, 518-
519:352–362, 2015. ISSN 18791026. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.03.007. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.03.007.
Page XII of XXIV
==PAGE:62==
References
Menjun Zhu, Fei Ge, Runliang Zhu, Xueye Wang, and Xiaoyan Zheng.
A dft-based
qsar study of the toxicity of quaternary ammonium compounds on chlorella vulgaris.
Chemosphere, 80(1):46–52, 2010.
ISSN 0045-6535.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2010.03.044.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0045653510003589.
Page XIII of XXIV
==PAGE:63==
A
ISO 11348 stock solution composition
Appendix
A
ISO 11348 stock solution composition
Table 1: Mass concentration for stock solution for bacterial inhibition test on V. fischeri
(ISO, 2008)
Chemical compound
Mass concentration in stock solution (g/L)
NaCl
20
B
ISO 8692 mineral medium compositions for stock solutions 1-4
Table 2: Mass concentrations of nutrients used for stock solution for freshwater algal inhibi-
tion on R. subcapitata (ISO, 2012b).
Stock Solution
Nutrient
Mass concentration in stock solution (g/L)
1: Macronutrients
NH4Cl
MgCl2*6H2O
CaCl2*2H2O
MgSO4*7H2O
KH2PO4
1.5
1.2
1.8
1.5
0.16
2: Fe-EDTA
FeCl3*6H2O
Na2EDTA*2H2O
0.064
0.1
3: Trace Elements
H3BO3
MnCl2*4H2O
ZnCl2*6H2O
CuCl2*2H2O
Na2MoO4*2H2
0.185
0.415
0.003
0.001
0.007
4: NaHCO3
NaHCO3
50
Page XIV of XXIV
==PAGE:64==
C
Composition of stock solution I, II, macronutrients and vitamin for M7 medium
preparation for ISO 6341 D. magna immobilization test
C
Composition of stock solution I, II, macronutrients and vitamin
for M7 medium preparation for ISO 6341 D. magna immobiliza-
tion test
C.1
Composition of solutions I and II used to prepare M7 medium for ISO
6341 D. magna immobilization test.
Table 3: Compositions of solutions I and II used to prepare the Elendt M7 medium for ISO
6341 D. magna immobilization test (ISO, 2012a).
Stock solution(s) 1
(single substance)
Concentration in
MiliQ-water (mg/L)
Concentration in
relation to m7 medium
To prepare the combined stock solution II,
add the following volume of stock solution I
to pure water (mL/L)
H3BO3
57,190
20,000 fold
1
MnCl2*4H2O
7,210
20,000 fold
1
LiCl
6,120
20,000 fold
1
RbCl
1,420
20,000 fold
1
SrCl2*6H2O
3,040
20,000 fold
1
NaBr
320
20,000 fold
1
Na2MoO4*2H2O
1,260
20,000 fold
1
CuCl2*H2O
335
20,000 fold
1
ZnCl2
260
20,000 fold
1
CoCl2*6H2O
200
20,000 fold
1
KI
65
20,000 fold
1
Na2SeO3
43.8
20,000 fold
1
Nh4VO3
11.5
20,000 fold
1
Na2EDTA*2H2Oa
5,000
200 fold
FeSO4*7H2Oa
1,991
200 fold
Page XV of XXIV
==PAGE:65==
D
Range-finding concentrations for HHT 48h D. magna immobility test
C.2
Composition of vitamin stock solution used for M7 medium
Table 4: Composition of vitamin stock solution used to prepare M7 medium for ISO 6341
D. magna immobilization test(ISO, 2012a).
Vitamin
Concentration (mg/L)
Concentration in
relation to M7 medium
Thiamine hydrochloride
750
10,000 fold
Cyanocobalamin (B12)
10
10,000 fold
Biotin
7.5
10,000 fold
C.3
Preparation of the M7 medium using stock solution II, the macro-nutrients
and vitamins
Table 5: Preparation of the M7 medium using stock solution II, the macro-nutrients and
vitamins (ISO, 2012a).
Stock solutions
Concentration in
MiliQ-water (mg/L)
Concentration in
relation to m7 medium
Volume of stock solution
added to prepare m7 medium
(mL/L)
Stock solution II (combined trace elements)
20 fold
50
Macro-nutrient stock solutions (single substance)
CaCl2*H2O
293,800
1,000 fold
1.0
MgSO2*7H2O
246,600
2,000 fold
0.5
KCl
58,000
10,000 fold
0.1
NaHCO3
64800
1,000 fold
1.0
Na2SiO3*9H2O
50000
5,000 fold
0.2
NaNO3
2740
10,000 fold
0.1
KH2PO4
1,430
10,000 fold
0.1
K2HPO4
1840
10,000 fold
0.1
Combined vitamin stock
–
10,000 fold
0.1
D
Range-finding concentrations for HHT 48h D. magna immobility
test
Table 6: Range-finding test concentrations conducted on D. magna (48h) for HHT. The
highest concentration from range-finding test 3 was selected to determine the final tested
concentrations.
Range finding test number
Concentration (mL/L)
1
4.3
8.6
17.2
34.4
68.8
2
0.43
0.86
1.72
3.44
6.88
3
0.43
0.043
0.0043
0.00043
0.000043
Page XVI of XXIV
==PAGE:66==
E
OECF 301-A mineral medium compositions for solutions A-D
E
OECF 301-A mineral medium compositions for solutions A-D
Table 7: Stock solution compositions used to prepare final stock solution used for OECD
301F ready biodegradability test (OECD, 1992).
Solution
Chemical compound
Mass concentration in stock solution (g/L)
A
KH2PO4
K2HPO4
NaHPO4*2H2O
NH4Cl
8.50
21.75
33.40
0.50
B
CaCl2
CaCl2*2H2O
27.50
36.40
C
MgSO4*7H2O
22.50
D
FeCl3*6H2O
0.25
Page XVII of XXIV
==PAGE:67==
F
Potassium Dichromate as reference compound for short-term toxicity tests on R.
subcapitata and D. magna
F
Potassium Dichromate as reference compound for short-term
toxicity tests on R. subcapitata and D. magna
Figure 1: (left) 72h concentration-response curve for K2Cr2O7 for R. subcapitata inhibition.
(right) 48h concentration-response curve for K2Cr2O7 for D. magna immobility.
Figure 1 illustrates the results of the reference test for R. subcapita and D. magna
acute immobilization test. Both tests met all validity criteria. According to OECD 201, the
reference test can be utilized to determine the growth inhibition of unicellular green algae
when exposed to substances or mixtures (OECD, 2006). The concentration-response data
in Figure 1 displays a clear inhibition for both EC10 and EC50 values. The identified EC10
value was 0.26 mg/L, 95% CI [0.14, 39], and an EC50 value of 1.15 mg/L 95% CI [0.89, 1.41].
The EC50 value aligns with previous tests conducted in the DTU laboratory (EC50 = 1.18
mg/L).
Additionally, the average growth rate of the controls was found to be 1.21 d-1, meeting
the validity criteria of at least 0.92 d-1. The coefficient variation (CV) was 4.35%, meeting the
criterion of 5% or less. The pH deviation was less than 1.5 per test day, with a total change
of 0.23. Therefore, it can be concluded that the reference test for Raphidocelis subcapita met
all the validity requirements for OECD test 201.
The OECD 202 acute immobilization test for D. magna has two validation criteria:
• Not more than 10 percent of the daphnids should have been immobilized in the control,
including the control containing the solubilising agent.
• The dissolved oxygen concentration at the end of the test should be >/3 mg/l in control
and test vessels.
Considering no neonates in the control were immobilized within the testing period of
48h, it can be concluded that the first criteria was met. The dissolved oxygen concentration
was within valid range as well. Furthermore, the EC10 was 0.54, 95% CI [0.41, 0.68] and the
EC50 was 1.15 mg/L, 95% CI [1.0, 1.29].
Page XVIII of XXIV
==PAGE:68==
G
Classification of validity criteria for Biotox™test with V. Fischeri for all compounds
G
Classification of validity criteria for Biotox™test with V. Fis-
cheri for all compounds
Table 8: Validity criteria KF values for V. fischeri inhibition test (t=10) following ISO 11348
guidelines.
Chemical Compound
Correction factor (KF)
Pass/Fail
AR2
1.06
Pass
AR3
0.64
Pass
HHT
0.95
Pass
B1
0.80
Pass
B2
0.97
Pass
B3
0.96
Pass
B4
0.84
Pass
Table 9: Classification of validity KF values for V. fischeri inhibition test (t=20) following
ISO 11348 guidelines for all compounds.
Chemical Compound
Correction factor (KF)
Pass/Fail
AR2
0.77
Pass
AR3
0.42
Fail
HHT
0.66
Pass
B1
0.60
Pass
B2
0.85
Pass
B3
0.91
Pass
B4
0.83
Pass
H
Relative inhibition EC10 and EC50 (t = 10) for Biotox™test with
V. Fischeri
Table 10: Toxicity responses of test chemicals AR2, AR3, and HHT on luminescence output
of V. fischeri at t=10. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L).
Chemical compound
10-min EC10 and
95% confidence interval
10-min EC50 and
95% confidence interval
AR2
*
*
AR3
*
*
HHT
0.0031 [-0.007, 0.014]
0.12 [0.036, 0.28]
Page XIX of XXIV
==PAGE:69==
I
Validity criteria for freshwater algal growth inhibition test with R. subcapitata (72h)
Table 11: Toxicity responses of test chemicals B1-B4 on luminescence output of V. fischeri
at t=10. Shown as EC10 and EC50 (mL/L).
Chemical compound
10-min EC10 and
95% confidence interval
10-min EC50 and
95% confidence interval
B1
2.08 [15.7, 2.60]
2.98 [2.46, 3.50]
B2
1.34 [-, 4.80]
1.54 [-, 5.06]
B3
1.50 [1.25, 1.73]
2.57 [2.25, 2.90]
B4
1.68 [1.15, 4.14]
2.23 [0.17, 4.29]
I
Validity criteria for freshwater algal growth inhibition test with
R. subcapitata (72h)
Table 12: Validity criteria for freshwater algal growth inhibition test with R. subcapitata
following ISO 8692.
Chemical compound
Mean growth rate
[d-1] (0-72h)
Stdv (72h)
Mean CV (72h)
AR2
0.32
0.27
0.85
AR3
0.90
0.44
0.49
HHT
0.70
0.08
0.11
B1
0.13
0.15
1.15
B2
1.61
0.03
0.02
B3
1.33
0.19
0.15
B4
1.10
0.15
0.13
J
R. subcapitata growth rate for AR2 and AR3 exposure (72h)
Figure 2: Growth rate for R. subcapitata following exposure to AR2 and AR3 for 72h fresh-
water algal inhibition test.
Page XX of XXIV
==PAGE:70==
K
Validity criteria for Daphnia magna 48h immobility test
K
Validity criteria for Daphnia magna 48h immobility test
Table 13: Percent of D. magna immobile in control set for each test chemical after 48h.
Compound
Percent immobile in control
AR2
5
AR3
0
HHT
0
B1
0
B2
0
B3
0
B4
0
Page XXI of XXIV
==PAGE:71==
L
Biodegradation following addition of NaOAc
L
Biodegradation following addition of NaOAc
Figure 3 presents the inhibition curves following the addition of NaOH to ensure inocu-
lum was active. When comparing these results to that of the oxygen consumption (Figure
9), it is evident that the addition of NaOAc affects the oxygen uptake for all three chemicals.
It can be observed that the addition of NaOAc generally results in higher oxygen uptake
values, with an increasing trend over time, compared to the data without NaOAc. Without
NaOAc, oxygen consumption for AR2, AR3 and AR50 was 47.65, 41.65 and 47.9 mg/L,
respectively. Whereas, following the addition of NaOAc, the oxygen consumption for AR2,
AR3 and AR50 was 52.6, 80.1 and 60.1 mg/L, all of which are higher. These results signify
that the organic matter was still active at the end of the test.
Figure 3: Average oxygen consumption (mg/L) for AR2, AR3, and AR50 over 10 days for
OECD 301 open bottle test following the addition of NaOAc.
Figure 5 presents the inhibition curves for B1, B2, B3 and B4 following the addition
of NaOAc. B2, B3, and B4 demonstrated higher biodegradation potential in the presence
of NaOAc compared to that of the control. The final values for B2, B3 and B4 were 24.3,
24.4 and 28.2, all of which were higher than the positive control. B1 exhibited lower rates
throughout a majority of the test, however it ultimately passed the control at between day 7-
8 with a final value of 14. When comparing this test to that of the open bottle test as shown
in Figure 13, the biodegradation values of B1-B4 are all lower when NaOAc was added, thus
Page XXII of XXIV
==PAGE:72==
L
Biodegradation following addition of NaOAc
indicating that the presence of NaOAc has an inhibitory effect on the biodegradability of
the chemicals.
Figure 4: Average oxygen consumption (mg/L) for B1-B4 over 9 days for OECD 301 open
bottle test following the addition of NaOAc.
Page XXIII of XXIV
==PAGE:73==
M
CLP classification flow chart
M
CLP classification flow chart
Figure 5: Flow chart for the EU CLP classification system for chronic environmental hazards
(Agency, 2023; Baun et al., 2017).
Page XXIV of XXIV
