==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
AutoML and Meta-Learning through data
science competition
Jonah Tabbal (s210158)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this thesis is to explore the current state of competitive machine
learning by looking at reporting from the data science community. We define the
current challenges and promising path that competitive machine learning has to
offer. We also explore the area of AutoML, especially Neural architecture search
to get insights on possible future directions of application of AutoML. From this
we create a program called the data science util, which has as objective to stream-
line to process of entering and participating data science competitions. We use
the modern machine learning operations stack and current packages used by the
community to create a comprehensive tool usable by data science practitioners.
We then test the program against 9 competitions. The effectiveness of the pro-
gram is demonstrated by scoring high results for 2 of those competition placing
ourselves in the top 10% of participant. We show the strong program’s founda-
tion and make recommendation of improving the feature engineering part and the
model selection to encompass more effective method used in competitive machine
learning. The program can be downloaded here,the Data science util repository.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a master degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelli-
gence.
Kongens Lyngby, July 23, 2023
Jonah Tabbal (s210158)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thanks Nicki Skafte Detlefsen for his continual support throughout
my master’s journey. He initially sparked my interest in the subject of MLOps, in-
troducing it in what ultimately became my favourite course of my entire master’s
program. His mentorship extended to supervising my spring semester project and
ultimately guiding me in my master’s thesis.
I would like to thanks my sneks Samy Tessier and Paul Seghers for being
awesome and sharing the master’s adventure with me.
Finally I would like to thanks Luca Scaglia for supporting me in the hard
moments during the writing of this thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
The State of the Competitive Machine Learning
3
2.1
The data science competition landscape
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Current trends in winning solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Tabular data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Natural Language Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
The Data science Util
13
3.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
User Guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Program Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Data Splitting and Saving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.7
Advantages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.8
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.9
Possible Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.10 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Neural Architecture Search
27
4.1
Introduction to Neural Architecture Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Current Benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.3
NAS in data science competition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Interesting paths for NAS in competitive machine learning . . . . .
37
5
Competitions results and Meta-analysis
39
5.1
Selected competition and setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Feature Engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Ensembling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
Prediction and scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.6
Quick Autoencoder analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Discussion and Conclusion
47
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Bibliography
49
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Over the years, data science competitions have evolved, and companies still seek
talented data scientists to create insightful models with their data. Nowadays,
data science competitions mainly revolve around two aspects: modeling and fea-
ture engineering.
The former is generally a question of computational power.
The most eﬀicient and powerful models that win data science competitions are
generally ensembles of the most powerful models, trained with proper parameters
found through long grid and random search algorithms. We can also find neu-
ral networks designed to solve these problems, trained over long periods of time.
These models are generally kept secret. In data science competitions, the main
method of improving scores is through feature engineering. This is where the
most insight comes out of these competitions, as producing interesting features
requires a certain understanding of the main dataset and the subject matter. The
features engineered by competitors are often shared.
For these data science competitions, the process is generally the same: pre-
processing, EDA, modeling, and predicting. This is a repetitive process, which
is good when you are introduced to data science, but for more experienced pro-
grammers, it means less time spent on feature engineering and competing for the
top solution. It can also be a barrier, as getting into data science competitions
is time-consuming.
The goal of this project is to facilitate entry into data science competitions
by creating a program that can help contribute to the best solution. By cutting
down on time spent on menial coding of models, data loading, and preprocessing,
users will be able to program to get started on a competition. The only files
that the user would have to modify are the config file for preferred options and
anything related to external features or custom feature engineering.
Another goal of the project is to explore the state-of-the-art method of au-
tomatic machine learning by examining the applications of Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) and explore the possible application on data science competition.
The last goal of the project is to conduct an analysis of the different types
of data science competitions and study how the tool evaluates the best solution
depending on the characteristics of these competitions.
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
The State of the
Competitive
Machine Learning
Data science and machine learning have grown exponentially over the past decade,
largely fueled by the proliferation of data and advances in computational power.
A notable trend in this expansion has been the advent of data science competition
platforms, which provide opportunities for practitioners and enthusiasts to apply
their skills, learn from peers, and contribute to the field’s advancement. Numer-
ous data science competitions platforms have emerged, fueled by companies and
research institutions that see value in involving the data science community in
problem-solving. These competitions are a key method for learning coding, ma-
chine learning, and data science, helping to meet the growing job demand for
data scientists, analysts, and engineers.
This creates a cycle: the need for data science skills leads to higher investment
in competition prizes. This increased investment then drives more participation,
resulting in a more skilled workforce.
2.1
The data science competition landscape
In this chapter we will explore the current state of dompetitive machine learning.
Figure 2.1 provides an overview of the data science platforms as they existed in
2022. Let’s review some notable ones.
2.1.1
Kaggle
Launched in 2010 by Anthony Goldbloom and Ben Hamner, Kaggle quickly rose
to prominence as a platform for data science and machine learning competi-
==PAGE:14==
4
2 The State of the Competitive Machine Learning
Figure 2.1: Ranking of the competitions platform by number of user, taken
from the ”State of Competitive Machine learning 2022” [Car23]
tions. It involves participants building machine learning models to address spec-
ified problems, evaluated by their predictive accuracy against a hidden dataset.
[Edi22]
As of June 24, 2023, Kaggle has achieved 14 million registered users from 194
countries, demonstrating its global reach and impact in the field. [Lin23]
Kaggle has historically hosted various significant competitions, leading to
progress in areas such as gesture recognition for Microsoft Kinect, football AI
for Manchester City, and the search for the Higgs boson at CERN. Additionally,
it has driven advancements in HIV research, chess ratings, and traﬀic forecasting.
The platform has played a key role in promoting machine learning techniques like
XGBoost.
In 2017, Google acquired Kaggle, strengthening its importance and aligning
it more closely with the wider goal of democratizing AI tools and infrastructure.
2.1.2
Tianchi
Tianchi is the data science competition platform of Alibaba Cloud. Tian Chi has
hosted the second most number of competition in 2022 , some associated with
academic conferences such as AAAI 2022. Like Kaggle, the competitions have a
clear problem description, context, evaluation metrics, and data. It also features
a leaderboard and a discussion forum, with discussions mainly in Mandarin. The
platform also provides cloud-based notebooks with unlimited CPU runtime and
==PAGE:15==
2.1 The data science competition landscape
5
limited GPU runtime. Participants can create private notebooks or share their
solutions publicly.
2.1.3
CodaLab
CodaLab, an open-source competitions platform, is maintained by Université
Paris-Saclay and allows anyone to sign up, host, or participate in a competi-
tion. CPU resources are available for inference and can be supplemented with
hardware provided by competition organizers. Beyond its function as a competi-
tion platform, CodaLab serves as a web-based medium for collaboration among
researchers, developers, and data scientists. [Pav+22]
2.1.4
HuggingFace
Hugging Face has recently launched its own data competition platform on their
website. Hugging Face’s open source platform has become a major hub for all
things data science related, with ressources such as datasets and popular pre-
trained models like ResNet-50, RoBERTa, and BERT. This development indi-
cates the rising recognition among important actors in the data science commu-
nity of the value added by hosting a competition platform.
2.1.5
Bitgrit
Bitgrit is an AI competition and recruiting platform with over 25,000 engineers
worldwide, focusing on developing a comprehensive online ecosystem centered
around a blockchain-powered AI Marketplace .
2.1.6
Contribution from Academia
Data science competitions predominantly receive funding from companies seeking
solutions to their specific problem use cases. Despite the considerable financial
and research contributions from the corporate sector, academia continues to play
a crucial role.
Notably, machine learning conferences, such as NeurIPS, have
introduced state-of-the-art models like AlexNet, GANs, and GPT-3, which have
significantly impacted data science competition performances. These models have
excelled in areas like image classification, tabular data, and natural language pro-
cessing. From hosting five competitions in 2017 with a $25k prize pool, NeurIPS
has expanded to 25 competitions in 2022, offering prize pool of $380k. [Car23]
However, participation in these academically driven competitions is somewhat
limited due to their challenging nature, thus creating a high barrier to entry. Nev-
==PAGE:16==
6
2 The State of the Competitive Machine Learning
ertheless, these events attract expert researchers specializing in niche competition
areas, significantly contributing to the advancement of the field.
2.1.7
Purpose and Challenges
Machine learning competition may seem, for an outside observer, as just a gam-
ification of the data science endeavor made for general practice and fun but not
so much for application. In reality, competitive machine learning can be think
as a sandbox to evaluate predictive methods. It is the perfect sandbox for a few
reason. Evaluating predictive models requires a certain setup, namely:
1. A well defined problem with good quality data
2. A mechanism to penalize overfitting
3. Incentive to find the best model possible which would incentivize the slight-
est model improvement
4. Open source and public results to learn and merge the best solutions
We find these characteristics in well-run competitions as we get curated datasets,
financial incentive from the prize pool and a private test disclosed after the com-
petition ends that prevent overfiting.
Machine learning problem in industry has a few of these characteristics, though
some essential ones are missing. The solutions of the problems are not opensource
to keep competitive edge. The talent pool is also limited to the resources of the
company.
Academia shares some of these features as well, but it faces a significant
challenge: the issue of reproducibility.
Indeed, a wide range of fields, including psychology and biomedical sciences,
are currently grappling with a reproducibility crisis.[Ioa05] A 2016 survey by Na-
ture found that 70% of scientists were unable to replicate their peers’ experiments,
and surprisingly, half couldn’t even replicate their own. [Bak16] This is a cau-
tionary tale for AI research, as the survey also highlighted the absence of source
code as a barrier to reproducibility for almost 50% of scientists who attempted
to reproduce result.In 2020 it has been recorded that only 15% of AI studies
share their code. [BH22] Considering the rate of publishing that AI research is
currently witnessing, and considering the diﬀiculty of reproducing another paper
from scratch, scientist must trust that the results of papers are reliable, especially
if these paper are claiming state-of-the-art (SOTA) results. Steps has been taken
to tackle this problem, at least in academia.
NeurIPS added a checklist of what researcher need to provide when submitting
to the ML conference, i.e. code and and detailed descriptions of the experiments.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Current trends in winning solutions
7
The competition “Reproducibility Challenge” also taking part in the NeurIPS
conference tries to address the problem by challenging students to repoduce pub-
lished research, the best papers will be publish in the ReScience journal [Cha19].
It sensitizing student and future researcher about reproducibility by giving an
incentive.
”Papers with Code” is another project aimed at boosting transparency. It
started as a website where researchers could pair their studies with their corre-
sponding code. Now, it has teamed up with arXiv. As a result, all machine-
learning papers on arXiv come with a section that provides a link to the authors’
code or implementation by other researcher. The goal of this project is to make
sharing code a standard practice.
The competitive data science scene is therefore a great medium to evaluate
predictive methods and it also encourage reproducibility. We will see in the fol-
lowing section which of these predictive methods are the most popular depending
on the problem type.
2.2
Current trends in winning solutions
There is clear trends that has been developing through the years in data science
competition since the popularisation of data science endeavour. Python is clearly
the programming language that has dominated the field since its inception. The
modular and intuitive nature of the language is certainly one aspect that made
it a favourite for data science practitioners and through the years the language
has evolve and many packages came together to make it the perfect data science
toolbox. Only C++ appears as a companion for certain computer vision tasks in
the competition landscape [Car23] . Each area of competitive machine learning
have a set of packages that are recurring in winning solutions. Let’s take a look
at each areas.
2.3
Tabular data
We call tabular data problems where the training data is structured as row and
column with numerical values, as opposed to images, text or signals. Tabular
data competition were very common in the early years of kaggle, most data scien-
tist started their careers practising machine learning with tabular dataset and it
is a common format for business related machine learning problems. It used to be
the case that competitors generally had a list of machine learning models from
sklearn and looked for the most performant ones and then ensembling. Since
those early years of competitive machine learning one type of method have reign
==PAGE:18==
8
2 The State of the Competitive Machine Learning
supreme: gradient boosted decision trees (GBDT). These are ensemble methods
that put together many smaller models to create a more complex one, one tree
at a time. The most popular packages are XGBoost, LightGBM and CatBoost
as seen on Figure 2.2, we can see that they are central in the data science ecosys-
tem. In 2022, LightGBM was the method most used with CatBoost as second
and XGBoost as third, which is ionteresting as XGBoost has been the number
one method used for many years before. These methods are particularly eﬀicient
for structure data, contrary to deep learning method that are good at find fea-
tures in unstructured data. This duality has fuelled the debate for years abut
which methods are better for tabular data and it still does to this day. Looking
at the set of competition analyzed by MLcontest on the year 2022 on Figure 2.1
we can see the clear domination of GBDT methods for each solution. However,
the situation is not as clear-cut as it appears, as we can see on the table that a
4 out of 7 solutions with GBDT use ensembling methods of GBDT and neural
networks. This shows a clear trend where neural network still have their place
in tabular competition, so much so that there is dedicated group of research that
look into deep learning models tailored specifically for tabular data.
[Cod23].
The competition where neural network are used are generally competitions that
has under-lying structure in their dataset. That makes the combination of GBDT
and neural network generally the best models for these types of tasks. Hyper-
parameter optimistation (HPO) and experiment tracking have become essential
in tabular data competition as participant can get an edge with tweaking their
model parameters, especially now with easier access to GPU competitors can use
Figure 2.2: Current Toolkit for modern competitive machine learning [MLC23a]
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Computer Vision
9
Competition
Winning Approach
Air Quality Prediction (PM25)
GBDT + Linear Regression
Air Quality Prediction (NO2)
GBDT + NN
Alvin Transaction Classification
GBDT
Amex Default Prediction
GBDT + GRU
JPX Stock Price Prediction
Linear Regression
Mars Spectrometry (EGA)
CNN/RNN/Transformer
Mars Spectrometry (GCMS)
CNN, Transformer
NASA Airport Configuration
GBDT
G-Research Crypto
GBDT + NN
Ubiquant Market Prediction
GBDT + TabNet
Table 2.1: Set of winning approach of award winning tabular competition.
more computing time to get the very best model possible. Optuna has taken an
important place in the HPO part of competitive machine learning, taking shares
from simple gridsearch and random search from sklearn. About 30% of winners
who did HPO used Optuna [MLC23b]. It is often used with Weight&Biases for
a better and more reliable experiment tracking.
2.4
Computer Vision
The computer vision (CV) area has witness quite a few change on trends in the
past few years.
First, PyTorch has completely taken over Tensorflow for any
kind of modelling for data science competition. The shares of winning solutions
using Pytorch went from 72% in 2020 to 96% in 2022, which set Pytorch as the
undisputed winner in this area. [Car23] The most common type of model for
winning solution has been convolution neural networks (CNN) with AlexNet be-
ing the SOTA architecture since it was released. CNNs have been uncontested
until recently with the introduction of Transformers for CV in 2020/2021. This
new architecture took over completely in the NLP landscape, and has showed
that it can sometimes rival and outperform CNN in CV problems. We now see in
Figure 2.3 that they get included in winning solution more and more, though still
not overtaking CNNs. In 2022, ConvNext was introduced [Liu+22] which mod-
ernize the ResNet (CNN) architecture towards a similar design of Transformers.
This family of models competes with current Transformers architectures. There
should be interesting development for these two methods for the coming years.
This trend also shows that the CV and NLP area seem to converge to one set of
models/design. Pre-trained models are often used in CV. These are models that
==PAGE:20==
10
2 The State of the Competitive Machine Learning
Figure 2.3: Most used neural network architectures among competition winners
have already been trained on large data collections like ImageNet. These models
are easily accessible on the HuggingFace platform. Using pre-trained models in
CV is advantageous because images from the real world shares common features
that can translate well in different use cases as it serves as a ”general knowledge
base”. These pre-trained models are almost always fine-tuned on task-specific
data. In 2022, EﬀicientNet was the most used pre-trained model for CV tasks as
it doesn’t take much computing power to run, as the name suggest. In other pop-
ular models we find ResNet, ConvNeXt, U-net and Swin-Transformer. [Car23]
2.5
Natural Language Processing
Since their rise in 2017, Transformer-based models, the architetcure design of
BERT, GPT, and ChatGPT, have stayed dominant in the NLP field. Winning
solutions in NLP competitions all leverage pre-trained models, similarly to CV
problems.
Despite the high computational resources recquired by Transformers, their
superiority in performance is undeniable and the trend should continue with the
huge boom of these method in the Large Language Model (LLM) revolution.
However, the common approach was the use of ensembling Transformers with
other models such as LSTMs or LightGBM. This illustrates that, despite the
dominance of Transformers, integrating other models can create an effective blend
for tackling complex NLP problems. [Car23]
==PAGE:21==
2.6 Conclusion
11
2.6
Conclusion
With this overview of the competitive data science landscape, we can clearly
see trends and standardize procedure applicable to many use cases. To make a
significant contribution the data science community, we need to follow the trends
and use all the modern methods and tools that data scientist and competitors are
familiar with. We will take these learning from the current competitive landscape
to build a end-to-end machine learning competition program
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
The Data science Util
In data science competitions, participants typically follow a standard procedure.
Initially, they conduct an exploratory data analysis and subsequently pre-process
the data. The next step involves modeling, where the optimal machine learning
model is selected. HPO is performed to identify the most effective model. The
best model is then chosen for ensembling, which enables prediction. Following
this, a feedback process is initiated where participants share and discuss their
solutions on a forum.
This includes discussing successful models, unexpected
outcomes, and feature engineering strategies. These processes, when participat-
ing in data science competition, are generally redundant as it is useful for new
participants to learn all the steps. But for more experienced competitors and
programmers, it always involves the same coding practice and it can take more
time every time to set up a new competition, which might discourage new par-
ticipants to engage in a multitude of competitions as it is very time consuming.
So, we would like to streamline the process of entering data science competition
by offering a program that gets rid of this tedious, repetitive coding to be done
and just go straight into the essential, leaving the participant to focus on the
interesting part and the discovery part and the innovative part of the data sci-
ence competition, which is generally feature engineering, discovery, modeling and
assembling, testing. In this section, we’re going to present the program in details
by first presenting the concept. We will dive into the architecture, how it was
built and what makes all the components of the program. We’ll have a user guide
with a step-by-step guide on how to use the program, some design discussion on
how all the objects work, such as class and functions. Then we’ll go through
the program workflow and we’ll discuss the advantages of using the program, the
limitations and possible improvements.
3.1
Concept
The Data Science Util, draws inspiration from Jeff Heaton’s Kaggle Utilities
[Hea23]. Heaton’s utilities, was a program made to perform ensembles for many
models in a streamlined way that he used to place himself in the top 10% in
==PAGE:24==
14
3 The Data science Util
three kaggle competitions. The program allowed for the integration of external
features and models from other participants. This approach typically resulted in
higher rankings due to the combination of the best public features and models
available.
The design of Data Science Util mirrors the process of a data science compe-
tition, broken down into four key steps:
1. Data Pre-processing
2. Feature Engineering
3. Model Training
4. Model Ensembling and Prediction
The goal is to streamline the process of entering a competition by offering a
package that would get rid of the menial coding and really focusing on solution
building for predictive problems. Each steps is self contained and can be cus-
tomized based on the requirements of a specific competition, providing a flexible
and modular approach to competition participation. This design aims to main-
tain the traditional approach of these four steps while allowing for customization
and the addition of external models and features. The user would just have to
setup a config file and run experiments using exclusively the terminal.
3.2
Architecture
The project aims to adhere to contemporary MLOps guidelines and architecture,
ensuring a program that is easily modifiable and updatable.
Anticipating fu-
ture maintenance and potential contributions from data science practitioners, a
standardized, streamlined approach to program structure is essential. This is
achieved through the use of the cookie-cutter template architecture [Dri23], a
widely recognized boilerplate template for sharing data science projects.
The cookie-cutter architecture operates with a makefile, enabling the execu-
tion of various program steps via the terminal.
The makefile, central to the
program, will be used to go through the 4 stages of model building. There is a
make command for data processing, feature building, and model training, and
prediction.
As mention in section ?? reproducibility is an issue prevalent in science and
also in machine learning and data science. It necessitate a program architecture
that promotes easy readability, comprehension, and replication of experiments.
The cookie-cutter template, provides an ideal foundation for such a project. The
program employs modern tools and techniques, including those commonly used
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Architecture
15
Figure 3.1: ML stack used in different section of the util. Hydra, pytest and
pep8 are used over the whole project.
in data science competitions, alongside good coding practices required by MLOps
practitioners. The stack is summarize in Figure 3.1. Starting from the general
tools used over the whole program, we have Hydra for logging results and statistics
at every stage, ensuring each experiment is well-documented.
This makes it
easy to review past experiments and maintain consistency during and between
competitions.
We use PyTest for all program tests and adhere to PEP-8, a standardized
Python scripting guideline, to ensure clean, readable code. The program is built
primarily with sklearn modules, as it is the standard in competitive machine
learning and it provides options to build customs modules using the same de-
sign. However, we also utilize state-of-the-art models outside of SKLearn, such
as gradient-boosted decision trees like CatBoost and XGBoost.
For hyperparameter optimization, we use Optuna, one of the best frameworks
for this purpose. Weights and Biases is used in the training part of the program for
==PAGE:26==
16
3 The Data science Util
its visualization and logging capabilities, and it works in tandem with Optuna.
For deep learning, we use Pytorch, as we saw that it was de facto the most
used framework in competitive machine learning. Optuna is also used for neural
architecture search and hyperparameter optimization on neural networks, which
we will discuss further in the next chapter.
Finally, for predictions, we continue to use sklearn for ensembling. The pro-
gram is designed to be self-contained, using the Kaggle API to load competitions
and submit predictions from the terminal, creating a complete standalone suite
that can be operated entirely from the terminal or a coding IDE.
3.3
User Guide
To install the program, execute a git pull on the repository. This repository
acts as a template with ready-to-use scripts, but requires some manual additions
by the user.
After obtaining the repository, set up your Kaggle API key to pull data from
the API on the terminal. Select a competition and pull the data into the data/raw
folder within the competition’s folder.
The folder should be named after the
competition and contain train, test.csv, and the submission sample.
Before proceeding, install the requirements from requirements.txt and run
setup.py from the cookie carrier template. This will set up a Python environ-
ment with all the necessary packages.
The makefile is then ready for use. Define the competition name (which
should match the folder name), problem type (classification or regression), met-
ric to measure, direction of the metric (maximize or minimize), and the target
column to predict.
Other options in the makefile include preprocessing, where the user decides
on a test size and the number of splits for cross-validation. This ensures con-
sistency and prevents overfitting. All models will be trained on the same cross-
validation, making it easier to evaluate their performance.
The ensemble list contains the models to be trained and ensembled. If you
want to train only one model for testing, you can do so. The ensemble list is only
used during the ensembling part.
If you intend to use hyperparameter optimization, you can use Optuna. If
not, setting Optuna to false will trigger the predefined parameters. You will have
a file with pre-saved parameters (presaved_param.py) that allows you to use
pre-made parameters.
For feature engineering, you can choose to have no feature engineering, custom
feature engineering, or automatic feature engineering. The external feature
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Program Workflow
17
option allows you to assemble features made by other participants. There’s also
a scaling feature.
The random state option ensures that every experiment is reproducible. The
same random state is used for every algorithm and cross-validation fold.
Finally, in the selected model option of the makefile, input the dates of your
experiment. When you train your new model, it will create a folder with the date
and time of the training and save your model there. These models will be used
for ensembling.
3.4
Program Workflow
3.4.1
Feature Engineering
The first step in our process involves feature engineering. For this, we take ad-
vantage of sklearn’s robust suite of modules, specifically the pipeline and column
transformer modules. Our goal is to take our relatively clean data and move it
through typical feature engineering steps, such as inputting missing data, scal-
ing numerical data, and encoding categorical data and targets, if required. We
heavily rely on sklearn’s pipeline structure to ensure reproducibility, as all pre-
processing will be replicated for the test set at a later stage.
3.4.2
Data Pre-processing
We load the cleaned data and construct a custom pipeline. This pipeline divides
the numerical and categorical columns using sklearn’s column transformer. We
employ one-hot encoding for categorical columns, which is the standard approach
for categorical data pre-processing, despite potentially demanding considerable
computational power. The sklearn simple imputer fills any missing categorical
data values with the most frequent ones. Although most competitions, especially
those from the playground, have no missing values, having this functionality is
beneficial for the overall program.
For numerical columns, we use a different approach. Instead of using sklearn’s
imputer, we an LGBM imputer to input values for a column. This method has
been preferred in recent competition . Subsequently, we scale these features.
3.4.3
Advanced Feature Engineering
Before scaling, we perform advanced feature engineering, where we employ a class
system from the feature_class.py file, which contains all our feature engineer-
ing classes. Firstly, the auto_feature_transform class is used, which utilizes
==PAGE:28==
18
3 The Data science Util
Figure 3.2:
Structure of the modules in build_feature.py.
Appart from
SimpleImputer() and FunctionTransformer() which are sklearn modules, all
the other class are contained in objectives.py. They share the same structure
of fit, transform as sklearn modules such that all the classes can be put in a
Pipeline, ColumnTransformer object.
the polynomial feature class from sklearn. This class creates first and second or-
der operations on the numerical columns and selects the most impactful features
using a random forest classifier or regressor based on permutation importance.
This class adheres to the sklearn structure with a transform and fit method and
provides the ability to retrieve new feature column names.
Other classes like external_feature and custom_feature provide templates
for the user to add external and custom features that they create themselves,
for potentially more complex features that go beyond the scope of polynomial
features.
The pipeline utilizes these classes based on what is selected in the
config file. The entire process is encapsulated in the column transformer, which
deals with categorical and numerical data separately.
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Data Splitting and Saving
19
3.5
Data Splitting and Saving
Post feature engineering, the script creates a train-test split for training, with a
test holdout for validation. The pipeline is applied to the train and test data,
resulting in the engineered X_train and X_test variables. These are saved in the
data/processed/competition_name folder. Additionally, the pipeline object is
saved in the model folder under the corresponding competition name, allowing
for standardization across different models while maintaining the same feature
engineering. In the next section, we will discuss the training part of the process.
3.5.1
Training and Model Selection
The training process begins with data extraction from the ’process data’ folder.
This data is further divided into training and validation sets. The split from the
feature engineering stage serves as a holdout for predictions, mitigating overfit-
ting.
A dictionary is employed, containing the names of all models in the ensemble
list. This dictionary facilitates access to the objective functions.
Optuna is utilized for hyperparameter optimization and training. It operates
with an optimizer class, which in turn uses another class for training. An objective
class with a specific structure is required, which Optuna optimizes.
The dictionary calls all the necessary model classes for optimization. Opti-
mization occurs within the parameters of these classes. Model parameters are
obtained, and Optuna suggests numbers within a range using the ‘trial.suggest
integer‘ or ‘uniform‘ methods.
The Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE)
algorithm is used by Optuna to locate the optimal point for hyperparameter
optimization.
During optimization, Optuna generates several plots for visualization in Weights
& Biases, including a control plot, parallel coordinate, and optimization history.
Pre-saved parameters, located in the ‘pre-saved_parent.py‘ file, can also be
used. A choice is made between using Optuna or not during the ‘make train‘
command line execution.
Each trained model is saved as a pickle file in the
’competition name model’ folder.
All objective functions can be found in the ‘objectives.py‘ file.
Once the
models are trained, the prediction stage of the program can commence.
3.5.2
Ensembling
The ensemble.py‘ script is used in the model stacking process. It reloads the
processed data, specifically the training and holdout data prepared during feature
==PAGE:30==
20
3 The Data science Util
Figure 3.3: Structure of train_model.py. The config file select which models
go in the dictionary. Each model need an objective class per problem type for
Optuna to perform HPO.
engineering. This allows the models to predict on unseen data, which is beneficial
for preventing overfitting.
The script uses the ensemble list from the config file to select the models.
A custom ensemble class is set with a ‘predict_probability‘ method.
This is
particularly useful when using different packages from various sources, as they
may not always be compatible. For instance, while XGBoost and CatBoost have
a Scikit-learn type of function/API, PyTorch models do not. For PyTorch, we
use no_grad for prediction, necessitating a approach.
The custom ensemble class simplifies the prediction process. Each models
returns the class probability, making it easier to merge. The ensemble model
then appends the probabilities of each model,ensembling is then achieved by
taking the mean of all prediction probabilities. This provides a form of class
weighting, rather than just hard voting. This is important in competitions that
require the retention of probabilities, not just the class output. To determine
the best ensemble, a power set of all model combinations is created. The script
makes predictions with various combinations of models (e.g., model 1, model 1
and 2, model 1 and 3, model 2 and 3, and model 1, 2, and 3). The best prediction
==PAGE:31==
3.6 Summary
21
Figure 3.4: Structure of ensemble.py and predict_model.py. The model list
from the config file select which saved model to use.
on the holdout set is kept and saved as a stacking model.
The final prediction is made using the stacking model saved as a pickle file in
the predict_model.py script. The prediction is saved in the submission folder in
the data directory with the competition name. This file is ready for submission
to Kaggle, which can be done via the terminal using the ‘make kaggle submit‘
command.
3.6
Summary
This workflow can be summarize in a few steps. For a quick first run of a compe-
tition, the user should follow these successive steps:
1. Place the data in the data/raw folder making sure that the train and test
data are in a folder named after the competition.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 The Data science Util
2. Setup the config file with all the options corresponding to the competi-
tion: competition_name, problem_type, metric, direction, target_col,
predictions_format
3. Use the command make data to launch the preprocessing and setup the
files properly.
4. Use the command make feature to launch the feature engineering.
5. Use the command make train to run the HPO.
6. Change the selected_model date in the config file to use the folder of gener-
ated models. Select which model will be used by changing ensemble_list.
7. Use the command make ensemble to generate the ensemble and output the
local score.
8. Use the command make predict to generate the submission file.
9. Submit your solution !
Refer to this summary for a quick use case.
3.7
Advantages
The design of this program offers numerous benefits. The cookie cutter boiler-
plate template ensures a smooth and well-organized flow between files, facilitating
easy navigation during modeling. This structure allows for simultaneous partic-
ipation in multiple competitions, a process typically time-consuming to set up
and investigate.
The program’s logging feature allows for easy resumption of tasks, with each
model training session saved for future reference. Integration with Weights&Biases
provides high-quality visualizations for multiple competitions simultaneously.
The program’s training and assembly components are eﬀicient, requiring min-
imal interaction with models or assembly models. Instead, the focus is on feature
engineering and configuration files, speeding up the assembly and testing process.
The program’s data handling, with consistent cross-validation, effectively
guards against overfitting. This strength is evident in the low discrepancy be-
tween cross-validation results and public scores. The program’s self-contained
nature allows users to concentrate on their cross-validation scores, a crucial as-
pect in Kaggle competitions.
The program’s standardized structure benefits the data science community
by facilitating easy sharing of experiments. Users can share their configuration
==PAGE:33==
3.8 Limitations
23
files and feature engineering functions or classes, enabling others to reproduce
their scores. This consistency, coupled with the same seed, promotes the use
of the best public features and models, creating a positive feedback loop. This
encourages experimentation with different feature engineering and problem types,
ultimately leading to the development of the best predictive models.
3.8
Limitations
The primary constraint of the program lies in its analytical flexibility. While the
program can handle a wide array of competitions, recent competitions have devi-
ated from the traditional sequence of feature engineering, training, and sampling.
In recent data science competitions, some participants have adopted a mod-
eling approach that involves adding features from models and training another
model on top of it. This method, akin to ensemble prediction, significantly in-
fluences the final score. However, our program is limited to the more classical
framework and cannot accommodate this more exotic analysis.
Another limitation is that our program only allows for the use of each model
once, assuming the same cross-validation for each model. This is based on the
premise that consistent results negate the need for multiple models with different
parameters. However, evidence suggests that ensembling different parameters of
the same model can potentially eliminate weak points, resulting in a stronger
combined model.
Our program also struggles with metric handling, particularly with uncom-
mon metrics. In such cases, custom functions must be created for each metric
if not available in sklearn.
This requires more manual inputs and traditional
programming, and necessitates modifications to the program file.
The neural architecture search component of our program is also limited. Due
to diﬀiculties in synchronizing or merging different packages, our search space is
not as complex as it could be. This results in a narrow range of potential neural
network models, which is suboptimal for implementing neural networks in tabular
competitions.
Our program currently cannot handle image data for computer vision prob-
lems, a common type of competition on Kaggle. This requires a different pipeline
and type of feature engineering. The same limitation applies to natural language
processing problems, which use entirely different models and frameworks.
When dealing with unclean data, our program requires substantial manual
input from the user to treat the data properly. The feature engineering function
could also benefit from improved design, as users currently need to modify certain
scripts, which is not ideal for a standardized program.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 The Data science Util
Lastly, our program lacks a wide range of possible models. While we have
incorporated the most popular ones, we are missing others, such as Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) models, which are frequently used in winning compe-
tition solutions. The current Python packages for GAN are not easily integrable
with sklearn, requiring a custom implementation of the algorithm for our pro-
gram, which would entail substantial additional work.
3.8.1
Model Limit
The primary constraint of the program lies in its analytical flexibility. While the
program can handle a wide array of competitions, recent competitions have devi-
ated from the traditional sequence of feature engineering, training, and sampling.
In recent data science competitions, some participants have adopted a mod-
eling approach that involves adding features from models and training another
model on top of it. This method, akin to ensemble prediction, significantly in-
fluences the final score. However, our program is limited to the more classical
framework and cannot accommodate this more exotic analysis.
Another limitation is that our program only allows for the use of each model
once, assuming the same cross-validation for each model. This is based on the
premise that consistent results negate the need for multiple models with different
parameters. However, evidence suggests that ensembling different parameters of
the same model can potentially eliminate weak points, resulting in a stronger
combined model.
Our program also struggles with metric handling, particularly with uncom-
mon metrics. In such cases, custom functions must be created for each metric
if not available in sklearn.
This requires more manual inputs and traditional
programming, and necessitates modifications to the program file.
The neural architecture search component of our program is also limited. Due
to diﬀiculties in synchronizing or merging different packages, our search space is
not as complex as it could be. This results in a narrow range of potential neural
network models, which is suboptimal for implementing neural networks in tabular
competitions.
Our program currently cannot handle image data for computer vision prob-
lems, a common type of competition on Kaggle. This requires a different pipeline
and type of feature engineering. The same limitation applies to natural language
processing problems, which use entirely different models and frameworks.
When dealing with unclean data, our program requires substantial manual
input from the user to treat the data properly. The feature engineering function
could also benefit from improved design, as users currently need to modify certain
scripts, which is not ideal for a standardized program.
==PAGE:35==
3.9 Possible Improvements
25
Lastly, our program lacks a wide range of possible models. While we have
incorporated the most popular ones, we are missing others, such as Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) models, which are frequently used in winning compe-
tition solutions. The current Python packages for GAN are not easily integrable
with sklearn, requiring a custom implementation of the algorithm for our pro-
gram, which would entail substantial additional work.
3.9
Possible Improvements
The current program, still in its alpha-beta version, is ripe for enhancements on
several fronts. Key areas that can be improved include:
1. Code Quality and Interface: An immediate requirement is to streamline
the program files and improve the interface. As it stands, the program can
benefit from several quality of life enhancements in the code.
2. Documentation: The current report serves as the initial documentation of
the program. However, a comprehensive ’read-the-docs’ website would be
more beneficial and in line with standard practices for Python programs.
3. Metric Handling: Improving metric handling can significantly enhance the
program’s versatility, enabling it to tackle a wider variety of competitions.
4. Pre-processing and Feature Engineering: Enhancements can be made to the
feature pre-processing process, including a more versatile pipeline structure
to handle a wider array of categorical data. Flexibility in the feature gener-
ation process, including more feature creation options, and different types
of categorical encoding, are also important considerations.
5. Modeling: The inclusion of new models like GAM and more recent ones can
be beneficial. Additionally, possibilities of enhancing the Neural Architec-
ture Search (NAS) with a larger search space, and integration of different
neural networks in PyTorch, can offer significant benefits.
6. Collaboration: For fostering better collaboration and encouraging contri-
butions from the data science community, the project requires a robust
GitHub action system and better rules for maintaining the program as an
open-source platform.
7. Data Storage and Computational Power: If more models are expected to be
added to the platform, eﬀicient data storage solutions, possibly integrated
with services like Google Cloud Platform, can be of immense value. Access
to GPU power, particularly for integrating more neural network and deep
==PAGE:36==
26
3 The Data science Util
learning functions, would be highly beneficial, especially considering the
size of the datasets and the time required for model ensembling.
These potential improvements, when implemented, can significantly enhance
the program’s performance, usability, and collaborative potential.
3.10
Conclusion
Our program goes through each step of the Data Science Computation Frame-
work, which includes feature training, assembly, and prediction. The program’s
design gives a lot of benefits like the ease of switching between different compe-
titions, trust in the results, and the ability to get the same results again and
again. Also, it helps data scientists by giving them a common framework to work
together and find the best models.
Right now, the program is still new, which means there’s a lot of room to
make it better. This could include keeping up with the latest methods and adding
more advanced modeling and feature engineering options. Since the program is
still new, we hope that it will encourage data scientists to contribute and work
together to make it even better.
Before we look at the competition analysis, we plan to study new technologies,
specifically research on neural architecture and deep learning. We will talk about
these topics in the next chapter.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Neural Architecture
Search
In the last decade, the advancement of deep learning led many breakthrough in
the areas of computer vision, natural language processing, signal processing and
reinforcement learning. These breakthrough generally took shape with special-
ized, high performing and complex neural network architectures. In the early
days of deep learning, researchers used to determine the most suitable archi-
tecture for their specific use case by making educated guesses about the layer
types.
They would then adjust the parameters of their network and evalu-
ate the performance after numerous iterations, learning from any mistakes to
identify the best results.
The alternative path is to take architectures from
previous work.
With the advancement of tools in machine learning, like au-
tomated and streamlined HPO or other improvement in pipeline building, it
seems natural that the process of finding optimal neural network would be au-
tomated to alleviate the need for repetitive and tedious network tweaking. The
field of neural architecture search (NAS) emerged from that natural progres-
sion and the need to find true ideal model architecture solution.
The NAS
field has technically existed since the late 1980s with early attempt at discov-
ering neural network with genetic algorithm [Kit90], but the field has gained
widespread attention since the paper NAS with Reinforcement Learning [ZL17].
Figure 4.1: Number of NAS papers by year
[Aut23]
There has been more that 2000
papers release since 2020 in the
field of NAS, as seen on Figure
4.1 with currently 283 papers re-
leased in 2023 by the time of
writing of this thesis.
In this
chapter we will introduce and
give background on the topic of
NAS. We will look at the cur-
rent SOTA in the field in terms
of benchmark, algorithm and
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Neural Architecture Search
other research.
We will then
try to explore how NAS can be
applied in data science competi-
tion and what are the interest-
ing paths to follow.
4.1
Introduction to Neural Architecture Search
When constructing neural networks, we look to combine different types of layers
together (linear, convolution, dropouts …) and then we tweak the parameters of
these layers. The way to automate the process would be to find a way to test the
possible combination of layers as well as the different parameters. We can define
the process of NAS into 3 categories:
1. Search Space: The search space is the set of all possible architecture
within the set of possible layer component. Depending on the problem case,
we define a set of layer (Linear, Batchnorm, convolution,…) that we would
like to use and the maximum size of our network. Then the search space is
the powerset of the layer set, which gives all possible architectures. Using
prior knowledge to simplify the search and reduce the size of the powerset
is often done, but it can introduce human bias, limiting the discovery of
innovative architectures .
2. Search Strategy: the search strategy is the way to explore the defined
search space. This category encompass algorithms used, trimming of the
search space. This category is the classic exploration-exploitation trade-
off, it’s a balance between quickly finding good architectures and avoiding
settling too early on suboptimal solutions.
3. Performance Estimation Strategy: it is the process estimating the
predicting performance on unseen data.
The simplest option is to do a
Figure 4.2: Illustration of Neural Architecture Search methods [HKV19]
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Introduction to Neural Architecture Search
29
simple training and validation of the architecture on new data. This process
is however quite computationally expensive. recent research focus on finding
cost effective methods to evaluate architectures.
These three stages of NAS are summarize in Figure 4.2. Using the notation from
the figure we can now rigourously define what is NAS:
definitionNeural Architecture Search] Given a search space A, a dataset D, a
training pipeline P, and a time or computation budget t, the goal of Neural Archi-
tecture Search is to find an architecture a ∈A within budget t that achieves the
highest possible validation accuracy when trained using dataset D and training
pipeline P.
Let’s now look in detail at the different categories of NAS.
4.1.1
Search Space
Search space is the essential ingredient of NAS. In other area of AutoML like
HPO or feature engineering, there is similarities in the search and optimization
method used. However the search space is very unique to NAS. As mentioned
before, the design of the search space involves a tradeoff between human bias and
search eﬀiciency. Indeed a small search space means that there has been many
human decisions to pick the elements of the space, the search is going to be faster
and more simple, but there will be human bias in the solution. Whereas if the
search space is large with more variety in terms of building blocks, the search is
going to be computationally expensive but there is way more potential to find
real innovative architectures. [Whi+23]
There is few elements when building a search space:
• Operation/primitive is the first building block of a search space, namely
layer types and elements that we find in neural network. An operation is
essentially any transformation or process applied to the data as it passes
through the network. These can include: Fully Connected layers, Convolu-
tional Layers, Pooling Layers, Activation Functions, Normalization opera-
tions, Dropout, Loss functions etc..
• Layer is a level in the neural network where one or more operations are
applied. For example, in a convolutional neural network (CNN), a layer
could consist of a convolution operation followed by a ReLU activation
function.
• Block/Module refers to a group of layers stacked together to perform a larger
function within the network. An example would be a Residual Block (or
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Neural Architecture Search
ResBlock) in ResNet architectures, which includes multiple convolutional
layers and shortcuts for the input to pass through. [He+15]
• Cell refers to a predefined, reusable subgraph or substructure that can be
used to construct larger network architectures. For example, in NASNet
architectures, a cell is a specific arrangement of several operations that can
be repeatedly used to build the final network, as we can see on Figure
4.4. Cells and block are quite similar but generally generally block define
a larger structure than cells. [Tsa23]
Figure 4.3: Chain-structured neural networks (left) and Multi-branch networks
(right) architecture. L denotes layers and the edges denotes that the output of a
layer Ln−1 is received by the input of the layer Ln
From these elements we can first build one of the simpliest search space: chain-
structured neural networks. It can be viewed as a series of layers, where each layer
takes the output of the previous one as its input. A network A with n layers can
be written as A = Ln ◦. . . ◦L1 ◦L0. Here are the three characteristics that
describe the search space:
1. The maximum number of layers n. This might be limitless.
2. The operations each layer can do, like pooling, convolution, or more ad-
vanced operations.
3. The hyperparameters tied to the operation, like number of filters or kernel
size for a convolutional layer, or the number of units for fully-connected
networks.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Introduction to Neural Architecture Search
31
Figure 4.4: Example of a network built using two cells. Each cells can be put
in any order respective to the other one as their input and output have the same
characteristic.
Note that the third point depends on the second, so the search space parameters
aren’t fixed, but conditional.
This simple architecture can be expanded into a more complex one by al-
lowing layers to be connected to deeper layer in the network, using the design
of skip connections. These allow us to search for complex networks with mul-
tiple branches, as shown in Fig. 4.3 (right). In this case, the input for layer i
can be seen as a function gi that combines outputs from previous layers. This
gives us a lot more flexibility and access to many more architecture. These new
multi-branch architectures can include:
1. Chain-structured networks (where gi = Louti−1)
2. Residual Networks (ResNet), where previous layer outputs are added to-
gether (gi = Louti−1 + Loutj, j < i)
3. DenseNets, where previous layer outputs are concatenated
(gi = concat(Louti−1, ..., Lout0)).
In the continuity of exploring more complex architectures, we dive into the con-
cept of Cell-based Search Spaces. The idea is inspired by human-designed ar-
chitectures that frequently reuse specific patterns.
Rather than searching for
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Neural Architecture Search
a complete architecture, we set reusable ’cells’ or ’blocks’, which can then be
stacked in a sequence to construct the overall architecture
These cells are generally built with two elements, a normal cell that keeps the
dimensionality of the input and a reduction cell that reduce the spatial dimension.
We can then stack these cells together to form an architecture. This method has
two advantages:
1. The size of the search space is greatly reduced since the combination of
cells will be way smaller than finding each sub element to construct the
architecture. We can find more complex architectures with just a few cells.
This method has shown improvement in speed and performance. [Zop+18]
2. We can transfer cells from one dataset to another by tweaking the number of
cell used. Cells optimized on CIFAR10 have been transferred to ImageNet
which achieved SOTA performance. [Zop+18]
These advantages has led cell based architecture to be the most popular type of
of search space in NAS.
Two of the most popular cell-based search spaces are NAS-Bench-101 [Yin+19]
and the DARTS search space [LSY19]. We will explore the current benchmark
landscape in the following section.
4.2
Current Benchmark
In the early days of NAS research, people were mostly interested in how well
models did on tests like CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Everyone was doing experiment
on their side. However, this led to many different ways of setting up and training
models and it was diﬀicult to compare studies and code as they were all different,
it was also very expensive in terms of computing power.
To come up with a solution for these challenges, Ying et al. [Yin+19] released
the first public NAS benchmark for research. A NAS Benchmark is dataset that
comes with a fixed train-test split, a defined search space, and a set evaluation
pipeline for training architectures. It also provides precalculated evaluations for
every possible architecture within the search space,
This first benchmark was NAS-Bench-101.
It had about 423,000 different
architectures, and each one was tested on 3 different seeds on the CIFAR-10
dataset. Other versions of these benchmarks include NAS-Bench-1Shot1, NAS-
Bench-201, NATS-Bench, and HW-NAS-Bench-201.
There are also ”surrogate” benchmarks, which are a bit different.
These
benchmarks also have models, but they use certain methods to guess how well a
model will do without actually testing it.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 NAS in data science competition
33
A good example of a surrogate benchmark is Surr-NAS-Bench-DARTS. This
benchmark used a method to guess the performance of 60,000 different models
from the DARTS method.
Benchmarks like these let researchers easily try out many different model se-
tups without needing lots of computing power. However, if researchers rely too
much on a few benchmarks, they might miss out on new and different architec-
tures. That’s why it’s important to use a variety of benchmarks.
We can get the overview of the existing benchmark available with NAS-Bench-
Suite. Released in 2022 by Metha et al. [Meh+22], it is a comprehensive bench-
mark suite. It brings together the majority of existing queryable NAS bench-
marks, totaling 28 tasks, under a single, unified interface.
Table 4.1 gives a
summary of the benchmarks with their characteristics. We can see that there is
a lot of variety in terms of search space size, types and tasks. The task tackled are
generally image classification. We start to see applications on Speech recognition
and natural language processing.
Benchmark are an essential component of NAS research as many research
relies on comparison to evaluate novel methods. Indeed, as mentioned in section
2.1.7, NAS research also knows a reproducibility issue. White et al. [Whi+23]
mention that “it is nearly impossible to reproduce NAS methods without the
full code”. There is also factors such as random seed, training pipeline, hyper-
parameters that needs to be fixed to be able to reproduce results. That is why
benchmark like NAS-Bench makes this easier as most of these parameters are
fixed. The rapid rise of paper released after 2019 on Figure 2.1 coincide with the
release of the first benchmark. We can see the impact of having a shared testing
framework for all the NAS research community. We also found this propagating
effect when DARTS was released [LSY19] and the author provided an easy-to-use
code that facilitated numerous follow up work.
4.3
NAS in data science competition
NAS is primarily a deep learning research topic.
Since the field is quite “re-
cent” there has not been that many application to real world problem yet. A lot
more people are using AutoML methods in data science competition like HPO
and feature engineering. It seems to be a natural progression to include NAS to
find the best models for these data science competition. Nowadays competitors
use mainly gradient boosting method for tabular data and pretrained model for
computer vision and NLP problems. However we find potential in tabular data
when ensembling neural network with gradient boosting methods and many of
the benchmark in NAS research have transferable insight to similar image clas-
sification problems. There is interest in the NAS research field to expand the
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Neural Architecture Search
Queryable
Benchmark
Size
Type
Tab.
Surr.
LCs
One-Shot
Task
#Tasks
NAS-Bench-101
423k
cell
✓
Image class.
1
NATS-Bench-TSS
(NAS-Bench-201)
6k
cell
✓
✓
✓
Image class.
3
NATS-Bench-SSS
32k
macro
✓
✓
✓
Image class.
3
NAS-Bench-NLP
> 1053
cell
✓
NLP
1
NAS-Bench-1Shot1
364k
cell
✓
✓
Image class.
1
Surr-NAS-Bench-DARTS
(NAS-Bench-301)
1018
cell
✓
✓
Image class.
1
Surr-NAS-Bench-FBNet
1021
chain
✓
Image class.
1
NAS-Bench-ASR
8k
cell
✓
✓
ASR
1
TransNAS-Bench-101-Micro
4k
cell
✓
✓
✓
Var. CV
7
TransNAS-Bench-101-Macro
3k
macro
✓
✓
✓
Var. CV
7
NAS-Bench-111
423k
cell
✓
✓
Image class.
1
NAS-Bench-311
1018
cell
✓
✓
✓
Image class.
1
NAS-Bench-NLP11
> 1053
cell
✓
✓
NLP
1
NAS-Bench-MR
1023
cell
✓
✓
Var. CV
9
NAS-Bench-Macro
6k
macro
✓
✓
Image class.
1
HW-NAS-Bench-201
6k
cell
✓
Image class.
3
HW-NAS-Bench-FBNet
1021
chain
✓
Image class.
1
NAS-Bench-360
Var.
suite
✓
✓
✓
Var.
3
NAS-Bench-Suite
Var.
suite
✓
✓
✓
✓
Var.
25
NAS-Bench-Suite-Zero
Var.
suite
✓
✓
✓
✓
Var.
28
Table 4.1: An overview of NAS benchmarks. The type column tell us what
is the type of the search space the benchmark covers.
The column Tab tells
if the benchmark is a tabular benchmark that we can pull results from. If the
benchmark is not tabular it uses a surrogate model (column Surr.). The column
LCs and one-shot is the search strategy which correspond to Learning classifier
system (LCs) or one-shot methods.
benchmarking to a variety of different tasks, very different from the CIFAR10
and ImageNet datasets. That is what NAS-Perf-360 (NAS-Bench-360) is trying
to achieve [Tu+23]. They are providing benchmarks for 10 tasks, 8 of those are
new to the field of NAS. These tasks range from topics like sEMG signal for hand
gesture, partial differential equation for fluid dynamics, cosmic ray telescope im-
ages, cardiac diseases, etc.. These topics sounds familiar to frequent data science
competitors as it is about the range of problems thatr we can find on Kaggle
for example. From this paper they concluded that certain search algorithm can
perform well on different types of tasks (DARTS GAEA).
There is definitely a lot of potential with NAS to solve real world problems but
==PAGE:45==
4.3 NAS in data science competition
35
there still currently some challenges and limitations. Notably, NAS is computa-
tionally expensive, for which the application for data science competition requires
fairly fast method with ideally no more than a good GPU to run. That is why we
are going to explore the possiblity of doing architecture selection without running
the models.
4.3.1
Neural Architecture Search without Training
What if we had a way to affordably estimate the accuracy of a trained neural
network? Even though this estimate might not be flawless, it could be utilized to
weed out poor architectures, thereby saving time that could be better spent on
the remaining architectures. That what Melor et al. are exploring in their paper
”Neural Architecture Search without Training” (NASWOT) [Mel+21]. They are
deriving a metric that is aiming to classify the most interesting architectures.
The metric goes as follow: Let’s take the linear maps present at initialization.
Data points falls into the same linear region if they harder to break apart by the
layers. It shows how flexible is the architecture with respect to the data. The
linear maps are derived from the overlap of the ReLu activation layers and they
can be represented in binary code, as seen on Figure 4.5 on the 2nd layer. We
can measure the lack over overlap between two data point with the Hamming
distance dH(ci, cj). If this distance varies too much between all the data points,
it would mean that there is a mismatch between the architecture and the data.
We can then calculate this hamming distance for all the data using NReLu as the
Figure 4.5: Process of the separation of the linear region by the ReLu activation
layer. 1 show the first layer being separated by the ReLu function, 2. shows the
binary code of the linear map, 3 and 4 show the final two separations.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Neural Architecture Search
number of ReLu activation layer.
KH =


NReLu −dH(c1, c1)
. . .
NReLu −dH(c1, cN)
...
...
...
NReLu −dH(cN, c1)
. . .
NReLu −dH(cN, cN)


(4.1)
The metric is then given by s = log ∥KH∥. Now following the same experience
as [Mal21], we define a list of architecture taken from the NAS-Bench-101 bench-
mark that we can then apply the metric for each of the architectures. We now
have a score of the metric for each architecture pulled from the benchmark, and
thus an accuracy score from the pretrained architectures. We can plot the re-
lationship between the metric and the accuracy as seen on Figure 4.6. We find
a small relationship between the metric and the accuracy. There seen to be a
concentration of accuarte architecture on the median of the distribution of the
metric, however it is not distinct and it could be due to multiple factors. The
result could be highly dependent on the sample taken. Our result differ from
the original paper [Mel+21] and the reproduced experiment [Mal21], where they
found a higher correlation. As our experiment was not fully satisfying we will go
back on using simple architecture search for our program.
Figure 4.6:
Plot of Accuracy of trained Network vs Score based on ReLU
Activations
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Interesting paths for NAS in competitive machine learning
37
4.3.2
Alternative in the data science util
In the data science util, we will go back into a more classical NAS. We notice that
a lot of the tabular competition actually use very simple neural network composed
of a few linear layers. We also find some simple auto encoder architecture in those
ensembled solution [LEO23]. Since those neural network are simple in form, we
can predefine an architecture for the neural network and the autoencoder and use
Optuna to do NAS on the hyperparameters of the model. The neural network
architecture used for the competition analysis is as described :
1. Neural network with one linear layer for which its size can range from 50
to 200
2. Autoencoder with a two layer encoder and decoder. The latent space di-
mension is ranging from 3 to 16 and the larger layers shape ranges from 32
to 200.
4.4
Interesting paths for NAS in competitive
machine learning
Application of NAS is still an unexplored territory due to the nature of requiring
huge computational power and being mostly focus on computer vision problem.
However we saw that researcher tries to apply NAS to different types of prob-
lem [Tu+23]. This is the main barrier when it comes to apply current state of
the art search spaces to different problem. There is a few interesting ideas to
expand the problem type registry of NAS, notably Meta NAS [Wan+20] where
the author are exploring ways to find a universal NAS method for any kind of
problem type. The author are developing a task-aware architecture controller
for generating child models. Some results are promising when compared with
current method but it is still constraint to computer vision problems. In the case
of tabular data, one of the promising path would be to reduce the computational
power necessary to find architectures. That is why the NASWOT method has
potential but it would require more exploration in different metrics to measure
architecture potential. Other methods to reduce computational power are be-
ing explored such as TabNAS [Yan+22]. The authors uses a method to reject
computationally expensive architecture based on the idea of rejection sampling.
They have promising results when comparing with other reward shaping methods.
This paper is interesting as there is not many papers looking at tabular data, this
also shows that researcher are not forgetting this area in application of neural
network.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Competitions results
and Meta-analysis
In the context of the existing data science competition landscape and neural ar-
chitecture research, we have developed a program that aims to address current
challenges, leveraging best practices from competitive data science environments.
We now intend to evaluate the performance of our program against real-world
competition, examining whether its strengths hold true and identifying any un-
foreseen weaknesses.
5.1
Selected competition and setup
In this chapter, we aim to evaluate the performance of our program across a
diverse set of competitions primarily focusing on the Kaggle competition series
known as the ”playground series”. These competitions are regularly maintained
by Kaggle and provide data science practitioners with a variety of datasets, tar-
gets, and metrics to hone their skills. The diversity of these problems, particularly
in terms of data and feature characteristics, offers a robust testing ground for our
program. Most of these competition use a synthetically generated dataset from
an original use case dataset.
We will participate in already completed competitions, such that we can com-
pare our results with those achieved by the competition winners.
It offers a
benchmark for assessing our program’s performance in a hypothetical competi-
tion scenario.
For this study, we selected a set of 10 competitions, encompassing a range of
problems such as credit card fraud classification, kidney stone prediction, pulsar
classification, and stroke prediction. We have one competition from the platform
bitgrit. We primarily focused on binary classification problems to facilitate com-
parison across competitions, but we also have a few regression problems, s3e9,e14
and e1. We can see an overview of the competitions on Table 5.1 .
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Competitions results and Meta-analysis
Comp. No.
Name
Problem Type
Metric
Size (rows)
No. feature
Categorical
Numerical
s3e2
Stroke Prediction
classification
roc_auc
15k
10
4
6
s3e3
Employee Attrition
classification
roc_auc
1677
30
0
30
s3e4
Credit Card Fraud
classification
roc_auc
219k
30
0
30
s3e7
Reservation Cancellation
classification
roc_auc
42k
17
0
17
s3e10
Pulsar
classification
log_loss
117k
8
0
8
s3e12
Kidney Stone Prediction
classification
roc_auc
414
6
0
6
bitgrit
Generative AI Competition
classification
f1_score
5250
1200
0
1200
s3e9
Concrete Strength
regression
rmse
5400
9
0
9
s3e14
Wild Blueberry Yield
regression
mae
15k
15
0
15
s3e1
California Housing
regression
rmse
37137k
8
0
8
Table 5.1: Summary statistics of the studied competitions. The first column is
the kaggle id/name. The metric column is the name of the metric used to derive
the score.
We maintained a consistent configuration setup across all competitions, em-
ploying a five-fold cross-validation on an 80-20 train-test split. We use automatic
feature engineering class to create three new features and applied scaling. In the
case where the dataset contained categorical data, we imputed with the most
frequent input, and we applied one-hot encoding. No other feature engineering
was done
The training was conducted with six models: XGBoost, CatBoost, LGBM, a
Neural Network, an AutoEncoder, and RandomForest. Each model underwent 20
trials during the optimization phase, all competitions used the same parameter
range. With this setup, we proceeded to the first stage of the program, which
involved feature engineering.
5.2
Feature Engineering
To analyze the eﬀicacy of our feature engineering search, we are generating 10 new
features through PolynomialFeature(). We then perform feature importance
using random forest and recursive feature generation.
We select the 10 most
important features. We see on Figure 5.1 the number of feature generated that
are in the top 10 feature kept.
We see that almost all the competition keep
some generated feature, with the concrete strength problem having all 10 selected
feature as generated. We see that for the Pulsar and Stroke prediction problem,
we found 2 features in each competition that appear in winning solution. It is a
great sign that the program can find meaningful feature that can contribute to
the score improvement. We could think that all the kept feature are useful, but
for example in the California Housing, some features are the coordinates of the
house, which doesn’t make sense to multiply with other features. We could think
that the kept feature are all useful but some features are already highly correlated
with each other. It would mean that when squarred or multiplied the correlation
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Training
41
would be higher and it would be picked up by the feature importance of the
random forest classifier. Nevertheless, there is potential to pick up meaningful
feature that can contribute to the final solution. We will have more insights when
looking at the competition scores. For the competition analysis and the training
Figure 5.1: Number of generated feature kept after recursive feature elimination
(out of 10 feature kept). The orange bar shows how many of these generated fea-
ture have appeared in winning solutions of those competition (top 10 solutions).
part, we will keep the original dataset and then add the 3 best feature generated
using this method. Each dataset will have 3 new features such that we can gauge
the eﬀicacy of the method.
5.3
Training
Looking now at the training part we get an overview on how the HPO went
for all competition and all model.
Looking at Figure 5.2, we have the best
parameters selected by optuna. We see that there is not many trends for which
the hyperparameters of models like to converge to. We notice that the simple
neural network generally prefer lower learning rate for most of the tasks. For
the Autoencoder it either prefer to have a latent space of around 8 dimensions
for a few cases (s3e1, s3e12, s3e14), otherwise it diverges to a higher number of
dimensions which are at the upper limit of our range. That would imply that we
have to raise our upper limit or simply that the model architecture is not adapted
to the problem. For the other model the tuning
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Competitions results and Meta-analysis
Figure 5.2: Parallel plot of the best parameters for each model for each compe-
titions.
5.4
Ensembling
Taking a look at Figure 5.3 we see the most used models in the final ensembles.
Unsurprisingly we have our GBDT triad with XGBoost, CatBoost and LGBM
appearing the most in our final ensembles.
Catboost actually came in front
of LGBM even though we saw in Section 2.3 that LGBM was the most popular
method out of the three. We also see that the RandomForest appeared 3 times in
the final ensemble which is enough to justify its integration to the set of models
as it can definitely contribute. We see that the neural network also appear 3
times in the final ensemble. It confirm its utility in buidling ensemble model, as
seen in Section 2.3 and notably on Table 2.1 where we saw that neural network
appeared in multiple prize winning approach. Unfortunately, the Autoencoder
did not appear in any ensemble.
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Prediction and scores
43
Figure 5.3: Number of apparition of each models in the final ensemble.
5.5
Prediction and scores
We are now looking at the scores of each competition.
Table 5.2 summarize
the results that we got from our program, comparing it to the leaderboard. We
use the private score to judge our position in the leaderboard as it is the score
use by kaggle to decide on the competition winners. We have a wide range of
performance with some competitions like s3e4 and s3e9 scoring very high on the
leaderboard (top 7% and 4% respectively). Most of the competition end up in
the middle with score well above the baseline but still less than top performing
results, it ranges from top 22% to top 43%. Finally we have some catastrophic
results on s3e3 and s3e14 which are under the baseline level.
One very interesting result is the Concrete strength competition (s3e9)
which we saw earlier created and kept 10 feature from the feature engineering
part of the program.
Even though for the analysis we only added the top 3
feature created, the new feature were really strong.
None of those appeared
in the winning solution but considering our high score, it would imply that we
discovered novel feature that indeed boosted the performance of our ensemble.
Utilizing new feature that other participant do not have in their model gives
significant advantages as the models used for the final ensembling are generally
the same for everyone.
The final ensemble for this competition was Random
Forest and Catboost. The random forest appeared in the 1st and 23rd solution
(the only publicly available notebooks) but the Catboost was not in any of the
solution. Therefore, we managed to get a strong score with novel feature and
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Competitions results and Meta-analysis
Name
CV
public
private
1st public
1st private
Top%
s3e2
0.88989
0.86837
0.89522
0.89362
0.90085
22%
s3e3
0.81779
0.87161
0.86117
0.95767
0.90185
67%
s3e4
0.8404
0.82233
0.82427
0.87195
0.83268
7%
s3e7
0.89903
0.90672
0.89940
0.93188
0.92415
41%
s3e10
0.03219
0.03272
0.03180
0.03076
0.03029
32%
s3e12
0.85146
0.85866
0.75254
0.93466
0.78472
43%
s3e9
11.70399
11.91283
12.26568
11.68737
12.21599
4%
s3e14
464.57529
471.32482
468.88078
334.08274
327.38765
97%
s3e1
0.34446
0.56953
0.56507
0.55078
0.55224
44%
Table 5.2: Scores for each competitions. The CV score is the score from the
best ensemble on our local machine. The public score is the kaggle score on 20%
of the test data. Private score is the kaggle score on 80% of the test data. The
Top% column represent the position in the private leaderboard (using our private
score).
ensembles.
Our second best score is on the Credit Card fraud competition (s3e4).
There was 4 new features generated that were in the top 10 features. This can
imply that the current feature in the dataset were strong already, we can confirm
this as most of the participant didn’t do much feature engineering, mostly modi-
fying the ’Time” feature in the dataset. Here again it seems that our top 3 new
feature were useful in the solution. Our ensemble model consisted of the triad
XGBoost, LGBM and Catboost. From the three public notebook, participant
used ensembling of only XGBoost (top 30 solution) [Xu23], only Catboost (top
10) [LEO23] and the ensembling triad (top 36) [Tar23]. When these three mod-
els work well on a dataset, our program perform well considering good feature
engineering search.
Looking at the Pulsar competition (s3e10), we found earlier 2 features that
appeared in winning solution however we only got top 32% on our final score. It is
a good start when first entering the competition but not quite a satisfying finish.
Looking at the available public notebooks we see that the first place solution
used a GAM model with feature created with an XGBoost and a Lasso model
[SZU23] mentionning that there was almost no feature engineering due to the
nature of high-level features in the dataset. Other solutions used also GAM and
LGBM [Ald23], but we find also our interacting feature with additional features
created using log. In this competition there was a wide variety of model used for
the ensembling, that is why our program did not performed as good as expected
as we had a limited number of models for our ensemble and because the best
performing model for this data was GAM, which is missing in our program. We
==PAGE:55==
5.6 Quick Autoencoder analysis
45
note that our ensemble was composed of XGBoost and a Neural Network, which
is interesting as our network has a simple architecture and could maybe be an
inetresting addition to a stronger ensemble that would include GAM.
5.6
Quick Autoencoder analysis
We saw that there is potential in integrating neural network in ensemble models in
competitions. The Autoencoder model in our program did not show great results
for the set of competition explored. However there is still interest in utilizing
this model in solution. Going outside of the neural architecture area and going
back into exploratory data analysis, we are testing the autoencoder on the bitgrit
Generative AI competition. The goal of the competition is to classify images that
may or may not be AI-generated. It is not a computer vision problem as the data
has been set to be tabular with the impossibility of recreating the image. It is
therefore a highly dimensional tabular classification problem. Due to not having
Figure 5.4:
Visualisation of the 3-dimensional latent space of the encoder-
decoder architecture.
The blue and red color correspond to the label of the
data. In that case 1 represent an AI-generated image and 0 does not.
public solutions to comparing it to and the high dimensionality of the data we left
it out of the analysis. However, these high dimensionality datasets are a perfect
use for autoencoder and other dimensionality reduction techniques like PCA and
t-sne. We build a slightly more complex autoencoder network with an encoder-
decoder architecture consisting of 3 linear layers with 2 ReLu activation layers
in between with shape 256-64 with a latent space of 3 dimensions and the input
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Competitions results and Meta-analysis
size is 1200 (which is the number of features) and then look at the latent space
on Figure 5.4. We clearly see clusters of points that distinctively have different
classification values. There is still a small cluster between the two structure that
have a mix of both labels. One way that we could utilize this result is to not
have the autoencoder as a model in the ensemble but rather using it as feature
generation. As PCA and t-sne also fill the role of dimensionality reduction and
feature engineering, maybe the autoencoder would be more suited for this part
of the pipeline. That should be one of the possible improvement to the feature
engineering suite that seems to be missing more options for generating feature as
seen before.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion and
Conclusion
6.1
Discussion
The analysis showed promising results on the potential of the program to give
strong baseline results and potential high scoring solution for competition. The
proof-of-concept suggests potential for the program to evolve into a comprehen-
sive data science toolkit. Improvemnts could include the addition of more feature
engineering options, gathered from experimentation across various competitions.
As mentionned previously we could include PCA, t-sne, Auoencoders, and sim-
pler feature engineering methods such as adding function like mean, logs and
operations like division could be considered.
The modern competition solutions often use the same model multiple times
in their ensembling. Currently, the software uses a single pipeline design, ensem-
bling multiple models, but all different. An improvement could be to ensemble
multiple pipelines, thereby fully utilizing the new feature engineering options
and sometimes using the same model multiple times. This would increase the
program’s flexibility and facilitate better integration of external solutions.
In the realm of neural architecture search (NAS), there is a clear path towards
implementation and application to real-world problems and data science competi-
tions. However, this would necessitate further work in certain areas. For instance,
with tabular data and tabular NAS still under research, it would be beneficial to
establish benchmarks on diverse tasks of tabular data. This would enable further
exploration of this area through testing more algorithms. As previously men-
tioned, testing more algorithms could save computational power and allow for
the exploration of different architectures based on task-aware architecture. Com-
petitive machine learning could serve as a valuable baseline and resource for tasks
to establish such benchmarks, given the diversity of tasks and their applicability
to real-world problems.
Finally, this study and competition analysis could be expanded by including
more competitions and conducting a more thorough meta-analysis of each part,
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Discussion and Conclusion
from the HPO to the training to the ensembling. This would provide deeper in-
sights into the current best solutions in competitive machine learning and further
direction to follow.
6.2
Conclusion
We have developed a program that shows great potential in helping novice data
scientist to get started in competitive machine learning. It is also fit for experi-
enced data scientist competing to find the best predictive models. We hope that
by bringing all levels of data science practitioner into one platform we can ex-
pand and push the field to integrate more areas of machine learning in real world
applications, contributing to the collaboration and advancement of the field.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[Ald23]
Aldparis. Discussion on Playground Series S3E10. https://www.
kaggle.com/competitions/playground-series-s3e10/discussion/
396346. Accessed: 2023-07-23. 2023.
[Aut23]
AutoML.org. Literature on Neural Architecture Search. 2023. url:
https : / / www . automl . org / automl / literature - on - neural -
architecture- search/?tsr=&yr=&type=&auth=&tps_button=
Search.
[Bak16]
Monya Baker. “1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility.” In:
Nature (2016). url: https://www.nature.com/articles/533452a.
[BH22]
Nathan Benaich and Ian Hogarth. State of AI Report 2022. 2022.
url: https://www.stateof.ai/2022-report-launch.html.
[Car23]
Harald Carlens. “State of Competitive Machine Learning in 2022.”
In: ML Contests Research (2023). https://mlcontests.com/state-of-
competitive-data-science-2022.
[Cha19]
NeurIPS 2019 Reproducibility Challenge. Reproducibility Challenge
@NeurIPS 2019. 2019. url: https://reproducibility-challenge.
github.io/neurips2019/.
[Cod23]
Papers with Code. An Overview of Deep Tabular Learning. https://
paperswithcode.com/methods/category/deep-tabular-learning?
ref=mlcontests. Accessed: yyyy-mm-dd. 2023.
[Dri23]
DrivenData. Cookiecutter Data Science. https : / / github . com /
drivendata/cookiecutter- data- science. Accessed: 2023-07-15.
2023.
[Edi22]
ai.nl Editorial Staff. Kaggle made data science competitive: a look at
its history, key members, and major achievements. https://www.
ai.nl/artificial-intelligence/kaggle-made-data-science-
competitive-a-look-at-its-history-key-members-and-major-
achievements/. Accessed: (27/06/2023). 2022.
==PAGE:60==
50
Bibliography
[He+15]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.
2015. arXiv: 1512.03385 [cs.CV].
[Hea23]
Jeff Heaton. JH Kaggle Util. https://github.com/jeffheaton/jh-
kaggle-util. Accessed: yyyy-mm-dd. 2023.
[HKV19]
Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated
Machine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges. Springer, 2019.
url: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-030-
05318-5.
[Ioa05]
John P. A. Ioannidis. “Why Most Published Research Findings Are
False.” In: PLOS Medicine (2005). url: https://journals.plos.
org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124.
[Kit90]
Hiroaki Kitano. “Designing Neural Networks Using Genetic Algo-
rithms with Graph Generation System.” In: Complex Syst. 4 (1990).
[LEO23]
MELKOZEROV LEONID. Discussion on Playground Series S3E10.
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/playground-series-
s3e4/discussion/382539. Accessed: 2023-07-23. 2023.
[Lin23]
Kaggle Linkedin. We’ve oﬀicially passed 14M community members
on Kaggle. https://www.linkedin.com/posts/kaggle_weve-
officially-passed-14m-community-members-activity-7078063761030291456
39tW?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop. Accessed:
(27/06/2023). 2023.
[Liu+22]
Zhuang Liu et al. A ConvNet for the 2020s. 2022. arXiv: 2201.03545
[cs.CV].
[LSY19]
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differen-
tiable Architecture Search. 2019. arXiv: 1806.09055 [cs.LG].
[Mal21]
Lukas Malik. A Deep Dive into Neural Architecture Search With-
out Training (NASWOT). https://wandb.ai/lumalik/NASWOT-
DEEPDIVE/reports/A-Deep-Dive-into-Neural-Architecture-
Search-Without-Training-NASWOT---Vmlldzo3MDExMDE. Accessed:
2023-07-11. 2021.
[Meh+22]
Yash Mehta et al. NAS-Bench-Suite: NAS Evaluation is (Now) Sur-
prisingly Easy. 2022. arXiv: 2201.13396 [cs.LG].
[Mel+21]
Joseph Mellor et al. Neural Architecture Search without Training.
2021. arXiv: 2006.04647 [cs.LG].
[MLC23a]
MLContests. Tabular Data Competitions - Winning Strategies. https:
//mlcontests.com/tabular-data/. Accessed: 2023-07-12. 2023.
[MLC23b]
MLContests. Winning Toolkit for Competitive ML. https://mlcontests.
com/winning-toolkit/. Accessed: yyyy-mm-dd. 2023.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
51
[Pav+22]
Adrien Pavao et al. “CodaLab Competitions: An open source plat-
form to organize scientific challenges.” In: Technical report (2022).
url: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03629462v1.
[SZU23]
PIOTR SZULC. Discussion on Playground Series S3E10. https:
//www.kaggle.com/competitions/playground-series-s3e10/
discussion/396345. Accessed: 2023-07-23. 2023.
[Tar23]
Viktor Taran. Discussion on Playground Series S3E10. https://www.
kaggle.com/competitions/playground-series-s3e4/discussion/
382493. Accessed: 2023-07-23. 2023.
[Tsa23]
Sik-Ho Tsang. Review: NASNet — Neural Architecture Search Net-
work (Image Classification). 2023. url: https://sh-tsang.medium.
com/review- nasnet- neural- architecture- search- network-
image-classification-23139ea0425d.
[Tu+23]
Renbo Tu et al. NAS-Bench-360: Benchmarking Neural Architecture
Search on Diverse Tasks. 2023. arXiv: 2110.05668 [cs.CV].
[Wan+20]
Jiaxing Wang et al. “M-NAS: Meta Neural Architecture Search.” In:
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 34.04
(April 2020), pages 6186–6193. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i04.6084.
url: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/
6084.
[Whi+23]
Colin White et al. Neural Architecture Search: Insights from 1000
Papers. 2023. arXiv: 2301.08727 [cs.LG].
[Xu23]
Hardy Xu. Discussion on Playground Series S3E10. https://www.
kaggle.com/competitions/playground-series-s3e4/discussion/
382447. Accessed: 2023-07-23. 2023.
[Yan+22]
Chengrun Yang et al. TabNAS: Rejection Sampling for Neural Ar-
chitecture Search on Tabular Datasets. 2022. arXiv: 2204 . 07615
[cs.LG].
[Yin+19]
Chris Ying et al. NAS-Bench-101: Towards Reproducible Neural Ar-
chitecture Search. 2019. arXiv: 1902.09635 [cs.LG].
[ZL17]
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural Architecture Search with Rein-
forcement Learning. 2017. arXiv: 1611.01578 [cs.LG].
[Zop+18]
Barret Zoph et al. Learning Transferable Architectures for Scalable
Image Recognition. 2018. arXiv: 1707.07012 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:62==
