==PAGE:1==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global
scale using satellite earth observations
Master Thesis
Connor Ward Chewning
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Connor Ward Chewning
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Red Zeppelin 2020 from Unsplash.com
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering, Bygningstorvet, Build-
ing 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk/en
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis is weighted 30 ECTS points and has been prepared from the months of Febru-
ary to July 2023 at DTU Sustain, Department of Environmental Engineering, at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
The thesis was produced in collaboration with DTU and the Dansk Hydraulisk Institut (DHI)
under the supervision of:
Peter Bauer-Gottwein, PhD, Professor in Hydrology and Water Resources Management,
DTU Sustain
Christian Tøttrup, PhD, Senior Advisor and Project Manager, DHI
Cécile Kittel, PhD, Senior Remote Sensing Specialist, DHI
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, hydrology,
and remote sensing.
Connor Ward Chewning - s213073
Signature
Date
ii
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
While reservoirs provide a means of managing water resources within an increasingly wa-
ter scarce future, their operational objectives can have adverse effects on river ecosys-
tems. Alterations to the natural flow regime from reservoir operations are of particular
interest; however past studies of the global impact of reservoirs on flow regimes utilize
over simplistic representations of reservoir operations, thus limiting the ability to assess
their impacts.
This study leverages earth observations to assess the impacts of reservoir dynamics on
natural flow regime for 618 reservoirs at a global scale. Dynamics are assessed over a
range of dates from 1997 to 2023 depending on data availability. Data from well known
multi-mission satellite altimetry databases (Hydroweb, DAHITI, and the DTU Space multi-
mission altimetry database) and a monthly optical-based surface water extent dataset (
Joint Resource Committee Global Surface Water) is used to estimate monthly storage vol-
ume changes. The DHI Global Hydrological model is used to couple volume changes with
simulated inflow to estimate reservoir release. The impacts of reservoirs on the natural
streamflow is calculated using 6 indicators that describe various critical aspects of the flow
regime (long-term average, statistical low flows, seasonal amplitudes, seasonal regime,
temporal shifts and interannual variability). These indicators reveal a slight decrease in
global seasonal amplitudes and inter-annual variation, an increase in global statistical low
flows and moderate impacts to global seasonal regimes. Irrigation reservoirs display the
worst performance among all indicators. The results are largely consistent with previous
studies.
Target volume curves are generated for each reservoir to demonstrate the potential of in-
tegrating volume based release curves within a global hydrological model. It is proposed
that integration within a global model would both improve the mass balance scheme im-
plemented within this study and the global hydrological model itself by improving the rep-
resentation of local evaporation and cascade reservoir effects within both components.
Future work should aim to make the scheme presented here more suitable for integration
within a hydrological model by increasing the representation of reservoirs, propagating
uncertainties from satellite observations and the curve fitting process to the volume esti-
mations and accounting for other processes such as evaporation and precipitation.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Acronyms
AWEI Automatic Water Extraction Index
COV Coefficient of Variation
DEM Digital Elevation Model
DHI-GHM Dansk Hydraulisk Institut Global Hydrological Model
DOR Degree of Regulation
EO Earth observations
FHReD Future Hydropower Reservoir and Dam Dataset
GeoDAR Georeferenced Dam and Reservoir Dataset
GloRiC Global Rivers Classification
GOODD GlObal GeOreferenced Database of Dams
GRanD Global Reservoir and Dam Dataset
ICOLD International Coalition of Large Dams
MNDWI Modified Normalized Difference Water Index
MODIS Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
NAM Nedbør-Afstrømnings Model
NDVI Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
NDWI Normalized Difference Water Index
OCOG Offset Center of Gravity
OLTC Open Loop Tracking Command
SAR Synthetic Aperture Radar
SOP Standard Operating Policy
SRTM Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
SWE Surface Water Extent
TCW Tassel Cap Wetness
WRD World Register of Dams
WSE Water Surface Elevation
iv
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend thanks to Peter Bauer-Gottwein for your patience, thoughtful guid-
ance, and generosity with your time. Thank you for believing in my potential as a future
researcher and investing in me. It has been a pleasure working with, learning from and
being inspired by you.
Thank you also to Christian Tøttrup, Cécile Kittel and everyone else within Data and
Analytics at DHI for the opportunity to work on such an interesting project alongside dedi-
cated and passionate colleagues. I have felt welcomed and inspired at DHI from the start.
An additional thank you to Karina Nielsen from DTU Space for providing time series for
the Sentinel-3 data used within this project and to Christian Schwatke from Technis-
che Universität München for opening up access to additional altimetry targets within the
DAHITI database.
To my parents, Ward and Gerrie Ann, thank you for supporting and loving me as I have
furthered my education, explored new places and tried new things. To my sister Regan,
thank you for your kindness, excitement and understanding. You will always have top
notch ”Expedition Behavior”. To the many friends I have met along the course of the past
two years, thank you for making Denmark feel like home. I will miss many of you as you
continue on, but look forward to the years ahead with those of you who stay. Finally to
Sarah, thank you for your unwavering support and love. You have helped me to smile,
grow and believe in myself.
Quote
“Being naturalized to place means to live as if this is the land that feeds you, as if these
are the streams from which you drink, that build your body and fill your spirit. To become
naturalized is to know that your ancestors lie in this ground. Here you will give your gifts
and meet your responsibilities. To become naturalized is to live as if your children’s future
matters, to take care of the land as if our lives and the lives of all our relatives depend on
it. Because they do.” - Robin Wall Kimmerer, Braiding Sweetgrass
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Motivation
1
1.1
The role of reservoirs in water management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Environmental considerations as an objective to reservoir operations . . . .
3
1.3
Previous studies on the global impact of reservoirs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Earth Observations can help improve upon past global studies
. . . . . . .
6
2
Research Objectives
11
3
Methods
13
3.1
Data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Reservoir selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Retrieval of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5
Calculation of Area-Elevation-Volume Relationships
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.6
Estimation of reservoir releases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.7
Calculating indicators of impact on flow regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.8
Generation of target curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4
Results
45
4.1
Summary of reservoirs and river systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.2
Reservoir summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.3
Impacts on global flow regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.4
Continental comparison of flow regime impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.5
Correlation of DOR and indicators of flow regime impact . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5
Discussion
69
5.1
Reservoir Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.2
Altimetry timeseries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.3
Surface Water Extent timeseries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.4
Finding representative monthly WSE and SWE values . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.5
Curve fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.6
DHI-GHM as natural unregulated flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.7
Evaporation within mass balance scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5.8
Satellite coverage for individual reservoirs affects the temporal resolution
of results downriver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5.9
Use of indicators for determining impact on flow regime
. . . . . . . . . . . 72
5.10 Application to future Hydrological Models and benefit of target curves
. . . 73
6
Conclusion
75
Bibliography
77
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
vii
==PAGE:10==
A Appendix
83
A.1 Example Reservoir Summaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.2 Continental Indicator Maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.3 DHI-GHM performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
viii
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:11==
1
Motivation
1.1
The role of reservoirs in water management
Fresh water is an essential resource which over 126,000 species rely upon for life (Balian
et al. 2008). Freshwater ecosystems provide drinking water and other services for the
diverse communities that live there, while also creating additional benefits for humans
through the provision of usable water for agriculture, hydroelectric power, and industry.
Though this resource is incredibly important for environmental sustainability and devel-
opment, as shown in Figure 1.1, surprisingly little is available for access. Furthermore,
freshwater is not evenly distributed around the globe. Some regions experience ample
rainfall or seasonal snowmelts which provide freshwater resources to river basins, while
other regions are defined by dry, arid conditions that limit their access to fresh surface
water. Geopolitical boundaries, economic growth and population dynamics do not, reflect
the distribution of freshwater around the globe. This leads to discrepancies between wa-
ter withdrawals and available freshwater resources, otherwise known as water scarcity.
Currently, almost 2/3 of the world’s population experiences water scarcity for at least one
month each year, and as much as 700 million people may be displaced due to water
scarcity by the year 2030 (UNICEF 2023). The distribution of water scarcity around the
globe is shown in Figure 1.2. Climate projections indicate that changes in precipitation and
evapotranspiration will also play a large role in future water scarcity, though the regional
and local specifics of these impacts are highly uncertain (Caretta et al. 2022).
Globally, water demand is expected to increase from demand in 2010 by 20-30% be-
fore the year 2050 with much of the water demand increases occurring in Africa, South
America and Asia (Burek et al. 2016). Agriculture accounts for up to 69% of global fresh-
water resources (UN-Water et al. 2021) and demand within this sector is expected to rise
as demand for food, fueled by population growth, will increase by 60% before the year
2050 (Boretti et al. 2019). Additionally, agricultural water demand, is expected to meet
increasing competition from industrial and hydropower demands. This competition will be
fueled by economic growth and movement towards developing more renewable energy
infrastructure (UN-Water et al. 2021).
Projections of population growth, economic development, changes in climate, disruption
to freshwater distribution and consequentially water scarcity, indicate a crucial need to
properly manage water resources now and in the future. Humans have attempted to
manage water resources to support growth and development as early as the bronze age
(Whitehead et al. 2008) and since then, reservoirs have continued to be used to alter the
natural flow regime of rivers to meet anthropogenic needs. Today, reservoirs may be used
for one or more purposes. As shown in Figure 1.3, reservoirs are used to meet domestic,
industrial, agricultural and hydroelectric demands but may also be used for flood control
and recreational use. Reservoirs and water management can also be inherently political
as river basins do not follow geopolitical boundaries and water resources must often be
distributed between multiple governing entities. Currently there are 310 international river
basins that cover 150 countries. These basins make up 47.1% of land surface area and
are home to more than half of the global population (McCracken et al. 2019). Hence, water
managers must increasingly balance a growing number of objectives within basins and
play a crucial role in meeting the downstream demands. Managers must also ensure a just
and fair distribution of resources, while considering the conservation of these resources
for use in an uncertain future.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Division of global freshwater resources between type and storage location
(USGS 2023)
Figure 1.2: The number of months per year with severe water scarcity (ratio of water
demand to availability > 1.0). Sourced from Caretta et al. 2022
Figure 1.3: Division of stated use by single purpose and multipurpose dams. (ICOLD
2023)
As shown in Figure 1.4, reservoir construction boomed during the mid 20th century before
tapering off in the late 20th century. According to the International Coalition of Large
Dams (ICOLD), a large dam is defined as a dam with a height of 15 meters or a dam with
2
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:13==
a maximum storage capacity greater than 3 million cubic meters. There are over 58,000
large dams in the world that are listed within the ICOLD database ICOLD 2023. Recently,
there is a renewed increase in reservoir construction due to an emphasis on hydroelectric
power and a growing realization of the need to better manage water resources. Reservoir
construction has particularly increased in Asia and Africa (Lehner, Liermann, et al. 2011).
As of 2015, at least 3,700 hydropower dams with the capacity to generate over 1MW were
under construction or planned for future construction (Zarfl et al. 2015). The relatively
recent widespread impoundment of rivers leaves only 37% of global rivers longer than
1,000 kilometers free flowing (G. Grill et al. 2019) and has made significant impacts on
estimations of the global mean sea level budget and terrestrial water cycle (Frederikse
et al. 2020). Such large-scale alterations to the terrestrial water cycle also raises a critical
question: how are reservoirs affecting the ecological health of the rivers upon which they
are located and are water managers considering environmental requirements as they
should?
Figure 1.4: Growth in number of dams and total capacity around the globe. Lehner,
Liermann, et al. 2011
1.2
Environmental considerations as an objective to
reservoir operations
Though reservoir operations must balance a complex combination of objectives, an em-
phasis must also be made on the environmental changes upon the downstream river ecol-
ogy. The spatial and temporal dynamics of rivers are largely driven by the flow regime
(N. LeRoy Poff et al. 1997) and the alteration of this natural regime by reservoir opera-
tions can have profound negative effects upon the surrounding ecosystem. Dudgeon et
al. (2005) classified flow modification as 1 of 5 main threats to freshwater biodiversity; the
others are noted as over-exploitation, water pollution, habitat degradation, and species
invasion.
Rivers are spatially and temporally dynamic and alterations to natural stream flow can be
described by any combination of differences in the magnitude, frequency, duration, timing
and rate-of-change of flow from the natural regime (N. Leroy Poff et al. 2010; N. LeRoy
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
3
==PAGE:14==
Poff et al. 1997). These characteristics alongside flow depth, temperature, oxygen con-
tent, turbidity and other physical and chemical attributes affect the range of environmental
conditions that are seen throughout a given period within a riparian ecosystem (Allan et al.
2021). It is the dynamic changes in the conditions that make up the environmental varia-
tion of a specific riparian ecosystem that enables and supports biodiversity (Leopold et al.
1995). Biodiversity is supported by this environmental variation because native species
have developed traits and characteristics that enable them to survive and reproduce within
the given ecosystem’s range of conditions (Richter et al. 1997).
Because biodiversity depends on environmental variations, alteration of the natural regime
can affect the health of keystone species and alter ecological roles, while homogenized
flows may allow for the population growth of invasive species that were previously un-
able to thrive in natural flow conditions (Tonkin et al. 2018; N. Leroy Poff et al. 2010).
Décamps et al. (1997) offers an example of how the construction of the Garrison Dam in
1953 along the Missouri river led to the decrease in pioneer poplar-willow communities
due to changes in flow regime and consequentially the river morphology. An opposing ex-
ample is given of how the construction of two dams along the Platte River reduced the flow
and morphology and led to an increase of poplar-willows in previously unsuitable areas.
The shift in keystone species and introduction of invasive species can ultimately change
the ecological landscape and in the case of reduced flow variability, may be as harmful
for a riparian ecosystem’s health as extreme periods of drought (Tonkin et al. 2018).
Other effects of altered stream flow include changes in the downstream river morphology,
potentially leading to the degradation of flood attenuation areas which dampen peak flood
flows and affect sediment transport (Tonkin et al. 2018; Dudgeon et al. 2005; Décamps et
al. 1997). Rivers serve as a means of transport for wood and other physical habitat struc-
ture as well as carbon and nutrients that fuel the riparian food web. Reduction in nutrient
transport alongside other factors such as the reduction of peak flows and reduction in
flow variability impede the distribution of these resources along the river system (Tonkin
et al. 2018; Décamps et al. 1997). Studies have also shown that altered stream flows
due to reservoir operations play a major role in the thermal regime downstream because
the flow affects two major factors in water temperature: residence time and surface area
(Tonkin et al. 2018; Caissie 2006; Chandesris et al. 2019). Finally, river systems play a
role in pollution reduction from non-point sources and flow regime changes can lead to a
degradation in water quality (Tonkin et al. 2018; Décamps et al. 1997). A review of 165
studies found overall negative impacts on the number and diversity of macroinvertebrates,
fish populations and riparian vegetation due to a reduction in the magnitude of flows and
decrease in peak flows (N. Leroy Poff et al. 2010).
1.3
Previous studies on the global impact of reservoirs
Several studies have been conducted to assess the global impact of large reservoirs upon
the natural flow regime. Initial studies focused on the change in residence time based
on reservoir storage capacity to identify high impact reservoirs while following studies at-
tempted to estimate reservoir releases based on specific reservoir characteristics. Recent
studies have shown that reservoir storage change can be observed by satellite earth ob-
servations and this study extends these findings towards an analysis on the global impact
of reservoirs.
Early studies introduced a ratio of a representative capacity to average annual inflow,
defined as the Degree of Regulation (DOR), to assess the impacts upon the natural flow
regime. It has often been used to assess the impacts of reservoirs upon river systems
at a high level because it only requires knowing a reservoirs storage capacity and the
4
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:15==
natural flow of the river at the point of the reservoir. This allows for a comparison to be
made between river systems around the world and highlight those that are most likely
stressed due to anthropogenic impoundments. A study conducted by C. J. Vörösmarty
et al. (1997) included maximum storage capacity data retrieved from 746 reservoirs in the
ICOLD database and found that 75% of reservoirs investigated had residence times under
one year corresponding to a DOR less than 100%. Dynesius et al. (1994) conducted a
similar study in which the fragmentation of the main channels and tributaries of 139 large
river systems within Europe, the Soviet Union, and North America (Mexico excluded) was
assessed. Following the thinking of DOR, the effects of reservoirs were accounted for by
summing the representative storage capacities of each reservoir within the river system
and dividing by the mean annual discharge. They conclude that 77% of discharge from
these river systems is moderately to severely fragmented due to reservoir operations,
interbasin diversion and irrigation. Nilsson et al. (2005), largely followed the approach
presented by Dynesius et al. (1994) but extended it to include 292 large river systems that
drain 54% of the global land area and are responsible for 60% of global river runoff. It was
found that found 172 of the large river basins were affected by reservoirs and irrigation.
More recently, DOR has been applied to individual reservoirs by combining annual flows
from a combination of the HydroSHEDS flow routing scheme and runoff estimates from
the WaterGAP global hydrological model (Petra Döll et al. 2003) with the Global Reservoir
and Dam Dataset (GRanD) reservoir dataset (Lehner, Liermann, et al. 2011). They found
that 27 out of the 100 largest reservoirs in the dataset had DOR values greater than
200%. In all the above studies, impacts are assumed to be represented by the DOR .
While the DOR, can serve as an indicator of the potential impact of reservoirs, the true
operations are not assessed, and seasonal variations among other characteristics of flow
are ignored.
To address these concerns several additional studies have attempted to incorporate reser-
voir operations within a global hydrological model. These studies use daily or monthly
timesteps to determine how reservoirs should release water downstream based on spe-
cific reservoir characteristics or demand within the lower reaches (Meigh et al. 1999; Coe
2000; Petra Döll et al. 2003; Hanasaki et al. 2006; Haddeland et al. 2006). More recently,
the reservoir operation algorithms developed by Hanasaki et al. (2006) and Haddeland
et al. (2006) have been implemented individually or combined with one another to assess
the impact of reservoirs and irrigation withdrawals (Döll et al. 2009; Biemans et al. 2011;
Zhou et al. 2016). Hanasaki et al. (2006) set rules based on specific reservoir character-
istics, hydrometeorological characteristics and water demand within the lower releases
to simulate the operations of 452 reservoirs over a 2 year period. The addition of more
specific reservoir characteristics leads to better estimations for reservoir releases, though
the reservoir operations are not reproduced exactly. In contrast, Haddeland et al. 2006
combines the effects of reservoirs and irrigation while assuming a perfect knowledge of
the inflow to determine what releases should be. Inflows for each reservoir for the follow-
ing 12 months were used to determine the reservoir releases for that year. By taking this
approach, specific reservoir characteristics are not needed, thus allowing a larger scale
analysis to be performed. While this approach removes the need for specific reservoir
characteristics, it still uses the base assumptions of how a reservoir should be operated
as outlined in Hanasaki et al. (2006) as it does not include information on observed reser-
voir operations.
Döll et al. (2009) was the first to conduct a global assessment of the role of reservoir
operations specifically on the alteration of the flow regime by combining the algorithms in-
troduced by Hanasaki et al. 2006 with the GRanD Version 1 Dataset (Lehner, Liermann,
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
5
==PAGE:16==
et al. 2011) and the global water model WaterGAP (Alcamo et al. 2003). This study also
included the effect of irrigation withdrawals and focused on flow variability as the main in-
dicator of alteration of flow regimes. In doing so, Döll et al. 2009 adapted 5 indicators from
Richter et al. (1997) and one additional indicator from Black et al. (2005), to define the
impacts. 6 indicators were chosen because of the ability to calculate them from monthly
flow values. With these indicators, Döll et al. (2009) found significant flow regime alter-
ations downstream of dams. The indicators provide a measure of anthropogenic impacts
that have the potential to affect:
• the health and number of fish species in the river reach
• the health of groundwater dependent floodplain vegetation
• the habitat availability and conditions for aquatic organisms, nearby land organisms
and organisms of floodplains
• the compatibility of the flow regime with the life cycle of aquatic organisms
• the connectivity of the channel and surrounding ﬂoodplain (defined as the ability of
nutrients, energy and organisms to flow between portions of the river ecosystem)
• the river’s ability to dilute wastewater and pollution
In almost all the studies previously mentioned, uncertainty in reservoir operating rules was
mentioned as a large source of uncertainty within their results. None of the studies include
observed reservoir releases. The inclusion of realistic reservoir operations that are spe-
cific to each reservoir would enable an analysis of the impact of reservoir operations to
reflect what is observed rather than assumed. Observation derived reservoir operating
rules for individual reservoirs across the globe are difficult to obtain due to a decrease
in in-situ stream flow observations over the past 50 years (Schwatke et al. 2015). This
is especially the case within developing regions, where many new dam projects are be-
ing built to support development (Hannah et al. 2011). Additionally, various political and
economic security interests compel many international governments to withhold valuable
water resource data (C. Vörösmarty et al. 2001; Hannah et al. 2011). It is this lack of data
that has led to the uncertainties discussed within previous studies.
1.4
Earth Observations can help improve upon past global
studies
Satellite earth observations can help fill the gap of in-situ streamflow observations and
when coupled with a hydrological model can provide meaningful estimates of reservoir
operating rules. Modern satellite missions carrying satellite radar altimeters and laser al-
timeters extend as far back as the early 1990s and can provide accurate and precise wa-
ter surface elevation time series of many of the freshwater bodies that their ground tracks
intersect. These missions often operate with near global coverage, and revisit times be-
tween 10 – 30 days allowing them to monitor reservoirs in hard-to-reach basins regardless
of geopolitical boundaries. Optical and SAR sensors provide information on surface water
extent that has a higher spatial resolution and extends further back in time than satellite
altimetry. The combination of these two data sources enables the estimation of volume
changes in freshwater bodies between consecutive satellite passes. Additionally, satellite
products help create and inform other key data products such as topography, landcover,
global precipitation models, and more. These are key inputs to the global hydrological
models that can provide inflow estimates for estimating reservoir release.
6
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:17==
1.4.1
Satellite altimetry for observing water surface elevation
Satellite altimetry was originally designed for monitoring changes in sea surface levels
but has since successfully been leveraged for monitoring the cryosphere, and coastal
and inland waters (Abdalla et al. 2021). Satellite radar altimetry uses radar pulses emit-
ted from satellites to measure the distance between the satellite and the Earth’s surface.
By analyzing the time it takes for the radar signals to return and correcting for various
atmospheric effects and orbital errors, altimeters on board satellites can precisely deter-
mine the water surface elevation of inland water bodies (J. F. Cretaux et al. 2011). Though
tracking and re-tracking errors must be considered, especially when measuring heights of
smaller inland water bodies, satellite altimetry overall has shown good perfomance over
inland water bodies (Jean François Cretaux et al. 2006, Schwatke et al. 2015, Nielsen
et al. 2015). The temporal resolution of data retrieved from the satellite is limited to the
satellite’s revisit time at a particular target, thus multi-mission timeseries which combine
several temporally overlapping satellite missions have inherently better temporal resolu-
tion. These datasets also extend the timeseries by combining observations from different
satellite missions into a single timeseries allowing for a historical record of inland water
levels spanning up to 30 years to be built.
1.4.2
Satellite derived datasets for observing surface water extent
Surface water extent datasets are typically created by using either optical sensors, Synthetic
Aperture Radar (SAR) or a combination of both. Water detection with optical data relies
on the principle that water has a lower reflectance than other land cover types within the
infrared region. This allows water to be extracted from optical images by density slicing
a single infrared band, applying supervised or unsupervised classification models, deci-
sions trees, or creating thresholds for various water indices. Typical indices include Tassel
Cap Wetness (TCW), Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), Normalized Differ-
ence Water Index (NDWI), Modified Normalized Difference Water Index (MNDWI) and
Automatic Water Extraction Index (AWEI). A common issue with using only an optical
approach is misclassification due to ground shadows and obscureness due to cloud cov-
erage. Ground shadows often contain a similar spectral characteristic to water bodies,
but use of a DEM can aid in preventing misclassification due to terrain shadows. To han-
dle cloud coverage, a cloud mask can be applied to the data; however, cloud coverage
is distributed unevenly around the globe with arid regions having few clouds and tropical
regions having significant cloud coverage. Thus, when using this approach, cloud cover-
age can be a source of bias or lead to spotty coverage when calculating water area within
a region (C. Huang et al. 2018).
SAR is based on the principle that the microwave scattering on water surfaces varies
from other land cover types. Water acts as a mirror and reduces backscatter, while rough
land surfaces increase backscatter. Thus water shows up as extremely dark regions
within reconstructed SAR images. SAR offers an advantage to optical sensors because
microwaves can penetrate cloud coverage and operate independent of daylight. For this
reason, it can provide data day and night regardless of smoke or cloud coverage (Brisco
2015). SAR does not come without its disadvantages, however. For example, SAR is
side-looking and thus cannot see water on the other side of the mountains that its sensor
is facing towards. Using a both ascending and descending orbits can add a view to both
sides; however, deep canyons and valleys likely prevent SAR from seeing water from
either orbit (Tøttrup et al. 2022). Fusion approaches attempt to combine the strengths of
both optical and SAR observations into a final water classification product. It has been
shown that fusion approaches produce better results across a wide range of conditions,
though an optical or SAR only approach may work better in more specific areas (Tøttrup
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
7
==PAGE:18==
et al. 2022). Overall, the two approaches in tandem can help overcome the weaknesses
of the other and lead to generally good results for surface water extent mapping.
1.4.3
Global hydrological models for estimating reservoir releases
Hydrological models describe the fluxes in water storage within various components of a
given catchment or basin. These components can include snow storage, surface storage,
root zone storage and groundwater storage and usually include important processes such
as precipitation, evapotranspiration and infiltration. Global hydrological models aim to do
this from a broader perspective and represent global hydrological processes as a whole.
GHMs are used for water resources management and planning, predicting floods and
droughts and can be coupled with other models that reflect economics, food trade, energy,
land use, etc.
These models often divide the globe into grids for calculation of with rainfall runoff mod-
els and then connect grids through some form of routing scheme. Many newer GHMs
have come to rely on large amounts of satellite data to determine or calibrate regional
parameters. Satellite products such as solar radiation, Digital Elevation Model (DEM)s,
land use products, precipitation models, and evapotranspiration can all provide mean-
ingful input to GHMs. Common GHMs include WaterGAP (Alcamo et al. 2003), Glofas
(Thielen et al. 2012), WW-HYPE (Arheimer et al. 2020 and the newly introduced Dansk
Hydraulisk Institut Global Hydrological Model (DHI-GHM) (Murray et al. 2023). Most of
these GHMs either lack an explicit representation of reservoir operations or only attempt
to estimate reservoir operations based on specific reservoir characteristics. Thus, these
models can serve as valuable data sources for assessing reservoir operations around the
world, as they provide estimations of natural inflow at specific points along a river sys-
tem. Additionally, integration of reservoir operations within these models could improve
the model outputs and lead to better representations of the actual state of global hydro-
logic processes. Improvements would mainly be made in highly regulated basins in which
reservoir dynamics have severely altered natural flows.
1.4.4
Recent studies estimating reservoir releases with earth
observations
Several studies have investigated the feasibility of representing reservoir operations us-
ing observations from space and hydrological models. These studies often use DEMs or
corresponding Surface Water Extent (SWE) and Water Surface Elevation (WSE) obser-
vations to establish an area-elevation relationship curve that is integrated to calculate the
changes in water storage. The volume at a given time point can then be created by a
single WSE or SWE data point, and the volume timeseries can be constructed from the
series of calculated points (Yoon and Beighley 2015; Bonnema, Sikder, et al. 2016; Han
et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2022; X. Zhang, Jiang, Liu, et al. 2023). Satellite observations
have also already been used to assess the impact of reservoirs on flow regime but only
for specific regions or areas (Bonnema and Hossain 2017; Shen et al. 2022).
Han et al. (2020) integrated satellite observations with a distributed Hydrological model to
estimate daily releases and generate reservoir operation curves for three study regions in
the United States, China and Thailand. The study used data from the Saral, Cryosat and
Jason missions to acquire water surface elevations and data from the JRC-GSW dataset
for surface water extent. Storage changes were calculated by finding the average area
of the reservoir over the study period and multiplying this value by the change in water
surface elevation. The satellite derived operation curves were compared with four other
existing operation schemes and found that the satellite derived operation curve yielded
the best results. The satellite-based observation curves were also applied to a test case
8
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:19==
with cascade reservoirs and found that uncertainty within the hydrological model and a
lack of remote sensing data for all cascade reservoirs increased errors in daily release
estimations.
Shen et al. (2022) further investigated the application of multi-satellite datasets and inflow
simulations for storage changes. The focus was on the impact of various hydrological
modeling and satellite-based approaches on the estimated reservoir storage changes. 10
inflow simulations from different hydrological models and blending schemes were used
in combination with three different storage change estimates from two different satellite-
based approaches. Altimetry data from Sentinel-3A was used for WSE data while SAR
images from Sentinel-1 were used to calculate SWE changes. Storage change estimates
were calculated by fitting a power law relationship between elevation and area and inte-
grating to find either a SWE-Capacity or WSE-Capacity relationship. The use of a mean
surface area with WSE changes was also investigated to assess its applicability to reser-
voirs in which no satellite imagery is available. Overall, the study found that inflow esti-
mations are a key factor influencing the accuracy of release estimates. Storage change
estimates were found to be more sensitive to SWE than WSE, suggesting that using a
WSE-Capacity relationship for primary storage change estimates is preferred. Addition-
ally, when no satellite imagery is available, using the average area with WSE changes is
sufficient.
In a similar manner, X. Zhang, Jiang, Liu, et al. (2023) calculated flow regime changes
in the Lacang river by integrating multiple sets of EO data with a hydrological model. A
power law relationship was also fit to derive a WSE-SWE relationship for volume change
estimation. They looked at cascade reservoirs within the basin, finding that reservoir
operations can be attributed to a shortened wet season, flattened flood peak patterns,
and an increase in dry season low flows.
In many of these studies it is recommended that the next steps are to apply these tech-
niques in a global context to assess their merit. These studies provide the basis and mo-
tivation for the research presented within this thesis. Earth observations (EO) present a
unique opportunity to observe reservoir storage changes in previously unassessed reser-
voirs around the globe. The increase in coverage and ability to observe ungauged or
unreported reservoir releases provides grounds to conduct a study of the impact of reser-
voir operations upon natural flow regimes and investigate the potential to integrate the
observed reservoir operations within a global hydrological model.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:21==
2
Research Objectives
The main objectives of this study are threefold: to leverage satellite observations to de-
rive reservoir volume and release timeseries for 618 individual dams around the world,
quantify their impacts to natural flow regime and investigate the feasibility of incorporating
reservoir operations within a GHM.
Is there enough satellite data to observe reservoir operations around the world?
The spatial coverage of altimetry missions presents limitations to which reservoirs can be
observed within a global study. It is more likely that larger reservoirs are observed by
altimetry data due to the higher probability that a satellite track passes over a reservoir
boundary. A key interest is how this limitation shapes a global investigation into reservoir
operations and if there is enough coverage of large reservoirs of interest to human ac-
tivities. Another component of this research objective is determining if there are enough
corresponding observations of altimetry and surface water extent data to estimate good
elevation-area-capacity relationships. It is also important that the data is available on the
time scales and frequencies that are usable for estimating reservoir operations. Finally,
do satellite observations expand our ability to observe and monitor new reservoirs that
have yet to be included in previous studies of reservoir operations?
What is the global impact of reservoir operations upon the natural flow regime of
the rivers on which they are located?
Globally, to what extent are there temporal and spatial changes in the flow regimes? Past
studies have used a ratio of storage capacity and average annual inflow to assess the
impact of a reservoir, does this align with a satellite-based approach or does the addition
of satellite observations lead to different conclusions? How are the impacts distributed
between continents and regions. Specifically, which reservoirs are most likely to be re-
sponsible for ecological changes due to changes in flow regime and are there specific
countries, regions, basins or rivers under high risk?
How can reservoir release estimates from satellite observations be integrated into
an existing global hydrological model?
Finally, because access to observed inflow for most reservoirs around the world is limited,
reservoir storage change estimates must be coupled with a hydrological model to estimate
reservoir operations. The hydrological model can provide simulated inflows which are
subsequently used with estimated storage changes to calculate the reservoir operations.
This thesis implements a mass balance scheme that properly models the connections
of cascade reservoirs and couples the storage changes with outputs from a hydrological
model. The next logical step is to integrate observed reservoir operations within a hydro-
logical model. Because most current GHMs account for reservoirs in an overly simplistic
manner, integrating operations with a GHM would improve streamflow estimates, partic-
ularly in highly regulated basins. Thus, while directly integrating reservoir operations into
a global hydrological model lies outside of the scope of this thesis, the merits of doing so
is investigated.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:23==
3
Methods
3.1
Data sets
3.1.1
Altimetry
There are several global databases which provide inland surface water level timeseries
derived from various satellite missions. The two used within this thesis are Hydroweb
(J. F. Cretaux et al. 2011) and DAHITI (Schwatke et al. 2015) which both implement their
own methods of combing altimetry measurements from different missions into a single wa-
ter level time series for lakes and virtual river gauge stations around the world. Hydroweb
uses the techniques outlined in (J. F. Cretaux et al. 2011; Jean François Cretaux et al.
2006; Silva et al. 2010) to estimate water levels per track from the TOPEX/Poseidon,
GFO, Jason-1 Jason-2, Jason-3, Envisat, Cryosat-2, SARAL, Sentinel-3A and Sentinel-
3B missions. These heights are then combined to create a monthly time series for each
body of water covered. By contrast, the DAHITI database combines observations from
the similar missions and uses an extended outlier rejection technique and Kalman filter to
estimate the water level at each observation (Schwatke et al. 2015). These two databases
were selected mainly due to their large coverage, ease of access and use of multiple mis-
sions resulting in long dependable timeseries. Both databases provide access to water
level timeseries through an API. When a reservoir was not covered by the Hydroweb or
DAHITI databases, Sentinel-3A and Sentinel-3B data was extracted from the DTU Space
multi-mission satellite altimetry database to fill in gaps in coverage and timeseries follow-
ing the technique outlined by Nielsen et al. (2015).
3.1.2
JRC Global Surface Water History and Transition data
The European Commission’s Joint Research Center’s global surface water dataset com-
piles the archive of optical data from Landsat 5, 7 and 8 to classify open water, land or
non-valid pixels from 1984 till present (Pekel et al. 2016). Open water is defined as a
stretch of water greater than 30x30 meters in area that is visible to the sky. No data pixels
indicate insufficient observations for a given pixel over the course of the month due to
cloud coverage or other errors. Data is provided on a 30-meter resolution and includes
products such as maximum extent and water transition. A monthly record of surface wa-
ter extent is also provided. The dataset was accessed through the Google Earth Engine
Java and Python API (Gorelick et al. 2017).
3.1.3
DHI Global Hydrological Model
The DHI-GHM is a global hydrological model that uses global datasets to produce histor-
ical, real-time, 10-day and seasonal forecasts of flows in over 1,000,000 basins around
the globe. The model covers 97.6% of landmasses equating to 99.99% of the global pop-
ulation. The model uses inputs from the World Wildlife Fund HydroSHEDS products to
delineate catchments and river networks. The basins within the model are delineated by
the HydroBASINS (Lehner and Günther Grill 2013) product which further divides large
basins into subbasins larger than 100 km2. Lakes larger than 10 km2 that are located
along main river channels within the HydroLAKES (Messager et al. 2016) dataset are
included within the model resulting in a total of 15,052 lakes and reservoirs. Lakes and
catchments are connected by river reaches represented within the Global Rivers Classi-
fication (GloRiC) dataset (Dallaire et al. 2019; Ouellet Dallaire et al. 2020). The model
includes data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) land
cover products (Townshend et al. 1999) to provide land cover data as inputs to the model.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
13
==PAGE:24==
The Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) digital elevation database (NASA Shuttle
Radar Topography Mission n.d.) was used as elevation inputs for the model along with
updated river reach elevations from the MERIT Hydro River network hydrography maps.
Precipitation and temperature data and forecasts are retrieved from the IMB Weather
Company database and potential evapotranspiration is calculated using methods from
(McMahon et al. 2013). The model performance has been evaluated using observed
river discharge from the Global Runoff Data Centre (GRDC) dataset (GRDC Data Portal
n.d.).
The DHI-GHM utilizes a Nedbør-Afstrømnings Model (NAM) within each grid cell to model
the hydrological elements of each catchment. The NAM model divides the rainfall-runoff
process by dividing water storage within a catchment into snow storage, surface storage,
lower root zone storage and groundwater storage. 15 parameters are required to describe
the model for each catchment, and these are determined by an a priori estimation for
each catchment based on the physical properties of the catchment. This leads to an
uncalibrated model in which parameters are determined from global datasets and ensures
that the model can be applied to ungauged basins.
The kinematic routing element within the DHI-GHM consists of 3 steps: 1) routing of water
as runoff from the grid cells specific NAM model 2) water is routed between cells within a
catchment to the catchment outlet 3) water is routed kinematically to the next downstream
sub-basin. Manning’s formula for open channel flow is used within this kinematic routing
scheme. Lakes and reservoirs are modeled as linear reservoirs, as shown in Equation
3.1 within the kinematic routing model. Lakes are assumed to have an average active
depth of 0.5 meters while reservoirs an average active depth of 1 meter. The effects of
the time delay are implemented at the catchment outlet and the effects are proportional
to the ratio of the lake area to the catchment area.
Ck = D · b
Qavg
(3.1)
where:
Ck
= time constant for delay
B
= active lake or reservoir area
d
= active lake or reservoir depth
Qavg = average discharge of the river
Water withdrawals due to irrigation are included within the DHI-GHM using timeseries from
Z. Huang et al. (2018) applied at the HydroBASINS Level-6 catchments. Each catchment
has a maximum water storage capacity of one month and if the capacity is full, water is
routed to the downstream catchment. Water is used during dry agricultural growing pe-
riods and otherwise stored. The irrigated water is applied as a sink due to the likelihood
of evaporation after application to fields. The model includes an option for groundwa-
ter abstraction and specific waterway regulation of withdrawals is not included. While
other withdrawals such as domestic and industrial can make up a considerable portion of
water withdrawals in a river system, irrigation is often the most prominent; thus, the in-
clusion of irrigation withdrawals makes the DGI-GHM a good tool for estimating reservoir
operations in this thesis. Calculations can be made assuming that most withdrawals are
accounted for, and any alterations calculated can be attributed to reservoir operations.
Using this data set means that the analysis performed will describe the alterations of a
natural streamflow that has already been altered by withdrawals.
14
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:25==
3.1.4
Global Reservoir and Dam Dataset v1.3
The GRanD dataset (Lehner, Liermann, et al. 2011) is a comprehensive database of exist-
ing large dams around the world today. The dataset contains information such as reservoir
and dam names, location, capacity, use, basin, year built, average and maximum storage
capacity and more. The data base was officially updated in 2019 to include reservoirs
constructed as of 2016. Some corrections to locations and polygons were provided in the
Georeferenced Dam and Reservoir Dataset (GeoDAR) (Wang et al. 2022) data set which
expands upon the GRanD dataset by including georeferenced points for 22,560 dams
within the World Register of Dams (WRD), from ICOLD. The main benefit of GeoDAR is
the number of medium sized dams added to the existing list of large dams found within
the GRanD dataset. However, reservoir information characteristics for dams that do not
overlap with GRanD are sourced from the WRD which is not publicly available for free.
Thus the GRanD dataset with location and polygon updates from GeoDAR remains the
best database for locating dams in which operations may have a high environmental im-
pact and was thus used as the basis for reservoir selection within this thesis. An overview
of reservoir locations is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Location of dams in the GRanD dataset.
3.1.5
Future Hydropower Reservoirs and Dams
Given that the GRanD dataset only contains reservoirs as recent as 2016, an analysis
that only includes this dataset is limited. Thus, a method for identifying reservoirs that
have been constructed between 2016 and present day was implemented for this the-
sis. There is little publicly available information that identifies recently constructed reser-
voirs and their locations. Some efforts such as the GlObal GeOreferenced Database of
Dams (GOODD) (Mulligan et al. 2020) have digitized over 38,000 reservoirs adding to the
spatial knowledge of reservoirs around the world, but GOODD fails to provide attribute in-
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
15
==PAGE:26==
formation for these reservoirs. Additionally, as previously mentioned, GeoDAR does not
provide open-source information on reservoirs not already included within the GRanD
dataset.
The Future Hydropower Reservoir and Dam Dataset (FHReD) dataset was compiled in
2015 collating information on over 3,700 hydropower dams that were planned for future
construction or already under construction at the time of the study (Zarfl et al. 2015). This
dataset provides location information as well as a planned start date for construction.
The information can be used as a reference for where to search for new reservoirs from
2015 onward. One downside to using this database as a starting point for searching for
recently built reservoirs is the fact that this dataset focuses on hydropower dams. As will
be discussed later, the criteria for selecting reservoirs for further analysis was that the ratio
of storage capacity to average annual inflow of the reservoir is greater than 100%. This is
more likely to be the case with reservoirs in which their main purpose is irrigation as these
reservoirs must store larger amounts of water to meet demands outside of the wet season.
Therefore, reservoirs found with this dataset are more likely to have less of an impact on
the flow regime of the rivers in which they are located than reservoirs within the GRaND
dataset that are listed for irrigation and a variety of other purposes. The reason to use
this dataset over one such as the GOODD dataset, is the knowledge that any reservoirs
found with the points can be considered as new reservoirs. While reservoirs within the
GOODD dataset may have been built before 2015. An overview of reservoir locations is
shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Location of reservoirs in the FHReD dataset
16
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Overview
An overview of the process for the investigation is shown in Figure 3.3 and is described
in the following section.
Figure 3.3: Overview of methodology
3.3
Reservoir selection
3.3.1
Initial Selection of GRanD Reservoirs
C. J. Vörösmarty et al. (1997) introduced an index to describe the disturbance in flow of
previously free flowing rivers from reservoir impacts. The index is referred to as the ‘mean
local aging’ of freshwater but is also referred to as the “Degree of Regulation” by following
authors (Nilsson et al. 2005) and within this thesis. The degree of regulation, or DOR
neglects reservoir operations, and, as shown in Equation 3.2, is defined as the ratio of the
maximum storage capacity and average annual inflow as a percentage. Reservoirs were
selected based on the DOR calculated from capacities listed within the GRanD dataset
and an average annual inflow extracted from the DHI-GHM. DOR was used to narrow
the options because of its common use to describe potential reservoir impacts, and the
assertion that this is likely over simplistic. Reservoirs selected in this manner are the ones
commonly assumed to be of high impact and the authority of DOR as indicator for flow
regime impacts can be determined.
DOR % = Representative Maximum Storage Capacity
Average Annual Inflow
· 100
(3.2)
To determine the average annual inflow for each reservoir, the yearly average of inflows
for the reservoir was calculated from the DHI-GHM from the year January 1997 to Jan-
uary 2023. The GRanD dataset provides values for storage capacity in 4 different values:
representative maximum storage capacity, reported maximum storage capacity, reported
normal storage capacity, and reported minimum storage capacity. The natural choice fol-
lowing the literature would be to choose the reported normal storage capacity, as this is
most likely representative of true reservoir operations; however, the dataset documen-
tation notes that in many cases, few distinctions were made on whether the reported
capacity estimates were maximum, minimum or normal capacities. Thus, it is possible
that some listed normal capacity values represent the maximum or minimum capacity of
the reservoir. On the other hand, the value represented as the representative maximum
storage capacity was assigned by priority: reported maximum capacity before reported
normal capacity before minimum capacity. Given this system of priority the representa-
tive maximum storage capacity is the value with the most likely relevant entries and was
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
17
==PAGE:28==
chosen for this study. A value in this column is unlikely to represent a minimum stor-
age capacity but if it does, it is assumed that this will lead to a calculated DOR that is
lower than reality and if this value is greater than 100%, is a large reservoir that should
be considered within the study. A weight to this value to estimate normal capacity is not
applied as in (C. J. Vörösmarty et al. 1997) due to the understanding that representative
maximum storage capacity values may be normal or minimum storages, thus the DOR
calculated may be an overestimation when compared to those calculated in other studies.
This leads to a conservative selection of reservoirs for the following steps.
Any reservoir with a DOR greater than 100% is considered a multi-year reservoir as it can
store more than one year’s worth of average annual inflow and release water according to
an “artificial demand driven regime” (Lehner, Liermann, et al. 2011). There are 1,937 out
of 7,325 reservoirs within the GRanD dataset which are considered multi-year reservoirs
according to a DOR calculated in the manner previously described. These reservoirs,
shown in Figure 3.4, were then assessed for altimetry coverage alongside the selected
reservoirs from the FHReD dataset described in Section 3.3.2.
Figure 3.4: Location of GRanD reservoirs with a high DOR
3.3.2
Initial Selection of FHReD Reservoirs
Reservoirs from this FHReD dataset were selected to add to the study as recently built
reservoirs that are not within the GRanD database. This dataset contains point locations of
reservoirs that were under construction or planned at the time of publication. Reservoirs
within this dataset are not guaranteed to have been built by their planned construction
date, so the points that represent built reservoirs needed to be identified. Points were
identified as having been built according to an inspection of nearby pixels in the JRC-Water
History Transition data. The transition band of the JRC-Water History dataset includes
nine classes which classify the behavior or changes in water types from 1984 to the most
18
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:29==
recent release. The classes of interest in determining a built reservoir are new permanent,
new seasonal, and seasonal to permanent waters.
The JRC-Water History transition data was sampled within a 1 km range from each point
within the FHReD dataset. The total count of water pixels within the sample, and distri-
bution of classes is considered. For a point to be selected as a potential built reservoir,
there must be at least 200 non-null pixels ( 5% of the sampled area) within the sample
and at least 50% of non-null sampled pixels must be classified as new permanent water.
The conditions aim to prevent the number of false positives due to points located along
meandering rivers which can often contain the new permanent water class. An example
outlining this process in practice is shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Example of FHReD selection process. (a) Google Earth Satellite image of
reservoir footprint before filling. (b) JRC-GSW Transition data in same footprint, indicating
a new reservoir. (c) Example of the extent of search radius around resrvoir point. (d) Same
view as in (d) but with JRC-GSW pixels included. If at least 5% of the JRC-GSW transition
pixels within the area are valid and at least 50% of these are new permanent water, the
reservoir is marked as a potential built FHReD reservoir.
Next, the reservoir maximum extent polygons are extracted for each of the potential
FHReD points. For the potentially built reservoirs, the transition pixels within a 100km
radius that are classified as “New Permanent, new seasonal, or seasonal to permanent”
are dilated by using a square 3x3 pixel max kernel to perform a closing operation of any
gaps created by the selection of only these three classes. This is necessary to connect
the two sides of the reservoir that lie on either side of the river center line. The center
line is typically marked as permanant water and runs through the center of the reservoir
polygon, occasionally creating a separation between the two half of the extracted reser-
voir polygon. The intersection of the selected pixels and maximum extent data from the
JRC-GSW data set is then vectorized within the 100 km search radius. This provides a
vector representing the reservoir polygon and other water bodies within the search radius.
To select the reservoir polygon from this list, the largest vector within 1 km of the initial
FHReD point is selected. This procedure accounts for the fact that some of the points
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
19
==PAGE:30==
from the FHReD dataset do not exactly fall within the reservoir polygons and ensures that
FHReD points located slightly downstream or outside of the actual dam location do not
map to a small vector that is an artifact of the procedure.
The previous procedure may still contain gaps in the reservoir polygon due to wide por-
tions of the river. Therefore, the polygons are cleaned by creating a convex hull around
the created polygon and vectorizing the maximum extent layer within this convex hull.
This ensures that all possible parts of the reservoir are included in vectorization but limits
the vectorization area to that immediately surrounding the polygon. The polygon is se-
lected in the same manner described for the initial polygon bound selection, and the result
is a complete reservoir polygon that represents the maximum extent of water coverage
within the JRC-GSW dataset. This process is shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Example of FHReD polygon extraction. (a) JRC-GSW Max Extent raster layer.
(b) JRC-GSW Transition raster layer. (c) Initial polygon from vectorization of JRC-GSW
Transition layer. (d) Final FHReD polygon from vectorization of JRC-GSW Max Extent
layer within the convex hull of the polygon shown in (c).
Out of the 3,700 future reservoirs within the FHReD dataset, the process above yields 130
potentially built reservoirs. Though the process does a good job of selecting large potential
reservoirs it also selects many reservoirs that are small or sections large dynamic rivers
in which no reservoir has been built. To reduce the number of false positives, polygons
smaller than 10 km2 were removed from the selection under the assumption that larger
reservoirs are likely of more interest to this study. 41 out of the 130 reservoirs selected as
potentially constructed from the FHReD dataset were identified and included within the
next steps of the analysis as recently built reservoirs.
3.3.3
Determining altimetry coverage
The resulting 1,937 reservoirs selected from the GRanD dataset and 41 reservoirs se-
lected from the FHReD reservoirs dataset were then assessed for their coverage by var-
ious satellite altimetry databases. As a first step all polygons were updated with any in-
tersecting polygons from the GeoDAR dataset. This ensures that the polygons represent
the most up to date shapes for determining their coverage. Spatial joins were performed
20
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:31==
between Hydroweb and DAHITI targets. Any polygons containing the point data provided
by either of the two data bases were marked as being covered by altimetry data. Fur-
thermore, a join based on reservoir name was performed between the altimetry targets
and GRanD dataset attributes to identify any targets with coordinates not falling within
the reservoir polygon bounds. Any targets showing a match between reservoir and tar-
get name were double checked by ensuring that the target points fall within 5 km of the
matched reservoir polygon.
To expand upon coverage from Hydroweb and DAHITI, a spatial join was performed be-
tween the Sentinel-3 relative ground tracks and polygons representing permanent water
within the reservoir polygons. The permanent water was used to increase the likelihood
of observing water at all points throughout the reservoir’s temporal dynamics. Any tracks
that had at least one track cross more than a total of 300 meters of intersection with the
permanent or new permanent water within the reservoir polygons were selected as reser-
voirs with valid Sentinel-3 data. A threshold of 300 meters was selected because the
SAR altimeter has an along track resolution of 300 meters, setting a limit to the size of
reservoirs that can be confidently observed.
An inherent but necessary limitation to selecting reservoirs based on altimetry coverage is
that data will only be available in locations where a waterbody intersects with a satellite’s
ground track. Larger water bodies are more likely to be covered by satellite altimetry. In
the case of a global analysis of the impacts of reservoirs upon global stream flow, these
limitations mean that smaller and medium reservoirs are more likely to be excluded from
the analysis. Additionally, smaller reservoirs less than 10 km2 were removed from those
found within the FHReD dataset further adding to the bias towards large reservoirs. With
this in mind, 811 reservoirs were selected as reservoirs with potential good coverage. 11
of these are FHReD reservoirs.
3.4
Retrieval of Data
Once the reservoirs were selected, the data was retrieved from each source. Each reser-
voir requires WSEn (altimetry), SWE (JRC-GSW), and inflow data (DHI-GHM). The pro-
cess for acquiring this data is described within this section.
3.4.1
Water Surface Elevation from Altimetry Data
While radar satellite altimetry is a reliable source of water level timeseries, there are a
few caveats that must be considered when extracting and processing data. The footprint
from SAR is large as the sensors are designed for open ocean measurements and land
contamination of the return signal can be problem at the boundaries of inland water bod-
ies; thus, data is less likely to be reliable and must be evaluated for smaller bodies of
water such as small lakes and rivers. This can lead to various tracking and retracking er-
rors. The tracker onboard satellite radars is responsible for recording the returned pulses
and relies on the assumption that the range window is appropriately set to record the full
echo. If the range window is set incorrectly, it will lead to incorrect measurements or no
measurements at all. This might occur if the range window is set from previous altimetry
measurements along the tack (possible when operating with closed loop tracking) or if
based on an inaccurate DEM (possible when operating with open loop tracking). Errors
from closed loop tracking are often the result of mountainous terrain which changes at
a rate quicker than can be followed between measurements, while errors in open loop
tracking can occur over recently filled reservoirs where the DEM is set to the low point of
the reservoir and the new water surface level has risen above the upper value in the range
window (X. Zhang, Jiang, Kittel, et al. 2020). Once a pulse is received by the tracker, a
retracker must be used to detect the peak of the pulse. Land contamination can make
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
21
==PAGE:32==
finding the peak of the pulse difficult and research is ongoing on finding new retracking
methods for inland water bodies. Offset Center of Gravity (OCOG) is the retracker that
generally performs well over inland waters on a global scale. It is used within Hydroweb
and Dahiti and is thus the retracker used for all altimetry timeseries in this study (J. F.
Cretaux et al. 2011; Schwatke et al. 2015).
Given these considerations, altimetry data was retrieved for each reservoir based on an
ordered system of priority. If available, data was downloaded for a reservoir from the
Hydroweb database. Otherwise, data was downloaded from the DAHITI database. In
both cases, if multiple targets fell within the reservoir polygons, the target that was marked
as a reservoir or lake target was chosen over a river target. If the only river targets exist,
the target closest to the reservoir point was selected. Targets from Hydroweb were given
higher priority over targets from the DAHITI database due to the ability to download data
without the need to request access. If the reservoir did not exist within the Hydroweb
or DAHITI databases or access was restricted within both data bases, Sentinel-3 data
was downloaded from the DTU Space multi-mission satellite altimetry database which
provides filtered timeseries of Sentinel-3 data based on a provided polygon mask. Each
track from the database was manually filtered based on knowledge of major Open Loop
Tracking Command (OLTC) table updates, shown in Figure 3.7, SRTM elevations, and the
tracks correlation with surface water extent timeseries. This is necessary due to knowl-
edge that many reservoirs are not covered in Sentinel-3 timeseries from improper ranging
in initial table updates or when operated in closed loop tracking (X. Zhang, Jiang, Kittel,
et al. 2020). The remaining Sentinel-3 tracks were adjusted for track bias which can occur
due to differences in where the track crosses a given reservoir or whether the satellite is
in a descending or ascending orbit as implied by Nielsen et al. (2015) and Bosch et al.
(2014). For all altimetry data, any observations occurring within the same month were
averaged to get an estimated representative water surface elevation value for the month.
Figure 3.7: Table of Major OLTC table updates considered when inspecting S3 data.
Reproduced from (ESA n.d.)
3.4.2
Surface Water Extent from the JRC Global Surface Water Dataset
Surface water extent history was retrieved from the JRC global surface water dataset
through the Google Earth Engine Java API. This dataset provides monthly binary data
indicating the presence of water within a 30-meter resolution pixel. Surface water extent
can then easily be calculated by summing the pixels within the reservoir polygon and
multiplying by the area of the pixel. Most of the reservoir polygons provided within the
GRanD dataset were determined by using the SRTM elevation model to identify extents
Lehner, Liermann, et al. 2011. This leads to polygons that represent the shape and area
of the reservoir at the time of the SRTM mission but often fail to represent the maximum
22
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:33==
area in which surface water may be found. Thus, to calculate accurate surface areas, the
polygons were updated to include the maximum extent of the reservoir over the whole
time for surface water extent extraction.
A simple buffering of the GRanD polygons fails to capture the complex fingers of reser-
voirs which contribute significantly towards the reservoir’s surface area dynamics, thus an
expansion of the reservoir based on the surrounding topography was implemented. First,
the elevation values within the current reservoir polygons were sampled and the highest
and lowest elevations were calculated. These elevations were then used as boundaries
for where the reservoirs surface water extent can be located. A slight buffer can be added
to the highest sampled elevation within the polygon before setting the elevation bound-
aries to account for a polygon in which the boundaries were made from SRTM values
taken at a point of low volume. It was found within this study that no buffer is needed to
sufficiently to capture the area around the reservoirs. This is because the SRTM DEM is
provided at a 90 meter resolution and pixels that overlap with the reservoir polygon often
provide elevation values that are notably higher than the elevation within the boundary
when sampled. A buffer would likely need to be set if using a higher resolution DEM.
The resulting ”elevation boundary” allows the selection of the maximum extent that is
connected to the reservoir polygon but effectively cuts the polygon boundary at the dam
location itself and upstream. Following this logic, the maximum extent layer is dilated by
60 meters to connect any separation due to bridges or small narrow straights. Then all
connected pixels of the dilated maximum extent that also have an elevation value between
the highest and lowest sampled elevation is used to create the reservoir polygon. The
resulting polygons were then manually inspected to ensure that the polygons cover any
possible surface area pixels based on the JRC Maximum Extent data layer. Surface water
extent timeseries were created for each reservoir by calculating the area of pixels marked
as water within the reservoir extent bounds polygons. Months in which less than 95% of
the area was recorded as water or land (the other option being No Data) were discarded
to maintain a degree of certainty within the elevation-area curve fits and resulting volume
timeseries estimation. The effects of this processes are shown in Figure 3.8
Figure 3.8: Example of the use of elevation boundaries within the polygon extension pro-
cess. (a) Original GRanD or FHReD polygon with JRC-GSW Maximum Extent layer. (b)
Original polygon with the associated elevation boundary. (c) Final polygon after vectoriz-
ing a dilated version of JRC-GSW Maximum Extent layer within the elevation boundary.
Notice that the new polygon includes all fingers and arms of the maximum extent layer.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
23
==PAGE:34==
3.4.3
Inflow volumes from DHI GHM
Inflow data was downloaded from DHI using the DHI-GHM API. To download flow data, the
PFAF ID for the corresponding HydroBASINS Level-12 catchment must be provided. A
spatial join was performed to determine which basins each reservoir belongs to. The PFAF
ID for the basin in which the reservoir is located was used to access the flows, thus it is
assumed within the mass balance scheme presented within Section 3.6 that the reservoir
inflow is equal to the basin runoff. As shown in Figure 3.9, this inherently introduces a
level of uncertainty due to fact that a reservoir may be located further upriver in the basin
and experience inflows in which the basin outflow is not necessarily representative. The
uncertainty is presumed to be low however, due to the face that a single catchment within
the level-12 product will contribute a small portion of the overall flows seen by the reservoir
for a given simulated value. Even so this is an assumption that is important to keep in
mind for future work. The daily flow values produced from the GHM were summed to get
a total volume entering the reservoir for each month available.
Figure 3.9: Example of different placements of reservoir points within basin used for inflow.
(a) Reservoir where the dam is located far upriver within the basin. This likely leads to an
overestimation of inflow. (b) Reservoir where the dam is located close to the basin outlet.
Extracted inflow for this basin is likely more representative of what enters reservoir.
3.5
Calculation of Area-Elevation-Volume Relationships
Area-Elevation-Capacity curves were created following a combination of the methods out-
lined in existing literature Yoon and Beighley 2015; Yoon, Beighley, et al. 2016; Bonnema,
Sikder, et al. 2016; Han et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2022; X. Zhang, Jiang, Liu, et al. 2023,
namely, the fitting of an empirical function for corresponding WSE and SWE points, the
use of an average surface water extent in conjunction with varying WSE values, and the
use of a DEM that was measured before the filling of a reservoir.
3.5.1
Establishing an empirical relationship
Many reservoirs within the GRanD dataset were built prior to a reliable global DEM such as
the SRTM, thus information on the topography prior to filling does not exist or is not easily
accessible for all reservoirs. In this case, the methods outlined in Han et al. 2020; Shen
24
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:35==
et al. 2022; X. Zhang, Jiang, Liu, et al. 2023 were implemented and corresponding WSE
and SWE observations were used to fit an empirical function to describe the relationship
between WSE and SWE. When utilizing this approach, volumes should only be estimated
for WSEs that fall within the range of data used for the fit. Any values outside of the range
likely will result in inaccurate volume estimations, due to an extrapolation of the observed
data.
When finding the relationship between WSE and SWE, a power law function, as shown
in Equation 3.3, is often used. The function describes the relationship between surface
area and water surface elevation based on two main parameters. Parameter b represents
the conceptual shape of the reservoir. As seen in Figure 3.10, the conceptual shape as
described by the parameter b can be divided into four categories which is defined by
how the steepness of the reservoir walls changes on average with respect to the water
surface elevation. The parameter a controls the steepness of the relationship as a whole.
For example, if parameter b = 1, then parameter a acts as the slope within a normal linear
function. WSE0 is the elevation in which the reservoir is empty and thus when SWE = 0
(Shen et al. 2022; X. Zhang, Jiang, Liu, et al. 2023).
SWE = a · (WSE −WSE0)b
(3.3)
Figure 3.10: Example of different reservoir shapes based on the value of the b parameter
For this thesis, Equation 3.3 was modified to account for the fact that in many cases, the
full range of WSE within a given reservoir is not seen. Thus, a fit made using the general
equation leads to a large extrapolation in most cases, as parameter WSE0 is not known
and therefore needs to be estimated. To handle this constraint, the data was transformed
such to subtract the lowest SWE and WSE observations from all observations respec-
tively, thus the power law is modified to model the reservoir anomalies over the lowest
SWE and WSE elevations seen. Furthermore, when using this method, the relationship
derived only provides the volume changes above the lowest observed value, not the ab-
solute volume. A third parameter, c is included to allow the fit more flexibility when fitting.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
25
==PAGE:36==
In this case, the parameter b only describes the shape of the reservoir above the lowest
observed WSE that has a corresponding SWE observation. The power law used within
the fit is then as follows:
SWE′ = a · (WSE′)b + c
(3.4)
where:
SWE′ = SWE −min(SWE)
WSE′ = WSE −min(WSE)
3.5.2
Curve fitting procedure
For each GRanD reservoir, a procedure was followed to remove outliers and determine
the proper fit for the reservoir. First, corresponding monthly values are extracted from the
SWE and WSE timeseries and used as data for fitting the relationship. Reservoirs in which
the WSE range of corresponding WSE and SWE observations is less than one meter are
fitted with a mean fit, where the mean is computed as the average surface water extent
over the full reservoir timeseries. This is equivalent to a power law with parameter b = 0
and is performed under the assumption that a meaningful relationship between WSE and
SWE will likely not be found within this range. This is consistent with (Yoon and Beighley
2015) who computes storage estimates from daily synthetic water surface elevation data
by multiplying the water surface elevation observations by average reservoir surface area.
Any reservoirs with a large enough WSE range, undergo a two step outlier removal pro-
cess. SWE values which fall outside of 3 standard deviations from the mean SWE value
are removed and the process is repeated for the WSE values. This process seeks to
remove extremely unlikely values from the data that may skew the process in the follow-
ing step. Removal of values in this method is not particularly robust to outliers, thus a
secondary outlier removal process is completed through bootstrapping.
Bootstrapping is a method of resampling data to extract more information about the un-
derlying distribution (Efron 1979). To perform the bootstrapped outlier removal, the data
is resampled 500 times with replacement to generate 500 resampled datasets that are the
same size as the original dataset. A fit is then performed with each resampled dataset and
the parameter estimates are recorded, providing a distribution of parameter estimates.
When performing the bootstrap fit, the a and b parameters are bounded to be greater than
0; the argument being that values less than 0 are unrealistic as they indicate that the SWE
decreases with an increasing WSE. Such parameter samples are likely a product of the
random selection and tend to occur when there is a smaller amount of corresponding data.
From these parameter estimates, the median absolute deviation (MAD) is calculated, and
bounds are created: Bounds = Median ± 4 · MAD. The MAD is multiplied with 4 as
this provided the best results by visual inspection. Future work could refer to (Leys et al.
2013) which proposes a method of determining outlier thresholds in a more systematic
manner. These parameter bounds provide the maximum and minimum curves in which
probable data will fall and any datapoints that lay outside of this region are considered
outliers. An example of a result from the bootstrapping procedure is shown in Figure 3.11
26
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:37==
(a) Example of outliers removed in first step of the outlier removal process. Note the point in
green fell outside 3 standard deviations from the mean of SWE points and was thus removed.
(b) Example of outliers removed in the second step of the outlier removal process. Note that the
bounds for removal with the bootstrapping method are set by the parameters that lie 4 MAD from
the median parameter estimate within the samples. The yellow point was removed because it
falls outside of the bounds.
Figure 3.11: Example of both steps in outlier removal process. The histograms show
the distribution of parameter estimates from the fits, which are used to create the outlier
boundary.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
27
==PAGE:38==
The remaining data is used for an initial fit in which a typical 95% confidence region is
calculated. A typical confidence region can be calculated under these circumstances
because the parameter distributions are more likely to follow a normal distribution after
removing outliers. Given the diversity of reservoirs under consideration, the statistical sig-
nificance of the parameter estimates from the resulting initial fit are considered to assess
whether the reservoir’s dynamics can be better represented by the mean SWE or a linear
function. Examples of the distinctions are shown within Figure 3.12. The distinction is
made to uphold the principle of parsimony and to avoid overfitting. Four conditions are
considered:
1. A test is made to see if the fit power law fit (SWE′ = a · (WSE′)b + c) could be
better assessed by a linear fit. A two tailed t-test is performed under the following
hypothesis: H0 : b = 1, Ha : b ̸= 1
• If the null hypothesis can be rejected under a statistical significance of 90%
(p<0.1), then the initial fit is assessed under condition 2.
• Otherwise, it is considered that the data can be better described by a simple
linear fit of the data and a linear function is fit. The linear fit is assessed under
condition 2.
2. A test is made to see if the fit could be better represented by a mean fit.
• If a power law fit (SWE′ = a · (WSE′)b + c), a one tailed t-test is performed
under the following hypothesis: H0 : b ≤0, Ha : b > 0
– If the null hypothesis is rejected under a statistical significance of 90%
(p<0.1), then the initial fit is assessed under condition number 3. (If a
linear fit was)
– Otherwise, it is considered that the data can be better described by the
mean of the SWE and a mean function is used as the final fit.
• If a linear fit (SWE′ = a · (WSE′) + b), a one tailed t-test is performed under
the following hypothesis: H0 : a ≤0, Ha : a > 0
– If the null hypothesis is rejected under a statistical significance of 90%
(p<0.1), then the linear fit is accepted as the final fit.
– Otherwise, it is considered that the data can be better described by the
mean of the SWE and a mean function is used as the final fit.
3. A test is made to ensure that the power law fit (SWE′ = a · (WSE′)b + c) can-
not be better represented by a mean fit. A t-test is performed under the following
hypothesis: H0 : a ≤0, Ha : a > 0
• If the null hypothesis is rejected under a statistical significance of 90% (p<0.1),
then the initial power law fit is kept as the final fit.
• Otherwise, it is considered that the data can be best described by the mean of
the SWE and a mean function is used as the final fit.
4. Finally, any remaining fit with an r2 value less than 0.1 is represented a mean fit to
avoid fitting to noise.
28
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.12: Examples of the variety of fits resulting from the curve fitting process.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
29
==PAGE:40==
3.5.3
Establishing relationship with a digital elevation model
Reservoirs within the FHReD dataset, were built after the SRTM was flown in 2000. Thus,
this mission provides the full topography within the reservoir boundary before reservoir
filling. In this case, the cumulative area below a range of elevations was retrieved to
build the elevation-area curve (Bonnema, Sikder, et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2022; X. Zhang,
Jiang, Liu, et al. 2023). Cumulative elevations are multiplied with the area of the pixel,
approximately 90 m2 to calculate the area-elevation relationship curve. High elevations
especially from mountainous or hilly terrain can be falsely recorded within the cumulative
area due to contamination from the 90 meter resolution DEM used in the process. If
the slope bounds intersect with a small portion of a pixel that is representative of higher
elevations outside of the true reservoir extent, the portion of the pixel inside the reservoir
bounds is counted in the area count. Even so, the resulting upper plateau of the curve can
be ignored because no elevations are seen above these limits when calculating volume
changes. This approach adds the benefit of providing a more detailed understanding
of the reservoir shape and also adds the benefit of providing an estimation of absolute
volume in the reservoir; however, the approach requires an accurate DEM for the area at
hand. An example of this curve is shown in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Example of DEM derive curve and how WSE and SWE estimates match.
Values between the green lines represent the observed WSE values over the observation
period. The flat part of the curve above WSE of 590 meters is not representative of the
area elevation relationship and is caused by portions of high elevations from the 90 meter
SRTM DEM.
3.5.4
Creating volume timeseries
As shown in Figure 3.14, the resulting elevation-area relationships regardless of method
were integrated to calculate the elevation-capacity curve. This curve is used to create an
observed volume timeseries from WSE values. The volume timeseries is made primarily
of the full timeseries of monthly WSE levels that fall within the range of the WSEs used
in the fit. WSEs that fall outside of the range used to fit the area-elevation relationship
are not used to calculate the volume for that month as this would require extrapolation
from the observed relationships. For months in which no valid WSE observations exist,
but a valid SWE observation does exist, the SWE value is used to calculate the estimated
reservoir volume. For a SWE observation to be valid, the corresponding WSE from the
30
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:41==
elevation-area curve must fall within the range used to fit the curve and at least 95% of the
pixels counted must not be marked as no data pixels within the JRC-GSW data. This is to
ensure that the SWE is not underestimated due to cloud contamination or other factors.
If no valid WSE or SWE observations exist for a given month, the volume is marked as
N/A and no estimation is made for the month.
Figure 3.14: Illustration of described concepts for volume estimations. The top image
illustrates a top down view of a theoretical FHReD reservoir and its area-elevation rela-
tionship. The different colors mark the area that fall within a given height. The bottom
image shows a cross section of a theoretical GRanD reservoir and how corresponding
WSE and SWE observations can reveal the area-elevation relationship. The image on
the right shows how both of these curves are integrated to get the volume changes be-
tween various WSE or SWE observations.
3.6
Estimation of reservoir releases
3.6.1
Mass balance scheme
Once the reservoir volume timeseries have been established, a mass balance scheme
must be implemented to estimate reservoir releases. In its current iteration, it is not pos-
sible to represent reservoir regulation directly within the GHM, thus the outputs at reservoir
locations must be extracted from the GHM and coupled with the reservoir volume time-
series. A reservoir network and mass balance scheme were implemented to perform
this coupling by connecting all reservoirs for which data was retrieved and facilitating a
monthly mass balance for each reservoir. The basic water balance for calculating reser-
voir release can be represented as shown in Equation 3.5.
Vout,t = Vin,t + Vt−1 −Vt + (Pt −Et) · At
(3.5)
where:
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
31
==PAGE:42==
Vout,t = the outflow of the reservoir downriver (reservoir release) at the given time step
Vin,t = the inflow to the reservoir from upriver at the given time step
Vt−1 = the volume of the reservoir at the previous time step
Vt
= the volume of the reservoir at the given time step
Pt
= the precipitation per unit area over the reservoir at the given time step
Et
= the evaporation per unit area over the reservoir at the given time step
At
= the area of the reservoir at the given time step
For the mass balance scheme implemented here, it is necessary to break down the total
flow (Vin,t term) into its components as shown in Figure 3.15. First, as shown in Equation
3.6, total inflow can be separated into two components: controlled and uncontrolled in-
flow. Uncontrolled inflow is the proportion of flow from the GHM that is not routed through
upstream reservoirs, while, as shown in Equation 3.7 the controlled inflow is any flow
that has been routed through an upstream reservoir and any alterations due to reservoir
operations.
Total Inflow = Vin,t = Uncontrolled Flow + ControlledFlow
(3.6)
Vin,t = Uncontrolled Flowt + (GHM FlowUpstream Res,t + Upstream Alterationst)
(3.7)
where:
Upstream Alterationst = Vout,Upstream Res,t −GHM FlowUpstream Res,t
Figure 3.15: Illustration of described concepts for volume estimations
The flow represented by the DHI-GHM is representative of all upstream catchments and
thus includes the GHM flows at reservoirs upriver but lacks alterations due to reservoir
operations, shown in Equation 3.8.
GHM FlowRes,t = Uncontrolled Flowt + GHM FlowUpstream Res,t
(3.8)
32
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:43==
For example, in Figure 3.15 the GHM flow extracted at the location of the downstream
reservoir will come from both the blue and yellow catchments, while the flow extracted
from the GHM at the location of the upstream reservoir will only come from the blue
catchment. This is important because it means that alterations to the GHM flow from
upstream reservoir operations can be directly applied to the extracted GHM flows for the
downstream reservoir. The total inflow to the reservoir can then be shown as in Equation
3.9.
Vin,t = GHM FlowRes,t + Upstream Alterationst
(3.9)
The basic water balance is further modified for this mass balance scheme, particularly
the precipitation and evaporation inputs. Precipitation and evaporation over lakes and
reservoirs are already considered within the GHM. Precipitation over water bodies is con-
sidered within the distributed NAM model as a component of the surface storage/runoff
variable which is later used in river routing. By contrast evaporation is accounted for as a
loss within the discharge simulation for lakes and reservoirs larger than 10 km2. It is not
possible with the current GHM setup to neglect these computations for specific reservoirs
of interest when extracting flows. This makes it difficult to account for precipitation and
evaporation mass changes on an individual reservoir level, as doing so without adjusting
the GHM would lead to a double calculation of these mass exchanges: once within the
DHI-GHM and a second time at the reservoir mass balance. Including these mass bal-
ances, particularly evaporation, within the reservoir mass balance itself can play a crucial
role in the accuracy of reservoir release estimations. Evaporation can play a large role in
the reservoir mass balance, especially within dry and arid regions (Zhao et al. 2022; Tian
et al. 2022). Further work upon this subject should work to include open water precipitation
and evaporation losses, but as it is currently not possible to extract the 2D data such as
local rainfall and potential evapotranspiration products from the GHM, theses exchanges
are neglected in the current work.
The final mass balance maintained for each reservoir is then as shown in Equation 3.10.
Vout,t = GHM FlowRes,t + Upstream Alterationst + Vt−1 −Vt
(3.10)
The main assumptions within the mass balance scheme are as follows:
• Mass balance is completed at a monthly timescale. This is limited by the JRC-GSW
dataset which is provided as a monthly history of SWE.
• Instantaneous flows are assumed throughout the whole river system for each month.
• The flows extracted from the DHI-GHM are representative of the natural flow regime
– Natural flow refers to the conditions without reservoir operations but includes
withdraws
– All withdrawals are accounted for in the DHI-GHM and no withdrawals occur at
the reservoir
• The observed volume changes within a reservoir can only be accounted for by in-
flows and releases
– Losses due to evaporation and groundwater seepage are neglected
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
33
==PAGE:44==
3.6.2
Network structure
The network structure is required to link cascade reservoirs and ensure that all upstream
alterations are calculated before conducting a mass balance for a given reservoir. Infor-
mation on the connectivity and associated river reaches of each reservoir is included from
the GLORIC dataset. The network is built in Python using principles from object-oriented
programming. It consists of a “Network” object which is comprised of “River System” ob-
jects. A river system organizes all reservoirs and associated river reaches that empty
at the same pourpoint. The river system object is comprised of “River Path” and “River
Layer” objects which denote the horizontal and vertical locations of reservoirs within a river
system, respectively. In other words, the river paths within a system are separated by dif-
ferent initial reservoirs but all empty at the same pour point, thus describing each unique
path that water may have taken to exit the river system within the network. The river layer
objects segment river systems based on their reservoir order and distance along their
respective path from the river system’s pour point. Reservoirs that do not have a down-
stream reservoir but empty to the pour point are always considered as the first layer. Any
reservoirs in which the reservoir directly downstream is a layer 1 object are considered
a part of layer 2. This labeling process is continued until no reservoirs remain within the
given river path. An additional “Simulation” object oversees the management of mass
balances between reservoirs. Figure 3.16 shows the main components and structure of
the network.
Figure 3.16: Illustration of network components for organization of mass balance scheme.
3.6.3
Running a simulation
When running a simulation, river systems are processed iteratively. For a given river
system, reservoirs within the river layer furthest from the pour point are considered first.
These reservoirs are guaranteed to be “Initial Reservoirs” meaning that there are no reser-
voirs upstream that are considered within the model and thus volume calculations for the
entire timeseries can be calculated without consideration of up stream flow alterations.
A mass balance is performed on each individual reservoir within the layer to determine
the reservoir release and the release timeseries is recorded. If the reservoir has a down-
stream reservoir, the releases are recorded for the downstream reservoir as alterations
34
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:45==
to flow. Once all reservoirs within the first layer are processed, the reservoirs in the next
downstream layer are considered. This process is repeated until all layers are processed
for a given river system. For example, referencing Figure 3.16, the reservoir marked as
red within layer 4 would be processed first, followed by the reservoirs within the green
in layer 3, and so on until the single reservoir in layer 1 is processed last. By iterating
through reservoirs by their layer rather than downstream a specific river path, it is guar-
anteed that all upstream flow alterations are calculated and recorded before processing
cascade reservoirs.
When processing an individual reservoir, a mass balance is carried out on a monthly time
scale. The first volume within the constructed volume time series is used as the initial
volume of the reservoir. Note that this value is only the volume above lowest calculated
when constructing the elevation-area-capacity curves. Absolute volume is not needed as
here, only the change in volume within the reservoir is calculated between timesteps. The
mass balance calculations then begin in the month following the initial volume observation
and follow an iterative process for each month until the end of the timeseries is reached.
Figure 3.17, illustrates a summary of the mass balance calculations performed at each
timestep. Assuming that there is a valid volume observation for the reservoir at each
timestep, the process is as follows:
1. The volume entering the reservoir for this time step is computed by considering the
monthly volume from the DHI-GHM for this reservoir and any alterations for this time
step from upstream reservoirs. Alterations can be positive if upstream reservoirs
have released flows or negative if upstream reservoirs are increasing storage.
• Vin,t = VGHM,t + Vupstream alterations,t
2. The expected reservoir volume given the last observed volume and the inflow vol-
ume in the absence of the reservoirs release is calculated
• Ve,t = Vobs,t−1 + Vin,t
3. The volume released is calculated given the difference between the current ob-
served volume and the expected reservoir volume for the month
• Vout,t = Ve,t −Vobs,t
4. Vout,t is saved for the time step as the regulated flow and VGHM,t is saved for the
time step as the natural flow (VNat,t).
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.17: Process of calculating release at each reservoir
Realistically, there are gaps in observed volumes due to missing WSE or SWE readings.
If a reservoir has a missing volume observation, the Vin,t term is recorded for the time
step and added in at the next available observation. A volume change and release are
then calculated for the two observations on either side of the period without observations
and a mean volume in, and regulated flow is distributed for the timesteps with missing ob-
servations, as shown in Figure 3.18. The same is true if all upstream reservoirs have not
released their flows in the same month. This could be the case if one reservoir upstream
has valid observations every other month while a downstream reservoir has monthly ob-
servations. In this case, the downstream reservoir will be modeled with a resolution of
every other month and the inflows and releases will be distributed over the two-month pe-
riod. Another possibility, as seen in Figure 3.18, could be that an upstream reservoir has
no observations until midway through a lower reservoir’s timeseries; in this case, the flows
are distributed over the first part of the reservoirs timeseries until all upstream reservoirs
have observations. Finally, due to the assumption within the mass balance scheme that
the DHI-GHM provides accurate observed flows, the mass balance will calculate nega-
tive values. This occurs when the increase in observed volume is greater than the volume
entering the reservoir as simulated in the DHI-GHM. The presence of these negtive flows
is indicative of errors within the DHI-GHM and points out locations in which the DHI-GHM
does not perform as observed in real life. In the event that negative values are calculated,
the values are set to N/A and the time series is marked as an untrustworthy timestep within
the mass balance.
36
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:47==
(a) Volume observations with occasional
gaps.
(b) Distributed volumes and releases corre-
sponding to (a)
(c) Volume observations with no upstream
releases at begining of timeseries.
(d) Distributed volumes and releases corre-
sponding to (c)
Figure 3.18: Illustration of how volumes are distributed when no observations or upstream
observations are available for a reservoir with no upstream alterations.
3.7
Calculating indicators of impact on flow regime
The range of variation approach laid out by Richter et al. 1997 provides a set of more
specific targets based the frequency, timing, duration, magnitude and rates of change
of water conditions. From theses concepts of hydraulic alteration, the range of variation
approach calculates 32 indicators from observed or simulated daily flows that reflect the
conditions of the river without human interference. These indicators can be used to set
targets for reservoir operators when making release decisions. 5 of the indicators are
based on monthly aggregations of flow and are thus applicable to a monthly analysis for
flow regimes. These indicators are the same as those used by Döll et al. (2009), who also
added an additional indicator from Black et al. (2005). Richter et al. (1997) asserts that
the indicators are best implemented when there is enough information on the flow regime
before the introduction of reservoir operations. If setting targets for reservoir operations,
it is suggested to have at least 20 years of flow data to set targets. It is proposed here
that though some reservoirs are assessed over shorter time periods, these indicators are
still relevant when quantifying the difference between regulated and natural flows. The
indicators consider variability and allow for comparison across different types of flows in
different areas around the world and are thus considered here. A detailed description
of each indicator follows as well as an illustration of what they represent within the flow
regime in Figure 3.19.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
37
==PAGE:48==
3.7.1
Long-term Average (LTA)
The long-term average is a metric that determines the overall change of flows over a yearly
averaged time frame. The overall impact of the long-term average is important because
large changes in this indicator can lead to changes in the number of fish species that can
thrive and impacts the amount of ground water that is available for vegetation located in
nearby floodplains. While this indicator is more affected by withdrawals than reservoir
operations, its inclusion can still give some information on the potential long-term filling of
reservoirs and its consistency with other studies can build confidence in the results. This
indicator is measured as a percentage in the difference between long term averages in
natural flow and released flows.
LTA =
Total V olume
Number of Y ears =
∑M
m=1 V olumem
M/12
(3.11)
ILTA = LTARelgulated −LTANatural
LTANatural
· 100
3.7.2
Statistical Low Flows (LF)
Statistical flows are defined by the frequency that a given flow is equivalent to or equal
to a given value throughout the duration of the observed period. For example, Q90 is the
flow that is exceeded throughout 90% of the flow record. In other words, it is the lower
10th percentile of the distribution of observed flows. This is a relevant and often used
parameter to maintain when optimizing reservoir operations. A rivers natural statistical low
flow is often a crucial target to maintain as it can represent the overall connectivity of the
river channel which can alter the natural habitat conditions. Connectivity here refers to the
ability of nutrients, energy and organisms to flow between portions of the river ecosystem
Richter et al. 1997. Additionally, high enough statistical low flows are important for the
dilution of wastewater if present. Improper dilution of wastewater can impact the health
of downstream species and disadvantage human activities such as irrigation and drinking
water supply.
LF = Q90 = 10th Percentile V olumes
(3.12)
ILF = LFRelgulated −LFNatural
LFNatural
· 100
3.7.3
Seasonal Amplitude (SA)
The seasonal amplitude describes the difference between the maximum and minimum
mean monthly flows. To calculate this metric, the flows for each matching month through-
out the observation period are summed and divided by the number of times observations
within the given month occur in the observation period. The difference between the max-
imum and minimum values from the resulting set of 12 mean monthly flows is then taken.
This is calculated for both natural and released flows and the percent difference is calcu-
lated. The seasonal amplitude of river flows is an important factor because it can affect
the habitat availability of nearby areas, particularly nearby floodplains.
Mean Monthly Flow =
{∑IJan
i=1 V olumei
IJan
,
∑IF eb
i=1 V olumei
IFeb
, ...,
∑IDec
i=1 V olumei
IDec
}
(3.13)
SA = Max(Mean Monthly Flow) −Min(Mean Monthly Flow)
ISA = SARelgulated −SANatural
SANatural
· 100
38
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:49==
3.7.4
Seasonal Regime (SR)
The seasonal regime describes the long-term monthly mean of the absolute differences
between natural flow and released flow as a percentage of natural long term monthly
average flow. It serves as an indication of how closely the natural flow is followed overall.
A seasonal regime that closely resembles the natural seasonal regime is important for
maintaining good habitat conditions and ensuring that flows are compatible with the life
cycle of the organisms present.
Mean Monthly Difference =
∑12
m=1 | ∑Im
i=1 V olRegulated −∑Im
i=1 V olNatural|
12
(3.14)
Natural Long Term Monthly Average Discharge =
∑M
i=1 V olM
M
ISR =
Mean Monthly Difference
Natural Long Term Monthly Average Discharge · 100
3.7.5
Temporal Shift (TS)
Reservoir operations can impact when peak seasonal flows occur, which is a relevant
characteristic for ensuring that the flow regime is compatible with the life cycle of the or-
ganisms that are present in the downstream reach. Shifts to the peak flow are determined
by calculating the difference in months between when the maximum mean monthly flow
occurs. The month of the maximum natural flow is subtracted from month of the maximum
flow due to reservoir operations. The value ranges from [-6 to 6] indicating the number
of months earlier or later that a peak flow occurs. Note that the value -6 and 6 indicate
that a shift occurs exactly half a year earlier or later and the sign of the value should be
disregarded. Values closer to zero indicate that the seasonal peak flow has not shifted
temporally.
Max Monthly Discharge = argmax(Mean Monthly Flow)
(3.15)
I∗
TS = Max Monthly Discharge Released −Max Monthly Discharge Natural
ITS = f(ITS∗) =
{ −I∗
T S
|IT S∗| · (12 −|ITS ∗|)
|ITS ∗| < 6
ITS∗
|ITS ∗| ≥6
3.7.6
Interannual Variability (IV)
The natural flow regimes of river systems have a natural variability from year to year. The
interannual variability of river systems is important for the habitat conditions of aquatic
organisms, thus reservoir operations that decrease or increase the variability of the flow
regime pose risks for the organisms that live downstream. The impact on interannual vari-
ability is determined by the number of months that the coefficient of variation for monthly
flows is altered by reservoir operations. The Coefficient of Variation (COV) for each month
is found for both natural and release conditions. Then the change in COV is determined
by subtracting the natural COV from the release COV. The sum of negative changes is
then subtracted from the positive changes for all instances when the absolute change in
variability is greater than 10% (Döll et al. 2009) to get the impact on interannual variability.
If a month does not have a difference in COV greater than 10% of the natural variability,
the change is counted as 0.
Coefficient of V ariation = COVM =
Std(V olumesM)
Mean(V olumesM)
(3.16)
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
39
==PAGE:50==
Change in COV =
{
COVJan,Regulated−COVJan,Natural, ..., COVDec,Regulated−COVDec,Natural
}
IIV =
∑
[Change in COV > 0] −
∑
[Change in COV < 0]
*Change in COV is only calculated for a given month if the change is greater than 10% the natural variability, otherwise
the change is considered 0.
(a) Long Term Average
(b) Low Flows
(c) Seasonal Amplitude
(d) Seasonal Regime
(e) Temporal Shift
(f) Interannual Variability
Figure 3.19: Summary of the indicators of impact and what they highlight within the flow
regime
3.8
Generation of target curves
Reservoir operations must balance multiple objectives when making release decisions.
These objectives include present and future demands for irrigation, industry, domestic, hy-
dropower within the basin alongside the requirement of maintaining environmental flows.
40
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:51==
There are many different operating policies depending on which objectives are prioritized
for a specific reservoir (Loucks et al. 2017). These include but are not limited to a fixed
release, fixed storage, standard operating procedure, hedging rules, pack rules, flood
control rules, zone-based rules, and more complex rules to balance multiple objectives
or cascade reservoir operations Men et al. 2019. The Standard Operating Policy (SOP),
as shown in FIgure 3.20 is one of the simplest operation rules that aims to release water
to meet as much target demand as possible. Water is stored when the target release is
met up until the point when the reservoir’s storage capacity or a seasonally varying flood
control volume is met. In this case, water is allowed to spill, and the reservoir release is
equal to the inflow of the reservoir. The target release can vary throughout the year de-
pending on downstream demands and release objectives and can include minimum and
maximum environmental flows.
Figure 3.20: Illustration of SOP
When implementing the SOP within a hydrological model, the downstream demands and
storage capacity or flood control volume must be known. Another way to represent reser-
voir operations is by determining releases from a data driven reservoir volume curve
(Turner et al. 2020). As shown in Figure 3.21, releases from a volume curve are made
such that the volume stored in the reservoir is kept as close to a uniquely derived tar-
get volume as possible. As with target releases in the SOP, the target volume can vary
throughout the year based on inflows and downstream demands. Implementing a volume
based approach means that estimations of downstream demands and individual reservoir
operating policies can included within the release estimates. Implementation of satellite-
derived, volume-based reservoir operations has been investigated and shown to perform
better than most common operation policies (Han et al. 2020). Given this approach, tar-
get volume curves for each individual reservoir are generated, with the goal of providing
a basis for updating and improving the existing DHI-GHM.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.21: Illustration of satellite-derived, volume-based operating policy
There is great potential for integrating target volumes within the model structure itself. As
of now, the DHI-GHM does not include reservoir operations at all but models the time
delay within the kinematic routing model by representing lakes and reservoirs as linear
reservoirs. This scheme can therefore be improved by modeling reservoir operations
according to a volume based operating procedure that uses the generated target volume
curves to determine releases.
Two types of target volume curves are generated for each reservoir within the network.
The observed volume timeseries generated in the process of determining releases can
be used as observed volume targets within the existing hydrological mode when making
historical forecasts. If wishing to make forecasts, a yearly pattern or rule curve would
provide an estimation of where the reservoir is likely to be operated at a given time of year
and decisions based on the volume in from the kinematic routing within the GHM can be
made according to the standard operating policy to meet these volumes. To generate the
yearly pattern target curves, the distribution of releases is recorded throughout the period
of observation and the median release is taken as a best estimate for the yearly pattern.
The 5 and 95% percentiles are also provided for a measure of uncertainty.
In both cases, implementing reservoir releases derived from satellite observations would
improve upon the current method of treating reservoirs as linear reservoirs without opera-
tions or utilizing specific reservoir characteristics to estimate reservoir releases (Döll et al.
2009; Hanasaki et al. 2006; Haddeland et al. 2006). The performance of the DHI-GHM
will benefit the most in highly regulated river basins and river systems with many cas-
cade reservoirs. An example of a historical and monthly target volume curves is shown
in Figure 3.22
42
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:53==
(a) Historical Target Volume Curve.
(b) Monthly Target Volume Curve.
Figure 3.22: Example of volume curves created for each reservoir. a) Historical Target
Volume Curve. The grey area marks a period of time where observations are missing.
b) Monthly Target Volume Curve. The yellow shaded region indicates the 5th and 95th
percentiles of volumes for a given month over the course of the whole observation period.
The grey shaded area relates to the proportion of months that are unobserved. Dark grey
areas indicated that fewer observations occur in a given month.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:55==
4
Results
4.1
Summary of reservoirs and river systems
Overall, 618 reservoirs were accounted for within the mass balance scheme. Out of these,
614 had enough volume observations for the reservoir and associated upstream reser-
voirs to assess the impacts to flow regime. The other four reservoirs lacked overlap-
ping volume observations between reservoir and their associated upstream reservoirs or
did not have enough volume observations on their own. The volume timeseries created
ranges from 1997 to 2023 depending on the availability of WSE and SWE observations
for each reservoir.
Table 4.1 shows the distribution of reservoirs and characteristics between continents.
There is a large representation of reservoirs within North America, Asia and Europe and
an under representation in Africa, South America and Oceania when compared to other
records of reservoir distribution around the world (A. T. Zhang et al. 2023; Mulligan et al.
2020). Though there are less reservoirs assessed in Africa and South America, the reser-
voirs accounted for in these two continents are larger than many within other continents
as seen when comparing total and median storage capacity. Though the total area of
reservoirs assessed within Africa is largest, the median area is smallest, indicating that
there are a few large reservoirs represented among many smaller reservoirs. The oppo-
site is the case for the represented reservoirs within South America, which has the second
smallest total reservoir area with the largest median area. Overall, the median DOR in all
continents is between 1.6 to 2.6 years.
Table 4.1: Summary of reservoir characteristics for which the mass balance scheme was
conducted.
Number Total Capacity Total Area Median Capacity Median Area Median DOR %
Continent
[MCM]
[km2]
[MCM]
[km2]
Africa
56
646288
88480
532
18
260
Asia
151
637465
21990
971
23
168
Europe
103
362146
18061
400
19
219
North America
223
911725
34786
749
26
180
Oceania
34
60183
2859
458
43
210
South America
45
391196
15551
1573
76
195
In terms of primary use, Table 4.2 shows that most reservoirs within the analysis are
intended for hydroelectricity and irrigation, followed by flood control and water supply.
North America has the most diversity in primary use. Irrigation is the most common main
purpose in Africa, Asia and Oceania. Hydroelectricity is most common in Europe, and
South America. Flood control is most common in North America but is followed closely
by hydroelectricity and irrigation. While these reservoirs may be used for other purposes,
they are likely to be operated to prioritize the listed main purpose.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
45
==PAGE:56==
Table 4.2: Summary of the division of reservoirs by primary use.
Number Flood control Hydroelectricity Irrigation Other Recreation Water supply
Continent
Africa
56
0
14
29
0
0
10
Asia
151
29
32
55
0
0
4
Europe
103
1
48
32
4
1
12
North America
223
56
44
51
7
30
34
Oceania
34
1
8
15
0
0
10
South America
45
4
20
2
0
0
3
Total
612
91
166
184
11
31
73
The location and connectivity of reservoirs within the analysis is shown in Figure 4.1. It is
shown that most reservoirs within North America can be attributed to the United States.
Within Europe a high density of reservoirs is found within Spain and Greece. Brazil is the
country with the most reservoirs in South America and reservoirs within China and India
dominate the makeup of Asian reservoirs. Finally, the river systems within the network
vary between single reservoir and complex multi-reservoir systems.
Figure 4.1: Distribution and connectivity of river systems included within the mass balance
scheme. Different colors indicate different river systems that share a common pour point
at the ocean.
46
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:57==
4.2
Reservoir summary
A fit summary of the fit and mass balance scheme was generated for each reservoir. Ex-
amples of a reservoir summary for each type of reservoir can be found in Appendix A.1.
Summaries include basic information from the GRanD or FHReD datasets, polygons used
for altimetry and SWE data collection, location of reservoir within mass balance system,
global location, timeseries used in mass balance, outlier removal summary, fit summary,
simulated releases and target volume curves. An overall summary of the fits made for
each reservoir is presented within Table 4.3. The division of fits by continent, provides
an estimate of the conceptual shape of reservoirs within this study, though they should
be regarded with caution. The conceptual shapes found within this study are mostly de-
scriptors of the higher elevations within the reservoir, unless a satellite timeseries has
observed extremely low values. Even so, a power law fit where b < 1 was the most com-
mon type of fit overall. An investigation into how reflective the conceptual shapes are was
not conducted as doing so would require in-situ data or a deeper look into the topography
surrounding each reservoir.
Table 4.3: Summary of the type of fit performed per continent.
Mean Fit Linear Fit Power Law Fit Power Law Fit DEM
Continent
b > 1
b < 1
Africa
7.0
9.0
17.0
23.0
1.0
Asia
38.0
41.0
23.0
49.0
2.0
Europe
37.0
22.0
16.0
28.0
0
North America
75.0
36.0
31.0
82.0
0
Oceania
2.0
11.0
9.0
12.0
0
South America
6.0
11.0
14.0
14.0
2.0
Total
165.0
130.0
110.0
208.0
5.0
The primary means of assessing each fit was the significance of fitted parameters and
the coefficient of determination. As shown in Figure 4.2 the distribution of all final fits
that were not mean fits was assessed. Mean fits by definition have an r2 value of 0 and
the reservoirs in which a DEM was used to derive the area-elevation relationship are not
considered within this particular step of analysis. Within the fit process, fits with an r2 less
than 0.1 were determined to be poorly described by the fit and a mean fit was performed
instead, thus values less than 0.1 are not shown. The distribution is left skewed and
calculation of the quantiles reveals that over 75% of fits have an r2 value greater than
0.64, indicating that in 75% of non-mean fits, at least 64% of the variability of SWE can be
explained by the variability of WSE. Following the same line of reasoning, at least 50% of
non-mean fits, explain at least 95% of the variability and at least 25% explain 96% of the
variability. Thus, it can be said that overall, the process of fitting the area-elevation curves
is worth completing as it provides a better descriptor of reservoir dynamics than using a
single mean SWE value. For the cases in which a mean fit was made, the decision can
be justified because the parameters from a linear or power law fit were not significant, or
the r2 reveals that the fit is not much better.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.2: Distribution of the coefficient of determination for all fits that are not made with
the mean fit or DEM methods.
In addition to the distribution of parameters globally, the r2 value is assessed by continent
and main purpose in Figure 4.3. The figure shows the percentage of reservoirs within a
given continent with all fits (including mean-fits) in which the coefficient of determination
falls within one of four categories. At least 60% of fits in Africa, Oceania and South Amer-
ica high r2 values while Asia, Europe and North America have a higher percentage of fits
with low r2 values. A likely explanation for this distinction lies in the division of main uses
for each continent. When referring back to Table 4.2, Africa and Oceania have a higher
percentage of irrigation reservoirs, while North America and Europe high a higher share of
hydropower, flood control and recreation. These kinds of reservoirs have a higher portion
of low r2 values due to their likely operating policies. Hydropower is likely to be operated in
a way to generate electricity as a run of the river reservoir, without altering the flow regime
or operated to alter the flow regime in a way to balance energy demands. Flood control
reservoirs are operated in a way to enable the control of large amounts of inflow over a
short period of time and release at a more gradual rate. Recreational reservoirs tend to be
operated at a smaller range of WSE variation to keep docks and access ramps in use year
round. A lack of variation in SWE and WSE would then lead to less observed correlation
and lead to a lower r2 for the fit. The opposite can be seen for irrigation, which holds the
lowest share of low r2 values and highest share of high r2 values. Irrigation reservoirs
characteristically have larger surface areas as they must be able to store enough water to
meet demands during water sparse times. The large surface area and high variation from
filling and releasing water lead to more satellite observations that cover larger portions of
the area-elevation relationship. The variation reveals a greater connection between area
and elevation and thus leads to stronger fits.
It is important to keep in mind that the uses referred to here are listed as main uses but may
be designed and operated to accomplish other goals. Differences and trends here may
48
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:59==
also be driven by large scale regional effects. For example, many reservoirs within Africa
are likely located within dry, arid regions that experience low cloud coverage, leading to
more observations and a better fit, while the opposite may be true for reservoirs within
North America. In all, the differences in fit types, r2 by continent and main use, align with
what is expected and give confidence in the fitting procedure.
Figure 4.3: Percentage of reservoirs within each country and primary use category in
which the coefficient of determination falls within specific ranges. Note: This figure reflects
all fits including mean fits.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
49
==PAGE:60==
4.3
Impacts on global flow regime
Global maps of each indicator is shown within this section. Each map shows reservoirs
marked with symbols and the affected downstream reaches colored by indicator value.
Affected stretches are considered any stretch of river downriver from a given reservoir.
In the event that a reach is down stream of multiple reservoirs, the indicator is assessed
by considering the upstream alterations and DHI-GHM for the confluence of rivers until a
new reservoir or confluence is met. The process is similar to the calculations performed
at reservoir points but does not account for any flow alterations at this point. As shown
in Figure 4.4, the process allows for the effects of multiple reservoirs upstream to be
combined and visualized along the river reaches. While the river reaches downstream
from a confluence are colored within the maps presented within this section, only the
releases at the reservoir outflows are included within the analysis of global and continental
impacts. River reaches are marked by a black line if the indicator value could not be
calculated. More detailed continental maps of each indicator can be found within Appendix
A.2.
Figure 4.4: Example of how river reaches are indicated within global maps.
50
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:61==
4.3.1
Long-term Average (LTA)
(a) Distribution of the indicator for impacts to
long-term average flows (Ilta).
(b) Proportion of reservoirs within the set ranges
for Ilta. The coloring is representative of that
shown within the map in Figure 4.5c
(c) Map of reservoirs and affected downstream river reaches colored by the value Ilta
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
51
==PAGE:62==
The indicator for impacts to long-term average shows differences between the magnitude
of yearly flows for natural and regulated conditions. It is shown as a percentage of the
natural conditions; thus, values less than 0% indicate that the natural long-term flow has
decreased due to reservoir operations. This could indicate a long period in which the
reservoir experiences an overall filling. Values over 0% indicate the opposite and likely
point to a reservoir that has released large amounts of water to meet demands down-
stream, such as during an extended period of drought.
Impacts to the long-term average flow have been found to stem mainly from anthropogenic
withdrawals rather than reservoir operations (Döll et al. 2009) and the revealed impacts
of reservoir operations on the global distribution of flow regimes for reservoirs within this
study is largely consistent. Figure 4.5a shows frequency histograms for each indicator,
representing the global distribution of impacts. The distribution of the indicator for long-
term average impacts is largely centered on zero but is slightly skewed right. The inner
quartile range is approximately from 0% to 5% indicating that long term averages over
the observation period were largely unaffected by reservoir operations themselves with a
few exceptions. The notable values within the positive side tail, indicate some long term
releases from reservoirs over the period. This is further reflected when breaking down
the impacts on a continental scale in Figure 4.5b. All continents except for Africa have at
least 69% of reservoirs that alter the long term average between -5 to 5%. North America
seems to has the highest proportion of reservoirs within this category. Africa is the conti-
nent that performs noticeably worse. Over half of reservoirs here increase the long-term
average by more than 5% and 1/4th of reservoirs show an increase greater than 25%.
Reservoirs within Africa, Europe and South America all have 10-15% of reservoirs that
show an increase greater than 50% of the natural long-term average flow. The reservoirs
that show an increase in long-term average appear in dry and arid regions such as the
western United States and Mexico, Spain and Morocco, Sub-Saharan Africa near the Gulf
of Guinea, South Africa and the Middle East. All of these places are known to have low
water availability and high water demands, thus the location of these particularly high im-
pact reservoirs is expected. Over long periods of time, reservoirs must eventually release
the inflow downstream, thus it is expected that this indicator should be on the scale of
reservoir capacity; however, in instances where a large reservoir is only observed for a
short period of time (2-3 years) it is possible to see a larger difference between flows on
a long-term average.
The overall impact of the long-term average is important because large changes in this in-
dicator can lead to changes in the number of fish species that can thrive in a river ecosys-
tem and impacts the amount of ground water that is available for vegetation located in
nearby floodplains; however, these are usually related to an decrease in long-term av-
erage flows. As noted by Döll et al. (2009), increases in this indicator due to reservoir
operations are globally much smaller than impacts from anthropogenic withdrawals.
52
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:63==
4.3.2
Statistical Low Flows (LF)
(a) Distribution of the indicator for impacts to sta-
tistical monthly low flows (Ilf).
(b) Proportion of reservoirs within the set ranges
for Ilf.
The coloring is representative of that
shown within the map in Figure 4.6c
(c) Map of reservoirs and affected downstream river reaches colored by the value Ilf
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
53
==PAGE:64==
The indicator for impacts to statistical monthly low flows describes whether reservoir op-
erations are altering the lowest flows seen in a river over the course of the time period.
Values less than 0% indicate that reservoir operations have lowered statistical low flows,
potentially risking the connectivity of the river or leading to lower water quality. Values
greater than 0% indicate that low flows have been increased due to reservoir operations
and species that rely upon statistically low flows as an ecosystem service may be at risk.
The global impacts of reservoir operations upon low flows is notably greater. The distribu-
tion of the indicator for low flow impacts, shown in Figure 4.6a, is largely centered around
0% , but there is a greater spread around the median with a noticeable shift towards an
increase in low flows. The inner quartile range spans from around 0% to 37% with the
median just under 7%. Thus around half of reservoirs see a little to moderate increase in
low flows, while a quarter experience an increase in low flows that is greater than 37%.
The differences between continental impacts are noticeable. Over half of reservoirs within
North America see little to no impact upon low flows while at least half of all reservoirs
within all other continents see an increase in lows greater than 5%. Africa and South
America show the greatest impacts with 46% and 37% of reservoirs respectively show-
ing an increase in low flows greater than 50%. The areas impacted are similar to those
experiencing larger increases in long-term average. These are areas such as the Rocky
Mountains in western North America, Mexico, Brazil, western and southern Africa, Spain,
the Middle East, India and northeast China. The eastern United States and Canada as
well as Northeast China show a noticeable high density of better performing reservoirs.
These results are consistent with Döll et al. (2009), which found that reservoirs tend to
homogenize flows for hydropower, water supply and flood protection.
54
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:65==
4.3.3
Seasonal Amplitude (SA)
(a) Distribution of the indicator for impacts to
the seasonal variability of long-term average
monthly discharges (Ilf).
(b) Proportion of reservoirs within the set ranges
for Isa.
The coloring is representative of that
shown within the map in Figure 4.7c
(c) Map of reservoirs and affected downstream river reaches colored by the value Isa
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
55
==PAGE:66==
The seasonal amplitude describes the difference between the maximum and minimum
long-term average monthly discharges. It is calculated as a percentage of natural sea-
sonal amplitude and thus ranges from -100% to infinity. A value less than 0% indicates
that the seasonal amplitude of the downstream reach has decreased due to reservoir op-
erations, while a value greater than 0% indicates that reservoir operations increase the
seasonal amplitude.
The bulk of impacts to seasonal amplitudes is shifted towards a decrease in seasonal
amplitudes. As shown in Figure 4.7a, half of reservoirs see a reduction in seasonal am-
plitude from 0% to -12% and a quarter of reservoirs to experience a reduction in ampli-
tudes from around -12% to -75%. The remaining reservoirs see an increase in seasonal
amplitude that ranges from mild to critical. Figure 4.7b, shows that the decreases in
seasonal amplitude occur for a high portion of reservoirs within South America, Europe
and Asia and Africa. As shown in Figure 4.7c, the large portion of reservoirs decreasing
flows within these continents can be found in Brazil, the Iberian Peninsula, western and
southern Africa, Greece, Turkey, India, northeastern China and southeast Asia. A few no-
table places of increase has occurred in the central United States and Canada, northwest
Africa, and Australia. Findings are largely consistent with other studies (Döll et al. 2009).
Decreases in seasonal amplitudes from reservoir operations likely stem from operation
policies designed to reduce peak flows to save water for distribution at other water scare
periods or to manage flood risk. These decreases may affect the habitat availability of
nearby areas such as floodplains.
56
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:67==
4.3.4
Seasonal Regime (SR)
(a) Distribution of the indicator for impacts on the
seasonal flow regime (Isr).
(b) Proportion of reservoirs within the set ranges
for Isr.
The coloring is representative of that
shown within the map in Figure 4.8c
(c) Map of reservoirs and affected downstream river reaches colored by the value Isr
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
57
==PAGE:68==
The seasonal regime considers the average of the absolute differences between typical
monthly flows for all months and describes how closely the natural flow is followed at each
month. Because this indicator uses the absolute differences in flow, decreases and in-
creases in flow are considered equally and the indicator can range from zero to infinity. In
this case, a value closer to 0%, indicates reservoir operations that more closely resemble
the natural seasonal flow regime. This may indicate a run of the river hydropower reser-
voir, or a reservoir used for flood control during extreme rain events. Values approaching
100% indicate an altered seasonal regime that is on the same magnitude as the natural
long-term monthly average discharge. This may occur if the reservoir is used for irrigation
or water supply but maintains a relatively stable operating scheme.
According to Figure 4.8a, half of reservoirs show an alteration of seasonal regime that is
less than 7% of the natural seasonal regime and three quarters show an alteration of less
than 20%. The continental division of reservoirs shown in Figure 4.8b shows that North
America performs well in this regard, with Africa performing the worst. Half of reservoirs
in Africa modify the seasonal regime by more than 50% of the natural regime. The bulk
of reservoirs in the remaining continents fall within the range of 2-25% modification. On a
finer scale, as seen in Figure 4.8c, the majority of impacts can be found within the western
parts of North America, Brazil, Peru, the Iberian Peninsula, west and wouth Africa, the
Middle East, India, northeast China, and Australia. The habitat conditions may be at
risk within these rivers and the flow regime may be incompatible with the life cycle of
the organisms present. Less modification occurs in the eastern United States, central,
northern and eastern Europe and central Asia.
58
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:69==
4.3.5
Temporal Shift (TS)
(a) Distribution of the indicator for impacts on the
timing of maximum flows (Its).
(b) Proportion of reservoirs within the set ranges
for Its.
The coloring is representative of that
shown within the map in Figure 4.9c
(c) Map of reservoirs and affected downstream river reaches colored by the value Its
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
59
==PAGE:70==
The indicator for temporal shifts in peak flows describes if reservoir operations cause peak
flows to occur earlier or later than it would under naturalized conditions. As seen in Figure
4.9a, most reservoirs do not experience a shift in seasonal peaks. For reservoirs that do
see shifts, shifts greater than 1 or 2 months earlier or later are rare. Figure 4.9b shows
that the division between continental effects are relatively similar. Asia, North America and
South America show similar proportions of reservoirs that delay peak flows as those that
push peak flows earlier in the year. Africa, Europe and Oceania show a slightly greater
proportion of reservoirs that delay peak flows. Though on a whole, impacts to temporal
peak flows are relatively low, areas with notable shifts include the western United States,
Mexico, the Iberian Peninsula, the Middle East, west Africa and Australia. The results are
consistent with that of Döll et al. 2009 and in these areas of extreme impacts, the flow
regime may be incompatible with the life cycle of the organisms that are present in the
downstream reaches.
60
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:71==
4.3.6
Interannual Variability (IV)
(a) Distribution of the indicator for impacts on the
interannual variability of flows (Iiv)
.
(b) Proportion of reservoirs within the set ranges
for Iiv.
The coloring is representative of that
shown within the map in Figure 4.10c
(c) Map of reservoirs and affected downstream river reaches colored by the value Itv
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
61
==PAGE:72==
The indicator for interannual variability describes how homogenized or varied a flow has
become due to reservoir operations. Values can range from -12 to 12, with a value of 0
indicating that overall, the interannual variability is not significantly altered. Recall that for
months in which the COV does not change more than 10%, a value of zero is assigned.
Negative values indicate that reservoir operations have decreased the interannual varia-
tion on their respective river reach while a positive value indicates the opposite. Note that
this indicator provides a generalization of the change in variation over the whole yearly flow
regime. It does not provide an indication to the magnitude of these changes. Therefore,
two reservoirs with an Iiv of 3 indicates that overall, there are 3 more months where the
COV increased due to reservoir operations but the magnitude of the increase in COV may
vary between the two reservoirs. A decrease in interannual variability may be expected
for reservoirs in which downstream demands are consistent from year to year, while an
increase in interannual variability may occur if downstream demands are variable from
year to year.
As seen in Figure 4.10a, the indicator for interannual variability suggests that while 25% of
reservoirs saw no change in variability. Figures 4.10b and 4.9c show that these are mainly
concentrated in the eastern United States. Globally, the distribution of the indicator shows
that many reservoirs cause a decrease in interannual variability. This is also shown within
a continental comparison that reveals a higher percentage of reservoirs with a decrease
in interannual variability for all continents except North America. The decrease in interan-
nual variability can be found in the west of North America, Brazil, the Iberian Peninsula,
west and south Africa, the Middle East and China. The results are consistent with Döll
et al. (2009) which finds an increase in interannual variability when including reservoir
operations and anthropogenic withdrawals but finds a decrease in interannual variability
directly downstream of reservoirs with low consumption.
62
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:73==
4.4
Continental comparison of flow regime impacts
The results are now presented in a different in manner to highlight comparisons in impacts
from reservoir operations between continents, indicator and primary use. Figure 4.11
shows a matrix of pie charts for indicators and continents where the absolute value of
the indicator has been taken. Therefore, the impacts of a decrease in an indicator are
taken to be equally harmful as an increase in an indicator. For example, a 50% increase
in seasonal amplitude due to reservoir operations is counted as equal to a 50% decrease
and a shift of the peak flow 2 months early than the natural regime is considered as an
equal impact to a shift 2 months later. Doing so allows the impacts among all indicators
to be compared within a given continent.
Overall, the proportion of reservoirs that have high indicators is greatest within Africa, sug-
gesting that the impacts of reservoir operations here are disproportionate when compared
to other continents. Its worst performing indicator is regarding low flows while the best
performing indicator is within temporal shifts. Asia, Europe, Oceania and South America
often have a similar proportion of reservoirs within each category for all indicators. Eu-
rope has a higher proportion within the worst performing category for seasonal regime
impacts, Oceania performs worse for interannual variation, and South America performs
worse in low flows. The indicator for which Asia has a high proportion of reservoirs in the
worse impact category is low flows. North America by far has the highest proportion of
reservoirs within the lowest impact category for all indicators.
Figure 4.11: Pie chart matrix of the percentage of reservoirs within a given continent that
fall within the indicator categories for each indicator. The first four rows share the same
indicator divisions.
The performance of each continent is likely driven by the distribution of reservoirs within
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
63
==PAGE:74==
each one. Thus of additional interest is how each type of reservoir performs within the 6
indicators of impact. A similar analysis is made for the primary use of reservoirs and is
shown in Figure 4.12. Across all indicators, the worst performing primary reservoir type is
irrigation. The high proportion of poor performing reservoirs within irrigation is consistent
with the expectation that flows are stored during periods of high inflow and released during
periods of low inflow to meet downstream demands. These reservoirs often must store
large quantities of water to meet demands in off seasons. Flood control, hydroelectricity
and water supply reservoirs all seem to have similar proportions of reservoirs within each
impact category. These reservoirs, while still having moderate impacts, perform much
better than irrigation reservoirs. This is likely because their main purpose does not de-
mand such extreme alterations of flow. Water supply reservoirs likely see less extreme
demands for supplying drinking or industrial water to downstream users and flood control
reservoirs likely are operated to prevent large peak flows during heavy rain events. Hy-
dropower dams are likely operated to save enough water to meet energy demands. While
these uses alter the flow, as shown in this study, the impacts seem to be less than with
irrigation reservoirs. Notably well performing reservoirs are recreation reservoirs. The
assumption that these reservoirs likely aim to maintain a similar water elevation and limit
variation aligns with the results of the analysis. This also explains the high proportion of
reservoirs lower impact reservoirs within North America. Almost all recreational reservoirs
are found in North America and the continent also has the highest diversity of reservoirs.
The ’other’ category is not discussed here as there is no documentation on the make up of
this category within the GRanD dataset. It is important to note that these uses presented
are only primary uses, and many of these reservoirs may be operated with other uses and
priorities.
64
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:75==
Figure 4.12: Pie chart matrix of the percentage of reservoirs within a given type that
fall within the indicator categories for each indicator. The first four rows share the same
indicator divisions.
Building off the previous analysis, the worst performing reservoirs across all indicators
were also investigated. These are defined as a reservoir that performs in the worst cate-
gory, marked in red within 4.12 for more than half of the indicators. The divisions of these
186 reservoirs by continent, country and type are shown in 4.13. Even though Asia has a
low proportion of reservoirs within the worst performing categories of most indicators, the
continent has the most reservoirs that perform poorly in at least half of the indicators. It is
followed by Europe and North America. It is important to note that the values presented
here are no longer proportions of reservoirs but actual counts, thus it could be expected
to see a higher representation from these three continents as they have a high total count
compared to the other three continents. Even so, this distinction is important because it
indicates where the worst performing reservoirs are within the dataset as a whole. When
distinguishing these reservoirs by country, many of the locations pointed out within the
spatial analysis as high impact are present. Spain, the United States, China and Brazil
are represented with more than 15 reservoirs. The other worst performing reservoirs
come from Australia, Asia, North America, north and west Africa and the Iberian Penin-
sula. It is important to keep in mind that the analysis here is limited to what was originally
included as a selected reservoir, thus these areas with a higher density and number of
reservoirs are more likely to appear in an analysis such as this. Nevertheless, these areas
are highlighted as areas with high impact reservoirs and warrant extra investigation into
the environmental impacts from high alteration of flow regimes. A final mention is made
of the primary use distribution within the 183 high impact reservoirs. Most reservoirs
within this group are classified as irrigation reservoirs, further confirming the assertion
that irrigation reservoirs are more likely to have a high impact on the flow regime. Of in-
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
65
==PAGE:76==
terest is the second leading type, hydroelectricity. Hydroelectricity represents 40 of the
high impact reservoirs identified here. One possible explanation for the high count is that
these particular reservoirs are operated in a way to meet energy demands which require
significant alteration of stream flow among many indicators. A second explanation is that
these reservoirs are multi-use reservoirs and are also operated to meet a number of other
priorities which influence the flow regime. In either case, further investigation would be
warranted into the impacts of hydropower reservoirs as these are often though to pose
less potential impacts to the flow regime.
(a) Counts of worst performing reservoirs by continent (left) and country (right). Note that only
countries with more than 5 worst performing reservoirs are included for the country counts.
(b) Counts of worst performing reservoirs by primary use
Figure 4.13: Summary of the worst performing reservoirs (Within the worst categories of
at least 1/2 of indicators.)
4.5
Correlation of DOR and indicators of flow regime impact
Finally, the correlation between DOR and the 6 indicators investigated within this study is
presented. DOR has been used often in the past as an indicator of the potential impact
of reservoirs. This is a logical assumption if observed releases and information on the
natural flow regime is not available; however, the results from this study, as shown in
Figure 4.14 indicate that DOR shows little to no correlation with any of the 6 indicators
investigated. The correlation between DOR and the indicators ranges from 0.15 to 0.4.
This indicates that for reservoirs that can hold over one year’s worth of annual inflow,
the DOR shouldn’t be used to distinguish between which reservoirs may have a greater
66
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:77==
impact, as DOR is too simple. This strengthens the case that observing actual reservoir
observations is beneficial for investigating the true impacts of regulation upon natural flow.
Finally, the correlation between the used indicators is also quite low, with the exception
of Ilta, Isr and Isa. Thus as expected the indicators represent different parts of the flow
regime and should be used in combination to fully quantify impacts. No one indicator
stands out as a single proxy for overall impact to flow.
Figure 4.14: Correlation matrix of DOR and the 6 indicators of impact.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
67
==PAGE:78==
68
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:79==
5
Discussion
5.1
Reservoir Selection
There are several considerations that should be made regarding the selection of reser-
voirs for analysis within this thesis. First, the GRanD dataset which is used as the main
reservoir database within this study is primarily designed to include most of the largest
dams in the world and does not include many smaller reservoirs. The appeal of using
the GRanD dataset is the large amount of information provided for each reservoir and
the fact that it allows for the calculation of each reservoir’s DOR. For a global analysis,
the reservoirs within this dataset represent a good starting point for representing and in-
vestigating operations. The data is free and publicly available making its inclusion within
this analysis easier. Additionally, the reservoirs represented within this dataset are well
known and provide services to much of the world’s population. The demands affecting
the regimes downstream of these reservoirs are likely large and are worthy of investiga-
tion. Even so, this inherently limits the analysis to larger reservoirs. It is often assumed
that larger reservoirs have a greater impact on flow regimes. Because of this, smaller
reservoirs have often been excluded from analyses and the extent of their impacts has
not been fully investigated. Smaller reservoirs could have significant impacts upon flow
regime and should be included within future studies.
Additionally, following previous work, the DOR of reservoirs was used as a starting point
to identify reservoirs of interest. The main reasoning behind selecting reservoirs with a
DOR greater than 100% is that these reservoirs can withhold a full year’s flow, and thus
establish an entirely artificial flow regime. This assumption thus disregards reservoirs with
lower DORs. For the reservoirs within this study, the DOR showed little to no correlation
with any indicators of impacts to flow regimes, thus the DOR may not be the most robust
attribute for selecting reservoirs. It is possible that reservoirs with a DOR less than 100%
could significantly alter the natural flow regime. Given that the analysis performed within
this study can easily be extended to a larger number of reservoirs, it is suggested that
further work investigate as many reservoirs as possible regardless of DOR. Doing so
would add to our knowledge of whether reservoirs with low DORs truly have less impact
on the downstream flow regime.
Another consideration is the dependency of satellite coverage for reservoir selection. Se-
lecting reservoirs based on coverage is necessary to be able to calculate storage changes
but can also lead to a bias in the size of reservoirs observed. To acquire usable altimetry
over a reservoir, the satellite ground track must intersect with the water body, thus it is
more likely that satellite ground tracks will cross over the boundaries of larger reservoirs
and is less likely that they intersect with smaller water bodies. This likely leads to an
additional bias towards larger reservoirs than what was already stated regarding the use
of the GRanD dataset. Additionally, because of the selection process, not all reservoirs
on a given river system are guaranteed to be included within the analysis. This means
that while cascade reservoir operations are included for all relevant reservoirs within the
analysis, there are likely many reservoirs not included that may play a significant role in
altering the temporal distribution of flows downriver. Thus, it is possible that not all flow
alterations are accounted for when calculating a given reservoir’s inflow. In this case, the
release estimations of reservoirs further downstream may be incorrect and their impacts
are subject to uncertainty. Though it will not be able to solve all issues with coverage,
the upcoming SWOT mission and future missions will likely increase overall coverage
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
69
==PAGE:80==
of inland water bodies, including smaller reservoirs. In terms of representing reservoir
operations within a GHM, the current selection may include the reservoirs of greatest im-
portance. GHMs are often used to make large scale simulations and make statements on
global or continental scale rather than local. While the inclusion of smaller dams and their
impacts on local communities is certaintly an important one, the resolution and purpose
of including operations within a GHM is likely to focus more on the large scale. Thus,
selecting large reservoirs that hold the largest portions of surface water will ultimately be
the best starting point for inclusion within a global model.
Finally, the current analysis fails to include many recently built reservoirs within the anal-
ysis. While an attempt was made to include newer reservoirs, the use of the FHReD
dataset came with limitations. First, the dataset offered information on planned and un-
der construction reservoirs but offers no guarantees that the reservoirs have been built
by the stated end date of construction. Additionally, the dataset contains its own biases
due to difficulty in finding data in several countries and regions. Finally, the dataset only
covers reservoirs with the primary purpose of hydroelectricity, thus limiting the reservoirs
that would be included within the analysis. While this dataset offered a decent starting
point for identifying new reservoirs, the workflows developed within this thesis can be
extended to identify new reservoirs from more comprehensive datasets. Datasets such
as GOODD, and GDAT include a significant increase in the number of reservoir points
from which to begin searching for new reservoirs, but only include point data and do not
include attribute information such as year built. Even so, the work in this thesis includes
a method for determining maximum extent and permanent water extent boundaries from
the JRC-GSW dataset for monthly historical SWE timeseries extraction and assessment
for altimetry coverage. Altimetry timeseries could then be used to determine the year in
which a reservoir was built, and open the door for the inclusion of newly built reservoirs.
Other works such as Druce et al. 2021, have classified water bodies using surface water
extent time series which would also provide a starting point for updating the inventory
of new reservoirs and their inclusion within a global analysis. Having methods to main-
tain update the global reservoir inventory would present benefits for the performance of a
GHM that uses observation derived volume rules as the performance of the model would
be linked to the representation of reservoirs around the globe. Inventories that include
recently built reservoirs would be an important factor in being able to create dependable
forecasts and recent historical timeseries.
5.2
Altimetry timeseries
There are always errors and uncertainties associated with radar altimetry observations
that stem from processes such as tracking, retracking, land contamination, ice cover etc.
The use of reputable altimetry databases should have limited the inclusion of these errors
as the data is processed and filtered before extraction. Additionally, an effort was made
to inspect Sentinel-3 timeseries for instances in which the tracking range was incorrect
due to major OLTC table updates. In future work, the uncertainties associated with the
generated timeseries should be included within the fitting and volume estimation process.
This aids in enabling uncertainties in storage change and release time series, which has
major implications on flow impact assessments and the inclusion of reservoir operations
within a GHM.
5.3
Surface Water Extent timeseries
The JRC-GSW dataset is created from optical sensors onboard the Landsat missions.
The optical approach means that reservoirs located in extremely cloudy areas such as
70
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:81==
the tropics or closer to the poles may not be observed at all during a given time series
due to seasons where data cannot be gathered. This may lead to less defined fits of the
elevation-area relationship and lower temporal resolution of volume estimates. Addition-
ally, the product can only record open water and may not be able to capture the full surface
water extent of the reservoir at high volumes if the reservoir edges or inundation areas
are heavily vegetated. This limitation could lead to a bias in parameter estimates within
the area-elevation curves as the effect of this process could emulate a reservoir shape
with steep canyon-like walls. This may indeed be one reason for a higher proportion of
fits that had a statistically significant 0 < b < 1.
5.4
Finding representative monthly WSE and SWE values
Most reservoir volume change estimations rely on the empirical fit describing the relation-
ship between area and elevation. When creating this curve, it is assumed that the WSE
and SWE values are representative of the full month and can be treated as corresponding
values. The SWE data is provided as a monthly value, but the mean of any WSE values
within a given month is considered representative for that month. Given that reservoirs
can be dynamic at time scales shorter than a month, it is possible that the elevation val-
ues used for the month do not capture the peak of a reservoir’s dynamics between WSE
observations. This could lead to further uncertainties within the fits and within volume
storage change estimations. It is assumed however, that given enough observations,
the true relationship can be determined. Future work could instead pair individual sur-
face water extent observations with temporally nearby altimetry observations to build the
area-elevation relationship. Additionally, data from SWOT will be able to provide both
SWE and WSE observations simultaneously, removing the discrepancy between SWE
and WSE when creating fits. Doing so would not only allow for a better assessment of the
area-elevation relationship, but would also open the door for resolving mass balances at
shorter time scales.
5.5
Curve fitting
Confidence intervals were created within the fitting process, but prediction intervals were
not. Future work should be sure to include the upper and lower prediction interval bounds
when creating volume estimation curves. As of now, one value is given as the estimated
volume, but a prediction interval would allow for a range of volume estimations and re-
leases, thus adding more information about the confidence in each reservoir’s target vol-
ume and releases. This information could better inform an analysis of impacts upon flow
regime and lead to more robust results. In terms of integration of target volumes within a
GHM, the prediction intervals would provide more information on the confidence of inte-
grated release decisions within the model.
5.6
DHI-GHM as natural unregulated flow
Another consideration is the assumption that the DHI-GHM can fully represent the natural
and unregulated flow. The DHI-GHM is itself a model and is subject to error, thus the
results within this study are subject to the same error. The DHI-GHM is known to per-
form worse in dry, arid regions such as Africa, Australia and the western United States.
This is thought to be mainly due to high levels of regulation and water withdrawals within
these areas which disrupt the natural flow. While this thesis attempts to account for reser-
voir operations, it relies on the irrigation withdrawal and evaporation calculations within
the DHI-GHM. The DHI-GHM only accounts for irrigation withdrawals and could benefit
from including other withdrawals. Figures detailing more information on where the model
performs well are presented within Appendix ??
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
71
==PAGE:82==
Furthermore, the DHI-GHM uses a kinematic routing scheme while the mass balance
scheme within the thesis assumes instantaneous flow for whole month periods. This could
lead to discrepancies between when the flow alterations are distributed within the mass
balance scheme and when the corresponding DHI-GHM flow reaches the downstream
reservoir, particularly between reservoirs located far apart from each other. Though there
may be differences, they are likely to be small when compared to other sources of error,
due to the monthly time scale of the analysis. Any discrepancies are likely small when
compared to the full month of aggregated volume.
Another consideration is the assumption that the reservoir inflow is equal to the entire
basin runoff of the HydroBASINS Level 12 basin in which it is located. While this could lead
to an overestimation of inflow, if the reservoir is located further upriver within the basin,
the volume relative to that passing through the basin is likely quite small. Additionally, if
the inflow volume is overestimated from this assumption, the flow will be passed along the
river within the mass balance scheme and the comparison between regulated and natural
flow will be unaffected.
5.7
Evaporation within mass balance scheme
The exclusion of evaporation within the mass balance scheme is a large limitation of this
study. Evaporation from reservoirs is significant and can play a major role in reservoir
dynamics, especially in dry and arid regions. While evaporation is accounted for to some
degree within the DHI-GHM, it is not necessarily removed at the reservoir outflow itself.
Additionally the loss is constant for reservoirs greater than 10km2. For dynamic lakes
with large changes in surface area, it could be important to incorporate a dynamic mass
balance loss term to account for water losses due to reservoir dynamics. Because the
current analysis neglects evaporation losses, release estimates are likely overestimated
downstream, thus impacting the analysis of impacts to flow regime. Future work should
investigate the best way to include evaporation within the analysis. The inclusion of evap-
oration is more likely an easier task when integrating reservoir operations within the GHM
as evaporation losses depend on local meteorological variables that are considered within
the model.
5.8
Satellite coverage for individual reservoirs affects the
temporal resolution of results downriver
Given the setup of cascade reservoirs within the mass balance scheme, the resolution
of reservoir release estimates is dependent upon the resolution of releases upstream. In
other words, an observation from a given reservoir and each reservoir upstream is needed
to determine the release of the reservoir for that month. This can lead to release estimates
that are distributed over multiple months limiting the ability to analyze the statistical flows of
some reservoirs. For example, if a reservoir’s release must be distributed over a 4-month
period due to lack of coverage from a single reservoir upstream, the peak flows could be
missed, affecting the indicators of seasonal amplitude and temporal shifts. The temporal
misalignment of satellite observations across reservoirs within the same river system is a
challenge that should be investigated when integrating reservoir releases within a GHM
as it would be important to have a complete and trustworthy target volume curve to make
reservoir release decisions.
5.9
Use of indicators for determining impact on flow regime
A final limitation highlighted here is the choice in impact indicators. The indicators are
best understood when there is enough data to determine the natural flow regime. The
72
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:83==
flow regime can vary over the course of many years and Richter et al. (1997) suggests
having at least 20 years of natural flow data to set proper targets. Some reservoirs do
not have satellite coverage until the start of the Sentinel-3B mission, meaning that in
some cases there are only 1-4 years of observations. This short period occasionally
occurs if the OLTC table updates were not correct at an early stage of the mission. Thus,
this study should be considered as highlighting the differences in flow over the course
of the observation period, rather than a definitive statement on a complete alteration of
flow regime. Over time, more data and observations can lead to better estimates on the
impacts and deviations from a statistically varying natural flow regime.
5.10
Application to future Hydrological Models and benefit of
target curves
This study highlights the potential of representing reservoir operations within a GHM. The
target volume curves generated for the reservoirs within this study can be used to include
reservoir operations under the standard operating procedure. Including operations would
lead to a clear improvement upon the comparison of DHI-GHM flows to observed stream
flows within heavily managed river basins such as the Colorado river basin. In fact, many
of the regions showing high impacts to flow regime correspond with regions highlighted as
having poor performance within the GHM. Examples, shown in Appendix A.3 include the
Rocky Mountain region in the western United States and Canada, western South Amer-
ica, the Iberian Peninsula, west Africa, south Africa and western Australia. Integration of
reservoir operations, particularly in these highly regulated and dry areas, would help prop-
erly account for mass balances by accounting for both anthropogentic flow alterations and
losses due to evaporation. The inclusion of dynamic reservoir surface water extents could
in return be used to help improve the existing evaporation scheme within the GHM. Im-
proved reservoir releases can then be included within the kinematic routing portion of the
GHM, making it easier to track flow alterations for downstream reservoirs and improving
the GHM estimates. A hard coupling of the GHM with the satellite derived reservoir mass
balance scheme presented here would benefit both the current mass balance scheme
and the GHM itself. Ultimately the inclusion of reservoir operations would help the DHI-
GHM better model the terrestrial water cycle by including natural flow and anthropogenic
impacts to these flows. The model would then be able provide more realistic information
for water management and planning, studies of anthropogenic impacts, and can lead to
improved flood forecasting.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
73
==PAGE:84==
74
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:85==
6
Conclusion
This study leveraged satellite earth obsevations in conjunction with a global hydrological
model to calculate reservoir releases and their associated impacts upon the natural flow
regime for reservoirs around the world. The study investigated the following:
1. Is there enough satellite data to observe reservoir operations around the globe?
2. What is the global impact of reservoir operations upon the natural flow regime of the
rivers on which they are located?
3. How can reservoir release estimates from satellite observations be integrated into
an existing global hydrological model?
It was found that volume and release estimates could be found at an acceptable distribu-
tion around the world for 618 reservoirs. 5 of these reservoirs are recently built reservoirs
and a method was developed that can increase the number of recently built reservoirs
within a future analysis. The results are largely consistent with previous global studies.
For the reservoirs included, little to no impacts were found for long-term average flows
(Ilta) and timing of peak flows (Its). A noticeable global decrease was observed in sea-
sonal amplitudes (Isa) and inter-annual variability (Iiv). A global increase was observed in
statistical low flows (Ilf) and moderate impacts were observed in seasonal regimes (Isr).
On a continental scale, Africa has the greatest proportion of reservoirs that fall within the
worst performing category of all indicators. North America has the highest proportion of
reservoirs that fall within the best performing category of all indicators. This is likely due to
a North America having a large diversity in the primary types listed for reservoirs. Reser-
voirs that perform poorly in over half of the indicators assessed are located in dry, arid
regions. These regions are similar to regions that perform poorly in the DHI-GHM due
to high anthropogenic withdrawals and regulation. In terms of impacts by primary use,
irrigation reservoirs generally have higher impacts to flow regimes, driven by the need
to alter many aspects of the flow to meet downstream agricultural demands during peak
agricultural production seasons. Hydropower reservoirs showed a larger impact than ex-
pected and a further investigation could be made into whether this stems from objectives
related to hydroelectricity or from other purposes.
It was found that the degree of regulation is not a good indicator for estimating the impacts
to flow regimes by reservoir operations. Operations can be observed with earth obser-
vations and can be incorporated within a global hydrological model to both improve the
hydrological model and to gain a better understanding of the impacts of reservoirs on flow
regimes. Target volume curves and reservoir summaries were generated for each reser-
voir to demonstrate the potential of incorporating observations within a global hydrological
model.
Future work should focus on including more reservoirs from known datasets and introduc-
ing more recently built reservoirs into the analysis, propagating uncertainties and errors
through the workflow to produce uncertainties in the target volume curves, and including
evaporation and local precipitation within the mass balance scheme. Doing so would fur-
ther the ability of representing satellite derived reservoir operation rules within a global
hydrological model and lead to a better understanding and representation of the global
hydrological system.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
75
==PAGE:86==
76
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
Abdalla, Saleh et al. (July 2021). “Altimetry for the future: Building on 25 years of progress”.
In: Advances in Space Research 68 (2), pp. 319–363. ISSN: 18791948. DOI: 10.1016/
j.asr.2021.01.022.
Alcamo, Joseph et al. (2003). “Development and testing of the WaterGAP 2 global model
of water use and availability”. In: Hydrological Sciences Journal 48 (3), pp. 317–337.
ISSN: 02626667. DOI: 10.1623/hysj.48.3.317.45290.
Allan, J. David, María Castillo Uzcanga, and Krista Capps (Jan. 2021). “Stream Ecology,
Structure and Function of Running Waters”. In: DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-61286-3.
Arheimer, B. et al. (2020). “Global catchment modelling using World-Wide HYPE (WWH),
open data, and stepwise parameter estimation”. In: Hydrology and Earth System Sci-
ences 24.2, pp. 535–559. DOI: 10.5194/hess-24-535-2020. URL: https://hess.copernicus.
org/articles/24/535/2020/.
Balian, E. V. et al. (2008). “The Freshwater Animal Diversity Assessment: An overview of
the results”. In: Hydrobiologia 595 (1), pp. 627–637. ISSN: 15735117. DOI: 10.1007/
s10750-007-9246-3.
Biemans, H. et al. (2011). “Impact of reservoirs on river discharge and irrigation water
supply during the 20th century”. In: Water Resources Research 47 (3). ISSN: 00431397.
DOI: 10.1029/2009WR008929.
Black, A.R. et al. (2005). “DHRAM: a method for classifying river flow regime alterations for
the EC Water Framework Directive”. In: Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater
Ecosystems 15.5, pp. 427–446. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.707. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/aqc.707. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/aqc.707.
Bonnema, Matthew and Faisal Hossain (May 2017). “Inferring reservoir operating pat-
terns across the Mekong Basin using only space observations”. In: Water Resources
Research 53 (5), pp. 3791–3810. ISSN: 19447973. DOI: 10.1002/2016WR019978.
Bonnema, Matthew, Safat Sikder, et al. (May 2016). “Understanding satellite-based monthly-
to-seasonal reservoir outflow estimation as a function of hydrologic controls”. In: Water
Resources Research 52 (5), pp. 4095–4115. ISSN: 19447973. DOI: 10.1002/2015WR017830.
Boretti, Alberto and Lorenzo Rosa (Dec. 2019). “Reassessing the projections of the World
Water Development Report”. In: npj Clean Water 2 (1). ISSN: 20597037. DOI: 10.1038/
s41545-019-0039-9.
Bosch, Wolfgang, Denise Dettmering, and Christian Schwatke (2014). “Multi-Mission Cross-
Calibration of Satellite Altimeters: Constructing a Long-Term Data Record for Global and
Regional Sea Level Change Studies”. In: Remote Sensing 6.3, pp. 2255–2281. ISSN:
2072-4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs6032255. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/6/3/2255.
Brisco, Brian (2015). 6 Mapping and Monitoring Surface Water and Wetlands with Syn-
thetic Aperture Radar. URL: http://www.radartutorial.eu/20.airborne/ab07.en.html;.
Burek, Peter et al. (2016). Water Futures and Solution Fast Track Initiative-Final Report.
URL: www.iiasa.ac.at.
Caissie, D. (Aug. 2006). “The thermal regime of rivers: A review”. In: Freshwater Biology
51 (8), pp. 1389–1406. ISSN: 00465070. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2427.2006.01597.x.
Caretta, M A et al. (2022). Water. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vul-
nerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, pp. 551–712. DOI: 10.1017/9781009325844.
006.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
77
==PAGE:88==
Chandesris, Andr et al. (Nov. 2019). “Small dams alter thermal regimes of downstream
water”. In: Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 23 (11), pp. 4509–4525. ISSN: 16077938.
DOI: 10.5194/hess-23-4509-2019.
Coe, Michael T (Feb. 2000). “Modeling Terrestrial Hydrological Systems at the Continen-
tal Scale: Testing the Accuracy of an Atmospheric GCM”. In: Journal of Climate 13,
pp. 686–704.
Cretaux, J. F. et al. (May 2011). “SOLS: A lake database to monitor in the Near Real Time
water level and storage variations from remote sensing data”. In: Advances in Space
Research 47 (9), pp. 1497–1507. ISSN: 02731177. DOI: 10.1016/j.asr.2011.01.004.
Cretaux, Jean François and Charon Birkett (Nov. 2006). “Lake studies from satellite radar
altimetry”. In: Comptes Rendus - Geoscience 338 (14-15), pp. 1098–1112. ISSN: 16310713.
DOI: 10.1016/j.crte.2006.08.002.
Dallaire, Camille Ouellet et al. (Jan. 2019). “A multidisciplinary framework to derive global
river reach classifications at high spatial resolution”. In: Environmental Research Letters
14.2, p. 024003. DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/aad8e9. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/
1748-9326/aad8e9.
Décamps, Henri and Robert J Naiman (1997). THE ECOLOGY OF INTERFACES: Ripar-
ian Zones, pp. 621–58.
Döll, P, K Fiedler, and J Zhang (2009). Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Global-scale
analysis of river flow alterations due to water withdrawals and reservoirs, pp. 2413–
2432. URL: www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/13/2413/2009/.
Döll, Petra, Frank Kaspar, and Bernhard Lehner (2003). “A global hydrological model
for deriving water availability indicators: model tuning and validation”. In: Journal of
Hydrology 270, pp. 105–134. URL: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhydrol.
Druce, Daniel et al. (2021). “An Optical and SAR Based Fusion Approach for Mapping
Surface Water Dynamics over Mainland China”. In: Remote Sensing 13.9. ISSN: 2072-
4292. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/13/9/1663.
Dudgeon, David et al. (2005). “Freshwater biodiversity - importance, threats, status and
conservation challenges”. In: Biology Review 81, pp. 163–182.
Dynesius, Mats and Christer Nilsson (1994). Fragmentation and Flow Regulation of River
Systems in the Northern Third the World Fragmentation and Flow Regulation of River
Systems in the Northern Third of the World, pp. 753–762.
Efron, B. (1979). “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife”. In: The Annals of
Statistics 7.1, pp. 1–26. ISSN: 00905364. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2958830
(visited on 07/23/2023).
ESA (n.d.). User Guides - Sentinel-3 Altimetry - OLTC - Sentinel Online - Sentinel Online.
URL: https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/user- guides/sentinel- 3- altimetry/
overview/oltc.
Frederikse, Thomas et al. (Aug. 2020). “The causes of sea-level rise since 1900”. In:
Nature 584 (7821), pp. 393–397. ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2591-3.
Gorelick, Noel et al. (2017). “Google Earth Engine: Planetary-scale geospatial analysis
for everyone”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 202. Big Remotely Sensed Data:
tools, applications and experiences, pp. 18–27. ISSN: 0034-4257. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.06.031. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0034425717302900.
GRDC Data Portal (n.d.). URL: https://portal.grdc.bafg.de/applications/public.html?
publicuser=PublicUser#dataDownload/StationCatalogue.
Grill, G. et al. (May 2019). “Mapping the world’s free-flowing rivers”. In: Nature 569 (7755),
pp. 215–221. ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1111-9.
78
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:89==
Haddeland, Ingjerd, Thomas Skaugen, and Dennis P. Lettenmaier (Apr. 2006). “Anthro-
pogenic impacts on continental surface water fluxes”. In: Geophysical Research Letters
33 (8). ISSN: 00948276. DOI: 10.1029/2006GL026047.
Han, Zhongying et al. (Sept. 2020). “Improving Reservoir Outflow Estimation for Un-
gauged Basins Using Satellite Observations and a Hydrological Model”. In: Water Re-
sources Research 56 (9). ISSN: 19447973. DOI: 10.1029/2020WR027590.
Hanasaki, Naota, Shinjiro Kanae, and Taikan Oki (July 2006). “A reservoir operation scheme
for global river routing models”. In: Journal of Hydrology 327 (1-2), pp. 22–41. ISSN:
00221694. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2005.11.011.
Hannah, David M. et al. (Mar. 2011). “Large-scale river flow archives: Importance, cur-
rent status and future needs”. In: Hydrological Processes 25 (7), pp. 1191–1200. ISSN:
08856087. DOI: 10.1002/hyp.7794.
Huang, Chang et al. (June 2018). “Detecting, Extracting, and Monitoring Surface Wa-
ter From Space Using Optical Sensors: A Review”. In: Reviews of Geophysics 56 (2),
pp. 333–360. ISSN: 19449208. DOI: 10.1029/2018RG000598.
Huang, Zhongwei et al. (Apr. 2018). “Reconstruction of global gridded monthly sectoral
water withdrawals for 1971-2010 and analysis of their spatiotemporal patterns”. In: Hy-
drology and Earth System Sciences 22 (4), pp. 2117–2133. ISSN: 16077938. DOI:
10.5194/hess-22-2117-2018.
ICOLD (2023). General Synthesis. URL: https://www.icold-cigb.org/article/GB/world_
register/general_synthesis/general-synthesis.
Lehner, Bernhard and Günther Grill (2013). “Global river hydrography and network rout-
ing: baseline data and new approaches to study the world’s large river systems”. In:
Hydrological Processes 27.15, pp. 2171–2186. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.9740.
eprint: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / hyp . 9740. URL: https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/hyp.9740.
Lehner, Bernhard, Catherine Reidy Liermann, et al. (Nov. 2011). “High-resolution mapping
of the world’s reservoirs and dams for sustainable river-flow management”. In: Frontiers
in Ecology and the Environment 9 (9), pp. 494–502. ISSN: 15409295. DOI: 10.1890/
100125.
Leopold, L.B., M.G. Wolman, and J.P. Miller (1995). Fluvial Processes in Geomorphology.
Dover books on earth sciences. Dover Publications. ISBN: 9780486685885. URL: https:
//books.google.dk/books?id=BLkGyV8RhaYC.
Leys, Christophe et al. (July 2013). “Detecting outliers: Do not use standard deviation
around the mean, use absolute deviation around the median”. In: Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology 49 (4), pp. 764–766. ISSN: 00221031. DOI: 10.1016/j.jesp.
2013.03.013.
Loucks, Daniel P and Eelco Van Beek (2017). Water Resource Systems Planning and
Management An Introduction to Methods, Models, and Applications. Springer Nature,
pp. 81–87. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-44234-1.
McCracken, Melissa and Aaron T. Wolf (2019). “Updating the Register of International
River Basins of the world”. In: International Journal of Water Resources Development
35.5, pp. 732–782. DOI: 10.1080/07900627.2019.1572497. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1080/07900627.2019.1572497. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2019.1572497.
McMahon, T. A. et al. (2013). “Estimating actual, potential, reference crop and pan evap-
oration using standard meteorological data: A pragmatic synthesis”. In: Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences 17 (4), pp. 1331–1363. ISSN: 10275606. DOI: 10.5194/hess-
17-1331-2013.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
79
==PAGE:90==
Meigh, J R, A A Mckenzie, and K J Sene (1999). “A Grid-Based Approach to Water
Scarcity Estimates for Eastern and Southern Africa”. In: Water Resources Management
13, pp. 85–115.
Men, Baohui et al. (2019). “Reservoir Operation Policy based on Joint Hedging Rules”.
In: Water 11.3. ISSN: 2073-4441. DOI: 10.3390/w11030419. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/2073-4441/11/3/419.
Messager, Mathis Loïc et al. (Dec. 2016). “Estimating the volume and age of water stored
in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach”. In: Nature Communications 7. ISSN:
20411723. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13603.
Mulligan, Mark, Arnout van Soesbergen, and Leonardo Sáenz (Dec. 2020). “GOODD,
a global dataset of more than 38,000 georeferenced dams”. In: Scientific Data 7 (1).
ISSN: 20524463. DOI: 10.1038/s41597-020-0362-5.
Murray, Alexandra M. et al. (May 2023). “DHI-GHM: Real-time and forecasted hydrology
for the entire planet”. In: Journal of Hydrology 620. ISSN: 00221694. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jhydrol.2023.129431.
NASA Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (n.d.). URL: https://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/
dataprod.htm.
Nielsen, Karina et al. (2015). “Validation of CryoSat-2 SAR mode based lake levels”. In:
Remote Sensing of Environment 171, pp. 162–170. ISSN: 0034-4257. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2015.10.023. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0034425715301759.
Nilsson, Christer et al. (2005). Fragmentation and Flow Regulation of the World’s Large
River Systems. URL: www.sciencemag.orgSCIENCEVOL30815APRIL2005.
Ouellet Dallaire, Camille, Bernhard Lehner, and Irena Creed (2020). “Multidisciplinary
classification of Canadian river reaches to support the sustainable management of
freshwater systems”. In: Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 77.2,
pp. 326–341. DOI: 10.1139/cjfas- 2018- 0284. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-
2018-0284. URL: https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2018-0284.
Pekel, Jean François et al. (Dec. 2016). “High-resolution mapping of global surface water
and its long-term changes”. In: Nature 540 (7633), pp. 418–422. ISSN: 14764687. DOI:
10.1038/nature20584.
Poff, N. Leroy and Julie K.H. Zimmerman (Jan. 2010). “Ecological responses to altered
flow regimes: A literature review to inform the science and management of environmen-
tal flows”. In: Freshwater Biology 55 (1), pp. 194–205. ISSN: 00465070. DOI: 10.1111/
j.1365-2427.2009.02272.x.
Poff, N. LeRoy et al. (1997). “The Natural Flow Regime”. In: BioScience 47.11, pp. 769–
784. ISSN: 00063568, 15253244. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1313099 (visited
on 07/18/2023).
Richter, Brian D. et al. (1997). “How much water does a river need?” In: Freshwater Biology
37 (1), pp. 231–249. ISSN: 00465070. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2427.1997.00153.x.
Schwatke, C. et al. (Oct. 2015). “DAHITI - An innovative approach for estimating water
level time series over inland waters using multi-mission satellite altimetry”. In: Hydrology
and Earth System Sciences 19 (10), pp. 4345–4364. ISSN: 16077938. DOI: 10.5194/
hess-19-4345-2015.
Shen, Youjiang et al. (Feb. 2022). “Estimating Reservoir Release Using Multi￿Source
Satellite Datasets and Hydrological Modeling Techniques”. In: Remote Sensing 14 (4).
ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs14040815.
Silva, Joecila Santos da et al. (Oct. 2010). “Water levels in the Amazon basin derived from
the ERS 2 and ENVISAT radar altimetry missions”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment
114 (10), pp. 2160–2181. ISSN: 00344257. DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.2010.04.020.
80
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:91==
Thielen, J. et al. (Nov. 2012). “The Global Flood Awareness System (GloFAS)”. In: ISBN:
978-0-415-62144-1. DOI: 10.1201/b13715-225.
Tian, Wei et al. (Apr. 2022). “Estimation of global reservoir evaporation losses”. In: Journal
of Hydrology 607. ISSN: 00221694. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2022.127524.
Tonkin, Jonathan D. et al. (Jan. 2018). “Flow regime alteration degrades ecological net-
works in riparian ecosystems”. In: Nature Ecology and Evolution 2 (1), pp. 86–93. ISSN:
2397334X. DOI: 10.1038/s41559-017-0379-0.
Tøttrup, Christian et al. (May 2022). “Surface Water Dynamics from Space: A Round Robin
Intercomparison of Using Optical and SAR High-Resolution Satellite Observations for
Regional Surface Water Detection”. In: Remote Sensing 14 (10). ISSN: 20724292. DOI:
10.3390/rs14102410.
Townshend, John et al. (1999). “MODIS Enhanced Land Cover and Land Cover Change
Product Algorithm Theoretical Basis Documents (ATBD) Version 2.0 MODIS Enhanced
Land Cover and Land Cover Change Principal Investigator”. In:
Turner, Sean W. D., Kenji Doering, and Nathalie Voisin (2020). “Data-Driven Reservoir
Simulation in a Large-Scale Hydrological and Water Resource Model”. In: Water Re-
sources Research 56.10. e2020WR027902 2020WR027902, e2020WR027902. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020WR027902. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/2020WR027902. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1029/2020WR027902.
UNICEF (2023). Water scarcity | UNICEF. URL: https://www.unicef.org/wash/water-
scarcity.
USGS (2023). Freshwater (Lakes and Rivers) and the Water Cycle | U.S. Geological
Survey. URL: https : / / www . usgs . gov / special - topics / water - science - school / science /
freshwater-lakes-and-rivers-and-water-cycle.
Vörösmarty, C. et al. (2001). “Global water data: A newly endangered species”. In: Eos
82 (5). ISSN: 23249250. DOI: 10.1029/01EO00031.
Vörösmarty, Charles J et al. (1997). The Storage and Aging of Continental Runoff in Large
Reservoir Systems of the World, pp. 210–219.
Wang, Jida et al. (Apr. 2022). “GeoDAR: georeferenced global dams and reservoirs dataset
for bridging attributes and geolocations”. In: Earth System Science Data 14 (4), pp. 1869–
1899. ISSN: 18663516. DOI: 10.5194/essd-14-1869-2022.
UN-Water, World Water Assessment Programme, and Unesco. (2021). Valuing water. The
United Nations World Water Development Report 2021, p. 187. ISBN: 9789231004346.
Whitehead, P. G. et al. (2008). “Modelling of hydrology and potential population levels at
Bronze Age Jawa, Northern Jordan a Monte Carlo approach to cope with uncertainty”.
In: Journal of Archaeological Science 35 (3), pp. 517–529. ISSN: 10959238. DOI: 10.
1016/j.jas.2007.05.001.
Yoon, Yeosang and Edward Beighley (Apr. 2015). “Simulating streamflow on regulated
rivers using characteristic reservoir storage patterns derived from synthetic remote
sensing data”. In: Hydrological Processes 29 (8), pp. 2014–2026. ISSN: 10991085.
DOI: 10.1002/hyp.10342.
Yoon, Yeosang, Edward Beighley, et al. (Apr. 2016). “Estimating Flood Discharges in
Reservoir-Regulated River Basins by Integrating Synthetic SWOT Satellite Observa-
tions and Hydrologic Modeling”. In: Journal of Hydrologic Engineering 21 (4). ISSN:
1084-0699. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)he.1943-5584.0001320.
Zarfl, Christiane et al. (Jan. 2015). “A global boom in hydropower dam construction”. In:
Aquatic Sciences 77 (1), pp. 161–170. ISSN: 14209055. DOI: 10.1007/s00027- 014-
0377-0.
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
81
==PAGE:92==
Zhang, Alice Tianbo and Vincent Xinyi Gu (Dec. 2023). “Global Dam Tracker: A database
of more than 35000 dams with location, catchment, and attribute information”. In: Sci-
entific Data 10 (1). ISSN: 20524463. DOI: 10.1038/s41597-023-02008-2.
Zhang, Xingxing, Liguang Jiang, Cécile M.M. Kittel, et al. (Sept. 2020). “On the Perfor-
mance of Sentinel-3 Altimetry Over New Reservoirs: Approaches to Determine On-
board A Priori Elevation”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 47 (17). ISSN: 19448007.
DOI: 10.1029/2020GL088770.
Zhang, Xingxing, Liguang Jiang, Zhaofei Liu, et al. (Mar. 2023). “Flow regime changes
in the Lancang River, revealed by integrated modeling with multiple Earth observation
datasets”. In: Science of the Total Environment 862. ISSN: 18791026. DOI: 10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2022.160656.
Zhao, Gang et al. (Dec. 2022). “Evaporative water loss of 1.42 million global lakes”. In:
Nature Communications 13 (1). ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-31125-6.
Zhou, Tian, Bart Nijssen, and Dennis P Lettenmaier (2016). “The Contribution of Reser-
voirs to Global Land Surface Water Storage Variations*”. In: DOI: 10.1175/JHM-D-15.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JHM-D-15-.
82
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:93==
A
Appendix
A.1
Example Reservoir Summaries
A.1.1
Summary of irrigation reservoir
Reservoir Name: Sirikit
Dam Name:         Sirikit
Location:              Uttaradit, Thailand
Main Use:            Irrigation
DOR:                   105%
Network ID: 213
Reservoir ID: GRAND_5140
Long-term average (Ilta) : 1.0%
Statistical Low Flows (Ilf) : 20.7%
Seasonal Amplitudes (Isa) : -30.8%
Seasonal Regime (Isr) : 16.5%
Temporal Shift (Its) : 0.0 Months
Inter-annual Variability (Iiv) : -2.0 Months
Reservoir
SWE Boundary
Other Reservoirs
River System
River System Location
100.50100.75
lon
17.75
18.00
18.25
lat
99 100101
lon
14
16
lat
100
0
100
lon
50
0
50
lat
1999
2004
2009
2014
0
2000
Inflow [MCM/day]
Time Series Overview
1999
2004
2009
2014
150
200
250
SWE [km2]
1999
2004
2009
2014
140
160
WSE [m]
1999
2004
2009
2014
0
1000
Volume [MCM]
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
83
==PAGE:94==
Corresponding SWE and WSE points: 44
Removed with initial: 0
Removed with bootstrapping: 0
Readded to prevent data loss: 0
Used in fit: 44
GRAND_5140
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
WSE (m)
150
200
250
300
SWE (km2)
Outlier Summary
WSE bounds
SWE bounds
Valid Bootsrapping Region
General outliers
Bootsrapped outliers
Used points
0e+00
5e+07
1e+08
2e+08
0
100
200
300
400
500
A Samples
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
10
20
30
40
B Samples
-2e+08
-1e+08
-5e+07
0e+00
0
100
200
300
400
500
C Samples
Median
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Parameter Estimates:
A: 6.73 ± 3.45, (pval = 0.000000)
B: 0.81 ± 0.13, (pval = 0.000000)
C: -5326.11 ± 9.06, (pval = 0.000332)
Transformation values:
min(SWE):  152.24 [km2]
min(WSE):   132.22 [m]
Fitted Function:
SWE = a (WSE
min(WSE))b + c + min(SWE)
SWE = 6.73 (WSE
132.22)b +
5173.87
r2 = 0.887
Fit: power_law
135
140
145
150
155
160
WSE (m)
150
200
250
300
SWE (km2)
Final fit
95% Confidence Interval
Used points
Fit
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
(km2)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Count
Histogram of residuals
Mean=2.62
Std.=10.32
160
180
200
220
240
260
Predicted SWE (km2)
160
180
200
220
240
260
Observed SWE (km2)
84
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:95==
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
0
500
1000
1500
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Observed Volume
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
0
1000
2000
3000
Volume [MCM]
natural_volume_in
volume_in_adjusted
upstream_alterations
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
1000
2000
3000
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Negative Estimates
Volume In
Volume In (Distributed)
Volume Released (Distributed)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
500
1000
1500
Volume [MCM]
Observed Volume
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of unobserved months
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
1000
2000
Volume [MCM]
Mean Volume In
90% CI
Mean Volume Released
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of months with invalid estimates
Network id: 213, Reservoir id: GRAND_5140
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
85
==PAGE:96==
A.1.2
Summary of hydroelectricity reservoir
Reservoir Name: nan
Dam Name:         Temengor
Location:              Perak, Malaysia
Main Use:            Hydroelectricity
DOR:                   135%
Network ID: 369
Reservoir ID: GRAND_5172
Long-term average (Ilta) : 0.1%
Statistical Low Flows (Ilf) : 5.6%
Seasonal Amplitudes (Isa) : -4.2%
Seasonal Regime (Isr) : 1.4%
Temporal Shift (Its) : 0.0 Months
Inter-annual Variability (Iiv) : 0.0 Months
Reservoir
SWE Boundary
Other Reservoirs
River System
River System Location
101.3
101.4
lon
5.25
5.50
5.75
lat
101.00
101.25
lon
4
5
lat
100
0
100
lon
50
0
50
lat
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
500
1000
Inflow [MCM/day]
Time Series Overview
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
120
140
SWE [km2]
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
240
245
WSE [m]
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
50
Volume [MCM]
86
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:97==
Corresponding SWE and WSE points: 25
Removed with initial: 0
Removed with bootstrapping: 1
Readded to prevent data loss: 0
Used in fit: 24
GRAND_5172
236
238
240
242
244
246
248
WSE (m)
110
120
130
140
150
SWE (km2)
Outlier Summary
WSE bounds
SWE bounds
Valid Bootsrapping Region
General outliers
Bootsrapped outliers
Used points
0e+00
2e+07
4e+07
6e+07
0
100
200
300
400
A Samples
0
5
10
15
20
0
50
100
150
B Samples
-6e+07
-4e+07
-2e+07
0e+00
0
100
200
300
400
C Samples
Median
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Parameter Estimates:
A: 1.35 ± 0.52, (pval = 0.000000)
B: 4565.13 ± 2.05, (pval = 0.000000)
Transformation values:
min(SWE):  123.66 [km2]
min(WSE):   238.16 [m]
Fitted Function:
SWE = a (WSE
min(WSE)) + b + min(SWE)
SWE = 1.35 (WSE
238.16) + 4688.79
r2 = 0.231
Fit: linear
238
240
242
244
246
WSE (m)
125
130
135
140
SWE (km2)
Final fit
95% Confidence Interval
Used points
Fit
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
(km2)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Count
Histogram of residuals
Mean=-0.00
Std.=4.73
125
128
130
132
135
138
140
Predicted SWE (km2)
125
130
135
140
Observed SWE (km2)
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
87
==PAGE:98==
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
20
40
60
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Observed Volume
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
250
500
750
1000
Volume [MCM]
natural_volume_in
volume_in_adjusted
upstream_alterations
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
250
500
750
1000
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Volume In
Volume In (Distributed)
Volume Released (Distributed)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
20
40
60
Volume [MCM]
Observed Volume
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of unobserved months
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
200
400
600
800
1000
Volume [MCM]
Mean Volume In
90% CI
Mean Volume Released
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of months with invalid estimates
Network id: 369, Reservoir id: GRAND_5172
88
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:99==
A.1.3
Summary of water supply reservoir
Reservoir Name: nan
Dam Name:         Rocklands
Location:              Victoria, Australia
Main Use:            Water supply
DOR:                   235%
Network ID: 403
Reservoir ID: GRAND_6654
Long-term average (Ilta) : -2.4%
Statistical Low Flows (Ilf) : -18.1%
Seasonal Amplitudes (Isa) : 20.6%
Seasonal Regime (Isr) : 12.1%
Temporal Shift (Its) : 2.0 Months
Inter-annual Variability (Iiv) : -1.0 Months
Reservoir
SWE Boundary
Other Reservoirs
River System
River System Location
142.0
142.1
lon
37.3
37.2
lat
141
142
lon
38.0
37.5
lat
100
0
100
lon
50
0
50
lat
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
20
40
Inflow [MCM/day]
Time Series Overview
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
20
40
SWE [km2]
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
188
190
192
WSE [m]
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
20
40
Volume [MCM]
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
89
==PAGE:100==
Corresponding SWE and WSE points: 15
Removed with initial: 0
Removed with bootstrapping: 0
Readded to prevent data loss: 0
Used in fit: 15
GRAND_6654
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
WSE (m)
10
20
30
40
SWE (km2)
Outlier Summary
WSE bounds
SWE bounds
Valid Bootsrapping Region
General outliers
Bootsrapped outliers
Used points
0e+00
1e+07
2e+07
3e+07
0
100
200
300
400
500
A Samples
0
1
2
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
B Samples
-3e+07
-2e+07
-1e+07
0e+00
0
100
200
300
400
500
C Samples
Median
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Parameter Estimates:
A: 5.03 ± 0.32, (pval = 0.000000)
B: -112.00 ± 0.81, (pval = 0.601957)
Transformation values:
min(SWE):  13.87 [km2]
min(WSE):   187.68 [m]
Fitted Function:
SWE = a (WSE
min(WSE)) + b + min(SWE)
SWE = 5.03 (WSE
187.68) +
98.13
r2 = 0.950
Fit: linear
188
189
190
191
WSE (m)
15
20
25
30
35
SWE (km2)
Final fit
95% Confidence Interval
Used points
Fit
-4
-2
0
2
4
(km2)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Count
Histogram of residuals
Mean=0.00
Std.=1.23
15
20
25
30
Predicted SWE (km2)
15
20
25
30
Observed SWE (km2)
90
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:101==
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
10
20
30
40
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Observed Volume
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
10
20
30
40
Volume [MCM]
natural_volume_in
volume_in_adjusted
upstream_alterations
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
10
20
30
40
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Volume In
Volume In (Distributed)
Volume Released (Distributed)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
10
20
30
40
Volume [MCM]
Observed Volume
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of unobserved months
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
10
20
30
Volume [MCM]
Mean Volume In
90% CI
Mean Volume Released
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of months with invalid estimates
Network id: 403, Reservoir id: GRAND_6654
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
91
==PAGE:102==
A.1.4
Summary of flood control reservoir
Reservoir Name: Stampede
Dam Name:         Stampede
Location:              California, United States
Main Use:            Flood control
DOR:                   191%
Network ID: 433
Reservoir ID: GRAND_151
Long-term average (Ilta) : 6.2%
Statistical Low Flows (Ilf) : 161.4%
Seasonal Amplitudes (Isa) : -4.4%
Seasonal Regime (Isr) : 9.0%
Temporal Shift (Its) : 0.0 Months
Inter-annual Variability (Iiv) : -5.0 Months
Reservoir
SWE Boundary
Other Reservoirs
River System
River System Location
120.15
120.10
lon
39.46
39.48
39.50
lat
120.0
119.5
lon
39.5
40.0
lat
100
0
100
lon
50
0
50
lat
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
50
100
Inflow [MCM/day]
Time Series Overview
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
5
10
SWE [km2]
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
1800
1810
WSE [m]
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
20
40
Volume [MCM]
92
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:103==
Corresponding SWE and WSE points: 10
Removed with initial: 0
Removed with bootstrapping: 0
Readded to prevent data loss: 0
Used in fit: 10
GRAND_151
1790
1800
1810
1820
WSE (m)
5
10
15
SWE (km2)
Outlier Summary
WSE bounds
SWE bounds
Valid Bootsrapping Region
General outliers
Bootsrapped outliers
Used points
0e+00
1e+06
2e+06
0
100
200
300
400
500
A Samples
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
20
40
60
80
B Samples
-2e+06
-1e+06
0e+00
0
100
200
300
400
500
C Samples
Median
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Parameter Estimates:
A: 0.56 ± 0.13, (pval = 0.000000)
B: 0.86 ± 0.09, (pval = 0.000000)
C: 288.93 ± 0.12, (pval = 0.000043)
Transformation values:
min(SWE):  7.11 [km2]
min(WSE):   1797.51 [m]
Fitted Function:
SWE = a (WSE
min(WSE))b + c + min(SWE)
SWE = 0.56 (WSE
1797.51)b + 296.04
r2 = 0.995
Fit: power_law
1798
1800
1802
1804
1806
1808
1810
WSE (m)
8
10
12
14
16
SWE (km2)
Final fit
95% Confidence Interval
Used points
Fit
-0
-0
0
0
0
(km2)
0
1
2
3
4
Count
Histogram of residuals
Mean=0.00
Std.=0.15
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Predicted SWE (km2)
8
10
12
Observed SWE (km2)
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
93
==PAGE:104==
2019-01
2019-07
2020-01
2020-07
2021-01
2021-07
2022-01
2022-07
2023-01
0
10
20
30
40
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Observed Volume
2019-01
2019-07
2020-01
2020-07
2021-01
2021-07
2022-01
2022-07
2023-01
0
20
40
60
80
Volume [MCM]
natural_volume_in
volume_in_adjusted
upstream_alterations
2019-01
2019-07
2020-01
2020-07
2021-01
2021-07
2022-01
2022-07
2023-01
0
20
40
60
80
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Volume In
Volume In (Distributed)
Volume Released (Distributed)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
10
20
30
40
Volume [MCM]
Observed Volume
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of unobserved months
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
20
40
60
Volume [MCM]
Mean Volume In
90% CI
Mean Volume Released
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of months with invalid estimates
Network id: 433, Reservoir id: GRAND_151
94
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:105==
A.1.5
Summary of recreational reservoir
Reservoir Name: nan
Dam Name:         Belton Dam
Location:              Texas, United States
Main Use:            Recreation
DOR:                   148%
Network ID: 129
Reservoir ID: GRAND_1273
Long-term average (Ilta) : 0.0%
Statistical Low Flows (Ilf) : 0.3%
Seasonal Amplitudes (Isa) : -3.9%
Seasonal Regime (Isr) : 0.7%
Temporal Shift (Its) : 0.0 Months
Inter-annual Variability (Iiv) : 0.0 Months
Reservoir
SWE Boundary
Other Reservoirs
River System
River System Location
97.6 97.5
lon
31.1
31.2
31.3
lat
98
96
lon
30
32
lat
100
0
100
lon
50
0
50
lat
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
500
Inflow [MCM/day]
Time Series Overview
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
40
50
SWE [km2]
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
180
185
WSE [m]
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
10
Volume [MCM]
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
95
==PAGE:106==
Corresponding SWE and WSE points: 24
Removed with initial: 1
Removed with bootstrapping: 2
Readded to prevent data loss: 0
Used in fit: 21
GRAND_1273
179
180
181
182
183
WSE (m)
40
45
50
55
SWE (km2)
Outlier Summary
WSE bounds
SWE bounds
Valid Bootsrapping Region
General outliers
Bootsrapped outliers
Used points
0e+00
2e+06
4e+06
6e+06
8e+06
0
100
200
300
400
500
A Samples
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
0
20
40
60
80
100
B Samples
-8e+06 -6e+06 -4e+06 -2e+06
0e+00
0
100
200
300
400
500
C Samples
Median
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Parameter Estimates:
A: 1.79 ± 0.69, (pval = 0.000000)
B: 1.26 ± 0.29, (pval = 0.000000)
C: 643.16 ± 0.65, (pval = 0.000207)
Transformation values:
min(SWE):  43.53 [km2]
min(WSE):   179.73 [m]
Fitted Function:
SWE = a (WSE
min(WSE))b + c + min(SWE)
SWE = 1.79 (WSE
179.73)b + 686.69
r2 = 0.809
Fit: power_law
180.0 180.5 181.0 181.5 182.0 182.5 183.0
WSE (m)
45
50
55
SWE (km2)
Final fit
95% Confidence Interval
Used points
Fit
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(km2)
0
2
4
6
8
Count
Histogram of residuals
Mean=0.00
Std.=0.96
44
46
48
50
52
Predicted SWE (km2)
44
46
48
50
52
Observed SWE (km2)
96
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:107==
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
5
10
15
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Observed Volume
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
200
400
600
Volume [MCM]
natural_volume_in
volume_in_adjusted
upstream_alterations
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
200
400
600
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Volume In
Volume In (Distributed)
Volume Released (Distributed)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
5
10
15
Volume [MCM]
Observed Volume
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of unobserved months
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
100
200
300
400
Volume [MCM]
Mean Volume In
90% CI
Mean Volume Released
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of months with invalid estimates
Network id: 129, Reservoir id: GRAND_1273
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
97
==PAGE:108==
A.1.6
Summary of FHReD Reservoir
Reservoir Name: Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam Name:         
Location:              , Ethiopia
Main Use:            Hydroelectricity
DOR:                   %
Network ID: 814
Reservoir ID: FHRED_3088
Long-term average (Ilta) : -0.0%
Statistical Low Flows (Ilf) : 0.0%
Seasonal Amplitudes (Isa) : -1.0%
Seasonal Regime (Isr) : 0.4%
Temporal Shift (Its) : 0.0 Months
Inter-annual Variability (Iiv) : 0.0 Months
Reservoir
SWE Boundary
Other Reservoirs
River System
River System Location
35.235.4
lon
10.5
11.0
lat
3035
lon
0
20
lat
100
0
100
lon
50
0
50
lat
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
20000
40000
Inflow [MCM/day]
Time Series Overview
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
200
400
SWE [km2]
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
540
560
WSE [m]
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
5000
Volume [MCM]
98
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:109==
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Observed Volume
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Volume [MCM]
natural_volume_in
volume_in_adjusted
upstream_alterations
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Volume [MCM]
Values Distributed
Volume In
Volume In (Distributed)
Volume Released (Distributed)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
2000
4000
6000
Volume [MCM]
Observed Volume
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of unobserved months
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Volume [MCM]
Mean Volume In
90% CI
Mean Volume Released
90% CI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of months with invalid estimates
Network id: 814, Reservoir id: FHRED_3088
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
99
==PAGE:110==
A.2
Continental Indicator Maps
A.2.1
Long-term Average
100
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:111==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
101
==PAGE:112==
102
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:113==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
103
==PAGE:114==
104
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:115==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
105
==PAGE:116==
A.2.2
Low Flows
106
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:117==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
107
==PAGE:118==
108
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:119==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
109
==PAGE:120==
110
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:121==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
111
==PAGE:122==
A.2.3
Seasonal Amplitude
112
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:123==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
113
==PAGE:124==
114
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:125==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
115
==PAGE:126==
116
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:127==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
117
==PAGE:128==
A.2.4
Seasonal Regime
118
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:129==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
119
==PAGE:130==
120
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:131==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
121
==PAGE:132==
122
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:133==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
123
==PAGE:134==
A.2.5
Temporal Shits
124
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:135==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
125
==PAGE:136==
126
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:137==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
127
==PAGE:138==
128
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:139==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
129
==PAGE:140==
A.2.6
Interannual Variability
130
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:141==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
131
==PAGE:142==
132
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:143==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
133
==PAGE:144==
134
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:145==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
135
==PAGE:146==
A.3
DHI-GHM performance
Figure A.1: DHI-GHM performance using ERA5 precipitation and Priestley-Taylor potential evaporation
forcing datasets for A) North America, B) Europe, C) South America, D) Asia, E) Africa, and F) Australia. The
colour coding on the maps show stations with KGE in the following ranges: grey:< - 0.41, orange: - 0.41 to
0.2, yellow: 0.2–0.4, light green: 0.4–0.6, medium green: 0.6–0.8, dark green: 0.8–1.0. Note that the orange
bin, - 0.41–0.2, is three times as large as the other bins, and the poorer results are lumped together. Bar
plots in each panel show the distribution of KGE values. Scatter plots in each panel insert depict the WBE;
points above and below the blue line on the plot indicate positive and negative WBEs respectively. Figure
and caption reproduced from Murray et al. 2023
136
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
==PAGE:147==
Assessing reservoir dynamics at a global scale using satellite earth observations
137
==PAGE:148==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk/en
