==PAGE:1==
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder
Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sin-
tering
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Naiqi Shang
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Produktion-
storvet, Building 427, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Approval
Naiqi Shang - s212628
Signature
Date
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
i
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Binder Jetting has attracted widespread interest as one of the metal additive manufactur-
ing technologies and has been increasingly used to produce a wide range of materials.
Martensite stainless steel 440C is known for its high hardness, high wear resistance and
moderate corrosion resistance, which is difficult to be fabricated by the traditional man-
ufacturing approaches. A growing practice of producing stainless steel 440C integrates
with additive manufacturing technologies.
This thesis aims to investigate the possibility of producing stainless steel 440C compo-
nents by using binder jetting and optimize the process chain in order to achieve high
density of the binder jetted objects. A series of investigations have been conducted on
printing, debinding and sintering process. Besides, a comprehensive literature review has
been made on stainless steel 440C and the process parameters of binder jetting to lay
solid foundation for the further research.
Following the previous study on the correlation between printing parameters and green
part strength from the author of this thesis, the binder jetted samples with different satu-
ration level have been further investigated in the post processes.
Furthermore, thermogravimetric analysis has been conducted to optimize the gas atmo-
sphere and temperature of debinding and sintering process. The result is accompanied
by the modelling result from Thermo-Calc based on the chemical composition of 440C
powder.
The sintering is performed in both solidus phase and supersolidus phase. The sintered
samples are characterized by light optical microscope, scanning electron microscope, el-
emental analysis, diffraction analysis, compression test and hardness test.
The findings of this work contribute to the production of stainless steel 440C with binder
jetting and provide further insight into the process chain of binder jetting. Moreover, this
work paves the way for achieving high-density binder jetted objects.
ii
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
David Bue Pedersen (Principle supervisor)
Ph.D., Senior Researcher, Section for Manufacturing Engineering Technical University of
Denmark, Produktionstorvet, Building 427, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
dbpe@mek.dtu.dk
Marcel A. J. Somers (Co-supervisor)
Professor, Section for Materials and Surface Engineering, Department of Civil and Me-
chanical Engineering, Produktionstorvet, 425, 120, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
majs@dtu.dk
Venkata Karthik Nadimpalli (Co-supervisor)
Researcher, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering Manufacturing Engineering,
Produktionstorvet, 427, 322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
vkna@dtu.dk
Thomas Lundin Christiansen (Co-supervisor)
Associate Professor, Section for Materials and Surface Engineering, Department of Civil
and Mechanical Engineering, Produktionstorvet, 425, 110, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
thoch@dtu.dk
Thomas Dahmen (External supervisor)
Postdoc, Section for Materials and Surface Engineering, Department of Civil and Mechan-
ical Engineering, Produktionstorvet, Building 425, 108, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
tdah@nordicmetals.com
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
iii
==PAGE:8==
iv
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Outline of this Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Binder Jetting Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
440C Stainless Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Process Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methodology
13
3.1
440C Stainless Steel Powder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Testing Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Materials Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results and Discussion
23
4.1
Shrinkage, Density and Porosity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Microstructure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Elemental Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Phase Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.5
Mechanical Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.6
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Conclusion
45
5.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Bibliography
47
A Appendix
55
A.1 Conference Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 Density of Ethanol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.3 XRD Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Additive Manufacturing (AM), which was originally referred to as Rapid Prototyping (RP)
since 1980s, utilizes digital models to construct 3D objects layer by layer. As an umbrella
term, AM consists of diverse fabrication techniques that are implemented on a broad range
of materials and successfully provide applications across various fields. The underlying
principles of layer-by-layer producing objects have enabled AM to bridge the barriers of
traditional manufacturing and creates sophisticated geometries with high design freedom
at a relatively low cost. Therefore, due to its versatility and functionality, AM has been
promised a great potential for the future production.
Metal Additive Manufacturing (MAM) first gained significant recognition and was adopted
by industries dating back to as early as 2000s, by virtue of the popularity of a series of
new technologies, such as Directed Energy Deposition (DED), Binder Jetting (BJ), and
Powder Bed Fusion (PBF). The original intention of Additive Manufacturing has also been
shifted from prototyping to producing customized models with complex geometries that
are difficult or impossible to create with conventional manufacturing methods.
There are two technologies that are considered to have great potential in metal additive
manufacturing field: BJ and Laser Powder Bed Fusion (LPBF); BJ displays merits and
strengths in many aspects that are difficult to achieve in LPBF. Owing to the powder bed
adopted in the manufacturing process, BJ can be regarded as printing a cross-section of
3D objects on each layer as fast as inkjet printing. The production rate, therefore, is supe-
rior as compared to other MAM technologies, especially when printing objects with large
cross-sections [1]. Besides, a support structure is not needed since it spreads a full layer
of powder and deposits binders on the top of powder bed [2]. It ensures the homogeneity
and integrity of the final components even with complex structures, such as overhanging
structures and cantilever beams. Unlike other fusion-based AM approaches, BJ prints
green parts at ambient temperature and requires lower energy consumption. On the one
hand, it avoids the residual stress and defects due to the local melting and solidification
of metal. On the other hand, a wider selection of materials can be applied to BJ, such as
non-weldable alloys, thermally conductive materials, optically reflective materials and so
on [3, 4].
BJ is a one of promising additive manufacturing technologies and has achieved a remark-
able growth in the past decades, but BJ is still remaining in its infancy that has not gained
popularity in the market. The components fabricated by BJ are limited in its relatively low
density [5]. The non-dense problem derives from the low packing density and the pres-
ence of binders during printing. Since the powder is uncompacted, the packing density
is always lower than the tap density. The theoretical packing density of green parts is
about 60% for homogenized spherical powder [6]. There is also an issue raised regard-
ing BJ by the fact that the shrinkage and distortion occur after sintering. The shrinkage is
anisotropic due to the effect of gravity, which has larger shrinkage in Z axis. The quality
of binder jetted objects is critically dependent on the sintering process where researchers
have committed great efforts to optimize the process parameters.
Martensitic stainless steel 440C as a high-carbon steel has not been extensively studied
yet, although metallic components hold a great share in the current BJ industry [7]. This
steel provides excellent hardness and high wear resistance, but it is subject to challenges
during production such as decarburization, hardening cracks and retained austenite, ow-
ing to the high carbon content. In addition, 440C is prone to produce grain boundary
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
1
==PAGE:12==
carbide networks during the high temperature sintering that hinders the post-processing
of 440C tools [8, 9]. Thus, BJ of martensitic 440C stainless steel remains a significant
space for research. In addition, the 440C powder feedstock is derived from spray-formed
overflow powder, which is commonly considered as scrap. The usability of the spray
formed powder is one of focuses of the study.
Accordingly, the motivation of this project is to explore the possibility of applying spray-
formed 440C stainless steel powder to the production of BJ and to optimize the process
chain for achieving high-density parts, specifically in printing, debinding, and sintering.
1.2
Learning Objectives
From the previous research (shown in Appendix A.1), the influence of saturation level,
layer thickness and part orientation on green parts has been statistically investigated.
The results reveal that the green strength is highly related to saturation level and part ori-
entation, while the effect of layer thickness is relatively low. To make sure the green parts
keep intact during depowdering, the optimal saturation range is between 80% and 120%,
and printing in a direction parallel to the building plate achieves higher green strength.
Therefore, following up on the previous study, this project aims to explore how the post-
processes affect the binder jetted objects and optimize the process parameters to fabri-
cate 440C parts with high performance and high density. Besides, the dimensional ac-
curacy after sintering is another focus under this topic. Since the printed samples have
anisotropic shrinkage in different directions, understanding the scaled-down ratio paves
the way for subsequent prints that have higher dimensional requirements.
Figure 1.1: Working flow in this project
The experimental working flow is shown in Figure 1.1. In this project, it requires several
skills and competencies throughout the research as follows:
• Experimentation of powder morphology, particle size distribution, chemical composition
and flow ability
• Fabrication of binder jetted green parts with different printing parameters
• Thermogravimetric analysis based on different gas atmospheres to determine the effi-
cient debinding parameters
2
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:13==
• Application of Thermo-Calc to simulate the phase diagram of 440C stainless steel
• Sintering of samples under different gas atmospheres and temperatures
• Acquisition of material mechanical properties including density, hardness, compressive
strength
• Measurement of dimensional changes before and after sintering
• Sample preparation for material characterization
• Analysis of micro-structures according to relevant tests
1.3
Outline of this Thesis
This thesis is organized into five chapters in order to provide an overall investigation on
the optimization of binder jetting process chain.
The overview of each chapter is briefly described by the following:
Introduction
The introduction gives the motivation of producing high-density 440C samples by using
binder jetting, and states the learning objectives to concretize the study.
Literature Review
The chapter provides a comprehensive review of current research on binder jetting, stain-
less steel 440C, process parameters and the application of binder jetting technology in
order to lay the grounds for the subsequent study.
Methodology
The preparation of the experiments is introduced, including the characterization of 440C
powder, testing methods, process parameters in the production.
Results and discussion
The results have been presented and interpreted based on several aspects, including
shrinkage and density, microstructure, phase analysis, elemental analysis and mechan-
ical properties. The critical consideration of producing high-performance binder jetted
samples in each process chain is discussed.
Conclusion
The conclusion chapter summarizes the main work and findings that have been done.
It also reflects on the limitations of the study and suggests the potential work for further
improvement of the results.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Binder Jetting Process
BJ builds three dimensional objects by dispensing liquid binding agents on the top of the
powder bed and was first developed by Sachs et al. [10, 11] in 1989 and publicly patented
in 1993. The companies Z Corporation and ExOne were pioneers in the development of
BJ technology and committed to commercializing and applying to different materials [7].
As patents expired in 2010, new competitors (e.g. Desktop Metal, Hewlett-Packard Com-
pany) gradually appeared in the BJ market. With the evolution of the technology, BJ has
been categorized as one of seven AM technologies and applied in many fields [12].
A BJ printing system typically consists of a job box, a build plate, a powder hopper, a
print head, a heating source and rollers (or spreading blades). Job box is used to collect
excess powder of powder bed. The build plate onto which three dimensional objects are
created is located in the middle of the job box. Powder hopper contains the powder feed-
stock and has a fine sieve at the bottom, which is connected and excited by ultrasonic
transducers. The print head jets micro-sale binder droplets through a number of nozzles.
A heating lamp is normally used as a heat source that accelerates curing of the binder.
Rollers (typically a rough roller and a fine roller) are utilized to spread out the powder bed.
As illustrated in Figure 2.1, the printing process involves the following steps: (a) Powder
flows out of the recoater and is dispersed by rollers or blades. Powder spreading plays an
important role on improving the quality of binder jetted parts since it directly determines
the creation of defects on the powder bed [13]. (b) Binder deposits on the powder bed as
designed configuration. (c) A heating lamp is employed to dry the powder bed and the de-
posited binder. (d) The piston drives the building plate down to provide space for the next
printing layer. The distance of downward movement per layer is defined as layer heights.
The optimal layer thickness, while varying by materials, is recommended to be less than
2.5 times the particle size [2]. This process repeats layer by layer until the objects are built.
Figure 2.1: Schematic of BJ process: Powder shivered off from hopper and dispersed by
rollers (a); Binder disposited from print head (b); Heating source drying powder bed and
binder (c); Build plate moving down (d)
After printing, the part is a so-called green part, which is a mixture of powder particles and
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
5
==PAGE:16==
binders. Post-processing, such as debinding, sintering and infiltration, is crucial for BJ as
they transform polymeric bonding into metallic bonding. The part is termed brown part
after thermal processing. Post-processing holds the key to the quality and mechanical
properties of samples. Hence, it has also become the focus of investigation.
In addition to the post-processes, associated research of the BJ process chain is multi-
disciplinary. For instance, some studies focused on the powder feedstock and spreading
since the powder bed is the basis of BJ print. Xu and Nan investigated the effect of pow-
der rheology on spread-ability for different particle sizes [14]. The powder re-usability was
investigated by Bidare et al. [15], where it was suggested to add 20% to 30% virgin pow-
der to the recycled powder to keep same particle size distribution. Ravel et al. proposed
a mathematical model to predict spreading and impregnation of binder droplets [16]. Wu
et al. proposed a powder spreading model that provides an instruction for the printing
parameters [17]. Besides, to bond powder particles and adapt to a broader range of ma-
terials, some research delved into the development of new binders [18, 19]. In addition,
the anisotropic shrinkage of sintered samples was discussed in many papers [20, 21, 22].
Some mathematical models were proposed to predict the dimensional changes in order
to produce samples with higher dimensional precision.
Although the majority of BJ research is carried out with metallic materials, it is also applica-
ble to other kinds of materials, such as ceramics and polymers, and has made promising
progress. Park et al. were dedicated to fabricate polymer-based components via binder
jetting and adopted infiltration and warm isostatic pressing process to further improve
the mechanical properties and density of printed parts [23]. Feng et al. applied BJ to pro-
duce silicon carbide components with complex geometries and achieved high mechanical
performance and wear resistance by subsequent liquid silicon infiltration [24]. Fei et al.
proposed a new AM method for ceramics based on BJ to improve the density of binder
jetted ceramic productions [25].
2.2
440C Stainless Steel
440C stainless steel is classified as a martensitic material, which contains a high level of
carbon (approximately 1 wt%) and chromium (15 wt%-18 wt%). Martensite stainless steel
offers high hardness as compared to other stainless steel grades, since it is able to be
hardened by quenching and tempering [26]. There are two common strengthening mech-
anisms present in the 440C heat treatment: solid-solution strengthening and precipitation
hardening. The formation of chromium and molybdenum carbides hinders the movement
of dislocations and thereby improves the strength and hardness [26, 27, 28].
The mechanical performance of stainless steel 440C is preferential to other martensitic
stainless steels due to the higher carbon content [29], which is known for high hardness,
high strength and high wear-resistance. After proper heat treatment, the hardness of 440C
can reach 745 HV [30]. By adding tantalum carbide (TaC), the composites with different
proportions of TaC and 440C reached the highest hardness of 83.8 HRA and transverse
rupture strength of 2458.4 MPa after sintering and heat treatment [31]. The stainless tool
steel 440C, with its outstanding mechanical properties, has revealed many applications
in various fields, such as knives [32], bearings [33], valves [34] and aerospace compo-
nents [35, 36].
Nevertheless, high-carbon content brings several drawbacks to stainless steel 440C.
First, it shows low machinability that cannot be manufactured by conventional approaches.
The presence of chromium, molybdenum, tungsten, and vanadium leads to severe ele-
mental segregation during solidification [37]. Apart from the inhomogeneous distribution
of the elements, the presence of carbides also affects the mechanical behavior of the ma-
6
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:17==
chined workpieces [38]. In addition, 440C is considered as a non-weldable material since
it is prone to brittle fracture in the heat affected zone. Moreover, the corrosion resistance
is relatively limited in comparison to other stainless steels with lower carbon content.
Traditionally stainless steel 440C is manufactured by casting. With the increasing de-
mands on complex geometry parts, Powder Metallurgy (PM) [26] and Powder Injection
Molding (PIM) [39, 9] have been adopted to the production of 440C decades ago. Al-
though both PM and PIM require a sintering processs that causes dimensional shrinkage,
the reduction in size can be predicted and compensated. Owing to the unique charac-
teristics of 440C, the fabrication process of high performance components with complex
geometries is beyond the scope of conventional manufacturing methods and powder met-
allurgy. Additive manufacturing is regarded as an alternative method that has great po-
tential for manufacturing stainless steel 440C. The common AM approaches of producing
440C components involve Spray forming [38] and LPBF [29, 40, 41]. Although BJ has
the potential to be applied on manufacturing 440C stainless steel, it still lacks deep and
systematic research and optimization throughout the processing chain.
The current stage of 440C stainless steel research focuses on the heat treatment and cor-
rosive behavior. Saikaew et al. focused on the effect of different 440C stainless steel heat
treatment parameters on mechanical properties and statistically analyzed the correlation
between soaking time and hardness [42]. Venkatesh et al. compared the performance
of 440C and M50 steels in a artificial maritime corrosive solution since both of them are
normally used in marine fields. Although the corrosion resistance of 440C is moderate
in the family of stainless steels, it has a lower corrosion rate than M50 steel owing to the
formation of protective chromia scale [43]. Besides, researchers attempted to modify the
surface of 440C using friction-stir processing to enhance its hardness and corrosion re-
sistance [44].
Due to the development of powder metallurgy, the sintering property of 440C has been in-
vestigated widely. The study of sintering on PM also provided a reference for binder jetted
parts. However, since the packing density of green parts from binder jetting is lower than
that produced from powder metallurgy, the porosity will be higher in the sintered samples
with the same sintering parameters. Huang et al. applied pre-alloyed 440C powder with
two different particle sizes (less than 25 µm and between 25 and 40 µm) to powder met-
allurgy and sintered at four temperatures in a vaccum sintering furnace. The hardness
results indicated the small particles provided smaller grain size, which is helpful to im-
prove the mechanical properties [45].
2.3
Process Parameters
The principal production chain of binder jetting includes printing, curing, debinding, and
sintering. The quality of the binder jetted objects depends on each step. Hence, it is ben-
eficial to understand the parameters of each process to control the overall quality. There
are still some unknowns requiring further investigation from the processing parameters to
the microstructure of finished parts.
Printing
The forming procedure of green parts has already been discussed in Section 2.1. The
quality of green parts is regulated by a variety of parameters. However, the interaction
between different parameters and factors has a complex and dynamic effect on samples,
which primarily varies from case to case. Thus, finding appropriate printing parameters
is the first priority for BJ. The optimal printing parameters are designed to produce green
parts with three characteristics: high packing density, adequate green strength and pre-
cision of samples, corresponding to different printing studies as listed in Figure 2.2.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Impact of printing parameters on green parts
The packing density is crucial to the printing process since it is highly related to final den-
sity [3]. The packing density can be simply estimated by the fraction of the mass of powder
on a bed of powder and the bulk volume, and its value is somewhere between the bulk
density and the tapped density [46]. Powder is dispensed by a wiper or a roller. In the top
of each layer it is much easier to fill up the voids due to the traverse movement of the pow-
der dispenser, resulting in relatively higher packing density on the top. Therefore, using
smaller layer thickness is beneficial to achieve higher packing density [3]. Finer powder
particles are also more likely to fill small pores in powder spreading. For powder disper-
sion, Miao et al. have been reviewed and summarized most of current research [13],
including the effect of spreaders, powder feedstocks, and spreading parameters.
The research of green strength derives from the need of extracting green parts from the
powder bed. As the samples are buried in the powder during printing and the green
strength can be only tested after curing, it is necessary to use reliable printing parameters
that produce robust green parts. Several studies also described the effect of saturation
and layer height on strength [47, 48]. Binder as a bonding agent between powder parti-
cles also has an effect on the strength after curing.
High printing precision and high production rate are the features of BJ since it adopts
the ink-jet printing method. Each layer is considered equivalent to selectively dispensing
binders on a two-dimensional plane. By accumulating layer by layer, the physical models
are built. The print head controls printing accuracy in X and Y axis, while the layer thick-
ness determines the surface finish in Z axis. Unlike the traditional ink-jet print, BJ requires
to consider the compatibility of powder bed and binder, binder infiltration and the impact
of binder dispersed on powder. The impact of droplets on powder bed and the behaviour
of droplets penetrating into powder bed are discussed in [49] and [50], respectively.
Curing
Curing is the process of evaporating solvents in the binder and forming polymeric bonds
between metal particles through organic substances. Although it attracts less attention
in research comparing with other post-processes since the temperature at which curing
takes place has less effect on the metallic material, curing parameters ensure the strength
of green parts. The green strength allows the sample to retain structural integrity as it ex-
tracts from the powder bed without damage or collapse.
8
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:19==
The curing temperature is typically around 180 ◦C to 200 ◦C, depending on the content of
binders. Ethylene glycol (EG) is one of main additives due to its solubility and low cost,
which has a boiling temperature of 197.6 ◦C [51]. The effective curing temperature is
somewhere lower than 195 ◦C.
From the previous experiments by the author of this thesis, curing time influences green
strength: at the same temperature (180 ◦C) samples are held for 2 hours and 25 hours
and the compressive green strength are 1.68 MPa and 3.07 MPa, respectively. Thus,
increasing the duration of curing enhances the green strength of the samples.
Lores et al. summarized about the curing temperatures and time regarding many types
of binder that can be found [52].
Debinding
Additional heat source is applied to decompose and burn out the polymeric bonds af-
ter samples are taken out from the powder bed. This process is so-called debinding.
The residual binder changes the chemical composition of powder feedstock and thereby
affects the sintering parameters. Moreover, leaving some undesirable elements also im-
pacts the alloy composition. The goal of debinding, therefore, is to remove residual binder
from the green parts as much as possible, which also results in the samples becoming
weak and fragile. The density of samples at this moment is equivalent to the packing
density.
Apart from effectively removing residual binders, during the debinding process, powder
particles react with ambient gas, producing undesirable substances (e.g. oxides). Se-
lecting gas atmosphere and temperature can be done with the help of thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA).
Sintering
Sintering is a post-process where the densification of powder particles happens and metal-
lic bonding forms. The metallic bonding initially originates from the rearrangement of
atoms. When samples are processed in a high temperature, driven by a mass transport
atoms is driven by a decreases surface free energy, which leads to desification. The
necks and bridges starts to form between adjacent particles. Therefore, finer particles,
which have higher surface energy, are easier to create a dense structure. To achieve
fully-dense (near-dense) sintering, the mean particle size of metal powder is suggested
to be below 20 µm [6]. Accompanying by the densification, shrinkage is inevitable during
sintering due to the particle rearrangement and pore closure. The degree of shrinkage is
highly related to the materials and sintering parameters.
The most vital factor in sintering is to control the sintering atmosphere and temperature.
Many studies are currently conducted on stainless steel 316L, which has a low carbon
content. The sintering process of binder jetted 440 samples has not been investigated to
date. Unlike low-carbon stainless steel, the window of sintering 440C samples is small:
insufficient sintering temperature may cause part distortion and high porosity, while ex-
cessive sintering temperature leads to the formation of carbides, which also reduces the
strength [53].
To obtain higher-density samples, Supersolidus Liquid-Phase Sintering (SLPS) has been
introduced. When the sintering temperature goes beyond the solid phase line and a liquid
phase forms, the sintering process goes faster and the mobility of atoms is facilitated. Be-
sides, as the liquid phase has lower melting temperature than the solid phase, there will
exist a mixture of melting particles and partial-melted particles in the sample. The most
obvious advantage of supersolidus liquid phase sintering is that the density is increased.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
9
==PAGE:20==
Besides, the liquid sintering process is faster than solid phase sintering since atoms move
much intensely.
Nevertheless, the presence of liquid phase in sintering is not always advantageous. The
processing window of liquid phase sintering is small since excessive sintering tempera-
tures cause part distortion, slumping and large changes in shape [54]. Nandwana et al.
suggested the fraction of liquid phase under 50% was an optimal temperature interval to
avoid part distortion [55]. Apart from this, elemental segregation can also be observed in
the microstructure. Some elements (such as Nb, Cr and Mo) segragate at grain bound-
aries [54].
Hot Iso-static Pressing (HIP) treatment has been proven beneficial in increasing the den-
sity and reducing the porosity of sintered parts [56]. Reheating the samples to austenite
temperature and applying additional pressure facilitate the expulsion of trapped gas from
pores. Dahmen et al. fabricated near full-dense (8.579 g/cm3) binder jetted MAR-M247
parts with hot iso-staric pressing, compared with the theoretical density of 8.58 g/cm3 [57].
In Kumar et al. study, the density increased from 92% to 99.7% by using HIP [56].
However, the heating process also leads to negative effects. Kumar et al. showed that
the yield strength dropped around 10% since HIP resulted in significant grain coarsen-
ing [56]. HIP was originally adopted for powder metallurgy. Therefore, HIP is limited in
sample geometries making it difficult to fit with binder jetting. In addition, the expensive
cost of HIP has become a barrier to its wider adoption.
Moreover, addition of sintering additives has also been found to improve the relative den-
sity during sintering. Do et al. reported that the highest relative density of the sintered
samples reached 99.6% due to the usage of boron compound as sintering agents [58].
For different binders and materials, researchers constantly explore the parameters of de-
binding and sintering as demonstrated in Table 2.1, which provides references for the
relevant studies.
2.4
Application
BJ exhibits outstanding versatility and excellent cost-effectiveness in the fabrication of
complex objects with good surface finish, making it adaptable across various fields and
industries.
BJ allows many materials that are difficult to produce by traditional technologies to de-
velop towards complex structures. Klee et al. studies the possibility of applying BJ to
produce 17-4PH gears [59]. The results achieved the maximum endurable tooth bending
stress of 708.96 MPa. Gaytan et al. fabricated barium titanate by using BJ and achieved
excellent piezoelectric properties [60]. The production of composites is also recognised
as one of the advantages of BJ and a future development trend [61, 62, 63]. However,
limited by the sintering process, the density is one of the reasons that affects its inability
to be applied in many products [64].
Apart from achieving the high densification by optimizing process parameters, some re-
searchers expended the potential of BJ to produce porous structure. The 316L porous
structure printed by BJ with the addition of a certain amount of polymethyl methacry-
late (PMMA) powder has the highest pore openness index of 1, which is considered to
hold great promise for the production of medical metal filters [65]. The porous character of
BJ was utilized in the production of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) fabricated with Stainless
Steel 430L [66]. The lower energy forming method is also one of the factors that allow BJ
to be used in the production of SOFC [67].
Moreover, the biomedical field is one of the popular research areas for BJ where the
medicine [68] and the artificial bones [69] can be directly printed.
10
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.1: Literature review of debinding and sintering parameters used in binder jetting
research
No.
Materials
Process
Binder
Debinding Parameters
Sintering Parameters
Ref
1
Copper
Binder
Jetting
ExOne
AquaFuse
450 ◦C; 60 mins;
Hydrogen
1075 ◦C; 80 mins; 5
◦C/min; Hydrogen
[70]
2
316L
Binder
Jetting
Aqueous-
based
binder
Vacuum/argon partial
pressure
1380 ◦C; 2 h;
Vacuum/argon partial
pressure
[71]
3
316L
Binder
Jetting
ExOne
AquaFuse
600 ◦C; 1 h; Vacuum
1220 ◦C-1430 ◦C; 2
h; 5 ◦C/min; Vacuum
[72]
4
316L
Binder
Jetting
ExOne
AquaFuse
180 ◦C; 30 mins; 420
◦C; 7 h;
Hydrogen-doped inert
atmosphere
1000 ◦C; 1.5 h; 1380
◦C; 4 h;
Hydrogen-doped inert
atmosphere
[21]
5
17-4PH
Binder
Jetting
ExOne
Aqueous
Binder
450 ◦C; 2 h; 600 ◦C;
2.5 h; 650 ◦C; 0.5 h;
Hydrogen; 940 mbar
1270 ◦C-1360 ◦C; 30
min-180 min; 6
◦C/min; Hydrogen;
1000 mbar
[73]
6
440C
Powder
Metallurgy
Polyvinyl
Alcohol
(PVA)
-
1250 ◦C-1280 ◦C; 1 h;
Vacuum; 1.3*10−3 Pa
[74]
7
Iron
Binder
Jetting
Water-
based
solvent
250 ◦C-350 ◦C; 5
min-40 min 5 ◦C/min;
Air
1390 ◦C-1490 ◦C; 2
h-6 h;
Ar(95%)-H2(5%)
[47]
8
316L
Binder
Jetting
ExOne
AquaFuse
470 ◦C; 4 h; Argon
1360 ◦C; 3 h; 5
◦C/min; Vacuum;
10−1mbar
[75]
9
316L
Binder
Jetting
Phenolic
resin-
based
binder
450 ◦C; 1 h; 900 ◦C; 1 h; 10 ◦C/min; 1300
◦C-1400◦C; 3 h; 5 ◦C/min; Vacuum
[76]
10
440C
Metal
Injection
Molding
Wax-
Polymer
binder
600 ◦C; 1 h; 2 ◦C/min;
Hydrogen and
vacuum
1240 ◦C, 1250 ◦C,
1260 ◦C; 0.5 h;
Hydrogen and
vacuum; 10−1Pa
[39]
11
440C
Powder
Injection
Molding
Self-
developed
binder
Methylene dichloride;
37 ◦C; 6 h; 200 ◦C; 1
h; 3 ◦C/min; 385 ◦C; 1
h; 2 ◦C/min; 425 ◦C; 1
h; 2 ◦C/min; 600 ◦C;
30 min; 3 ◦C/min;
Vacuum
950 ◦C; 5 ◦C/min;
1200 ◦C-1260 ◦C; 30
min; Vacuum
[9]
12
316L
Binder
Jetting
Modified
PVA
500 ◦C; 4 h; Argon
1100 ◦C; 1 h; 1380
◦C-1450 ◦C; 2 h;
Argon
[18]
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:23==
3
Methodology
3.1
440C Stainless Steel Powder
Stainless tool steel AISI 440C (SS440C) powder supplied by Asgaard Metals A/S (Den-
mark) is used as feedstock; the alternative trade name is THOR44. The powder particles
are predominantly spherically shaped as investigated in the Scanning Electron Micro-
scope (SEM), as shown in Figure 3.1. The 440C powder with D50 of 20.5 µm (D10:
11.7 µm; D90: 33.2 µm) is overspray powder of spray forming. The particle size distribu-
tion of 440C (shown in Figure 3.2) was obtained from a particle size analyser Mastersizer
3000 (Malvern Panalytical, UK) by laser diffraction. The chemical composition of SS440C
is listed in Table 3.1. The chromium content varies with different production batches. The
440C powder used in this case contains about 15.5% chromium.
Figure 3.1: 200X (left) and 500X (right) SEM image of 440C powder morphology
Figure 3.2: Particle size distribution of 440C
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
13
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.1: Chemical composition of stainless steel 440C in percentage (%)
Fe
C
Mn
Si
Cr
Mo
V
Ni
Cu
Bal.
1.1
0.255
0.271
15.581
0.556
0.210
0.255
0.315
The spray-formed 440C powder shows good flowability (approximately 14.08 m/s based
on ISO 4490:2018 [77]). The high flow ability leads to dense and defect-free powder lay-
ers, which also has a significant impact on the packing density. In addition, moisture re-
duces the flowability of the powder, resulting in a higher porosity of the final samples [15].
Therefore, before printing, the 440C powder was dried at 100 ◦C for 12 hours.
Chemical Composition
The chemical composition was measured from an iCAP Pro Inductively Coupled Plasma
Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-OES) analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US).
The 440C powder were dissolved in aqua regia solution. After standing for an hour, the
solution was then diluted 75 times with water. The standard solution contained full el-
ements of 440C except carbon, oxygen and nitrogen. Since the total amount of these
organic elements was small (about 1%), it was neglected.
The content of organic elements is usually determined by combustion analysis. The car-
bon content was measured with LECO CS230 (Germany). By combusting samples in
oxygen, carbon was converted to carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide, which could be
tested by using infrared absorption spectroscopy. The nitrogen content was obtained
from TC500 Nitrogen-Oxygen determinator (LECO, Germany) using a similar concept.
The samples was buried in a graphite crucible in Helium. The generated gas (N2) was
analyzed by infrared absorption spectroscopy.
3.2
Testing Samples
There are two types of samples tested in this project for different purposes of research:
cylinders (Figure 3.3a) and cubes (Figure 3.3b). Cylinders of 16 mm in height and 8 mm
in diameter are used for compression tests to measure the compressive strength. Cubes
of 10 x 10 x 10 mm are applied to measure the density and dimensional shrinkage in
different directions. Many researches reveal that the sintered parts suffer from anisotropic
shrinkage ratios in different orientations [12, 72]. To make sure sintered components keep
a height-to-diameter ratio of 2 and provide valid compressive strength, the cylinders are
scaled up 21% in X and Y direction and 22% in Z axis during printing, based on the
experience from Dahmen et al. [57].
Figure 3.3: Dimensions of tested samples: cylinder of 16 mm in height and 8 mm in
diameter (a); cube with side length of 8 mm (b)
14
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Processing
3.3.1
Printing and Curing
Printing Parameters
Among all the printing parameters, saturation level and layer thickness have been con-
sidered as key parameters that have significant impact on green parts. Based on the
previous green strength study where three saturation levels (40%, 80% and 120%) and
two layer thicknesses (45 µm, 90 µm) are implemented, it has been shown that 40% satu-
ration samples exhibited low mechanical properties that exacerbate the difficulty of green
part handling. Thus, two saturation levels are retained in this project: 80% and 120%.
Moreover, the impact of layer thickness is relatively low for 440C. Since increasing layer
thickness does not affect the green strength much at high saturation levels, only one layer
thickness (45 µm) has been further investigated.
The printing tasks are preformed on an Innovent+ Binder Jetting printer (ExOne, United
States), which equips a 30 pL (picoliter) print head and deposits a commercial aqueous
binder (AquaFuse BA005, ExOne, United States). The main composition of AquaFuse
BA005 includes approximately 10 vol% ethylene glycol monobutyl ether (EGBE), 20 vol%
ethylene glycol (EG) and isopropanol (IPA) [72, 75]. After curing, EGBE and IPA volatize
due to low boiling points, and EG can be polymerized into polyethylene glycol (PEG) cre-
ating cross-links to bond particles [51].
Curing Parameters
Curing provides a certain strength to the printed green parts by promoting the polymeric
cross-links between particles, which helps to depowder without crashing samples. The
printed samples together with the job box are cured in a heating chamber (Binder FD23,
Buch & Holm A/S, Denmark) for 3 hours at 180 ◦C in air.
After curing, samples were taken out from the job box and depowdered manually with the
help of a brush and compressed air.
Figure 3.4: SEM image of powder particles after curing: Agglomerated particles (a); Poly-
meric bridges between particles (b)
3.3.2
Debinding
Thermogravimetric Analysis
TGA was used to investigate the optimal debinding parameters including temperature and
gas atmospheres. The test was preformed on a STA 449C Jupiter (NETZSCH, Germany).
The gases were provided by gas cylinders to keep their purity.
The samples were slowly heated up to 700 ◦C at a heating rate of 2 ◦C/min and cooled
down to the room temperature at a high cooling rate of 30 ◦C/min, followed by a repeat
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
15
==PAGE:26==
of the temperature rise and fall process to establish a baseline of equipment. The ex-
periments (shown in Figure 3.5) were carried on four different gas atmospheres: N2-O2,
Ar-H2, CO2-N2 and N2.
Figure 3.5: TGA for debinding running in different gas atmospheres: N2-O2 (80/20), Ar-H2
(90/10), CO2-N2 (83/17), N2 (100)
From Figure 3.5, while undergoing a steadily heating, all the samples started to decrease
in mass at about 200 ◦C. Apart from the N2-O2 environment, the mass was constantly
dropping until 380 ◦C. The sample in N2-O2 produced new substances while decreasing
in mass, which was presumed to be oxides. Therefore, it appeared in two segments
that have different mass loss rates. After 450 ◦C, samples began to reacts with ambient
atmospheres, resulting in an increase in mass. The binder was considered to be removed
more completely in N2-O2 since it had the minimal mass. Argon and CO2-N2 were an
alternative of N2-O2 given their TGA results, although they trapped all the carbon from the
binder in the debinded parts. Only a small amount of organic matter could be removed
from the binder in nitrogen atmosphere.
An isothermal TGA was preformed based on N2-O2 environment. The holding tempera-
ture (438 ◦C) was chosen from the point where the rate of mass loss was the greatest.
Although temperature was still decreasing after 438 ◦C, with the formation of new sub-
stances the mass loss rate reduced.
The sample was heated up until 438 ◦C at 10 ◦C/min and held for 8 hours, as shown in
Figure 3.6. The mass dropped the minimum when the temperature reached 438 ◦C and
held for 10 minutes. The binder was burned out quickly. The mass kept rising in the time
afterwards with the slow formation of oxides.
16
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.6: Isothermal TGA at 438 ◦C
The phase analysis was preformed on the sample after the isothermal thermogravimetric
analysis at 438 ◦C. As illustrated in Figure 3.5, there are two main phases detected by
XRD: the dominant phase of ferrite and the secondary phase of austenite. The oxidation
is not found from the XRD results.
Figure 3.7: XRD spectra of the sample after the isothermal TGA: ferrite phase (PDF #06-
0696) and austenite phase (PDF #33-0397)
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
17
==PAGE:28==
Debinding Parameters
The debinding process was preformed on a tube furnace at 450 ◦C in air for 1 hour.
The idea of using air was to effectively remove most of binders without forming massive
amounts of oxides as found in the isothermal TGA result. A minor amount of oxide layer
will be burned out as sintering proceeds.
3.3.3
Sintering
The optimization of sintering process focuses on the comparison of solidus phase sinter-
ing and supersolidus liquid phase sintering (or liquid phase sitering). Solid-phase sintering
primarily relies on the diffusion of atoms on the particle surface and atomic rearrangement.
Liquid phase sintering improves the mobility of the particles and pores leading to higher
densities [78]. The final quality of sintering depends on material composition and process-
ing conditions. For the selection of sintering temperature, computational simulation and
physical experiment were used to determine the solidus phase temperature and control
the fraction of solidus phase presented in the sintering.
Solid Phase Line
Thermo-Calc 2021a was applied to simulate the Scheil solidification curve of 440C (illus-
trated in Figure 3.8) based on its chemical composition. The liquid phase starts to form at
approximately 1278 ◦C. With the increase of sintering temperature, the amount of liquid
phase passes through a plateau. After exceeding 1285 ◦C, the ratio of the liquid phase
raises rapidly. Until 1418 ◦C, it is in a liquid phase.
Figure 3.8: Thermo-Calc simulation of mole fraction of solid phase as a function of tem-
perature
18
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:29==
To experimentally test the solidus temperature, a sintering TGA (Figure 3.9) was con-
ducted on a thermal analyzer STA 449 F3 Jupiter (NETZSCH, Germany).
The sam-
ples were heated until 1300 ◦C at a heating rate of 5 ◦C/min in two different gas atmo-
spheres (95%N2-5%H2, 95%Ar-5%H2) and cooled to the room temperature at the same
cooling speed.
Figure 3.9: TGA for sintering running in different gas atmospheres
The mass loss of samples sintered in Ar-H2 and N2-H2 showed different outcomes. In
N2-H2, the sample started to gain mass from gas environment when heating up to near
1300 ◦C. It was postulated to be the formation of nitrides. Besides, the amount of nitriding
increased as the temperature reduced. On the other hand, this phenomenon did not occur
on the sample sintered in Ar-H2. Argon in the ambient gas did not react with the sample.
Therefore, the mass of the sample remained relatively stable when cooling. From the
DSC signal of Ar-H2, there is an endothermic peak at 1284 ◦C, which indicates a liquid
phase transition.
Accordingly, the sintering temperatures were chosen at 1250 ◦C and 1280 ◦C. 1250 ◦C
is a reliable temperature in solid phase sintering. Moreover, a higher temperature also
leads to an increase in density since the diffusion depends on temperatures. [73]. Based
on the results from simulation and TGA, a small fraction of liquid phase occurs at 1280 ◦C.
A higher temperature may lead to a shape distortion.
Sintering Parameters
A tube furnace was employed to sinter samples in three different gas atmospheres (ar-
gon, nitrogen and mixture of 96% nitrogen and 4% hydrogen) at 1250 ◦C and 1280 ◦C,
respectively. Samples were heated until 1150 ◦C at a heating rate of 3 ◦C/min and in-
creased to the maximum temperatures at a lower heating rate of 2 ◦C/min holding for 2
hours, followed by cooling to the room temperature in the furnace.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
19
==PAGE:30==
3.4
Materials Characterization
Density
Density was tested based on the Archimedes’ Principle (ASTM B962-15) where samples
were weighted in air and liquid separately and the density was obtained by Equation 3.1.
The measurement was conducted on YDK 01-0D density determination kit (Sartorius,
Germany).
ρ =
Wa · ρl
Wa −Wl
(3.1)
where Wa is the weight of tested samples in air; Wl is the weight in liquid; ρl is the density
of the liquid.
By taking more factors into consideration, such as buoyancy of air and the change of liquid
buoyancy at different temperatures, Equation 3.2 provides more accurate results. Thus,
Equation 3.2 was used to calculate the density of samples.
ρcorr =
Wa · (ρl −ρa)
0.99983 · (Wa −Wl) + ρa
(3.2)
where ρa is the density of air.
In this case, the testing fluid was ethanol, instead of water, since ethanol provides several
advantages in the measurement. The sintered samples are porous, with small voids on
the surface and inside the body. Compared to water, ethanol has lower viscosity and
surface tension, making it easier to fill all the pores. Moreover, ethanol evaporates faster
than water, and thereby the possibility of contamination and corrosion is minimized.
Sample Preparation
After sintering, samples were cut in a parallel direction to the sintering direction by a
Accutom-50 cutting machine (Struers, Denmark).
The cross-section was hot-embedded (ProntoPress-20, Struers, Denmark) in epoxy resins.
Some samples had low mechanical properties leading to damages in pressing and hot-
embedding. Thus, the cold-embedding method was adopted to those samples.
The embedded samples were then grinded by sand papers from P500 to P4000, fol-
lowed by diamond polishing until 1 µm. The grinding and polishing were preformed on a
RotoPol-22 Semi-automatic grinder (Struers, Denmark) with the central force of 5 N and
the rotating speed of 150 RPM.
Light Optical Microscope
The light optical microscope was utilized to observe the cross-section of the sintered sam-
ples and count the porosities.
Scanning Electron Microscope
The microstructure was investigated with a Zeiss Ultra scanning electron microscope (Ger-
many), equipped with an energy-dispersive (EDS) detector. The accelerating voltage was
15 to 20 keV. A thin layer of carbon was sprayed on the sample surface to increase elec-
trical conductivity. Samples were connected with copper conductive paste and placed in
a vacuumed chamber.
X-ray Diffraction Analysis
X-ray Diffraction (XRD) was used to identify the phases formed after sintering. The test
20
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:31==
was conducted using Cu-Kα radiation (1.5418 [Å]) at a scanning rate of 0.5 s/step with a
step increment of 0.02◦. The diffractogram was captured in the 2-theta range from 30◦to
100◦.
Hardness Test
Vickers Hardness (HV) test was preformed on a DuraScan 70-G5 tester (Struers, Den-
mark) with a load of 0.2 kgf for 10 s. The size of the marks left on the surface of the material
by the indenter indicated the hardness of 440C. Although the samples were polished be-
fore running the hardness tests, the formation of pores after sintering might influence the
results.
Besides, three replicate tests were performed on each sample to calculate the mean and
minimize the errors.
Compression Test
The ultimate compressive strength was obtained by pressing the samples in a servo-
mechanical press Tresca (IPU, Denmark). The maximum force of the press was 150 kN.
The samples were tested between two heat-treated tool steel plates at a spead of 0.1
mm/s. Thus, the deflection of top and bottom platens was negligible. Before pressing,
the contact surfaces of samples were lubricated to minimize the influence of friction. Be-
sides, the displacement was obtained to calculate the strain. It started to record from
1.5 kN to the maximum compressive strength. The initial heights and diameters were
measured by a digital calliper.
In addition, three repetitions of each parameter setting were made to reduce the inaccu-
racy of the experiments.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
21
==PAGE:32==
22
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:33==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Shrinkage, Density and Porosity
The volumetric shrinkage of the samples occurs during the densification in sintering. Ta-
ble 4.1 presents the dimensions of the sintered samples in three directions (X, Y and Z
axis) and the volumtric shrinkages based on the fraction of the measured dimensions and
the initial preset dimensions (8x8x8 mm3). It is noting that the dimension is measured by
a digital caliper and therefore the results are not exactly precise.
At 1250 ◦C, the volumtric shrinkage is highly related to the saturation level and gas at-
mosphere. The high saturation is accompanied by a greater shrinkage, comparing the
shrinkages of three gas environment sets. The agglomeration effect occurs when the
binder bonds the powder particles, leading to localized agglomerates with large spac-
ing [79]. During the densification, the pore space and voids are reduced where volume
shrinkage occurs. The agglomeration effect is found in the green parts as shown in Fig-
ure 4.1, which exacerbates with higher saturation.
Besides, the largest shrinkage appears in the sample sintered in the mixture of nitrogen
and hydrogen, which reaches 33.107%. In argon environment, the shrinkage of binder
jetted cube is a minimum of 13.934%.
Figure 4.1: Agglomeration effect of powder particles due to the binder
The sintering temperature has the most signification impact on the shrinkage [12]. Theo-
retically, a higher sintering temperature leads to a larger shrinkage [46, 79]. However, the
results of the sintered samples at 1280 ◦C is contrary to expected results. The shrinkage
does not occur that much. The largest rate of the shrinkage is from the sample sintered in
nitrogen, which is 18.698%. The rest of samples keep their original dimensions, indicat-
ing the sintering process is not complete. It is observed some samples exceed the preset
dimensions, such as the 80% saturation sample sintered in nitrogen/hydrogen. There is
a possible explanation for exceeding the predetermined dimensions: the printed green
parts are commonly ten of microns (depending on the particle size) larger than the preset
dimensions due to the tolerance of binder in the planar direction [65], and the sintering
process is not effective. The dimension of samples is preserved from the initial size.
Based on the former study of green parts, when printing a cylinder (diameter of 10 mm
and height of 20 mm) in a direction parallel to the build plate, the resultant dimensions
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
23
==PAGE:34==
show average values of 10.08 mm in diameter and 20.23 in height from 12 data points.
Table 4.1: Volumetric shrinkage of sintered samples at different conditions
Sintering
Temperature
Gas (Saturation)
X (mm)
Y (mm)
Z (mm)
Volume (mm3)
Volumetric
Shrinkage (%)
1250 ◦C
N2-H2 (80)
7.07
7.13
6.87
346.311
32.361
N2-H2 (120)
7.04
7.01
6.94
342.492
33.107
Ar (80)
7.52
7.63
7.68
440.660
13.934
Ar (120)
7.45
7.43
7.43
411.277
19.673
N2 (80)
7.4
7.63
7.49
422.900
17.402
N2 (120)
7.43
7.44
7.4
409.066
20.104
1280 ◦C
N2-H2 (80)
8.05
8.03
8.06
521.010
-1.760
N2-H2 (120)
7.96
7.92
7.95
501.193
2.111
Ar (80)
8.01
8.03
8.03
516.492
-0.877
Ar (120)
7.91
7.98
7.94
501.187
2.112
N2 (80)
7.44
7.46
7.5
416.268
18.698
N2 (120)
8.11
8.1
8.08
530.783
-3.669
Figure 4.2 presents the images of the sintered samples, in which Figure 4.2a, b, c are sin-
tered in nitrogen-hydrogen, argon, nitrogen, respectively. In each image, the left sample
is sintered at 1250 ◦C and the one on the right is sintered at 1280 ◦C. Figure 4.2d illus-
trates an an image of all the samples in sequence, following the same order as Figure 4.2a
to c. Apparently, the samples sintered at 1280 ◦C are larger.
Figure 4.2: Images of the sintered samples: in N2-H2 (a); in Ar (b); in N2 (c); comparison
of all the samples (d)
The absolute density of 440C powder is considered as 7.8 g/cm3. Table 4.3 gives the
relative density of sintered samples. The density is measured by the Archimedes’ princi-
ple, in which the immersion time is essential to ensure the liquid fill up all the pores of the
samples. Therefore, the density is recorded after immersing in the ethanol for 10 minutes.
24
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:35==
The highest density achieved is 90.68% of the theoretical density by the sample sintered
in nitrogen/hydrogen. Besides, the sample has been tested in a long immersion time of
24 hours, which reaches 93.78% density.
The correlation of the saturation level and the density is not found between the saturation
of 80% and 120%. Although some studies have noted that the increasing of saturation
level is beneficial to increase the density [80], there is an inflection point where the satu-
ration above a certain amount decreases the density [70]. It is speculated the inflection
point is between 80% and 120%. On the other hand, the impact of the saturation on the
density is not significant, typically within an interval of 5% [80, 79]. Therefore, the mea-
surement error may also be a factor causing the lack of evidence of correlation between
the saturation and the density.
Table 4.2: Density of sintered samples in percentage (%)
Sintering
Temperature
Sintering Environment (Saturation)
N2-H2 (80%)
N2-H2 (120%)
Ar (80%)
Ar (120%)
N2 (80%)
N2 (120%)
1250 ◦C
90.68
80.66
85.32
87.64
86.07
88.13
1280 ◦C
84.64
85.96
87.95
84.45
88.68
87.43
To further investigate the influence of sintering atmospheres and temperatures on the final
density, the results are grouped and categorized in Table 4.3.
The densities of samples sintered under different sintering atmospheres are very close
to each other. However, the mean density of samples sintered in nitrogen atmosphere is
slightly higher than the samples sintered in argon and mixed gases.
The difference between the sintering temperatures is not obvious. Nevertheless, the in-
crease of sintering temperature and the presence of liquid phase improve the density
theoretically [47, 72, 73]. Therefore, it reinforces the idea that the potential oxidation af-
fects the sintered samples and hinders the sintering process.
Table 4.3: Density of samples sintering in different gas atmospheres in percentage (%)
1250 ◦C
Atmosphere
N2H2
Ar
N2
Average
86.41736
Relative Density (%)
85.67142
86.47763
87.10303
STD
3.378273
1280 ◦C
Atmosphere
N2H2
Ar
N2
Average
86.51807
Relative Density (%)
85.30242
86.19801
88.05378
STD
1.769262
4.2
Microstructure
The solid phase sintering depends on the diffusion and rearrangement of pores. The
excessive distance between particles leads to the difficulty in forming necks. It is hypoth-
esized the physical vibration after debinding decreases the packing density and results
in the inhomogeneity of sintered samples. The debinding process was preformed in a
tube furnace. The samples were stacked in a sintering boat. After debinding, the sam-
ples were picked up and placed in a sample box until they were sintered. Without the
polymeric bonding, the debinded samples, which rely on the solid-state diffusion and me-
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
25
==PAGE:36==
chanical interlocking, were even more fragile than the green parts. The movement and
vibration of samples lead to locally undesirable packing density and damages. These de-
fects are the primary contributors to the high porosity in sintering. The microstructure of
the sample cross-section has supported this hypothesis as shown in Figure 4.3.
The cross-section has a relatively high density in the center and a high porosity at the
edge. Besides, the distribution of porosity exhibits a regular rectangular shape and does
not present at all the boundaries, which is not caused by printing. It is presumed to be the
result of a collision.
Figure 4.3: High porosity occurs at the edge of the cross-section (the samples is 120%
saturation sintered in nitrogen at 1250 ◦C)
Although the handling of the debinded parts causes negative effects on the final density
and porosity, the effect of the gas atmospheres and sintering temperatures on the sam-
ples can be characterized in the sintered region.
Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5 present the pore morphology of sintered samples at 1250 ◦C
and 1280 ◦C, respectively. Since the sintering performance of the entire samples is not
homogeneous, the porosity obtained by image analysis software is not reliable. Thus, the
images from the light optical microscope are used to analyze the shape and size of the
pores.
In 80% saturation level, the pores of the samples appearing around the powder particles
are irregular and connected. The sintering necks are forming and the size of pores are
gradually reduced.
The high saturation seems to locally enhance the sintering performance by comparing
80% saturation samples and 120% saturation samples. The size of pores is smaller and
the more closed pores are formed as illustrated in Figure 4.4b and Figure 4.4f. The domi-
nant pores are irregular and small-sized with a small fraction of large pores along with the
densification.
26
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.4: Samples sintered at 1250 ◦C under 100X light optical microscopy
At 1280 ◦C, some of the samples (Figure 4.5a, c and f) that retained a similar powder
morphology have low mechanical properties that are adopted to use the cold-embedding
method and therefore have darker background where the morphology of the powder par-
ticles retains. The appearance of scratches due to dislodged metal particles during pol-
ishing is also an evidence of their poor structures.
It is observed in the region of well-sintered samples at 1280 ◦C that the pores are smaller
than the samples sintered at 1250 ◦C in both size and number (e.g. the comparison
of Figure 4.4b and Figure 4.5b, Figure 4.4f and Figure 4.5e). The pores are uniformly
distributed and prone to be more spherical. In some regions, it has formed densified
structures. The size of closed pores sintered in nitrogen is the smallest. There are some
connected pores in the samples sintered in nitrogen/hydrogen and argon (Figure 4.5b, d).
Figure 4.5: Samples sintered at 1280 ◦C under 100X light optical microscopy
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.6 demonstrates the images of samples sintered in N2-H2 at 1250 ◦C from scan-
ning electron microscope where a, b and c represent 80% saturation and d, e and f are
printed with 120% saturation.
It is clear that the porosity of the sample is high (Figure 4.6a), where the darker areas
represent higher porosity. The sintering does not appear in some regions (Figure 4.6b)
due to the inadequate packing density. The unsintered parts retain the morphology of the
powder particles. The formation of sintering necks are observed as the contact area of
the original powder is large. For 120% saturation sample (Figure 4.6d, e, f), the porosity
is relatively lower.
Figure 4.6: SEM images of samples sintered in N2-H2 at 1250 ◦C: 80% saturation (a, b,
c) and 120% saturation (d, e, f)
The EDS image (Figure 4.7) is from the sample with 120% saturation sintered in nitro-
gen/hydrogen at 1250 ◦C. There are two distinct pores formed during the densification in
the center of the image. Inside the pores, the carbon content is high since the sample is
sprayed with carbon to increase its conductivity. It is expected carbon is enriched in the
pores. At the grain boundaries, the presence of oxidation in the form of chromium oxides
and molybdenum oxides is observed. Since the initial chromium content is way higher
than the molybdenum, the chromium oxide is dominant.
28
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.7: EDS images of sample (120% saturation) sintered in N2-H2 at 1250 ◦C
In Ar environment, the distribution of pores in the samples is relatively uniform. However,
there is a large pore in the middle of the Figure 4.8a, which is due to the agglomera-
tion effect of the powder that reduces the local packing density, and is also difficult to
eliminate during the densification process. The formation of sintering neck is observed
(Figure 4.8b). From the SEM images of the 120% saturation sample, there are some
marks caused by the flaking of powder particles as shown in Figure 4.8d and e. The
voids can be observed at either end of the marks. The powder particles near the voids
lack metallic bonding, and therefore have poor strength.
Figure 4.8: SEM images of samples sintered in Ar at 1250 ◦C: 80% saturation (a, b, c)
and 120% saturation (d, e, f)
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
29
==PAGE:40==
From the EDS results as shown in Figure 4.9, the main elements enriched at the grain
boundaries are chromium, carbon and oxygen. It is presumed that the chromium carbides
and the chromium oxides are surrounding the powder particles.
Figure 4.9: EDS images of sample (120% saturation) sintered in Ar at 1250 ◦C
Figure 4.10 illustrates the 80% saturation and 120% saturation samples sintered in N2 at
1250 ◦C under the scanning electron microscope.
The middle of the sample is denser, while the high porosity is distributed at the boundary
as illustrated in Figure 4.10a and d. The voids appear around the particles (Figure 4.10c).
Figure 4.10: SEM images of samples sintered in N2 at 1250 ◦C: 80% saturation (a, b, c)
and 120% saturation (d, e, f)
30
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:41==
From the EDS results (Figure 4.11) of the sample sintered in nitrogen at 1250 ◦C, it is
observed that oxygen and chromium are present surrounding the large pores, which is
presumed to be chromium oxides. However, the amount of chromium considerably ex-
ceeds the amount of oxygen from the EDS results. The distribution of chromium is also
detected in the region of particle fusion. It is presumed the chromium enriches at the grain
boundaries in the form of chromium nitrides. Since the nitrogen is not included in the EDS
result, it still need to be confirmed by other ways.
Figure 4.11: EDS images of sample (120% saturation) sintered in N2 at 1250 ◦C
For the liquid phase sintering, Figure 4.12, Figure 4.14 and Figure 4.16 illustrate the SEM
images of samples sintered at 1280 ◦C in N2-H2, Ar, N2, respectively.
The samples in N2-H2 at 1280 ◦C, it is observed that the powder particles present in the
sintered samples. The sintering necks are weak. It is presumed to be the lack of packing
density. Once the distance between two adjacent particles is too large, the formation and
growth of the sintering necks become much more difficult.
Although the performance of sintering is not homogenous, the particle fusion exists in
some regions, and it is observed the appearance of the liquid phase marks (e.g. Fig-
ure 4.12f).
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.12: SEM images of samples sintered in N2-H2 at 1280 ◦C: 80% saturation (a, b,
c) and 120% saturation (d, e, f)
Figure 4.13 demonstrates the EDS image of the sampled sintered in N2-H2 at 1280 ◦C.
The main elements at the particle boundaries are chromium oxide and manganese oxide,
possibly accompanied by small amounts of carbide. There is a possibility that the car-
bon is from the carbon spraying, instead of the material. After polishing the sample, the
gold spraying method can be used as an alternative way to the carbon spraying method to
further analyze the sample. Besides, the nitrides are not detected from the testing sample.
Figure 4.13: EDS images of sample (120% saturation) sintered in N2-H2 at 1280 ◦C
32
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:43==
In Argon, the morphology of the powder particles also appears, which is similar to the
sintering in N2-H2. The small pores are found in the sintered region (Figure 4.14d).
Figure 4.14: SEM images of samples sintered in Ar at 1280 ◦C: 80% saturation (a, b, c)
and 120% saturation (d, e, f)
The EDS results further illustrate the products of sintering, as shown in Figure 4.15.
Chromium carbides and chromium oxides are concentrated at the grain boundaries. Be-
sides, molybdenum carbides and molybdenum oxides are also found at the same time.
Figure 4.15: EDS images of sample (120% saturation) sintered in Ar at 1280 ◦C
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
33
==PAGE:44==
For the samples sintered in N2 at 1280 ◦C, the SEM image is shown in Figure 4.16. The
high porosity appears on the sample of 120% saturation (Fgure 4.16a and d). The sinter-
ing is relatively excellent in some areas (Figure 4.16), retaining low porosity.
Figure 4.16: SEM images of samples sintered in N2 at 1280 ◦C: 80% saturation (a, b, c)
and 120% saturation (d, e, f)
From the EDS results, a noticeable amount of nitrides is detected, corresponding to the
distribution of chromium and molybdenum. A small amount of oxide is also present on
the surface of the sample.
Figure 4.17: EDS images of sample (120% saturation) sintered in N2 at 1280 ◦C
34
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:45==
4.3
Elemental Analysis
Carbon Content
The carbon content in the process chain of binder jetting has been tracked as shown in
Figure 4.18.
There is about 1.1 wt% carbon in the powder. After debinding, the carbon content in-
creases since the residual binder contains a small amount of carbon and stays in the
debinded parts. This hypothesis is also supported by comparing the debinded parts with
different saturation levels, 80% and 120%. The more binder used, the higher carbon con-
tent contained. The increment of carbon is small so that it is not sufficient to have an
impact on sintering.
The sintering process is accompanied by a loss of carbon content. It is found that the
decarbonization exhibits on the samples sintered at both 1250 ◦C and 1280 ◦C and the
sintering atmosphere affects the carbon content of the final samples. In N2-H2 environ-
ment, the carbon loss is relatively low, compared with agron atmosphere and nitrogen
atmosphere. The carbon contents are around 0.93% and 0.99% in the samples at 80%
saturation and 120%, respectively. Due to the usage of reducing gas (hydrogen), even if
oxides are present in the samples, the oxides will react with hydrogen first, and produce
water. In contrast, if sintering is performed in pure nitrogen, the oxides take away a par-
tial portion of the carbon from the material. It explains the results of the carbon content
sintered in nitrogen is lower than in nitrogen/hydrogen from Figure 4.18. The 80% satura-
tion samples have an average carbon content of 0.82% and the 120% saturation samples
have 0.86% carbon. Since argon is an inert gas that does not participate in any reaction,
the carbon loss in both 1250 ◦C sintering and 1280 ◦C sintering indicates the presence of
oxygen in the sample and in the furnace. The carbon contents of the samples sintered in
argon are 0.85% in 80% saturation and a mean value of about 0.86% in 120% saturation.
The difference of the carbon content between argon and nitrogen derives from the im-
purities of the gas supply. The higher carbon content in the samples sintered in argon
indicates the purity of the argon is higher than the nitrogen.
Figure 4.18: Carbon content of 440C powder, debinded parts and sintered parts
Figrue 4.19 demonstrates the simulation result of the solidus phase temperature as a
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
35
==PAGE:46==
function of carbon content from Thermo-Calc. It is clear that with the carbon content de-
creases the solidus phase temperature increases. Between 0.85% and 1.2% carbon, the
difference of the solidus phase temperature is minimal. However, once the carbon content
reduces to less than 0.85%, the solidus temperature increases rapidly. At 0.7% carbon,
the solidus phase temperature is as high as 1320 ◦C.
Therefore, an excessive loss of carbon in some regions leads to an inhomogeneous sin-
tering performance that compromises the overall quality of the sintered samples. The
desired fraction of the liquid phase is about 5% to 10%. The carbon loss indicates that
the liquid phase ratio may be lower than expected.
Figure 4.19: Variation of solid phase temperature with different carbon content between
0.7% and 1.2%
Nitrogen Content
The nitrogen content is approximately 0.15% in the 440C powder. After debinding, the
nitrogen content increases to 0.3%. For the samples sintered at 1250 ◦C, the sintering of
the samples in both nitrogen/hydrogen and pure nitrogen results in a high nitrogen content
as the nitriding, while in argon the nitrogen content is few. Besides, the concentration of
the nitrogen has an impact on the nitriding. The samples sintered in pure nitrogen have a
higher nitrogen content than in the mixture of nitrogen/hydrogen. At 1280 ◦C, the nitrogen
content in the samples exhibits a similar trend, except the samples sintered in nitrogen/hy-
drogenh have a very low nitrogen content. It is noting that the nitrogen solubility reduces
with the temperature. In a higher temperature, the amount of nitrides is decreased.
36
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.20: Nitrogen content of 440C powder, debinded parts and sintered parts
Oxygen Content
The initial oxygen content from the 440C powder feedstock is around 0.09%. There is
an increase after debinding, which reaches 0.2%. During the sintering, a small amount
of oxides can be removed. For the samples sintered at 1250 ◦C, the oxygen content is
around 0.03% in three gas atmospheres. The lowest oxygen content is detected from
the samples sintered in nitrogen/hydrogen. Due to the usage of reducing gas, the oxides
react with hydrogen producing water vapour. Therefore, addition of reducing gas to the
sintering gas environment is beneficial to reduce the oxidation. From the samples sinter-
ing at 1280 ◦C, the high oxygen content indicates the possibility of being oxidised.
Figure 4.21: Oxygen content of 440C powder, debinded parts and sintered parts
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
37
==PAGE:48==
4.4
Phase Analysis
Figure 4.22, Figure 4.23 and Figure 4.24 demonstrate the XRD spectra of sintered sam-
ples at 1250 ◦C and 1280 ◦C, corresponding to N2-H2, Ar and N2, respectively.
It is expected that the saturation level has no influence of the phases after sintering, since
the chemical composite remains the same with the satruation level. Although the per-
centage of each element varies slightly due to the saturation, only the qualitative phase
analysis is involved in this work. Therefore, the x-ray diffraction peaks appear at the iden-
tical 2-theta values of 80% and 120% saturation. The XRD results are influenced by the
gas atmospheres and sintering temperatures.
In N2-H2 environment, the dominate phase is ferrite in both 1250 ◦C samples and 1280 ◦C
samples. The presence of chromium nitrides is detected.
Figure 4.22: XRD spectra of the samples sintered in N2-H2
Figure 4.23 displays the presence of chromium carbides (Cr7C3) in the samples sintered
in argon at 1250 ◦C, according to the XRD results. However, the samples sintered at
1280 ◦C shows the samples contain both iron oxides and chromium oxides. The main
phase of the samples in argon is a ferrite phase.
38
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.23: XRD spectra of the samples sintered in Ar
Figure 4.24: XRD spectra of the samples sintered in N2
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
39
==PAGE:50==
The XRD spectra of the samples sintered in nitrogen at 1250 ◦C (Figure 4.24) indicates
the dominant phase is a ferrite phase with a fraction of chromium nitrides (Cr2N) and iron
nitrides (Fe2N). For the samples sintered at 1280 ◦C, apart from the chromium nitrides
and iron nitrides, the peak corresponds to another iron nitride (Fe3N).
The results of XRD diffractograms are consistent with the microstructure from the EDS
results. Due to the slow cooling rate, the samples sintered in three different gas atmo-
spheres present a ferrite phase. The original results of the XRD test are demonstrated in
the Appendix A.3.
4.5
Mechanical Properties
Compression Strength and Strain
The ultimate compressive strength and strain of sintered samples are illustrated in Fig-
ure 4.25.
Overall, the samples sintered at 1250 ◦C have higher strength than 1280 ◦C. The highest
strength achieved is around 1500 MPa, which is printed in 120% saturation and sintered
in N2-H2 at 1250 ◦C. At 1250 ◦C, the strength of the samples sintered in argon is basically
comparable to the samples sintered in nitrogen, which is approximately 560 MPa in 80%
satuation and 760 MPa in 120% saturation.
The higher saturation level provides a higher compressive strength, comparing 80% sat-
uration and 120% saturation in three different gas atmospheres. The high saturation
ensures the integrity of the samples during handling. The saturation level affects the
samples to a degree that increases as the strength of the samples decreases. For the
samples sintered in argon and nitrogen/hydrogen at 1280 ◦C, a high saturation leads to a
significant increase in strength since the initial strength of the samples is very low. This
phenomena may also be explained that the agglomeration of powder particles improves
the sinterability of the brown parts, resulting in better sintering performance.
The strain of the samples corresponds to the results of the compressive strength. The
highest strain achieved by the same sample that has the highest strength is about 0.4.
At the sintering temperature of 1250 ◦C, the strain of the samples sintered in argon and
nitrogen/hydrogen is between 0.2 and 0.3. However, for the samples sintered at 1280 ◦C,
the difference between gas atmospheres is larger. In argon, the highest strain is around
3.2. The lowest strain is from the 120% saturation samples sintered in nitrogen, which is
approximately 0.7.
40
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.25: Ultimate compressive strength and strain of sintered 440C samples
Hardness
The hardness of samples is demonstrated in Figure 4.26. The hardness of the samples
at the two sintering temperatures varies considerably. The hardest sample reaches an
average of 257 HV0.2/10s, which is sintered in the mixture gas of nitrogen and hydrogen
at 1250 ◦C. However, the harderness is not uniformly distributed on the cross-section.
Although the hardest region is measured as high as 385 HV0.2/10s, a result with a hard-
ness of 92.1 HV0.2/10s is also found on the same sample. In general, the hardness of
the samples sintered at 1250 ◦C is concentrated in the interval between 80 HV0.2/10s and
160 HV0.2/10s. The samples sintered in argon have slightly higher hardness than in nitro-
gen.
At 1280 ◦C, the hardness of the sintered samples is lower then the samples sintered
in 1250 ◦C. The surface hardness is relatively close in different sintering atmospheres,
which is in a range of 48 HV0.2/10s and 88 HV0.2/10s. In nitrogen, the hardness is higher
at 88 HV0.2/10s.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.26: Hardness of samples sintered in different gas atmospheres and temperatures
The hardness is comparable to sintered 440C compacts produced by metal injection mold-
ing [39], in which sintering in pure hydrogen and vacuum at 1250 ◦C, resulting in a hard-
ness of approximately 27 HRC and 38 HRC, respectively.
4.6
Discussion
A series of experiments and investigations have been done to produce high density binder
jetted samples with stainless steel 440C. This task involves the optimization of each pro-
cess, although sintering is the most direct and the final step to achieve its final quality and
density.
The proper printing parameters lay solid groundwork for the post processes. From the
findings of this work, the agglomeration effect of the high saturation level is a double-
edged sword: on the one hand, it partially improves the packing density and eases the
handling of green parts, which helps the sintering process. On the other hand, the ag-
glomeration effect leads to an inhomogeneous distribution of powder particles and the
presence of large pores after sintering. Moreover, the selection of 80% and 120% sat-
uration does not present a massive difference on the volumetric shrinkage and shape
distortion. Therefore, it is suggested to adopt a high saturation level for the further re-
search.
The goal of debinding is to burn out the polymeric bonding between particles, avoiding the
extra elements from residual binders and chemical reactions with ambient atmospheres.
The thermogravimetric analysis indicates the chemical reactions between the samples
and the debinding gas by monitoring the mass change. Air is a suitable and low cost gas
environment that removes binders efficiently. Due to the presence of oxygen, the debind-
ing temperature is suggested to keep below 450 ◦C. Otherwise, the formation of oxides
will hinder the sintering process and take away the carbon from the material. Moreover,
the debinded parts are fragile and slowly react with the ambient environment, which are
advised to reduce the movement of samples and the storing time. In some studies, a
combination of debinding and sintering process has been used. It ensures the improve-
ment of the overall quality of the samples.
The sintering process had been conducted on pure nitrogen, pure argon and nitrogen/hy-
42
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:53==
drogen environment and investigated the reactions between the samples and the sintering
gases. With the addition of reducing gas, it helps to remove a few oxides. In both nitro-
gen and nitrogen/hydrogen gas atmosphere, the formation of nitrides is observed. Since
argon does not react with the samples, the samples consists of ferrite phase with a small
fraction of oxides. The oxidation layer appears at the boundary of the powder particles
that impedes the densification process.
The basis for achieving a high density in sintering is the high packing density, which re-
quires the packing density exceeds 50% of the theoretical density [7]. The packing density
varies with the particle size, shape and the spreading approach. The binder plays a role
of bonding agents that guarantees a firm structure of the binder jetted parts. After the
debinding, the samples become more fragile. Collision and movement can lead to an
unsatisfactory packing density that influences the sintering performance.
In addition, a long storage duration of the debinded samples has an adverse effect on the
sintering. It is speculated that the samples have been oxidized. The degree of oxidation
is correlated with the specific surface area [66]. Since the debinded samples are porous,
the specific surface area is high, which makes it easier to be oxidized. According to Li et
al., the 440C samples were laid in air for days after debinding, resulting in an increase
of oxygen content to 0.33% [9]. On the one hand, if the chromium reserves in the steel
are not sufficient to carry the oxidation reaction to its completion, other elements will be
involved in the oxidation reaction, such as the formation of iron oxide [66]. The chromium
oxides (Cr2O3) will impede the formation of sintering necks and therefore hamper the
densification [9]. On the other hand, the carbon content is decreased locally due to the
oxidation-reduction reaction. The sintering performance may become inhomogeneous.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:55==
5
Conclusion
5.1
Summary
This thesis aims to adopt the binder jetting technology to the production of stainless steel
440C and optimze the process parameters to achieve high density of samples, including
printing, debinding and sintering.
For the printing process, the correlation between saturation level, layer thickness, part
orientation and the strength of green parts has been established, in which the saturation
level has a significant impact.
The experiments of thermogravimetric analysis reveal the influence of different gas envi-
ronments and temperature on debinding, including pure nitrogen, air, nitrogen/hydrogen
and carbon dioxide/nitrogen. The air environment has been considered as the optimal
debinding gas atmosphere due to a large mass loss and the temperature is determined
as 450 ◦C.
The solid phase sintering and the liquid phase sintering have been applied to the sinter-
ing of binder jetted stainless steel 440C objects. Besides, the influence of sintering gas
atmospheres on 440C samples is analyzed, including pure nitrogen, pure argon and a
mixture gas of nitrogen and hydrogen.
The resultant samples are characterised in a series of methods. The microstructure im-
ages from the light optical microscope and the scanning electron microscope present the
porous structure of sintered samples. The highest density achieved is about 93% mea-
sured by Archimede’s principle. The X-ray diffraction results reveal the phases of the
sintered samples, in which are mainly the ferrite phase. The compression test and the
hardness test give overall mechanical properties of the sintered samples. The highest
compressive strength reaches 1500 MPa and the highest hardness is 257 HV0.2/10s.
5.2
Future Work
Although the samples have been successfully sintered, the oxygen content from the sam-
ples and the low compressive strength indicate the possibility of oxidation since the de-
binded samples are placed in air for three weeks. To confirm the presence of oxide layers
in the samples and establish the correlation between the storing conditions after debind-
ing and the sintering performance, it requires further experiments.
Based on the TGA results and the modelling results, the sintering temperature at 1280 ◦C
is presumed to be in the supersolidus phase. However, from the microstructure of the
samples, the fraction of the liquid phase is low. Due to the carbon loss, the solid phase
temperature increases locally. Therefore, a higher sintering temperature is recommended
to compare with the current results until the shape distortion occurs.
In sintering process, although the sintering temperature has the primary impact on the
final densification, the holding time contributes to the sintering process, especially when
the size of the samples is large. It is suggested to increase the holding time as a com-
parison of this study. The pores are expected to become smaller. However, it is noting
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
45
==PAGE:56==
that the longer holding time potentially brings larger volumetric shrinkage [47] and grain
coarsening.
To improve the mechanical properties, the stainless steel 440C samples require to un-
dergo the heat treatment. The ferrite from the material transforms into the martensite,
resulting in higher strength. Besides, the tensile test can be utilized instead of the com-
pression test, in which can better demonstrate the brittleness of the material.
46
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Nathan B. Crane. “Impact of part thickness and drying conditions on saturation limits
in binder jet additive manufacturing”. eng. In: Additive Manufacturing 33 (2020),
p. 101127. ISSN: 22147810, 22148604. DOI: 10.1016/j.addma.2020.101127.
[2]
A. L. Maximenko et al. “Modeling of effect of powder spreading on green body di-
mensional accuracy in additive manufacturing by binder jetting”. eng. In: Powder
Technology 385 (2021), pp. 60–68. ISSN: 1873328x, 00325910. DOI: 10.1016/j.
powtec.2021.02.070.
[3]
Bastian Barthel, Frederik Janas, and Sandra Wieland. “Powder condition and spread-
ing parameter impact on green and sintered density in metal binder jetting”. In: Pow-
der Metallurgy 64.5 (2021), pp. 378–386. DOI: 10.1080/00325899.2021.1912923.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/00325899.2021.1912923. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1080/00325899.2021.1912923.
[4]
Hadi Miyanaji et al. “Effect of fine powder particles on quality of binder jetting parts”.
In: Additive Manufacturing 36 (2020), p. 101587. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2020.101587. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2214860420309593.
[5]
Nancy Huang et al. “Use of ultrasound to identify microstructure-property relation-
ships in 316 stainless steel fabricated with binder jet additive manufacturing”. In:
Additive Manufacturing 51 (2022), p. 102591. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.addma.2021.102591. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2214860421007387.
[6]
Peter R. Baker. “Three dimensional printing with fine metal powders”. In: Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology (1997). URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/46287.
[7]
Mohsen Ziaee and Nathan B. Crane. “Binder jetting: A review of process, materials,
and methods”. In: Additive Manufacturing 28 (2019), pp. 781–801. ISSN: 2214-
8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2019.05.031. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860418310078.
[8]
M. A. Newell et al. “Metal injection moulding of scissors using hardenable stainless
steel powders”. In: Powder Metallurgy 48.3 (2005), pp. 227–230. DOI: 10.1179/
174329005X71920. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1179/174329005X71920. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1179/174329005X71920.
[9]
Duxin Li et al. “Powder injection molding 440C stainless steel”. eng. In: International
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 49.1-4 (2010), pp. 105–110. ISSN:
02683768, 14333015. DOI: 10.1007/s00170-009-2398-8.
[10]
SACHS EMANUEL M et al. “THREE-DIMENSIONAL PRINTING TECHNIQUES”.
Granted Patent US 5204055 A (United States). Apr. 20, 1993. URL: https://lens.
org/065-793-465-753-397.
[11]
E. Sachs et al. “Three Dimensional Printing: Rapid Tooling and Prototypes Directly
from a CAD Model”. In: Journal of Engineering for Industry 114.4 (Nov. 1992),
pp. 481–488. ISSN: 0022-0817. DOI: 10.1115/1.2900701. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.2900701.
[12]
Yujia Wang and Yaoyao Fiona Zhao. “Investigation of Sintering Shrinkage in Binder
Jetting Additive Manufacturing Process”. In: Procedia Manufacturing 10 (2017).
45th SME North American Manufacturing Research Conference, NAMRC 45, LA,
USA, pp. 779–790. ISSN: 2351-9789. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.
07.077. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2351978917302597.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
47
==PAGE:58==
[13]
Guanxiong Miao et al. “A literature review on powder spreading in additive manu-
facturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing 58 (2022), p. 103029. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2022.103029. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2214860422004213.
[14]
Rui Xu and Wenguang Nan. “Analysis of the metrics and mechanism of powder
spreadability in powder-based additive manufacturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing
71 (2023), p. 103596. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2023.
103596. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860423002099.
[15]
Prveen Bidare et al. “Powder reusability in Metal Binder Jetting”. In: Proceedings
of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part E: Journal of Process Mechanical
Engineering 0.0 (2023), p. 09544089221147778. DOI: 10.1177/09544089221147778.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/09544089221147778. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/
09544089221147778.
[16]
Romain Ravel et al. “Combining experiments and modelling to predict the compe-
tition between liquid spreading and impregnation in porous media for Metal Binder
Jetting applications”. In: Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineer-
ing Aspects 666 (2023), p. 131347. ISSN: 0927-7757. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.colsurfa.2023.131347. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0927775723004314.
[17]
Shibiao Wu et al. “Study on powder particle behavior in powder spreading with dis-
crete element method and its critical implications for binder jetting additive manu-
facturing processes”. In: Virtual and Physical Prototyping 18.1 (2023), e2158877.
DOI: 10.1080/17452759.2022.2158877. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/17452759.
2022.2158877. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/17452759.2022.2158877.
[18]
Jiawei Cai, Baicheng Zhang, and Xuanhui Qu. “Microstructure evolution and me-
chanical behavior of SS316L alloy fabricated by a non-toxic and low residue binder
jetting process”. In: Applied Surface Science 616 (2023), p. 156589. ISSN: 0169-
4332. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2023.156589. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169433223002659.
[19]
Dustin Gilmer et al. “An in-situ crosslinking binder for binder jet additive manufac-
turing”. In: Additive Manufacturing 35 (2020), p. 101341. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2020.101341. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2214860420307132.
[20]
Marco Zago et al. “Dimensional and geometrical precision of parts produced by
binder jetting process as affected by the anisotropic shrinkage on sintering”. In:
Additive Manufacturing 43 (2021), p. 102007. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.addma.2021.102007. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S221486042100172X.
[21]
Kaiwen Zhang et al. “Numerical simulation and experimental measurement of pres-
sureless sintering of stainless steel part printed by Binder Jetting Additive Manu-
facturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing 47 (2021), p. 102330. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2021.102330. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2214860421004887.
[22]
Alberto Molinari et al. “Effect of geometry and green density on the anisotropic sin-
tering shrinkage of axisymmetric iron parts”. In: Powder Metallurgy 61.4 (2018),
pp. 267–275. DOI: 10.1080/00325899.2018.1483064. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/
00325899.2018.1483064. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/00325899.2018.1483064.
[23]
Seong Jun Park et al. “New possibilities in polymer binder jetting additive manufac-
turing via infiltration and warm isostatic pressing”. In: Materials & Design 231 (2023),
48
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:59==
p. 112045. ISSN: 0264-1275. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2023.112045.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264127523004604.
[24]
Kunhao Feng et al. “Preparation of low residual silicon content Si-SiC ceramics by
binder jetting additive manufacturing and liquid silicon infiltration”. In: Journal of the
European Ceramic Society (2023). ISSN: 0955-2219. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jeurceramsoc.2023.05.038. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0955221923003990.
[25]
Fan Fei et al. “Hydrothermal-Assisted Transient Binder Jetting of Ceramics for Achiev-
ing High Green Density”. eng. In: Jom 72.3 (2020), pp. 1307–1313. ISSN: 15431851,
10474838. DOI: 10.1007/s11837-019-03962-2.
[26]
Kuo-Tsung Huang, Shih-Hsien Chang, and Pei-Chung Hsieh. “Microstructure, me-
chanical properties and corrosion behavior of NbC modified AISI 440C stainless
steel by vacuum sintering and heat treatments”. In: Journal of Alloys and Com-
pounds 712 (2017), pp. 760–767. ISSN: 0925-8388. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jallcom.2017.04.125. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925838817313245.
[27]
Junaidi Syarif et al. “Effect of Partial Solution Treatment Temperature on Microstruc-
ture and Tensile Properties of 440C Martensitic Stainless Steel”. In: Metals 10.5
(2020). ISSN: 2075-4701. DOI: 10.3390/met10050694. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/2075-4701/10/5/694.
[28]
Kuo Tsung Huang et al. “Microstructures and mechanical properties of 440C stain-
less steel strengthened with TaC via vacuum sintering and heat treatments”. eng. In:
Materials Transactions 56.9 (2015), pp. 1585–1590. ISSN: 13475320, 13459678.
DOI: 10.2320/matertrans.M2015147.
[29]
Gyung Bae Bang et al. “Microstructural and mechanical properties of AISI 440C
stainless steel fabricated using selective laser melting”. In: Materials Science and
Engineering: A 860 (2022), p. 144259. ISSN: 0921-5093. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.msea.2022.144259. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921509322016392.
[30]
Abeer Salih et al. “Effect of Different Heat Treatment on the SS440C Martensitic
Stainless Steel”. In: Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences 5 (Dec. 2011).
[31]
Kuo-Tsung Huang et al. “Microstructures and Mechanical Properties of 440C Stain-
less Steel Strengthened with TaC via Vacuum Sintering and Heat Treatments”. In:
MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS 56 (Sept. 2015), pp. 1585–1590. DOI: 10 . 2320 /
matertrans.M2015147.
[32]
Ralph Bush, Jacob Gill, and Jarred Teakell. “Heat Treatment Optimization and Fab-
rication of a 440C Stainless Steel Knife”. eng. In: Jom 68.12 (2016), pp. 3167–3173.
ISSN: 15431851, 10474838. DOI: 10.1007/s11837-016-2117-5.
[33]
G. Prieto et al. “Rolling Contact Fatigue Resistance of Cryogenically Treated AISI
440C Steel”. eng. In: Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance 29.4 (2020),
pp. 2216–2226. ISSN: 15441024, 10599495. DOI: 10.1007/s11665-020-04777-y.
[34]
K. Jalaja et al. “Metallurgical Analysis of Failed AISI 440C Hydraulic Amplifier Valve
Spool for Launch Vehicle Actuators”. eng. In: Journal of Failure Analysis and Pre-
vention 23.2 (2023), pp. 728–738. ISSN: 18641245, 15477029. DOI: 10 . 1007 /
s11668-023-01597-9.
[35]
A. J. Slifka et al. “Tribological Behavior of 440C Martensitic Stainless Steel from
−184°C to 750°C”. eng. In: Materials (1992), pp. 323–330. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-
4757-9050-4_41.
[36]
K. Jalaja et al. “Metallurgical analysis of surface distress on balls during the op-
eration of AISI 440C ball bearings for satellite applications”. eng. In: Engineering
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
49
==PAGE:60==
Failure Analysis 124 (2021), p. 105376. ISSN: 18731961, 13506307. DOI: 10.1016/
j.engfailanal.2021.105376.
[37]
Guoqing Zhang et al. “Microstructure evolution and mechanical properties of T15
high speed steel prepared by twin-atomiser spray forming and thermo-mechanical
processing”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: A 558 (2012), pp. 566–571.
ISSN: 0921-5093. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2012.08.050. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921509312011719.
[38]
Vania M. Rodríguez et al. “Effect of Heat Treatment Processes on the Microstruc-
ture and Mechanical Properties of Spray-Formed 440C Martensitic Stainless Steel”.
In: steel research international n/a.n/a (), p. 2200749. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1002/srin.202200749. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/srin.
202200749. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/srin.202200749.
[39]
W.S.W Harun et al. “Effect of MIM Processing Parameters on the Properties of 440C
Stainless Steel”. In: Journal of the Japan Society of Powder and Powder Metallurgy
59 (May 2012), pp. 264–271. DOI: 10.2497/jjspm.59.264.
[40]
Venkata K. Nadimpalli et al. “Interface engineering of functionally graded steel-
steel composites by laser powder bed fusion”. In: Manufacturing Letters 28 (2021),
pp. 46–49. ISSN: 2213-8463. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mfglet.2021.03.003.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2213846321000146.
[41]
Daniel Gatões et al. “Selective Laser Melting and Mechanical Properties of Stainless
Steels”. In: Materials 15.21 (2022). ISSN: 1996-1944. DOI: 10.3390/ma15217575.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1944/15/21/7575.
[42]
Charnnarong Saikaew and Worakarn Sawatwor. “Influence of Proposed Hardening
Process on Hardness and Toughness of Martensitic Stainless Steel”. In: Key Engi-
neering Materials 750 (Aug. 2017), pp. 103–106. DOI: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/
KEM.750.103.
[43]
B. Venkatesh et al. “Corrosive behavior of 440C and M50 steels for marine ap-
plications”. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 2648.1 (Nov. 2022). 030010. ISSN:
0094-243X. DOI: 10.1063/5.0114398. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/acp/article-
pdf/doi/10.1063/5.0114398/16228272/030010\_1\_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1063/5.0114398.
[44]
L. Pan, C.T. Kwok, and K.H. Lo. “Friction-stir processing of AISI 440C high-carbon
martensitic stainless steel for improving hardness and corrosion resistance”. In:
Journal of Materials Processing Technology 277 (2020), p. 116448. ISSN: 0924-
0136. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2019.116448. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924013619304212.
[45]
Kuo-Tsung Huang et al. “Effects of Particle Size of Pre-Alloy Powders and Vacuum
Sintering Temperatures on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties of 440C
Stainless Steel”. In: ISIJ International 56 (Mar. 2016), pp. 335–340. DOI: 10.2355/
isijinternational.ISIJINT-2015-469.
[46]
B Verlee, T Dormal, and J Lecomte-Beckers. “Density and porosity control of sin-
tered 316L stainless steel parts produced by additive manufacturing”. In: Powder
Metallurgy 55.4 (2012), pp. 260–267. DOI: 10 . 1179 / 0032589912Z . 00000000082.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1179/0032589912Z.00000000082. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1179/0032589912Z.00000000082.
[47]
Issa Rishmawi, Mehrnaz Salarian, and Mihaela Vlasea. “Tailoring green and sin-
tered density of pure iron parts using binder jetting additive manufacturing”. In: Ad-
ditive Manufacturing 24 (2018), pp. 508–520. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.addma.2018.10.015. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2214860418304731.
50
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:61==
[48]
Zhao fa Zhang et al. “Binder jetting 3D printing process optimization for rapid cast-
ing of green parts with high tensile strength”. eng. In: China Foundry 18.4 (2021),
pp. 335–343. ISSN: 23659459, 16726421. DOI: 10.1007/s41230-021-1057-z.
[49]
Heather N. Emady et al. “Granule formation mechanisms and morphology from sin-
gle drop impact on powder beds”. In: Powder Technology 212.1 (2011), pp. 69–
79. ISSN: 0032-5910. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2011.04.030. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0032591011002257.
[50]
Yun Bai et al. “Characterizing Binder–Powder Interaction in Binder Jetting Additive
Manufacturing Via Sessile Drop Goniometry”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Science
and Engineering 141.1 (Oct. 2018). 011005. ISSN: 1087-1357. DOI: 10.1115/1.
4041624. eprint: https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/manufacturingscience/article-
pdf/141/1/011005/6278738/manu\_141\_01\_011005.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.4041624.
[51]
Truong Do, Patrick Kwon, and Chang Seop Shin. “Process development toward
full-density stainless steel parts with binder jetting printing”. In: International Journal
of Machine Tools and Manufacture 121 (2017). Special Issue on the State-of-the-
Art in North American Manufacturing Research, pp. 50–60. ISSN: 0890-6955. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2017.04.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0890695516304758.
[52]
Asier Lores et al. “A review on recent developments in binder jetting metal additive
manufacturing: materials and process characteristics”. eng. In: Powder Metallurgy
62.5 (2019), pp. 267–296. ISSN: 17432901, 00325899. DOI: 10.1080/00325899.
2019.1669299.
[53]
Yuji Soda, Takashi Hurusaki, and Michitaka Aihara. “Improvement in the MIM Sin-
tering Properties of 440C Stainless Steel”. In: Korean Society of Powder Metallurgy
(2006), pp. 217–218. URL: https://db.koreascholar.com/Article/Detail/4211.
[54]
Amir Mostafaei et al. “Powder bed binder jet printed alloy 625: Densification, mi-
crostructure and mechanical properties”. In: Materials & Design 108 (2016), pp. 126–
135. ISSN: 0264-1275. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2016.06.067. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026412751630819X.
[55]
Peeyush Nandwana et al. “Powder bed binder jet 3D printing of Inconel 718: Densifi-
cation, microstructural evolution and challenges”. In: Current Opinion in Solid State
and Materials Science 21.4 (2017), pp. 207–218. ISSN: 1359-0286. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cossms.2016.12.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1359028616300821.
[56]
Punit Kumar et al. “Tensile and fatigue properties of the binder jet printed and hot
isostatically pressed 316L austenitic stainless steel”. In: Materials Science and En-
gineering: A 868 (2023), p. 144766. ISSN: 0921-5093. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.msea.2023.144766. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921509323001909.
[57]
T. Dahmen et al. “Densification, microstructure, and mechanical properties of heat-
treated MAR-M247 fabricated by Binder Jetting”. In: Additive Manufacturing 39 (2021),
p. 101912. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2021.101912.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860421000774.
[58]
Truong Do et al. “Additively Manufactured Full-Density Stainless Steel 316L With
Binder Jet Printing”. In: June 2018, V001T01A017. DOI: 10.1115/MSEC2018-6681.
[59]
Lukas Klee et al. “Binder jetting in gears”. eng. In: Forschung Im Ingenieurwesen
(2023), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 14340860, 00157899. DOI: 10.1007/s10010-023-00670-x.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
51
==PAGE:62==
[60]
S. M. Gaytan et al. “Fabrication of barium titanate by binder jetting additive manu-
facturing technology”. eng. In: Ceramics International 41.5 (2015), pp. 6610–6619.
ISSN: 18733956, 02728842. DOI: 10.1016/j.ceramint.2015.01.108.
[61]
Sebastian Boris Hein and Alexander Loris. “Binder jetting of metal-ceramic-composites”.
eng. In: Proceedings Euro Pm 2017: International Powder Metallurgy Congress and
Exhibition (2017).
[62]
Ji Won Oh et al. “SiC-Si composite part fabrication via SiC powder binder jetting
additive manufacturing and molten-Si infiltration”. eng. In: International Journal of
Refractory Metals and Hard Materials 101 (2021), p. 105686. ISSN: 09580611,
02634368, 22133917. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrmhm.2021.105686.
[63]
Dean A. Snelling et al. “Binder jetting advanced ceramics for metal-ceramic com-
posite structures”. eng. In: International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Tech-
nology 92.1-4 (2017), pp. 531–545. ISSN: 02683768, 14333015. DOI: 10.1007/
s00170-017-0139-y.
[64]
Erica Stevens et al. “Density variation in binder jetting 3D-printed and sintered Ti-
6Al-4V”. In: Additive Manufacturing 22 (2018), pp. 746–752. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2018.06.017. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S221486041830232X.
[65]
Ganesh Kumar Meenashisundaram et al. “Binder Jetting Additive Manufacturing
of High Porosity 316L Stainless Steel Metal Foams”. In: Materials 13.17 (2020).
ISSN: 1996-1944. DOI: 10.3390/ma13173744. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-
1944/13/17/3744.
[66]
Sebastian Molin et al. “Evaluation of porous 430L stainless steel for SOFC operation
at intermediate temperatures”. eng. In: Journal of Power Sources 181.1 (2008),
pp. 31–37. ISSN: 18732755, 03787753. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.10.009.
[67]
Guha Manogharan, Meshack Kioko, and Clovis Linkous. “Binder Jetting: A Novel
Solid Oxide Fuel-Cell Fabrication Process and Evaluation”. eng. In: Jom 67.3 (2015),
pp. 660–667. ISSN: 15431851, 10474838. DOI: 10.1007/s11837-015-1296-9.
[68]
Sarah J. Trenfield et al. “Binder Jet Printing in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing”. In:
3D Printing of Pharmaceuticals. Ed. by Abdul W. Basit and Simon Gaisford. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 41–54. ISBN: 978-3-319-90755-0. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-90755-0_3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90755-0_3.
[69]
Andre Butscher et al. “Printability of calcium phosphate powders for three-dimensional
printing of tissue engineering scaffolds”. In: Acta Biomaterialia 8.1 (2012), pp. 373–
385. ISSN: 1742-7061. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2011.08.027. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1742706111003801.
[70]
Kazi Moshiur Rahman et al. “Impact of binder on part densification: Enhancing
binder jetting part properties through the fabrication of shelled geometries”. In: Ad-
ditive Manufacturing 62 (2023), p. 103377. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.addma.2022.103377. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2214860422007667.
[71]
Saereh Mirzababaei, Brian K. Paul, and Somayeh Pasebani. “Microstructure-property
relationship in binder jet produced and vacuum sintered 316 L”. In: Additive Man-
ufacturing 53 (2022), p. 102720. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.addma.2022.102720. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214860422001245.
[72]
Mohammad Jamalkhani et al. “Deciphering microstructure-defect-property relation-
ships of vacuum-sintered binder jetted fine 316 L austenitic stainless steel powder”.
In: Additive Manufacturing 59 (2022), p. 103133. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https :
52
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:63==
//doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2022.103133. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S221486042200522X.
[73]
Daniel Huber, Lucas Vogel, and Alfons Fischer. “The effects of sintering tempera-
ture and hold time on densification, mechanical properties and microstructural char-
acteristics of binder jet 3D printed 17-4 PH stainless steel”. In: Additive Manufac-
turing 46 (2021), p. 102114. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.addma.2021.102114. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214860421002797.
[74]
Kuo-Tsung Huang et al. “Effects of Particle Size of Pre-Alloy Powders and Vacuum
Sintering Temperatures on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties of 440C
Stainless Steel”. In: ISIJ International 56 (Mar. 2016), pp. 335–340. DOI: 10.2355/
isijinternational.ISIJINT-2015-469.
[75]
Nora Lecis et al. “Effects of process parameters, debinding and sintering on the
microstructure of 316L stainless steel produced by binder jetting”. In: Materials Sci-
ence and Engineering: A 828 (2021), p. 142108. ISSN: 0921-5093. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2021.142108. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0921509321013721.
[76]
Yiwei Mao et al. “Effect of sintering temperature on binder jetting additively manufac-
tured stainless steel 316L: densification, microstructure evolution and mechanical
properties”. In: Journal of Materials Research and Technology 22 (2023), pp. 2720–
2735. ISSN: 2238-7854. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2022.12.096. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2238785422019858.
[77]
“Metallic powders – Determination of flow rate by means of a calibrated funnel (Hall
flowmeter) (ISO 4490:2018)”. eng. In: (2018).
[78]
Amir Mostafaei et al. “Binder jet 3D printing—Process parameters, materials, prop-
erties, modeling, and challenges”. eng. In: Progress in Materials Science 119 (2021),
p. 100707. ISSN: 18732208, 00796425. DOI: 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2020.100707.
[79]
Yun Bai and Christopher B. Williams. “An exploration of binder jetting of copper”.
eng. In: Rapid Prototyping Journal 21.2 (2015), pp. 177–185. ISSN: 17587670,
13552546. DOI: 10.1108/RPJ-12-2014-0180.
[80]
Runbo Jiang et al. “Influence of powder type and binder saturation on binder jet
3D–printed and sintered Inconel 625 samples”. eng. In: International Journal of Ad-
vanced Manufacturing Technology 116.11-12 (2021), pp. 3827–3838. ISSN: 14333015,
02683768. DOI: 10.1007/s00170-021-07496-3.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix
A.1
Conference Paper
Impact of saturation, layer thickness and part orientation on green strength in metal
binder jetting additive manufacturing of powder feedstock obtained from spray
forming
Naiqi Shang1 s212628@dtu.dk; Thomas Dahmen1 tdah@dtu.dk; Thomas Lundin Christiansen1
thoch@dtu.dk; Venkata Karthik Nadimpalli1 vkna@dtu.dk;
1 Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark
Abstract
Low green strength of binder-jetted parts can lead to potential damage during depow-
dering and thus complicates green part handling. Understanding and optimizing green
strength is therefore essential for the overall control and repeatability of the process. This
study systematically investigates the effect of different saturation levels, layer thicknesses
and part orientation on the mechanical properties, via compression testing, of binder-
jetted cylindrical green parts. The results indicate excellent suitability of the spray-formed
powder as binder jetting feedstock due to the uniform spherical particle morphology and
high flowability. Mechanical testing indicated that higher binder saturation levels and load-
ing direction perpendicular to the build direction are found to improve the compressive
green strength, whereas the layer thickness only has a minor influence. The maximum
compressive green strength was achieved as 7.67 MPa on average under the condition
of 120% saturation and 90 µm layer thickness.
Introduction
In the group of Metal Additive Manufacturing (MAM) processes, Binder Jetting (BJ) and
Laser Powder Bed Fusion (LPBF) are seen as two technologies that have great potential
for manufacturing metal components with complex geometries. Both technologies have
been successfully applied to many distinct types of metals and alloy systems that cannot
be produced with complex shapes by conventional methods, such as composite materi-
als or high-performance alloys. BJ is a powder-bed-based approach that fabricates green
parts by dispersing powder to create a powder bed and depositing polymeric binder on
top of the powder bed. BJ draws from decades of development within inkjet printers to
deposit droplets on demand with a high positional accuracy. The green parts are porous
structures consisting of metal powders and binder and require a series of post-processing
steps for densification, which involves curing, depowdering, debinding, and sintering. In
comparison with LPBF, BJ does not involve any melting and therefore has lower energy
consumption during printing. Moreover, residual stresses resulting from the printing pro-
cess are therefore largely avoided [1]. BJ is also applicable to materials and composites
that have a high thermal-conductivity, and are considered traditionally non-weldable [2, 3]
since green parts are formed at ambient temperature. Besides, the shaping mechanism
of binder jetting facilitates a high production rate and support structures for overhanging
features are not needed [4, 5]. However, BJ has not been widely adopted on an indus-
trial scale for making functional components due to challenges related to porosity and
geometrical accuracy after sintering. Numerous studies have focused on the debinding
and sintering processes that govern the density and mechanical properties of the sam-
ples [6-9]. However, only a limited number of studies have focused on improving the
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
55
==PAGE:66==
strength of green parts [10]. Sufficient green strength enables green part extraction from
the powder bed without collapsing and cracking [2]. High green strength also allows BJ
of larger samples and more delicate structures. Studying green parts also contributes
to the understanding of the subsequent processes. Although the green strength is re-
lated to many factors, such as binder [11-13], powder morphology [1, 12, 14], packing
density [15], and curing conditions [16], three process parameters are the focus of the
present study: saturation, layer thickness and part orientation. Saturation is defined as
the ratio of the volume of binder to the volume of the void space between the particles.
It has been shown in several studies that the saturation level and layer thickness have
a direct influence on the green strength [5, 17, 18]. According to Enneti et al. [19], who
studied the impact of layer thickness (50 µm, 60 µm, 70 µm) and saturation (45%, 60%,
75%) on green strength, the green strength is directly proportional to the saturation, i.e.
increasing the layer thickness leads to a reduction in strength. In another study by Vaezi
et al., the layer thickness increased from 87 µm to 100 µm leading to a decrease in ten-
sile strength [18]. Based on Maximenko et al. a study with alumina, a layer thickness
of a maximum of 2.5 times the particle size was suggested to be optimal regarding di-
mensional accuracy after sintering [14]. However, the suitable layer thickness differs with
different powders and particle sizes. Some studies have investigated saturation and layer
thickness and their effects on green parts. Compared to the layer thickness, saturation
has a greater impact on the strength of green parts. Zhang et al. [10] focused on both
binder content and printing parameters. In their work, the layer height was in a range of
280 µm to 360 µm, and the saturation varied from 50% to 75%. The results showed that
layer thickness had a moderate influence on the tensile strength of green parts. Although
increasing saturation can effectively enhance the green strength, however, some studies
pointed out that high saturation levels also have adverse effects on the sintering process,
leading to higher shrinkage. According to Nandwana et al. who tested 85% saturation
and 105% in their work, both samples slumped at high temperatures, but the highly sat-
urated samples showed a higher degree of sagging [6]. Moreover, high saturation levels
may cause a greater impingement of binder on the powder bed resulting in higher sur-
face roughness and defects between layers [20]. Due to the absence of fundamental
knowledge on the binder jetting printing process, this paper aims to determine how BJ
process parameters (saturation level, layer thickness and part orientation) have an im-
pact on the green strength of binder-jetted stainless tool steel 440C parts. In this study,
green strength is assessed by the mechanical behaviour in compression testing of cured
and depowdered BJ parts. The impact of green strength on the eventual sinterability of
the parts is out of scope of the current work.
Methodology
The stainless tool steel powder THOR44 is supplied by Asgaard Metals A/S (Denmark),
a high-carbon martensitic stainless steel. The powder’s chemical composition (Table A.1)
lays within ASTM grade 440C or EN grade 1.4215. The powder feedstock originates from
a patent-pending spray forming process, in which superheated metal is atomized and
sprayed onto a rotating build plate to simultaneously form cylindrical billets and spherical
powder under an inert gas atmosphere. The powder was sieved to only include BJ size
fraction with a 25 µm sieve using an ultrasonically excited CSM 300 system (Assonic,
Germany).
Figure A.1a shows the spherical morphology of the spray-formed powder particles used in
this study. The particle size distribution (Figure A.1b) was measured via laser diffraction
using a Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Panalytical, UK). The THOR44 has an average D50
of 20.3 µm (D10: 11.4 µm; D90: 33.0 µm).
56
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.1: SEM micrograph (a) and PSD result (b) of spray-formed SS440C
Table A.1: Chemical composition of 440C powder
Fe
C
Mn
Mo
Ni
Cr
V
Si
Cu
Bal.
1.1
0.25
0.47
0.23
15.5
0.2
0.29
0.3
Before printing, the powder was dried at 100 ºC for 12 hours and cooled down to the am-
bient temperature in order to reduce the moisture level and improve flowability.
An Innovent+ binder jetting system (ExOne, USA) was used to produce cylindrical sam-
ples of 10 mm in diameter and 20 mm in height. A water-based binder, AquaFuse BA005,
(ExOne, USA), was deposited on the powder bed from a 30 pL printhead. After printing,
the green parts along with the job box were cured for 2 hours in Binder FD23 circulation
oven (Buch & Holm, Denmark) at 180 ºC in air. The curing temperature of 180 ◦C was
adopted from [21, 22] where the same binder was utilized. Lores et al. [23] reviewed the
curing conditions for different binder systems where most of the studies used two hours as
the curing time. The polymers in the binder crosslink and form bonds around the powder
particles, providing a certain green strength for handling. The samples were depowdered
manually by brushing and applying compressed air.
A fractional factorial Design of Experiments (DoE) of n=7 runs were chosen (cf. Table A.3
and A.2) with three different saturation levels (40%, 80% and 120%), two layer heights
(45 µm and 90 µm) and two part orientations (α = 0◦and α = 90◦). α = 0◦indicates
cylinders being printed parallel to the build direction (standing) and α = 90◦represents
the cylinders being printed perpendicular to the build direction (laying). The remaining
process parameters remained constant. The bed temperature was kept at 55 ◦C, and the
drying time was set as 15 s. The rotating speed of the fine roller and rough roller was
600 rpm and 400 rpm, respectively. Five cylinders were printed in each run, of which
three were used for mechanical testing and the remaining two for determination of green
density.
Table A.2: Design of experiment table for tested parameters
Label
Factor
Unit
Levels
A
Saturation
wt%
40
80
90
B
Layer thickness
µm
45
90
C
Orientation
degrees
0
90
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
57
==PAGE:68==
The printed cylinders were tested by using a compression and tensile tester MultiTest 2.5-I
(Mecmesin, UK), which is capable of loads up to 2.5 kN. During the compression testing,
the pressing plate approached the tested samples with a speed of 1 mm/min. Hardened
tool steel plates were used to apply the compressive load. In this work, the green strength
is defined as the ultimate compressive strength of the cylindrical green parts. The green
strain was obtained based on the maximum displacement before failure. The green den-
sity was calculated by the mass of printed samples divided by their volume, which was
measured by a digital calliper ABS 150 mm (HOLEX, Germany).The software JMP Pro
16 was used to interpret the DoE results. Each condition (Run 1-7) was replicated three
times, which yields 21 data points in total. The Hall Flowmeter test was used to evaluate
the flowability of THOR44 powder based on ISO 4490:2018.
Table A.3: Printing parameters used in different runs
Run
Saturation
Layer Thickness
Orientation
1
80%
45 µm
90º
2
80%
45 µm
0º
3
120%
45 µm
0º
4
40%
45 µm
0º
5
80%
90 µm
0º
6
120%
90 µm
0º
7
40%
90 µm
0º
Results & Discussion
The spray formed powder has good flowability in a Hall Flow meter, which has a flow
rate of 14.08 grams per second. Compared with other commercial stainless steel and
tool steel powder feedstock, which have flow rates in a range of 11 g/s and 21 g/s [24],
THOR 44 presents excellent flowability and powder agglomeration is not observed. A
high flowability is crucial to BJ since the quality of final parts relies on the powder bed,
and it also reduces the defects formed during printing between layers.
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied to determine the significance of the process
parameters, based on run 1-7. From a statistical perspective, a p-value less than 0.01
is considered as highly significant. For the green strength (see Table A.4), it is evident
that saturation, layer thickness and part orientation show a significant impact on green
strength.
However, the interaction of saturation and layer thickness does not signifi-
cantly affect the ultimate compressive strength (p-value > 0.05). Compared with the green
strength, saturation and orientation present highly significant effects on the green strain
from the results of ANOVA listed in Table A.5.P-values of layer thickness and the interac-
tion of saturation and layer thickness are higher than 0.05, indicating that the interaction
of these two factors does not play a significant role on the green strain.
58
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:69==
Table A.4: Analysis of Variance of green strength based on saturation, layer thickness
and part orientation
Source
DF
Sum of Squares
Mean Square
F Ratio
Prob >F
Saturation
1
143.89031
143.89031
706.8053
<.0001*
Layer thickness
1
3.09039
3.09039
15.1803
0.0013*
Orientation
1
9.41291
9.41291
46.2373
<.0001*
Saturation*Layer thickness
1
0.02004
0.02004
0.0984
0.7578
Model
4
165.00529
41.2513
202.6311
Error
16
3.25725
0.2036
C. Total
20
168.26254
<.0001*
Table A.5: Analysis of Variance for green strain based on saturation, layer thickness and
part orientation
Source
DF
Sum of Squares
Mean Square
F Ratio
Prob >F
Saturation
1
0.00137411
0.00137411
154.7684
<.0001*
Layer thickness
1
0.00000139
0.00000139
0.1564
0.6977
Orientation
1
0.00015625
0.00015625
17.5987
0.0007*
Saturation*Layer thickness
1
0.00000208
0.00000208
0.2346
0.6347
Model
4
0.00158090
0.000395
44.5149
Error
16
0.00014206
8.878e-6
C. Total
20
0.00172295
<.0001*
The individual main effects (Figure A.2) of saturation, layer thickness and orientation on
green strength and green strain are analyzed separately. Overall, both saturation and
layer thickness have a positive influence on green part mechanical response. The green
strength and strain show a decline in orthogonal (printing in 90 degrees) samples. In-
creasing saturation or layer thickness improves the strength and strain of tested samples.
However, increasing saturation exhibits a relatively larger impact on green parts than in-
creasing layer thickness. The deviation of green strength varies from approximately 0.5
MPa to 7.6 MPa with different saturation levels, while the result changes between 3.7
MPa to 4.5 MPa at 45 µm and 90 µm on average. However, changing the printing orien-
tation from 0º to 90º leads to a decrease in green strength from 4.1 MPa to 1.7 MPa. A
similar trend is also found in compressive strain results where the green strain improves
with increasing the saturation and the layer thickness does not have a large impact.
The observed results can be explained by the fact that the more the interstitial voids of
the green part are saturated with binder, the more surface of the metal particles are inter-
linked, leading to an increased green strength. Further, areas with less binder could act
as potential macroscopic slipping planes under mechanical loading. The least binder is
suspected in-between deposited layers, thus planes perpendicular to the build direction
may act as weak points. Based on this, there might be two possible explanations for the
lower green strength observed in vertically built samples. On the one hand, the vertically
built samples have twice as many layers, increasing the risk for potential crack initiation
sites. On the other hand, crack growth typically appears perpendicular to the loading di-
rection, which follows the same direction of the weaker planes present in vertically built
samples.
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.2: Main effect of saturation, layer thickness and part orientation on green strength
and green strain
The interaction of saturation, layer thickness and printing orientation (Figure A.3) is further
investigated to determine their effects on green part properties. The graph in Figure A.3a
illustrates these three factors do not interact with green strength since the lines are par-
allel. For the green strain (Figure 3A.3), saturation and layer thickness may interact at a
high saturation level which can be seen from the first plot in the second row. The figure
further demonstrates the interaction of saturation and layer thickness is not significant, as
well as presented in the analysis of variance.
Figure A.3: Interaction of saturation and layer thickness on green strength (a) and green
strain (b)
Impact of green density and part orientation of green strength
In Figure A.4, the obtained green strength is plotted against the measured green den-
sity. A correlation between high green strength, high green density and high saturation
is observed. By introducing more binder to fill the gaps between particles, the total mass
60
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:71==
is also consequently increased. Moreover, at high saturation levels, increasing the layer
thickness can increase the green strength. Since the layer thickness is doubled from
45 µm to 90 µm, the number of printed layers are halved. Therefore, the green density
of 45 µm layer thickness is higher than 90 µm. The large standard deviation of the 40%
saturation part is misleading due to the fact that these parts have very low green strength
and sometimes small chips from the part fell apart while measuring the volume, thereby
reducing the mass and thus the green density. For the 90 µm layer thickness samples, it
is clear that the green density increases with increasing the saturation level from 40% to
120%.
Figure A.4: Relationship of packing density and green strength of parts printed orthogonal
to the build direction
From Table A.6, results are shown based on the same saturation (80%) and layer thick-
ness (45 µm), but different part orientations. The green density indicates that the binder
content in horizontally built samples is higher than in vertical samples since the presence
of more binder causes a drop in density. This may serve as a potential explanation of the
green strength of horizontally built samples being approx. half of parallel samples. There-
fore, the relative amount of binder displays another important factor regarding enhancing
green strength.
Table A.6: Green strength and green density with different build orientations
Build Orientation
Green strength
(MPa)
Std. Dev.
Density
(g/cm3)
Std. Dev.
α = 90°
1.680
0.219
3.865
0.011
α = 0°
3.339
0.206
3.821
0.012
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
61
==PAGE:72==
Conclusion
In this work, spray-formed powder feedstock is firstly introduced to metal binder jetting.
The powder exhibited high printability and suitability regarding the high flowability and uni-
form spherical particles, compared with other commercially available stainless steel and
tool steel powders. The relationship between processing parameters, ultimate compres-
sive green strength and strain have been systemically investigated on binder jetted green
parts. A factorial DOE was conducted with saturation, layer thickness and part orienta-
tion as input factors, and green strength and strain as response variables. The revealed
correlations provide insights into optimizing the binder jetting process to obtain the de-
sired mechanical properties in the final part. A high green strength reduces the failure
of depowdering and the possibility of creating cracks during handing. By optimizing the
processing parameters, the green strength was increased from 0.39 MPa to 7.67 MPa.
The green strain was increased by up to 92.68% (from 0.026 to 0.049). The maximum
green strength is achieved by high saturation level, high layer thickness and horizontal
print direction, while the layer thickness has a lower impact.
THOR44 powder was successfully used for the BJ of green parts, encouraging further re-
search of spray-formed powders for Metal Additive Manufacturing processes in the future.
This study paves the way for a series of follow-up studies including debinding, sintering
and heat treatment of the obtained green parts.
62
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:73==
Reference
1. Barthel, B., F. Janas, and S. Wieland, Powder condition and spreading parameter
impact on green and sintered density in metal binder jetting. Powder Metallurgy, 2021.
64(5): p. 378-386.
2. Miyanaji, H., et al., Effect of fine powder particles on quality of binder jetting parts.
Additive Manufacturing, 2020. 36: p. 101587.
3. Barthel, B., S. Hein, and F. Petzoldt, Influence of Particle Size Distribution in Metal
Binder Jetting -Effects on the Properties of Green and Sintered Parts. 2019.
4. Roehling, J.D., et al., Reducing residual stress by selective large-area diode surface
heating during laser powder bed fusion additive manufacturing. Additive Manufacturing,
2019. 28: p. 228-235.
5. Bai, Y. and C.B. Williams, An exploration of binder jetting of copper. Rapid prototyping
journal, 2015. 21(2): p. 177-185.
6. Nandwana, P., R. Kannan, and D. Siddel, Microstructure evolution during binder jet
additive manufacturing of H13 tool steel. Additive Manufacturing, 2020. 36: p. 101534.
7. Wang, Y. and Y.F. Zhao, Investigation of Sintering Shrinkage in Binder Jetting Additive
Manufacturing Process. Procedia Manufacturing, 2017. 10: p. 779-790.
8. Do, T., P. Kwon, and C.S. Shin, Process development toward full-density stainless
steel parts with binder jetting printing. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manu-
facture, 2017. 121: p. 50-60.
9. Meenashisundaram, G.K., et al. Binder Jetting Additive Manufacturing of High Porosity
316L Stainless Steel Metal Foams. Materials, 2020. 13, DOI: 10.3390/ma13173744.
10. Zhang, Z.-f., et al., Binder jetting 3D printing process optimization for rapid casting of
green parts with high tensile strength. China Foundry, 2021. 18(4): p. 335-343.
11. Zhou, Z., et al., Binder jetting additive manufacturing of hydroxyapatite powders: Ef-
fects of adhesives on geometrical accuracy and green compressive strength. Additive
Manufacturing, 2020. 36. 12. Miyanaji, H., et al., Process development for green part
printing using binder jetting additive manufacturing. Frontiers of Mechanical Engineering,
2018. 13(4): p. 504-512.
13. Mao, Y., et al., Binder jetting additive manufacturing of 316L stainless-steel green
parts with high strength and low binder content: Binder preparation and process opti-
mization. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 2021. 291.
14. Maximenko, A.L., et al., Modeling of effect of powder spreading on green body dimen-
sional accuracy in additive manufacturing by binder jetting. Powder Technology, 2021.
385: p. 60-68.
15. Rishmawi, I. and M. Vlasea, Binder Jetting of Silicon Steel, Part I: Process Map of
Green Density. Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering, Transactions of the
Asme, 2021. 143(11).
16. Watters, M.P. and M.L. Bernhardt, Modified curing protocol for improved strength of
binder-jetted 3D parts. Rapid Prototyping Journal, 2017. 23(6): p. 1195-1201.
17. Crane, N.B., Impact of part thickness and drying conditions on saturation limits in
binder jet additive manufacturing. Additive Manufacturing, 2020. 33: p. 101127.
18. Vaezi, M. and C.K. Chua, Effects of layer thickness and binder saturation level pa-
rameters on 3D printing process. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 2011. 53(1): p. 275-284.
19. Enneti, R.K. and K.C. Prough, Effect of binder saturation and powder layer thickness
on the green strength of the binder jet 3D printing (BJ3DP) WC-12%Co powders. Inter-
national Journal of Refractory Metals and Hard Materials, 2019. 84: p. 104991.
20. Mostafaei, A., et al., Effect of binder saturation and drying time on microstructure
and resulting properties of sinter-HIP binder-jet 3D-printed WC-Co composites. Additive
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
63
==PAGE:74==
Manufacturing, 2021. 46: p. 102128.
21. Han, L., et al., Spray coating for washout tooling by binder jet additive manufacturing.
Composites Part B: Engineering, 2023. 250: p. 110436.
22. Mariani, M., et al., Effect of Printing Parameters on the Mechanical Strength of Green
Body from Binder Jetting Additive Manufacturing. 2020, European Powder Metallurgy As-
sociation (EPMA).
23. Lores, A., et al., A review on recent developments in binder jetting metal additive
manufacturing: materials and process characteristics. Powder Metallurgy, 2019. 62(5):
p. 267-296.
24. Marchetti, L. and C. Hulme-Smith, Flowability of steel and tool steel powders: A com-
parison between testing methods. Powder Technology, 2021. 384: p. 402-413.
64
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:75==
A.2
Density of Ethanol
Figure A.5: Density of ethanol at different temperature
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
65
==PAGE:76==
A.3
XRD Data Analysis
Figure A.6: Raw XRD data of the samples sintered in nitrogen/hytrogen at 1250 ◦C
66
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.7: Raw XRD data of the samples sintered in argon at 1250 ◦C
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
67
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.8: Raw XRD data of the samples sintered in nitrogen at 1250 ◦C
68
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.9: Raw XRD data of the samples sintered in nitrogen/hydrogen at 1280 ◦C
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
69
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.10: Raw XRD data of the samples sintered in argon at 1280 ◦C
70
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.11: Raw XRD data of the samples sintered in nitrogen at 1280 ◦C
Process Chain Optimization of Metal Binder Jetting: Printing, Debinding and Sintering
71
==PAGE:82==
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Building 427
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DTU Construct
Tlf. +45 45 25 19 60
https://construct.dtu.dk/
