==PAGE:1==
MSc Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Designing and Optimizing a Maritime Trans-
portation Network for Container Shipping
Sofus Rasmus Clausen - s173772
7th July 2023
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Stefan Røpke
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Since the introduction of containerization, the liner shipping industry has had a sig-
nificant impact on the world economy. As the quantity of the global trade is ever
increasing, as well as customers’ demand for short delivery times, it is essential for
liner shipping companies to design profitable liner shipping networks, meeting the
customers’ requirements for delivery times.
This thesis formulates an optimization model for designing and optimizing liner ship-
ping networks in order to maximize profits, while meeting delivery time requirements.
The model incorporates several optimization strategies from the existing literature
of the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem, while developing its own Large
Neighborhood Search operations.
The model is applied to several instances from
the LINER-LIB benchmarking suite.
The liner shipping network is built from scratch, by constructing an initial network
for later improvements. The initial networks are constructed based in the backbone
flow method presented in Krogsgaard et al. (2018). In order to improve upon the
network, a Large Neighborhood Search metaheuristic is applied, in order to explore
the solution space and thereby find better solutions. The Networks are evaluated by
flowing containers throught the existing network, using a path-flow formulation for
the Multi Commodity Flow problem, which is solved using delayed column generation.
The model is able to find better solutions, compared to the reference solutions, for the
smaller LINER-LIB instances. The model however, struggles to find good solutions
for the larger LINER-LIB instances.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis has been completed at the Department of Technology, Manage-
ment and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), as the final
element of achieving a master’s degree in Industrial Engineering and Management.
The master’s thesis accounts for 30 ECTS points and has been supervised by Stefan
Røkpe of DTU Management
This project consists of a report as well as the code for the solution methods used.
The code has been written and computed in Julia 1.7. During the project a lin-
ear MIP solver has been used Julia, which is the Gurobi Optimizer. Additionally,
the computational tests have been computed using a 2020 MacBook Pro with the
following technical specifications:
• Apple M1 chip
– 8-core CPU with 4 performance cores and 4 eﬀiciency cores
– 8-core GPU
– 16-core Neural Engine
• Memory
– 16 GB RAM
This project relies on a large amount of data, all gathered from the LINER-LIB data
set by Brouer et al. 2014a.
Kongens Lyngby, 7th July 2023
Sofus Rasmus Clausen (s173772)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my supervisor Stefan Røpke for his
support and guidance throughout the project. The constructive feedback and spar-
ring sessions have been beyond invaluable to me and the project.
Furthermore, i would like to thank Berit D. Brouer, J. Fernando Alvarez, Christian E.
M. Plum, David Pisinger and Mikkel M. Sigurd for developing the LINER-LIB data
set. This has been of tremendous help in examining real life liner shipping instances.
Finally, a very special goes to my family and the people closest to me for their love
and support throughout, not only this project, but my whole educational process.
Without you, none of this would have been possible.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Delimitation and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Liner Shipping Network Design
6
2.1
The containerised liner shipping industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Liner shipping terminology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Solution method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Input data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Container Flow Problem
16
3.1
Container flow network representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
The master problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
The sub problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
The delayed column generation procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Initial Solution
28
4.1
Auxiliary network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Backbone flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Generate initial rotations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Network Improvement
38
5.1
Altering functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Definition of rotation attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.1
Speed calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.2
DefineRotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.3
Simulated annealing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Computational Results
56
7
Discussion
63
8
Conclusion
65
Appendices
67
Appendix A
Search progression
68
Bibliography
72
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The liner shipping industry is a crucial part of the global economy.
In the year
2021, over 80% of the volume of international trade of goods was transported by sea
(Unctad, 2021a). The volume of maritime shipments have more that doubled since
1996, increasing from 4.8 billion tonnes to 11 billion tonnes in 2021, with a steady
increase each year (Unctad, 2021b). Several factors contribute to the large increase
in maritime transportation, the most predominant factor being that it is possible
to transport large quantities of cargo at a relatively low cost, compared to other
modes of transportation. Furthermore, the standardization of container sizes, makes
the transfer of cargo between different modes of transportation very straightforward.
Additionally, the CO2 emitted from container vessels is much lower compared to other
modes of transportation, as seen in figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1. Grams of CO2 emitted by transporting 1 tonne of goods 1 km
However, the CO2 emissions from container vessels are not negligible in the grander
scheme of things, as the maritime shipping accounted for nearly 3% of the global CO2
emissions in 2018.
The liner shippers’ goal, in terms of their network design, is to construct their network
such that they can meet as much demand as possible, while keeping their costs at a
minimum level. Therefore, several consideration goes into the network design process,
including which type of vessel to use, which ports to call in order to meet demand
and in which order the port should be called. Furthermore, the speed at which the
vessel should sail is of great importance, not only from a cost perspective but also
from an environmental perspective. The figure below illustrates the cost structure of
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Literature review
2
Maersk’s liner shipping networks from 2013.
Figure 1.2. Liner shipping network costs of Maersk, 2013 (Maersk, 2013)
It is evident that the terminal costs, vessel costs and bunker cost account for nearly
75% of the total cost of Maersk’s liner shipping networks. These three cost parameters
are some of the main features considered in this thesis.
This thesis investigates
the benefit of applying several operation research techniques to the Liner Shipping
Network Design Problem, with the focus on maximizing network profits.
1.1
Literature review
The Liner Shipping Network Design Problem involves the optimization of a container
ship transportation network, where factors such as cost, service level, shipping times
and transshipment times are considered. This literature review aims to provide an
overview of the existing research on the topic of Liner Shipping Network Design.
The study carried out by Agarwal and Ergun (2008), is considered to be the first in-
stance of a Liner Shipping Network Design using operations research techniques, how-
ever the authors call it the simultaneous ship-scheduling and cargo-routing problem.
The authors develop decomposition algorithms such as a column generation-based
algorithms as well as two-phase Benders decomposition-based algorithm. Unlike pre-
vious work, this study considers that customers expect that carriers maintain a regular
schedule, which the authors have met by introducing a weekly frequency constraint
at the ports visited by a carrier.
Álvarez (2009) solves the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem, using a two
phase solution approach where a Multi Commodity Flow Problem is used in order to
evaluate the cost of the network. Based on this, the network is optimized using a Tabu
Search algorithm. A shortcoming of the proposed formulation is that the model is
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Literature review
3
not able to recognize transshipments occurring within the same shipping route, which
makes the cost of the network slightly inaccurate. Furthermore, transshipment costs
are assumed to equal the loading and unloading costs of a port. This is however, not
necessarily realistic, as transshipment prices are much more competitive than loading
and unloading prices.
Brouer et al. (2014a) made their contributions to the research field of the Liner
Shipping Network Design Problem by developing the LINER-LIB benchmark suite,
with the purpose of promoting further research on the Liner Shipping Network Design
Problem as well as enabling the comparison of different solutions to the problem.
Additionally, they present a reference model, which is an extension of an earlier
solution method to the problem.
Brouer et al. (2014b) propose a matheuristic approach for solving the Liner Ship-
ping Network Design Problem.
The proposed matheuristic consists of four com-
ponents, namely a construction heuristic, an improvement heuristic, a reinsertion
heuristic, and a perturbation heuristic. Additionally, they present a case study which
evaluates the matheuristic as a tool for decision support.
Mulder and Dekker (2014) reduce the size of the problem by aggregating ports
into port clusters. Feeder services are then introduced in order to ship the cargo
within the constructed port clusters. They apply a two phase solution methodology,
using a genetic algorithm to solve the problem. Their best found solution yields a
network which is 10% more profitable than the reference network.
Karsten et al. (2015) Investigate the time constrained Multi Commodity Flow
problem in the context of the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem. They solve
the time constrained Multi Commodity Flow problem as a path based formulation,
using column generation, as opposed to an arc based formulation. The study shows
how the time constraints can be applied to the problem without increasing the solution
time.
Karsten et al. (2017) present a capacitated multicommodity network design for-
mulation for the Time Constrained Liner Shipping Network Design Problem. Their
model is an extension of Brouer et al. (2014b), where results are presented while
incorporating transit times and restraining the amount of transshipments.
Krogsgaard et al. (2018) describe how most of the previous, successful algorithms
for solving the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem implements a two-phase solu-
tion approach where the vessel routing is designed first and thereafter the containers
are flowed through the network. However, their solution approach reverses the afore-
mentioned approach by first flowing the containers through a relaxed network, and
thereafter designing the shipping routes which match the container flow the best.
After finding an initial solution, a variable neighborhood search method is used to
improve the solution. Furthermore, since each iteration of the search method solves
a complex multi-commodity flow problem, a Lagrange heuristic is used to flow con-
tainers through the network.
Koza et al. (2020) propose a column generation matheuristic that uses advanced
linear programming techniques combined with heuristics. Their solution method is
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Delimitation and assumptions
4
able to solve instances of up to 114 ports and additionally achieves better results than
existing methods presented in the literature.
Paper
Transit time
constaints
Transship-
ment cost
Solution method
Largest instance
solved
Agarwal and Ergun (2008)
No
Yes
Two phase
Column generation
Benders
20 ports
Álvarez (2009)
No
Yes
Two phase
Column generation
120 ports
Brouer et al. (2014a)
No
Yes
Two phase
Column generation
Tabu search
114 ports
Brouer et al. (2014b)
No
Yes
Two phase
Matheuristic
114 ports
Mulder and Dekker (2014)
No
Yes
Two-phase
Genetic Algorithm
Dissagragation techniques
58 ports
Karsten et al. (2015)
Yes
Yes
Column generation
114 ports
Karsten et al. (2017)
Yes
Yes
Two phase
Matheuristic
114 ports
Krogsgaard et al. (2018)
No
Yes
Backbone Flow
Variable Neighborhood Search
Lagrange heuristic
202 ports
Koza et al. (2020)
Yes
Yes
Integrated LSNDP and scheduling
Column generation
Matheuristic
114 ports
Table 1.1. Overview table of the literature
1.2
Delimitation and assumptions
This section serves as a delimitation of the thesis and describes the associated as-
sumptions made.
This thesis aims at designing and optimizing liner shipping networks, based on the
LINER-LIB data and benchmarking suite for liner shipping network design problems,
using several operations research techniques which will be described later on in this
thesis. In order to delimit the scope of this thesis, several assumptions are made,
which will be described here.
This thesis incorporates time constraints into the Liner Shipping Network Design
Problem. In other words, cargo has to be shipped within a given time limit. If it is
not possible to ship a certain type of cargo within its given time limit, the cargo must
not be shipped at all, which in turn will incur a certain penalty fee for omitted cargo.
The scope of this thesis has largely been to design and optimize shipping routes
that intercorrelate well with eachother, in term of being able to ship cargo between
different shipping routes in order to meet a large amount of demand, while the overall
goal is to maximize the profit of the designed network. Therefore, some aspects that
might have made the results more ”realistic” have been omitted, including draft
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Delimitation and assumptions
5
constraints. Draft determines the minimum water depth a ship can sail on. In reality,
some ships might not be able to berth at certain ports, as the water level at the port
might be to shallow for the ship to safely berth at. This aspect is not considered in
this thesis, and therefore it is assumed that any ship can berth at any port.
Furthermore, the time a ship berths at a port, largely depends on the amount of
container loaded and unloaded at the port. This aspect is also not considered in this
thesis, and a standard berthing time is set to 24 hours independent on the amount
of containers loaded and unloaded to and from the ship. A berthing time of 24 hours
is standard across the literature and is used in papers such as Brouer et al. (2014a)
and Karsten et al. (2017).
In continuation of this, a fixed transshipment time is also used. Transshipment
refers to the act of transferring a container from one ship to another at a port. A trans-
shipment time of 48 hours is used in Brouer et al. (2014a) and Karsten et al. (2017),
and will also be used in this thesis. Furthermore it is assumed that transshipments
to and from the same shipping route are not an option.
In reality, the amount of fuel it takes for a ship to travel at a certain speed, to a
certain degree, depends on the amount of containers the ship carries. This is however
also not considered in this thesis, and therefore it is assumed that fuel consumption
is independent of a ship’s container load.
Ships sail at a certain speed when operating a route. In this thesis, it is assumed
that the ships travel at a constant speed throughout the entire route.
Lastly, it is assumed that no two types of cargo can have the same origin and
destination port. This assumption is given on the basis of the LINER-LIB data set,
but the assumption is worth mentioning nonetheless.
Below is a brief overview of the above mentioned assumptions.
• No draft constraints
• Fixed berthing time of 24 hours
• Fixed transshipment time of 48 hours
• No transshipments between the same route
• Fuel consumption does not depend on a ship’s container load
• Ships sail at a fixed speed throughput the entire route
• No two types of cargo can have the same origin and destination
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Liner Shipping Network
Design
This chapter provides an overview of the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem
(LSNDP) as a whole, including an introduction to the industry behind the problem,
as well as a description of the terminology used when dealing with the LSNDP. Fur-
thermore, a detailed description of the LINER-LIB data set is provided, along with
the sets and parameters constructed on the basis of the LINER-LIB data set, to build
the model used for solving the LNSDP.
2.1
The containerised liner shipping industry
The liner shipping industry consists of so-called services. A service is a fixed cyclic
route operated by a number of identical vessels. The industry standard suggests a
weekly frequency of vessel departures in order to promote consistency and regularity
for customers. The companies operating the shipping services in order to fulfill the
weekly demand are called carriers, while the companies in possession of the demand
are called shippers. The goal of the shippers is to have most of their demanded supply
transported at a low cost, however other factors may be taken into consideration such
as transit time (the time it takes a carrier to transport a commodity from origin to
destination) and carriers’ reliability, namely the amount of goods a carrier is able
to transport on a weekly basis. The carriers will aim to design optimized shipping
routes in order to maximize their profits.
A carrier usually operates multiple services within the same geographical area.
A single one of these services might not be able to transport a certain commodity
between its origin and destination ports. This can either be due to capacity limitation
of the vessels or due to the fact that a service only visits the commodity’s origin port
and not its destination port.
In order to accommodate this issue, some port are
chosen as hub ports, where containers are able to be transferred between different
services. The act of transferring a container from one service to another is called a
transshipment. While transshipments add flexibility, they are usually costly, as the
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Liner shipping terminology
7
containers need to be unloaded, stored until the arrival of the new vessel and then
loaded onto the new vessel.1
2.2
Liner shipping terminology
Ports
From a carrier’s perspective, ports serve as the final origins and destinations
for cargo. However, in reality ports are the links between the maritime and inland
transportation of cargo. When loading and unloading cargo at a port, carriers are
charged a fee per container loaded or unloaded as well as a fee for storing a container
at the port, if a transshipment of containers are to be performed. Additionally, carri-
ers are charged a fee for simply calling a port, which depends on the size of the vessel
docking at the port.
Demand
In the context of the LSNDP, demands are weekly estimations of several
containers needed to be transported between several ports. Shippers expect a certain
service level, corresponding to a specific time limit (maximum transit time) at which
the containers should be transported between their respective origin and destination
ports. Carriers receive a certain amount of revenue, depending on which containers
are shipped, and how many. The carriers incur a goodwill penalty for each container
not transported. One unit of demand corresponds to one Forty-Foot Equivalent Unit
(FFE) container
Vessels
The size and capacity of a vessel, as well as the speed at which it can sail
are some of the main properties of the different vessel classes. The size and capacity of
a vessel, determines the amount of FFE a vessel can transport at a time. The vessels
size also determines whether or not it can sail through either the Suez or Panama
canals.
Legs
A leg can be defined as a route between two consecutive port calls. In some
cases, multiple possible legs between ports can exist due to the availability of the
aforementioned canals.
An example of this is shown in figure 2.1 where two legs
between London and Mumbai are illustrated, one sailing through the Suez canal and
the other sailing around Africa.
1Christiansen et al. 2020
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Liner shipping terminology
8
Figure 2.1. Illustration of two possible legs between London and Mumbai
Using the Suez canal will be much less time consuming however, a fee is incurred by
the carrier when using the canal. Additionally, some types of vessels are too large to
sail through the canal and are forced to sail around Africa.
Services
Also referred to as rotations, are certain routes on which the carriers
operate. A service is mainly defined by a sequence of port calls, following a fixed
schedule. The services are designed cyclically in order to eﬀiciently accommodate the
requirement of weekly port call frequencies. As weekly port calls are required, an
appropriate amount of vessels has to be assigned to the service. The figures below
illustrate three different service designs.
Figure 2.2. Simple
Figure 2.3. Butterfly
Figure 2.4. Complex
These figures are gathered from Koza et al. (2020).
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Problem description
9
2.3
Problem description
Christiansen et al. (2020) defines the LNSDP as: ”Given a collection of ports, a fleet
of container vessels and a group of origin-destination demands, a set of services is
constructed for the container vessels such that the overall operational expenses are
minimised, while ensuring that all demands can be routed through the resulting net-
work from their origin to their destination, respecting the capacity of the vessels.”.
In addition to this, this thesis will focus on an additional dimension to the problem,
which is the transit time restriction for the different types of cargo. This specific
problem will be referred to as the Time Constrained Liner Shipping Network Design
Problem (TCLSNDP) for the remainder of this thesis.
Karsten et al. (2017) presents a mathematical model for the TCLSNDP. The model
depends on a set of service variables, as well as a path-flow formulation of the underly-
ing time constrained Multi Commodity Flow (MCF) problem. The sets, parameters
and decision variables are shown in the overview table 2.1.
Sets
K
Commodities to be transported between a pair of ports
S
A set of feasible services
As
S
Sailing arcs representing a leg between two consecutive port calls contained
in a service s ∈S
S
A set of feasible services
E
A set of available vessel classes
Ωk
A set of feasible path for commodity k ∈K
Ω(a)
The set of all paths using arc a
Parameters
cs
The weekly cost of a service s ∈S
cρ
The cost of flowing one container through path ρ ∈Ωk for commodity
k ∈K
qk
The demand of commodity k ∈K
e(s)
The vessel class e ∈E assigned to service s ∈S
ne(s)
The number of vessel class e(s) required to maintain a weekly frequency
of port calls
Ue
The capacity of vessel class e ∈E
Ne
Number of vessels available of class e ∈E
Decision variables
xρ
The number of containers flowing through path ρ ∈Ωk for k ∈K
ys
Binary. 1 if service s ∈S if chosen to be operated. 0 otherwise
Table 2.1. Sets, parameters and decision variables for the mathematical TCLSNDP model
Having defined these sets, parameters and decision variables, the TCLSNDP can be
formulated as the following mixed integer program (MIP).
==PAGE:17==
2.3.1 Solution method
10
Minimize
X
s∈S
csys +
X
k∈K
X
ρ∈Ωk
cρxρ
(2.1)
Subject to
X
ρ∈Ωk
xρ = qk
k ∈K
(2.2)
X
ρ∈Ω(a)
xρ −Ue(s)ys ≤0
s ∈S, a ∈As
S
(2.3)
X
s∈S:e(s)=e
ne(s)ys ≤Ne
e ∈E
(2.4)
xρ ∈R+
ρ ∈Ωk, k ∈K
(2.5)
ys ∈{0, 1}
s ∈S
(2.6)
The objective (2.1) seeks to minimize the combined service and container transporta-
tion cost. Since the revenue gained from shipping containers is included in the trans-
portation cost, the objective is equivalent to maximizing profits. Constraints (2.2)
are flow constraints, which ensure that all of the available cargo is either transported
or forfeited. The capacity constraints (2.3) ensure that the capacity of the vessels
operating the arcs constituting the paths is not violated. Constraints (2.4) ensure
that the selected services can be operated by the available fleet. Lastly, constraints
(2.5) and (2.6) define the domain of the decision variables.
This model handles transshipments in the underlying path-based MCF problem,
using a directed graph G(V, A), with vertices V and arcs A. The set of arcs A in
the graph is divided into load arcs, unload arcs, transshipment arcs, sailing arcs and
forfeiting arcs, i.e. A = AL ∪AU ∪AT ∪AS ∪AK. Transshipment arcs connect an
arc used by service s ∈S entering a port p with an arc used by service s′ ∈S leaving
port p.
The model proposed by Karsten et al. (2017) is an extension of the LSNDP model
presented by Brouer et al. (2014a) in order to handle the transit time restrictions.
Since the TCLSNDP model contains the LSNDP model, which was found to be NP-
hard, the TCLSNDP model is NP-hard as well.
In the following section, the solution method used in this thesis will be explained.
2.3.1
Solution method
As an alternative to solving the above mentioned NP-hard exact model, this thesis
will use a two-phase approach to solving the problem heuristically, based on the prin-
ciples described in Karsten et al. (2015), Karsten et al. (2017) and Krogsgaard et al.
2018. The first phase of the solution approach alters the network consisting of a num-
ber of service rotations and the second phase flows container through the network.
The TCLSNDP is solved from scratch, i.e. no existing network is given as a starting
point. However, an initial liner shipping network is built using a construction heuris-
tic based on the backbone flow method proposed by Krogsgaard et al. (2018). The
==PAGE:18==
2.3.1 Solution method
11
overall two-phase heuristic iteratively goes back and fourth between the two phases,
evaluating the network design based on the profit gained from the current network
design, which is found by solving the second phase. In the first phase, the services
are altered based on several improvement functions as part of a grander Large Neigh-
borhood Search (LNS) algorithm. The second phase evaluates the proposed network
design, by flowing containers through the network using the path-flow formulation of
the time constrained MCF presented in Karsten et al. (2015). The path-flow formula-
tion is solved using delayed column generation, where the necessary columns (paths)
are generated in the sub problem and evaluated in the master problem. Since the
commodities are subject to transit time restriction, the sub problem can be solved as
a resource constrained shortest path problem (RCSPP). However, since the RCSPP is
an NP-hard optimization problem, the sub problem is solved using a label setting al-
gorithm as proposed in Irnich and Desaulniers (2005). A simple representation of the
optimization algorithm for the TCLSNDP used in this thesis is illustrated in figure
2.5.
Figure 2.5. Representation of the TCLSNDP optimization algorithm
The input data applied to the described solution approach is gathered from the
==PAGE:19==
2.3.2 Input data
12
LINER-LIB data set developed by Brouer et al. (2014a), and the results obtained
in this thesis, will be benchmarked with the solutions found in Karsten et al. (2017).
In the following section, the data from the LINER-LIB data set will be described
in detail.
2.3.2
Input data
The data from the LINER-LIB data set provides seven different instances for the
model to be tested on. These instances range from geographically small instances
to large worldwide instances. These instances are illustrated in table 2.2. The data
behind the instances can generally be categorised into four different data structures:
ports, demands, vessels and distances.
Instance
Instance type
Ports
Demands
Vessels
Total weekly
demand (FFE)
Total vessel
capacity (FFE)
Baltic
Single-hub
12
22
6
4,904
3,400
WAF
Single-hub
20
37
42
8,541
28,700
Mediterranean
Multihub
40
365
20
7,545
14,800
Pacific
Trade lane
45
722
100
44,180
151,800
AsiaEurope
Trade lane
114
4,000
176
76,944
425,900
WorldSmall
Multihub
47
1,764
263
136,387
611,800
WorldLarge
Multihub
202
9,615
501
138,914
1,071,100
Table 2.2. LINER-LIB instances
The two smallest instances Baltic and WAF (West Africa) are both single-hub in-
stances, meaning that all cargo demand is either shipped to or from the same port,
that being Bremerhaven, Germany and Algeciras, Spain, respectively. Even though
the total weekly demand for the WAF instance is only 74% higher than the total
weekly demand for the Baltic instance, the number of vessels and the their total
capacity are significantly higher, with an approximately 600% and 750% increase,
respectively. This is due to the fact that the distances between ports in the WAF
instance are much higher than in the Baltic instance.
The Mediterranean instance has a total weekly demand relatively similar to the
WAF instance however, it has a significantly larger amount of demand types, which
in turn makes the instance much more complex. Complex demand compositions like
this indicate the potential need for transshipments, as it is likely unreasonable to
transport all demand on direct connections.
The Pacific instance constitutes the trade flow between Asia and North America,
while the AsiaEurope instance reflect the trade between Asia and Europe. Transship-
ments of cargo between services will be vital to the performance of network designs
when dealing with these instances.
The two largest instances, WorldSmall and WorldLarge represent the most impor-
tant worldwide trade flows, where the WorldLarge instance aims to mimic the size of
the largest worldwide carriers.
==PAGE:20==
2.3.2 Input data
13
This thesis will not consider the WorldLarge instance, as this is also not considered
in Karsten et al. (2017), which is the paper this thesis’ results is benchmarked with.
As mentioned, the data constituting the instances are categorised into four different
data structures, which will be described in detail.
Ports
Each port can be recognised by its UNLOCODE, which is a unique identifier each
port is given. The location of each port is given by a set of latitude and longitude
coordinates. Additionally, a number of different costs are related to calling each port.
This includes the cost of loading and unloading a container at a port, the cost of
performing a transshipment at a port, which includes a cost of loading, unloading
and storing the container at a port. Intuitively, the act of transshipping containers
might seem economically unstable, as a transshipped container has to be loaded and
unloaded twice as well as stored at the port performing the transshipment. However,
due to the fact that a container, theoretically, has the option to be transshipped at
any given port, the degree of competition for transshipments is high. Therefore, the
cost of transshipping a container is usually lower than the cost of loading or unloading
a container. Furthermore, there is a fixed cost related to calling a port and finally a
variable port call cost depending on the size of the vessel calling the port. The set
containing all ports p is defined as P. Table 2.3 summarises the port data relevant
for this thesis.
Ports p
UNLOCODE
αp
Latitude
xp
Longitude
yp
(Un)load cost
mp
Transshipment cost
tp
Fixed port call cost
f p
Variable port call cost
vp
Table 2.3. LINER-LIB data related to ports
Demands
A demand is defined by its origin and destination port. Demands include a certain
amount of weekly FFE to be transported between origin and destination ports, the
revenue gained from transporting a single container of a certain demand and lastly
a maximum allowed transit time. The set of all demand k is defined as K. This is
summarised in table 2.4.
==PAGE:21==
2.3.2 Input data
14
Demands k
Origin port
αk
Destination port
βk
Quantity
dk
Revenue
f k
Maximum transit time
tk
Table 2.4. LINER-LIB data related to demands
Vessels
Vessel are first and foremost identified by their vessel class. Different vessel classes
have a variety of attributes, which are the vessels’ capacity in FFE, their design
speed which is the speed at which the vessels travel, and the bunker consumption
related to traveling at design speed. Other attributes include the bunker consumption
when a vessel is idle at a port, the time charter rate which is a time dependent cost
of operating a vessel. Furthermore, a fee for sailing through the Suez of Panama
canals is incurred and the fee depends on the vessel class. Lastly, depending on the
aforementioned instances, the quantity of certain vessel classes are also relevant. The
set of all vessels v is defined as V . Table 2.5 summarises the data structure for the
vessels.
Vessles v
Vessel class
tv
Capacity
cv
Daily time charter rate
T v
Design speed
dv
Minimum speed
mv
Maximum speed
M v
Daily fuel consumption, design speed
f v
Daily fuel consumption, idle
iv
Quantity of vessels
qv
Suez canal fee
sv
Panama canal fee
pv
Table 2.5. LINER-LIB data related to vessels
Distances
Similar to the demands, the distances are given by an origin and destination pair.
However, in this case origin and destination pair are not unique, as the distance
between the origin and destination ports will depend on whether a connection uses
one of the canals or not. Whether or not a distance includes a canal is given by an
binary parameter, where 1 indicates that a connection traverses the Suez canal (or
==PAGE:22==
2.3.2 Input data
15
Panama canal), and 0 otherwise. The set of all distances d is defined as D. Table 2.6
illustrates the data structure for the distances.
Distances d
Origin port
αd
Destination port
βd
Distance
ld
Suez traversal
sd
Panama traversal
pd
Table 2.6. LINER-LIB data related to distances
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Container Flow
Problem
In this chapter, the method for solving the container flow problem is described. As
mentioned in section 2.3.1, the container flow problem is solved as a path-flow for-
mulation of the time constrained MFC problem, using delayed column generation.
Specifically, this chapter will contain a detailed network description of the container
flow problem as well as a detailed description of the column generation procedure,
including the master problem and the sub problem.
3.1
Container flow network representation
In order to determine the paths that each container flow through as well as the
cost associated with flowing the containers, a graph representation is essential. As
part of constructing the graph to represent the container flow network, a set of service
rotations R is necessary. A service rotation is a data structure containing the following
parameters:
Rotation r
Vessel
vr
No. of vessels
qr
Cost
cr
Speed
sr
Duration
dr
Route
tr
Table 3.1. Service rotation data structure
vr indicates the type of vessel operating the rotation. It is assumed that only a single
type of vessel can operate a rotation. qr is the number of vessels operating the rota-
tion in order to maintain a weekly frequency of port calls. cr describes the weekly
cost of operating the rotation. It does not account for the cost of handling containers,
as this will be accounted for when solving the container flow problem. sr is the speed
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Container flow network representation
17
at which the vessels sail between ports. dr indicates the time is takes for a vessel
to complete a full round trip, assuming a fixed port stay time of 24 hours. Finally,
tr describes the route which constitutes the rotation. More specifically, a route is a
sequential collection of arcs that make up the entire rotation.
The graph representation for the container flow network will be entirely dependent
on the nodes and arcs which constitute the rotations. Similar to the rotations, an arc
is also defined as a data structure, which contains the following parameters:
Arc a
Port from
oa
Port to
da
Type
va
Cost
ca
Duration
da
Capacity
qa
Is Panama
pa
Is Suez
sa
Rotation
ra
Table 3.2. Arc data structure
oa and da represent the two consecutive port calls constituting the arc. va indicates
the type of arc, whether it is a sailing arc, a transshipment arc or a forfeiting arc etc.
In case arc a is a sailing arc, va is set as the vessel class operating the arc. ca is the
cost of using the arc to flow a single container. da is the time it takes to traverse the
arc. qa is the weekly amount of containers that can traverse the arc. pa and sa indi-
cate whether an arc uses the Panama canal and the Suez canal, respectively. Finally,
ra is an identifier indicating which rotation the arc belongs to. This identifier is used
to indicate whether or not a container is transshipped between two different rotations.
With this information available, it is possible to construct the graph Gc = (N c, Ac)
necessary for computing the container flow problem. The graph representation con-
tains a set of nodes N c and a set of arcs Ac.
The set of nodes N c corresponds to the set of ports P.
In order to connect the port calls and thereby construct the overall container flow
network, a set of four different types of arcs are defined: Ac = As ∪Al ∪At ∪Af.
• As - Sailing arcs: These arcs represent the flow of containers between two
consecutive port calls. The sailing arcs are the arcs that constitute the rotations
and can therefore be defined as: As = {a | a ∈r, r ∈R}. For these arcs, va is
the vessel class that operates a given arc. Additionally, ca is zero for all a ∈As,
as the cost of sailing these arcs are already accounted for in cr. The reasoning
behind this, is that if the arc is used in a rotation, it will be traversed by the
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Container flow network representation
18
vessel regardless of the amount of containers shipped on the arc. The duration
da is simply the distance between oa and da divided by the sailing speed used
by the vessel. Additionally, 24 hours are added to da in order to account for the
time used at the destination port. Here a port stay time of 24 hours are used
for all port calls.
• Al - (Un)loading arcs: These arc represents the loading and unloading of con-
tainers at their respective origin and destination ports. The (un)load arcs are
defined as: Al = {(i, j) | i, j ∈N c, i = j}.
These arcs are identified to be
(un)load arcs by setting vA to be a string ”(Un)load”. cA is the cost related to
(un)loading a single container at the given port. The duration da of unloading
arcs are always 0, as this is accounted for in the sailing arcs. qA is set as a
large number in order to model that an unlimited amount of containers can be
(un)loaded at all ports. rA is set to zero as the arcs in Al are not a part of any
rotations. Note that the arcs in Al serve as both loading and unloading arcs in
the constructed paths.
• At - Transshipment arcs: These arcs allow containers to flow through arcs from
different rotations in order to arrive at their final destination. More specifically,
these arcs connect two identical ports, called by different rotations. The trans-
shipment arcs are defined as: At = {(i, j) | i ∈r1, j ∈r2, r1 ∈R, r2 ∈R, r1 ̸=
r2, i = j}. In a sequential container flow path, an arc a ∈At will be the link
between an arc from one rotation and an arc from a different rotation. In this
case, vA is defined as ”Transshipment” and cA is the cost related to transship-
ping at a given port. dA is set as 48 hours (2 days). qA is set to be a large
number to indicate unlimited capacity and rA is zero as arcs in At is not a part
of any rotations.
• Af - Forfeiting arcs: These arcs allow the choice of not transporting a number
of containers, at the expense of a goodwill penalty.
The forfeiting arcs are
defined as Af = {(i, j) | (i, j) ∈N ∧(∃k ∈K, αk = i ∧βk = j)}.
vA is
defined as ”Forfeit”, while cA of flowing a container through this arc relates to
the aforementioned goodwill penalty of $1, 000, which is used for all demands
k ∈K. The duration dA is set as the transit time for the containers in question,
to make sure that these arcs are not a part of a ”real” container flow path, as
this would violate the transit time restriction. qA is unlimited and rA is zero.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the container flow network by presenting the paths of three
different commodities.
==PAGE:26==
3.1 Container flow network representation
19
Figure 3.1. Container flow network illustration
Figure 3.1 mainly shows the paths for commodities flowing on arcs operated by ro-
tation r1, which are indicated by the red arrows. Some part of rotation r2 is also
shown, indicated by the blue arrows. Both rotation r1 and r2 call the same port
p5. The figure also illustrated all forfeiting arcs related to the three commodities and
are indicated as black arrows. Commodity c1 is transported from its origin p2 to its
destination p4 by the ship operating rotation r1. c1’s path starts with an (un)load arc
in port p2 followed by two sailing arcs from p2 to p3 and then from p3 to p4. Finally,
c1’s path end with an (un)load arc in p4.
Commodity c2 arrives at port p5 and is then transshipped from r2 to r1, as indi-
cated by the transshipment arc in p5. c2 then travels with its new rotation r1 from
p5 to its final destination p1 using a sailing arc and finally the c2’s path end with an
(un)load arc at p1.
Commodity c3 is not being transported by any ships on any rotation. This is indi-
cated by its path only containing a forfeiting arc from its origin p1 to its destination
p2, resulting in a goodwill cost of $1, 000 per unit of c3 forfeited.
The (un)load arcs and transshipment arcs are enforced upon the commodities’
paths where necessary in the sub problem of the delayed column generation procedure,
and is described in detail in section 3.3.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 The master problem
20
3.2
The master problem
As mentioned in section 2.3.1, the container flow problem is modelled as a path-flow
formulation of the Multi Commodity Flow problem, which can be stated as follows.
Let Gc = (N c, Ac) be a directed graph, as described in section 3.1, with nodes N c and
arcs Ac, and define K as the set of commodities (containers) to transport, where dk
is the amount of commodity k ∈K that is available for transport as stated in section
2.3.2. Furthermore, let qa be the capacity of arc a ∈Ac as described in section 3.1.
All the necessary notation is summarized in table 3.3
Sets
K
Commodities to be transported
Ac
Set of available arcs
As
Set of sailing arcs As ⊂Ac
Ωk
Set of feasible paths for commodity k ∈K
Ω(a)
Set of feasible paths using arc a ∈As
Parameter
dk
Demand to be transported if commodity k ∈K
qa
Capacity of arc a ∈As
cj
Cost of using path j ∈Ωk
Decision variable
xj
Amount of containers using path j ∈Ωk
Table 3.3. Sets, parameter and decision variable for the path-flow MCF formulation
With the available notation from table 3.3, the following path-flow MCF problem can
be formulated as follows:
Minimize
X
k∈K
X
j∈Ωk
cjxj
(3.1)
Subject to
X
j∈Ωk
xj = dk
∀k ∈K
(3.2)
X
j∈Ω(a)
xj ≤qa
∀a ∈As
(3.3)
xj ≥0
∀k ∈K, ∀j ∈Ωk
(3.4)
The objective function (3.1) seeks to find the least expensive paths for each commod-
ity to flow through. Since the revenue of the demands are a part of the path cost,
minimizing cost is equivalent to maximizing profit. Constraints (3.2) ensure that all
demand is met, while constraints (3.3) ensure that that the container flow on the
==PAGE:28==
3.3 The sub problem
21
arcs constituting the paths are not exceeding their capacity. Only the sailing arcs are
considered here, as the other arc sets in Ac are unbounded in the upper bound with
respect to the capacity of the arcs. (3.4) defines the domain of the decision variables.
It should be noted that this thesis does not impose integrality conditions on the flow.
Brouer et al. (2011) investigate the issue of integrality for the LSNDP without time
constraints. They found that most solutions are integral and the gap, in terms of
objective value, never exceeds 0.01% when rounding down fractional flows. Therefore
this approach is also used in this thesis.
Implementing an ordinary column generation procedure to solve the path-flow for-
mulation to the MCF problem is not a practical solution method. The size of the
network for most of the LIBER-LIB instances are extensive, meaning that the com-
plexity of the combinatorial optimization problem will increase exponentially with
the number of nodes (ports) in the network. This is under the circumstance that all
possible paths for all commodities are known in advance. This issue, however, can be
bypassed by dynamically generating the most promising paths, using delayed column
generation. The number of decision variables are greatly reduced, as only a subset
of all possible paths are considered, i.e. only the most promising paths. These paths
are iteratively and dynamically generated as resource constrained shortest paths in
the sub problem.
3.3
The sub problem
The role of the sub problem is to identify and generate the columns (paths) that
have the highest potential of reducing the cost of flowing containers through the liner
shipping network. This works by allowing the master problem (3.1) - (3.4) to only
consider a subset of feasible paths for each commodity Ωk. Initially, Ωk will only
contain paths corresponding to the forfeiting arcs Af, meaning that the first iteration
of the column generation procedure will provide a solution where no commodities are
being transported. Solving the master problem will provide an optimal set of paths
to be chosen from the current subset of feasible paths Ωk, as well as dual variables πk
and λij corresponding to constraints (3.2) and (3.3), respectively. A reduced cost cj
is introduced in order to identify and generate a path with the potential of reducing
the cost of flowing containers through the network. For a path variable j ∈∪k∈KΩk,
let κ(j) denote the commodity that a variable serves and let p(j) represent the set
of arcs used by j. Having presented these parameters, the reduced cost cj for each
variable j ∈∪k∈KΩk can be calculated as:
cj =
X
a∈p(j)
(cij −λij) −πκ(j)
(3.5)
==PAGE:29==
3.3 The sub problem
22
If there exists a variable (path) j ∈∪k∈K(Ωk \ Ωk) such that cj < 0, then this path
has the potential of improving the master problem solution. This path will then be
added to the subset of feasible paths Ωk, where the master problem can be solved
again in order to provide new dual variables. If for a given iteration of the delayed
column generation procedure, all variables j ∈∪k∈K(Ωk \ Ωk) has a non-negative
reduced cost cj ≥0, then the procedure terminates. In other words, this means that
the current set of variables Ωk will ensure an optimal solution to the master problem.
Finding the path with the lowest reduced cost while respecting the transit time re-
striction, is equivalent to solving a Resource Constrained Shortest Path Problem
(RCSPP) for each commodity. When using the reduced cost approach to find the
most promising paths, the arc costs in the sub problem are updated to cij −λij. In
order to determine whether or not the path has the potential of improving the master
problem solution, πκ(j) is subtracted from the sum of arc costs for the given path.
Since cij ≥0 and λij ≤0 (constraint (3.3) is of type ≤in a minimization problem),
negative arc costs are not an issue that needs addressing in the RCSPP.
As mentioned in section 2.3.1, the RCSPP is solved using a label setting algorithm.
Here, the resources cost and time are considered when calculating the shortest path
through the graph, by implementing resource extension functions as well as domi-
nance functions. In the RCSPP, cost is treated as an unconstrained recourse which
is minimized, while time is a constrained resource, limiting the duration of the con-
structed paths with respect to the commodities’ individual transit time restrictions.
Before describing the RCSPP algorithm in detail, the data structure constituting
the labels used in the label setting algorithm are defined
Label l
Port
pl
Cost
cl
Time
tl
Arc
al
Pointer
ll
Table 3.4. Label data structure
pl indicates which port the label refers to. cl and tl represents the cost and time it
takes to reach a certain port, respectively. al indicates which arc was used to reach
the port in question, and ll is the label extended from the previous port.
Having defined the properties of the labels, the RCSPP algorithm can be described
in detail.
==PAGE:30==
3.3 The sub problem
23
Algorithm 1 Resource Constrained Shortest Path (RCSP)
1: Require: a set of nodes N c
2: Require: a set of sailing arcs As
3: Require: an origin node o
4: Require: a set E of destinations for demands with origin o
5: Initialize: initial set of unprocessed labels U = {Label(o, 0, 0, NaN, NaN)} (table
3.4)
6: Initialize: T = max(allowed transit time of all commodities leaving o)
7: Initialize: empty set of promising paths PE
8: while U ̸= ∅do current_label = popfirst(U)
9:
if current_label not is dominated via DOMINANCE then
10:
i = resident node of current_label
11:
for all outgoing edges (a ∈As) of arc(current_label) do
12:
new_label = RESOURCE_EXTENSION
13:
if time(new_label) > T then delete new_label
14:
else U ←new_label
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
else delete current_label
18:
end if
19: end while
20: for all e ∈E do PE ←CONSTRUCT_PATHS
21: end for
22: Output: PE
The RCSP algorithm uses three additional functions, namely a dominance function, a
resource extension function and a path construction function. These three functions
will be described shortly. Algorithm 1 finds the shortest path through the network
for each commodity being transported from port o, while respecting their individual
transit time restriction. Line 8 in the algorithm, pick the next label to be processed.
The set of labels U is modelled as a heap data structure. A heap data structure keeps
track of the lowest value element of a set. In this case, a label’s cost is considered
by the heap data structure. popfirst(U) means selecting the label from U with the
lowest cost. Line 9 determines whether or not it should be processed, on the basis
of the dominance function. If the label is not dominated, the label is extended, in
line 12, by every outgoing edge connected to the arc of the current label. Line 13
checks if the time it takes to reach the next port is within the time limit. If this is
true, the label is appended onto the set of unprocessed labels U. When there are no
more labels to be processed, line 20 constructs the shortest paths by backtracking
each label from each demand destination port to their collective origin port.
In the following sections, the DOMINANCE, RESOURCE_EXTENSION and
CONSTRUCT_PATHS functions will be described.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 The sub problem
24
The DOMINANCE function
The dominance function is used to determine whether or not to extend a certain
label of a port, based on the other labels associated with the same port. A label
la is dominated by another label lb (of the same port) if cost(la) ≥cost(lb) and
time(la) ≥time(lb). The dominance function also has the advantage of reducing
the running time of algorithm 1, as dominated labels do not need to be extended.
Algorithm 2 represents a pseudo code of the DOMINANCE function.
Algorithm 2 The dominance function (DOMINANCE)
1: Require: the current label current_label
2: Require: all other labels from the same port: other_labels
3: for all l ∈other_labels do
4:
if cost(current_label) ≥cost(l) and time(current_label) ≥time(l) then
5:
Output: TRUE
▷Current label is dominated
6:
end if
7: end for
8: Output: FALSE
▷Current label is not dominated
The RESOURCE_EXTENSION function
The purpose of the resource extension function is to create new labels at the ports
adjacent to the port from which the current labels being extended resides. Algorithm
3 provides a detailed overview of the resource extension function.
Algorithm 3 The resource extension function (RESOURCE_EXTENSION)
1: Require: the current label current_label
2: Require: an arc a leaving port(current_label)
3: Require: the dual variable λij, associated with arc a
4: Require: maximum transit time T
5: Initialize: trans_cost = 0 and trans_time = 0
6: if rotation(a) ̸= rotation(arc(current_label)) then
7:
trans_time = 48
8:
trans_cost = cat
9: end if
10: pl = destination(a)
11: cl = cost(current_label) + (cost(a) −λij) + trans_cost
12: tl = time(current_label) + duration(a) + trans_time
13: al = a
14: ll = current_label
15: new_label = Label(pl, cl, tl, al, ll)
16: Output: new_label
==PAGE:32==
3.3 The sub problem
25
Given line 11 in algorithm 1, the resource extension function tries to extend the label
in question by using all arcs connected to the arc of the current label. Line 6 checks
if the arc used to reach the port and the arc being examined to leave the port, are
part of the same rotation. If they are not part of the same rotation, the parameter
trans_time is set to 48 hours i.e. 2 days. The parameter trans_cost is set to the
cost of transshipping at the port. However, if the two aforementioned arcs are part
of the same rotation, the two parameters will remain as 0. Lines 10-14 define the
parameters that will constitute the new label. Notice that if the two arc are part of
the same rotation, then trans_cost and trans_time will have no effect on lines 11
and 12, respectively. Line 16 creates the label, while line 16 outputs the new label.
The CONSTRUCT_PATHS function
The purpose of this algorithm is to construct new promising paths for the master
problem, by backtracking the labels on all the ports which is a destination for demands
originating at a preselected port.
Before describing the algorithm in detail, it is
necessary to define the data structure constituting the paths.
Path pe
ID
npe
Arcs
ape
Cost
cpe
Duration
dpe
A unique path ID npe is given to each path, which is an integer. ape is a sequential
collection of arcs constituting the paths. cpe is the cost of the paths, while dpe is the
duration of the paths.
Having defined the path data structure, the path constructing function can be
described in detail. Algorithm 4 provides a detailed overview of the function.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 The delayed column generation procedure
26
Algorithm 4 The path constructing function (CONSTRUCT_PATHS)
1: Require: the arc sets Al and At
2: Require: an origin port o
3: Require: a label e corresponding to a demand’s destination
4: Require: a demand k with origin o and destination port(e)
5: Initialize: an empty path pe = Path(npe, [], 0, 0)
6: while port(e) ̸= o do
7:
if transshipment not detected then ape ←arc(e)
8:
else if transshipment is detected then
9:
ape ←arc(e)
10:
ape ←appropriate transshipment arc from At
11:
end if
12:
e = pointer(e)
13: end while
14: Reverse ape
15: Add (un)load arc al ∈Al to the start of ape corresponding to origin node the first
arc in ape
16: Add (un)load arc al ∈Al to the end of ape corresponding to destination node the
last arc in ape
17: calculate cost cpe and duration dpe of the path
18: if dpe > tk then
19:
Output: nothing
20: end if
21: Output: pe
Given an origin node and a destination node with a label from algorithm 1, the path
constructing function builds a path corresponding to the underlying RCSPP. Lines
6-13 backtrack the labels, starting at a destination node and ending in an origin node.
Line 7, adds the appropriate sailing arc to the path, provided that no transshipment
have occured. If this is not the case, line 10 adds a transshipment arc to the paths.
When the origin node is reached, line 14 reverses the path, as backtracking will lead
to a path in reverse order. Lines 15 and 16 finally adds (un)load arcs for origin and
destinations, respectively. Line 17 calculates the cost and duration of the path, based
on the properties of the arcs constituting the path. If the duration of the path is
greater than the allowed transit time, line 19 will not output a new path. Else, line
21 outputs the new promising path, to be used in the master problem.
3.4
The delayed column generation procedure
This section mainly serves as a composition of the previous sections in the chapter
in order to finally present the overall delayed column generation procedure. As pre-
viously mentioned, the container flow problem serves as a method to evaluate the
==PAGE:34==
3.4 The delayed column generation procedure
27
current network design, by flowing containers through the network. Depending on
how many containers of the different demands the transported, a certain revenue is
gained which is used to determine the profit of the overall network design, as the
purpose of this thesis is to design a liner shipping network that earns the carriers the
highest possible profits. Algorithm 5 which is used to determine revenue and thereby
evaluate the current network design is shown below:
Algorithm 5 The delayed column generation procedure
1: Require: a set of nodes N c
2: Require: a set of arcs Ac
3: Require: a set of demands K
4: Require: a set of initial paths Ωk, which correspond to the forfeiting arcs
5: Require: a cost vector c corresponding to the cost of each path
6: while Stop criterion is not met do
7:
obj_val, x, λij, πk = solve MP with Ωk, N c, Ac
8:
Initialize: new_paths = []
9:
for all αp ∈N c do
10:
new_paths ←RCSP
11:
if new_paths = [] then
12:
sol_val = obj_val
13:
for all cr ∈R do
14:
sol_val+ = cr
15:
end for
16:
Output: sol_val, x, Ωk, PA, PDL
17:
end if
18:
end for
19:
Update c and Ωk and Ω(a)
20: end while
Algorithm 5 enters a while loop in line 6, which does not stop until no new paths
are found (the loop breaks when line 16 is computed). Line 7 computes model (3.1)
- (3.4). New paths are computed by running algorithm 1 in line 10. If the RCSP
function finds new promising paths, then line 19 updates the cost vector c as well as
Ωk by inserting new paths for commodity k and Ω(a) by inserting paths using arc a.
If, however, the RCSP function does not finds new promising paths during an itera-
tion, the revenue sol_val is computed in lines 12-14. Line 16 outputs the necessary
parameters. Here PA is a port activity data structure containing information on the
amount of containers loaded and unloaded at each port. PDL is a data structure
containing information on how much demand is left to me transported in each port.
These two data structures are used in the Network improvement heuristic and will
be described in detail later on in this thesis.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Initial Solution
In this chapter, the construction heuristic used to obtain an initial solution to the
TCLSNDP is described. Generating a good initial solution can prove essential to
the performance of the succeeding Large Neighborhood Search algorithm. Several
methods for obtaining initial solutions are proposed across the literature related to
the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem.
Meng and Wang 2011 suggest a method for obtaining an initial solution based upon
generating a network design from a set of predetermined candidate rotations. There
are, however, several reasons as to why this method is not used to generate the initial
network in this thesis. Firstly, this thesis aims to generate the rotations to be used
in the initial solution to the TCLSNDP, which this method does not solve as the
candidate rotations are predetermined. Secondly, the quality of the initial solution is
highly dependent on the quality of the predetermined rotations.
Mulder and Dekker 2014 generate their initial solution by complete randomness and
of course adjust their rotations to comply with the relevant feasibility conditions.
This method can, due to the stochastic element of the method, generate a good ini-
tial solution. However, this method does not guarantee a good initial solution and
therefore a great amount of confidence is put on the improvement methods.
The method developed by Brouer et al. 2014a applies an advanced MIP neighborhood
in order to generate new candidate rotations. This method is able to solve the smaller
LINER-LIB instances to optimality, however for the larger, more complex, instances
this method would struggle to find good initial solutions within a reasonable amount
of time.
These methods for generating initial solutions seem to perform poorly with respect
to the quality of the solutions and the time to reach the solutions. The backbone
flow method presented by Krogsgaard et al. 2018, however, seems to be a reliable
method for finding good initial solution within a reasonable amount of time. This
method revolves around introducing a complete network between all ports, and thus
allows for the creation of an initial relaxed ”backbone” flow of the cargo. Based on
the backbone flow, a set of good rotations can be constructed and since the method
can be solved heuristically, the initial solution can be obtained in short time.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Auxiliary network
29
Based on the mentioned advantages of the backbone flow method, the initial
solution to the TCLSNDP is generated using this method.
4.1
Auxiliary network
When implementing the backbone flow method, the order of operations are reversed
with respect to the two-phase solution approach to Liner Shipping Network Design
Problem, where rotations are generated and then the containers are flown through the
resulting network. This method of generating rotations first flows containers through
an artificial network and the rotations are then generated based on this auxiliary flow.
The artificial network is presented as a complete, directed graph which consists of a
set of ports (nodes) and a set of connections between all ports (arcs). P denotes the
set of ports as described in section 2.3.2. Let Gaux = (N aux, Aaux) be the graph
depicting the aforementioned artificial network, where:
• Nodes N aux = {i | i ∈P}
• Arcs Aaux = {(i, j) | i, j ∈P, i ̸= j}
The auxiliary network Gaux mirrors a liner shipping network where the services con-
stituting the network will contain direct legs between all ports. As a liner shipping
network such as this would be far too expensive to operate in reality, the arcs in the
auxiliary network must be priced such that the containers are grouped on only as few
of the arcs. In order to account for this, a dynamic pricing scheme is introduced to
account for the cost of flowing a number of containers through the arcs:
fij = c0
ij
 
cu
ij
c0
ij
! lij
u
(4.1)
Where fij is the cost of an arc (i, j) at container load lij. u is the capacity of the vessel
used in the calculation of the arc cost. c0
ij is the cost of flowing the first container
through the network and cu
ij is the cost of flowing the uth container through the
network. The idea behind this arc pricing scheme is that the cost of using an arc will
decrease with the amount of containers already flowing on an arc. It is important
to note that (4.1) is not limited by an upper bound. This means that lij > u, i.e.
the amount of containers flowing on an arc is allowed to exceed the capacity of the
vessel used in the cost calculations. This also means that all arcs a ∈Aaux should
have no capacity restrictions. There are several reasons why this is allowed. First
and foremost u represents the fleet’s average capacity. Consider an instance where
the fleet consist of the following vessel:
• Two vessels of class Feeder_450 with capacity 450 FFE
• One vessel of class Feeder_800 with capacity 800 FFE
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Auxiliary network
30
• Two vessels of class Panamax_1200 with capacity 1200 FFE
The average capacity of the fleet is then:
u = 450 + 450 + 800 + 1200 + 1200
5
= 820
(4.2)
u is rounded to the capacity of the vessel with capacity closest to u. Therefore the
vessel used in the cost calculation for the above mentioned imaginary instance would
be the Feeder_800 vessel and u is rounded to 800. Therefore this value of u will also
take into account vessel with a greater capacity than u. Another reason is that more
than one vessel is allowed to operate on a leg, which means that the final capacity of
a leg is diﬀicult to estimate.
The equations for c0
ij and cu
ij are given below:
c0
ij = a ·
 
cγ
ij
u
!
(4.3)
cu
ij = b ·
 
cγ
ij
u
!
(4.4)
Here cγ
ij serves as the estimated, average cost of sailing leg (i, j), and is the sum of all
costs related to sailing the leg with the chosen vessel. a and b are chosen to serve as
scaling parameters in order to account for the concept of high load arc being cheaper
than low load arcs. The parameters are chosen as a = 10 and b = 0.001, as suggested
by Krogsgaard and Thorsen (2016). These parameter values provide a sensible trade
off between between concentrating containers on the same arcs while avoiding extreme
loads. The parameters suggest that the first container costs 10 times as much as the
average cost of flowing containers on an arc, while the ”last” container costs 0.1% of
the average cost.
The estimated average cost cγ
ij of sailing leg (i, j) is calculated as:
cγ
ij = cf + cT C + 1
2ci + 1
2cj
(4.5)
Where cf is the fuel cost of sailing leg (i, j), cT C is the time charter rate of sailing leg
(i, j). Finally, ci is the cost of calling port i ∈P, which includes the fixed and variable
costs related to calling a port as well as the cost of the idle fuel consumption at the
port and the daily time charter rate of the vessel. Since the rotations are cyclical,
ci for port i ∈P is halved in order to avoid having to pay double for calling a port.
This way arc entering port i and the arc leaving port i will share the cost related to
calling port i. The initial rotations generated in this thesis will not be able to use
canals, which is why this cost is not accounted for in cγ
ij.
The following equations describe how cf, cT C and ci are calculated for leg (i, j)
using vessel v:
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Auxiliary network
31
cf = dij
dv · f v
24 · 600
(4.6)
Where dij is the distance between port i ∈P and port j ∈P in nautical miles, dv
is the design speed of vessel v in knots and f v is the daily bunker consumption at
design speed for vessel v in tonnes. One tonne of bunker costs $600 which is used in
Brouer et al. (2014a).
cT C =
dij
dv
24 · T v
(4.7)
Where T v is the daily time charter rate of vessel v, measured in dollars. dij
dv is divided
by 24, in order to convert the duration to days, as T v is a daily cost.
ci = 1
2
 f i + vi · cv + 600 · iv + T v
(4.8)
Where f i is the fixed port call cost of port i ∈P, vi is the variable port call cost of
port i ∈P and iv is the daily idle fuel consumption of vessel v.
Having defined all the necessary parameters constituting the load dependent arc cost
function fij from (4.1), it is possible to illustrate the development if the function
as more containers are flowing through an arc. Figures 4.1 and 4.2 illustrate the
development of the cost function for a hypothetical instance, where the estimated,
average cost
cγ
ij
u is 100 and the vessel used in the cost function has a capacity of 1200
FFE.
Figure 4.1. Illustration of fij
Figure 4.2. Illustration of accumulated fij
Figure 4.1 clearly illustrates that when the arc load reaches 25% of the vessel’s ca-
pacity, the cost is equal to the estimated, average cost
cγ
ij
u , which in the hypothetical
instance is $100, at a load of 300 FFE. At a 100% load, the cost is only $0.1. Inspect-
ing figure 4.2, it is evident that the accumulated cost per added container reaches the
average leg cost cγ
ij at around 27% load. This means that the cost of sailing a leg is
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Backbone flow
32
being covered when a ship is loaded at 27% capacity. Since the cost of adding contain-
ers is relatively low after this point, the next 73% only result in a 9% over coverage
of the total cost of the arc, which which is within an acceptable range. Therefore the
cost function is deemed reasonably scaled, and the auxiliary network is appropriate
to generate initial rotations from.
4.2
Backbone flow
Having defined the auxiliary network Gaux as well as the cost function for pricing
the arcs, it is possible to create the backbone flow which is later used in order to
generate the initial set of rotations. The procedure of creating the backbone flow
is to iteratively flow a single container through the auxiliary network. This is done
using Dijkstra’s shortest path problem, where fij is defined as the arc costs. The
reason for only flowing a single container at a time, is that the cost function (4.1) is
extremely sensitive to changes in the arc loads. It should be noted that the shortest
path problem used to create the backbone flow does not account for transit time
restrictions. Algorithm 6 depicts the backbone flow creation procedure.
Algorithm 6 Backbone flow procedure
1: Require: the auxiliary network graph Gaux
2: Initialize: arcCost with 0 load using (4.1)
3: while Demand left do
4:
k = Select a random commodity with demand left
5:
arcsUsed = ShortestPath for commodity k
6:
for a ∈arcsUsed do
7:
Update arcCost by increasing load of arc a by 1 using (4.1)
8:
end for
9:
Decrease demand left for commodity k by 1
10: end while
Algorithm 6 creates the backbone flow by entering a while loop in line 3 which con-
tinues as long as any commodity still has containers left to be flows through the
auxiliary network. The containers are flown through the network individually, by se-
lecting a random commodity in line 4, where there are still containers left to be flown.
Line 5 computes Dijkstra’s shortest path for the commodity, which outputs the arcs
a ∈Aaux used to form the shortest path. Line 7 updates the arc costs by increasing
the load by 1 for each arc used in the shortest path. Finally, line 9 decreases the
amount of containers left by 1 for the chosen commodity.
The backbone flow is highly sensitive to the order of which the commodities are
chosen, as the arc costs decrease rapidly in the beginning as can be seen in figure 4.1.
Therefore, since the commodities are chosen at random, five different backbone flows
are generated, which are denoted BF1, BF2, BF3, BF4 and BF5. Each of these five
==PAGE:40==
4.3 Generate initial rotations
33
backbone flows are the average of 10 underlying backbone flows. This is illustrated
for BF1 in equation 4.9.
BF1 = BF11 + BF12 + ... + BF110
10
(4.9)
This is done in order to avoid too much flow concentration on a limited set of arcs.
Having created the backbone flows, the initial set of rotations can be generated based
on a greedy heuristic, highly centered around the arc loads from the five backbone
flows.
4.3
Generate initial rotations
As mentioned, the initial rotations are generated using a greedy construction heuris-
tic based on the five backbone flows. Thus, five sets of initial network designs are
generated, where the network performing best with respect to profit is chosen as the
final initial solution.
The rotations constituting the initial network designs are built using a serial gen-
eration method, where rotations are generated one by one, until no more rotations
can be generated. The serial generation method is chosen as opposed to a parallel
generation method, where a random rotation is chosen in each iteration and the best
arc for this given rotation is added. The serial generation method is chosen for one
simple reason, namely that the rotations are generated for vessels in the order of de-
creasing capacity, meaning that the arcs with the most flow are added to a rotation
operated by a vessels with high capacity.
The number of vessels chosen to operate a rotation is chosen stochastically, as
this will aid in generating multiple solution within the neighborhood.
The range
from which the number of vessels are chosen, is based on the table below.
Vessel class
No. of vessel
Feeder 450
[2, 5]
Feeder 800
[2, 8]
Panamax 1200
[4, 10]
Panamax 2400
[6, 12]
Post Panamax
[7, 14]
Super Panamax
[10, 10]
Table 4.1. Range of number of vessels to operate rotations
These ranges are defined by Krogsgaard et al. 2018 and also reflect the duration of
rotations, since e.g. a rotation operated by Feeder 450 having a duration of two weeks,
will require two vessel to operate the rotation in order to ensure a weekly frequency
of port calls. These duration intervals stem from actual liner shipping networks using
vessels with similar properties as these i.e. capacity, speed etc. In relation to the
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Generate initial rotations
34
duration of rotations, the initial solutions are generated only considering the vessels’
design speed.
The process of generating rotations is illustrated in algorithm 7 below. In algo-
rithm 7, vmin is the minimum amount of vessels v ∈V to operate a rotation, as given
in table 4.1.
Algorithm 7 Generate initial rotations
1: Require: a set of arc loads AL
2: Require: set of vessels V , sorted by decreasing capacity
3: Initialize: empty set of rotations R = []
4: for v ∈V do
5:
Initialize: vesleft = qv
6:
while unassigned vessels of v or StopCriterion do
7:
dur = randomly select amount if vessels v based on table 4.1
8:
r = create rotation using algorithm 8
9:
if rotation is empty then StopCriterion = True
10:
else
11:
Add r to R
12:
vesleft = vesleft −dur
13:
Mark all arc a ∈r as considered in AL
14:
end if
15:
if vesleft < vmin then StopCriterion = True
16:
end if
17:
end while
18: end for
19: Output: R
Firstly, algorithm 7 requires a list of arc loads which is created based on the load
gained from the backbone flow. An arc load al ∈AL is modelled as a data structure,
as depicted in table 4.2.
The algorithm iterates over all available vessel classes in line 4, and assigns the
parameter vesleft the value of the quantity of the chosen vessel class in line 5. Af-
terwards the algorithm enters a while loop which stops when no more vessels of v are
left to be assigned or until a stopping criterion is met. The number of vessels, and
thereby the maximum duration of the rotation in weeks, it chosen at random in line
7 based on the values given in table 4.1. Line 8 creates a rotation based on the set
AL as well as the vessel class and the amount of vessels chosen, by using algorithm
8. If algorithm 8 were not able to create a feasible rotation, it outputs an empty
rotation. If this is the case, the stopping criterion is met. If, however, a feasible
rotation is created, this rotation is added, in line 11, to the set of rotations R and
the amount of vessels left is adjusted in line 12. Afterwards, the arcs used in r is
marked as considered in the arc loads set AL, so as not to reuse the same leg in the
initial solutions. If the amount of vessels left is smaller than the minimum amount
==PAGE:42==
4.3 Generate initial rotations
35
of vessels that should operate a rotation (vmin), then the stopping criterion is met.
Finally, line 19 outputs the set of rotations R.
The set AL is created on the basis of the backbone flow in order to easily keep track
of the arc loads, as well as which arcs are used during the route creation. The data
structure behind the set is defined as follows.
Arc loads al
Origin
oal
Destination
dal
Distance
ral
Load
lal
Considered
cal
Table 4.2. Arc loads data structure
All al ∈AL have an origin and destination, denoted oal and dal, respectively, as well
as a distance ral between these. Recall that only non-canal legs are considered when
generating initial rotations. Based on the backbone flow, each al ∈AL is assigned
the appropriate load value, denoted lal. Finally, cal is an attribute given in order
to keep track of arcs that have already been considered when building the rotations.
cal = 1 if the arc has been considered. cal = 0 otherwise.
The process of creating the routes in line 8 of algorithm 7, is to iteratively attempt to
insert high load legs into the route being created. However, due to the limitations in
route duration, feasibility must be obtained prior to the insertion of any given leg, in
terms of cyclicity. The process of obtaining leg insertion feasibility is thus threefold.
Firstly, the new leg in inserted. Secondly, a return leg in inserted in order to obtain a
cyclic route. Lastly, the old return leg is removed. If a leg insertion is infeasible, the
route will revert back to the previous feasible and cyclic route. This method works
as a result of leg being inserted as an extension of either the first or last port call of
the route. The leg insertion method is illustrated in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3. Leg insertion
Figure 4.3 illustrates a feasible leg insertion of a small instance with four port calls.
The inserted leg is chosen among several candidate legs, based on the unconsidered
leg with the highest load. The blue arrows indicate candidate legs. The leg insertion
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Generate initial rotations
36
process is repeated until all legs have been considered. In figure 4.3, the inserted port
then becomes the new ”first port”.
Algorithm 8 provides an overview of the route creation process, used in algorithm
7. In algorithm 8, let the function InsertLeg indicate the operation illustrated in
figure 4.3.
Algorithm 8 Route creation
1: Require: a set of arc loads AL, sorted by decreasing load
2: Require: a vessel v
3: Require: a number of vessels dur (also duration in weeks)
4: Require: rotation identifier it
5: Initialize: maximum duration in hours max_dur = dur · 7 · 24
6: Initialize: empty set of chosen legs t = []
7: Initialize: empty route g = []
8: for al ∈AL do
9:
if al is considered then continue
10:
else if duration of leg al plus return leg > max_dur then continue
11:
else
12:
t ←InsertLeg(al)
13:
while StopCriterion do
14:
C ←all al ∈AL entering first port call and leaving last port call
15:
newLeg ←non-considered al ∈C with highest load
16:
t ←InsertLeg(newLeg)
17:
if t is infeasible with respect to duration then
18:
Revert back to old t
19:
repeat line 15
20:
else if newLeg = {} then StopCriterion = True
21:
end if
22:
end while
23:
end if
24:
break
25: end for
26: for al ∈t do
27:
g ←Arc(oal, dal, tv, 0, 24 + ral
dv , cv, 0, 0, it) as per table 3.2
28: end for
29: r ←define rotation properties as per table 3.1, using algorithm 21
30: Output: r
Algorithm 8 starts in line 8 by iterating over all arcs by decreasing load and inserting
the first feasible leg in line 12. The initial leg insertion is infeasible if the duration of
the leg plus the duration of the return leg is greater than the maximum duration, in
line 10. When a leg is inserted, the algorithm enters a while, which only stops when
newLeg is nothing, i.e. all legs al ∈C have have been considered. The set of legs C,
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Generate initial rotations
37
contains all legs entering and leaving the first and last port call, respectively, which
is equivalent to the blue arrows in figure 4.3. In line 15, newLeg is inserted into
the set of chosen legs. However, if this insertion means that the route will become
infeasible due to duration constraints, the set of legs revert back to the set prior to
the insertion, and line 15 is repeated, for the next leg with highest load. If no new
leg is found, line 20 ends the while loop. Line 24 breaks the for loop, as this is only
used in order to insert the first leg. Line 27 defines the arcs as per table 3.2 and line
29 define the rotations properties as per table 3.1.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Network Improvement
Having obtained an initial solution for the liner shipping network, the next step is to
improve upon the solution in order to achieve a better and more profitable network.
The network is improved by using the metaheuristic Large Neighborhood Search (LNS).
The LNS serves as the structure of the network improvement heuristic, where several
heuristic methods are applied in order to investigate various parts of the solution
space. The LNS consists of iteratively altering a known solution, and contains the
following elements.
• xin - Initial solution: The initial solution is the starting point of the LNS
procedure.
• F - Altering functions: These functions are what constitutes the LNS procedure
and allows the investigation of several neighborhoods. As the methods used
include destroy functions, repair functions, construction heuristics and functions
that simply change certain parts of the solution, the name altering functions
is used as an umbrella term for all of these. The functions typically focus on
elements of the network that contribute to a low solution quality, but can in
some cases also be completely random.
• Accept(x′, xn) - Acceptance criterion: This operation determines whether a new
solution xn should be accepted or not. Certainly, any new solution xn having
a better profit than the current x′ will always be accepted. However, the LNS
procedure will benefit from occasionally accepting a slightly worse solution than
the current solution x′. The reason being that this will allow the LNS procedure
to escape local optima, and thereby be able to investigate a larger area of the
solution space.
This is done by implementing the simulated annealing (SA)
acceptance criterion, where a worse solution has a certain probability of being
accepted. The SA acceptance criterion will be explained in detail later in this
chapter.
Algorithm 9 provides a pseudo code of the LNS procedure for the minimization prob-
lem used in this thesis. In algorithm 9, c(x) indicates the solution value of a solution
x.
==PAGE:46==
5.1 Altering functions
39
Algorithm 9 Large Neighborhood Search (LNS)
1: Require: an initial solution xin
2: Require: a set of altering functions F
3: Initialize: T0 (as in (5.7)) and α and T = T0
4: Initialize: x′ = xin and x∗= xin and
5: while there is time left do
6:
Randomly select f ∈F
7:
xn = f(x′)
8:
T = T · α
9:
if Accept(x′, xn) then
10:
x′ = xn
11:
end if
12:
if c(x′) < c(x∗) then
13:
x∗= x′
14:
end if
15: end while
Algorithm 9 enters the Large Neighborhood Search in line 5, which only terminates
when a certain time limit is reached. The time limit depends on which LINER-LIB
instance is solved and is specified in table 6.4. Line 6 randomly selects an altering
function. The ”old” solution xo is set to the set to the previous ”new” solution xn.
Afterwards xn is calculated as the altering of the latest accepted solution x′. If the
new solution xn is accepted based in the old solution no, then the latest accepted
solution x′ is set at the new solution xn. If the new solution is better than the best
known solution x∗, then this is established in line 13. In the following section, the
altering functions used in the LNS procedure is described.
5.1
Altering functions
A total of 10 altering functions have been developed, and is described in detail in
this section. An operation DefineRotation(r) is used at the end of all the altering
function. This operation takes a rotation and redefines the rotation attributes, as
seen in table 3.1. DefineRotation is described in detail in section 5.2.2.
Two additional operations are used across the 10 altering function, which will
briefly be described now.
RemoveCall(c, r)
This operation removes a port call c from a rotations r and subsequently restores the
cyclic nature of the rotation r as shown in the figure below.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Altering functions
40
Figure 5.1. Removal of port call from a rotation
InsertCall(c, r)
This operation inserts a port call c into a rotation r. The port call is inserted where
the length of the rotation is increased the least amount. This is illustrated below.
Figure 5.2. Insertion of port call to a rotation
Having defined these operations, the altering functions can be described in detail.
RandomCall
The RandomCall function selects a random set of rotations and removes a random
port call on each of the randomly selected rotations. Even though this function might
not have a direct impact on improving upon low quality solutions, the stochastic
element of the function is expected to aid in the overall search procedure. In the case
where a rotation only makes two port calls, the rotation is deleted. The RandomCall
function is illustrated in algorithm 10.
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Altering functions
41
Algorithm 10 RandomCall
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Initialize: RRC = select a random amount of rotations to be altered
3: Initialize: RN = the set of rotation not selected
4: Remove r ∈RRC from R
5: for r ∈RRC do
6:
c = select a random call from r to be removed
7:
RemoveCall(c, r)
8: end for
9: R = RRC ∪RN
10: for r ∈R do
11:
DefineRotation(r)
12: end for
13: Output: R
LowActivityCall
Unlike the RandomCall function, this function specifically targets low quality port
calls. More specifically, the port call which handles the least amount of containers
across all rotations is removed from the rotation it is a part of. In order to determine
which port call should be removed from which rotations, a data structure is used in
order to keep track of the activity in each port.
Port activity pa
Port
ppa
Rotation
rpa
Containers
dpa
Considered
cpa
The set of port activities is denoted PA. ppa and rpa indicate the port and rotation the
port activity pa refers to, respectively. dpa indicates the number of containers loaded
and unloaded at the port by the rotations. cpa indicates whether or not this port
call has been considered for removal. When a new solution is accepted in algorithm
9, all pa ∈PA are marked as unconsidered. The set PA is always sorted based on
increasing dpa.
Having defined this data structure, the pseudo code for for the LowActivityCall
function can be presented.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Altering functions
42
Algorithm 11 LowActivityCall
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of port activities PA
3: if all pa ∈PA is considered then
4:
Mark all pa ∈PA as unchecked
5: end if
6: r, c = find lowest activity, unconsidered port call c from rotation r in PA
7: Mark the selected pa ∈PA as checked
8: Remove r from R
9: RemoveCall(c, r)
10: DefineRotation(r)
11: Insert r into R
12: Output: R
PotentialCall
This function attempts to insert a promising port call into the rotation that yields
the least increase in total network sailing distance. A promising port call is a port
call with a lot of unfulfilled demand. Inserting a port call into a rotation might not
be feasible with respect to the duration of the rotation. Therefore when attempting
to insert a port call into a rotation, maximum sailing speed is assumed. Furthermore,
the amount of vessel is assumed to be the summation of the number of vessel already
operating the rotations and the number of vessel of the same vessel class not operating
on any rotation.
This will certainly not be the case in reality, as the operation
DefineRotation will assign the appropriate sailing speed and amount of vessels. If
however, the insertion is not feasible, the function outputs the original set of rotations.
In order to keep track of which port calls has the potential to improve upon the
overall solution, a data structure is constructed.
Port demand left pdl
Port
ppdl
Containers
dpdl
Considered
cpdl
The set of port demands left is denoted PDL. Here ppdl describes the port in question.
dpdl indicates the amount of demand not fulfilled at the port. cpdl indicates whether
the port has been considered or not. When a new solution is accepted, all pdl ∈PDL
is marked as unconsidered. This set is always sorted based on decreasing dpdl.
When either the RandomCall or the LowActivityCall functions are chosen in
algorithm 9, this function has a 1
3 chance of also being chosen as a means of repairing
the destroyed solution.
An overview of the PotentialCall function is given below.
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Altering functions
43
Algorithm 12 PotentialCall
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of port demands left PDL
3: if all pdl ∈PDL is considered then
4:
Mark all pdl ∈PDL as unconsidered
5: end if
6: c = find the port c with most demand left from PDL
7: Mark the selected pdl ∈PDL as considered
8: Find the rotation r ∈R that gives the least increase in network length when
inserting c
9: Remove r from R
10: InsertCall(c, r)
11: if insertion of c into r is infeasible then
12:
RemoveCall(c, r)
13: end if
14: DefineRotation(r)
15: Insert r into R
16: Output: R
RandomPotentialCall
This function randomly selects a port call among those pdl ∈PDL with any amount
of demand left, and inserts the selected port call into a random rotation. The random
port call selection is indifferent to considered port calls.
When either the RandomCall or the LowActivityCall functions are chosen in
algorithm 9, this function has a 1
3 chance of also being chosen as a means of repairing
the destroyed solution.
An overview of the RandomPotentialCall function is shown below.
Algorithm 13 RandomPotentialCall
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of port demands left PDL
3: Randomly select a port call c from PDL
4: Randomly select a rotation r
5: Remove r from R
6: InsertCall(c, r)
7: if insertion of c into r is infeasible then
8:
RemoveCall(c, r)
9: end if
10: DefineRotation(r)
11: Insert r into R
12: Output: R
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Altering functions
44
CombineRotations
This function randomly selects a vessel class operating two or more rotations. After-
wards two random rotation r1 and r2, among the rotations operated by the selected
vessel class, are chosen. The rotations are combined by inserting all port calls from
r2 into r1. In order to attempt to obtain a feasible rotation, the vessel’s maximum
sailing speed is assumed when checking feasibility. Additionally, the amount of avail-
able vessels is the summation of the number of vessels operating both r1 and r2 as
well as the number of unused vessels from the same vessel class.
Afterwards the
DefineRotation operation assigns the resulting rotation the appropriate speed and
amount of vessels. Algorithm 14 illustrates the CombineRotations function.
Algorithm 14 CombineRotations
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of vessels V
3: Initialize: a copy of R: Rcopy
4: Randomly select a vessel v ∈V , operating two or more rotations
5: Randomly select two rotations r1 and r2, operated by v
6: Remove r1 and r2 from R
7: for c ∈r2 do
8:
InsertCall(c, r1)
9: end for
10: if r1 is infeasible then
11:
Output: Rcopy
12: else
13:
DefineRotation(r1)
14:
Insert r1 into R
15:
Output: R
16: end if
BuildRoute1
The BuildRoute1 function is one of two construction heuristics used in order to add
new rotations to the existing network. This function attempts to construct a new
rotation using a randomly selected vessel class with any amount of unused vessels.
The number of vessels to operate the rotations is also chosen at random, based on
table 4.1. Recall that the amount of vessels operating a rotation corresponds to the
maximum duration of a rotation, in weeks. The ports inserted into the new rotation
are based on the PDL set containing ports with unfulfilled demand. Port calls are
inserted iteratively, in the order of descending unfulfilled demand. When no more
ports can be inserted into the rotation, the attributes of the rotation is defined and
the rotation is inserted into the set of rotations. Algorithm 15 provides an overview
of the BuildRoute function.
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Altering functions
45
Algorithm 15 BuildRoute1
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of vessels V
3: Require: a set of unfulfilled port demands PDL
4: Initialize: an empty rotation r
5: Randomly select a type of vessel v with unused vessels
6: Randomly select maximum duration max_dur, based on the number of available
vessels
7: for pdl ∈PDL do
8:
InsertCall(ppdl, r)
9:
if dr > max_dur then
10:
RemoveCall(ppdl, r)
11:
end if
12: end for
13: if r contains less than two port calls then
14:
Output: R
15: else
16:
DefineRotation(r)
17:
Insert r into R
18:
Output: R
19: end if
BuildRoute2
This function differs from the BuildRoute1 function, by constructing the rotation
based on distance rather than unfulfilled demand. The construction heuristic starts
by selecting an initial leg from one of the port with most unfulfilled demand to the
closest port. Afterwards, legs are inserted in continuation of either the first or the
last port call of the rotation, as in figure 4.3, based on distance. When no more ports
can be added to the rotation due to exceeded maximum duration, the construction
heuristic stops.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Altering functions
46
Algorithm 16 BuildRoute2
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of vessels V
3: Require: a set of distances D
4: Require: a set of unfulfilled port demands PDL
5: Initialize: an empty rotation r
6: Randomly select a type of vessel v with unused vessels
7: Randomly select maximum duration max_dur, based on the number of available
vessels
8: Select a random port call c in PDL with a lot of unfulfilled demand
9: Add shortest leg from port c to r
10: while StopCriterion is not met do
11:
Insert shortest possible leg into r as in figure 4.3
12:
if duration of r > max_dur then
13:
Remove leg
14:
StopCriterion = true
15:
end if
16: end while
17: DefineRotation(r)
18: Insert r into R
19: Output: R
SwitchCalls
This function takes a port call from two different rotations and switches the port
calls between the rotations. The function randomly chooses between two types of
operations. Either the function targets port calls with low activity from two differ-
ent rotations, or the port calls and rotations are chosen randomly. If the switch is
infeasible due to one of the rotations exceeding its maximum duration limit, the ro-
tations remain as initially designed. A pseudo code for the SwitchCalls function is
illustrated in algorithm 17.
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Altering functions
47
Algorithm 17 SwitchCalls
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of port activities PA
3: Initialize: a copy of R: rcopy
4: if random switch then
5:
Select two random rotations r1 and r2 from R
6:
Remove r1 and r2 from R
7:
Select random port calls c1 and c2 from r1 and r2, respectively
8:
RemoveCall(c1, r1) and InsertCall(c1, r2)
9:
RemoveCall(c2, r2) and InsertCall(c2, r1)
10:
if either r1 or r2 is infeasible then
11:
Output: Rcopy
12:
else
13:
DefineRotation(r1) and DefineRotation(r2)
14:
Insert r1 and r2 into R
15:
Output: R
16:
end if
17: else
18:
Select worst port call c1 from rotation r1 in PA
19:
Select next worst port call c2 from another rotation r2 in PA
20:
RemoveCall(c1, r1) and InsertCall(c1, r2)
21:
RemoveCall(c2, r2) and InsertCall(c2, r1)
22:
if either r1 or r2 is infeasible then
23:
Output: Rcopy
24:
else
25:
DefineRotation(r1) and DefineRotation(r2)
26:
Insert r1 and r2 into R
27:
Output: R
28:
end if
29: end if
MoveCall
This function takes the lowest activity port call and moves the port call to another
random rotation. The port call and associated rotation is chosen among the set PA,
where the unconsidered port with the least amount of activity is chosen.
A pseudo code for algorithm MoveCall is presented in algorithm 18.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Altering functions
48
Algorithm 18 MoveCall
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of port activities PA
3: Initialize: a copy of R: Rcopy
4: Select unconsidered port call c in rotation r1 from the set PA
5: Remove r1 from R
6: Select random rotation r2 from R
7: RemoveCall(c, r1)
8: InsertCall(c, r2)
9: if r2 is infeasible then
10:
Output: Rcopy
11: else
12:
DefineRotation(r1) and DefineRotation(r2)
13:
Insert r1 into R
14:
Output: R
15: end if
UseCanal
The last altering function is the UseCanal function. This function only applies to
LINER-LIB instances where canal usage is available. This function selects a random
connection between ports where canal usage is available. Afterwards a random ro-
tation sailing this direct connection is chosen. If the rotation sailing the connection
does not use the canal, the canal is set to be used. If however, the canal is used then
the canal is set to not being used.
Algorithm 19 provides an overview of the UseCanal function.
Algorithm 19 UseCanal
1: Require: a set of rotations R
2: Require: a set of distances D
3: Select a connection d ∈D where canal usage is available
4: Let Rd be the set of rotation using this connection d
5: Randomly choose a rotation r ∈Rc
6: Remove r from R
7: if r does not use canal for connection d then
8:
Use canal
9: else
10:
Do not use canal
11: end if
12: DefineRotation(r)
13: Insert r into R
14: Output: R
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Definition of rotation attributes
49
5.2
Definition of rotation attributes
Having described all the altering functions, this section presents the calculation of
the attributes constituting the rotation r ∈R.
Recall table 3.1, describing these
attributes.
• vr: The vessel class operating the rotation
• qr The amount of vessels used to operate the rotation
• cr: The cost of the rotation
• sr: The speed of the rotation
• dr: The duration of the rotation
• tr: A sequential set of arcs constituting the rotation
The calculation of the attributes qr, cr, sr and dr is composed in the function
DefineRotation (algorithm 21), which is used in all 10 altering functions. Firstly,
the speed sr is calculated, which is directly correlated with the amount of vessels qr
and the duration dr of a rotation.
5.2.1
Speed calculation
It is important to note that the speed calculation is not an optimization problem, but
an algorithmic approach where the algorithm attempts to find the least amount of
vessels needed in order to ensure a weekly frequency of port calls, while the amount
of vessels exactly equates to the duration of the rotation in weeks. Consider the fol-
lowing example.
A vessel class with minimum speed mv = 3 knots and maximum speed M v = 4 knots
operates the following very simple rotation.
Figure 5.3. Rotation used in example of speed calculation
==PAGE:57==
5.2.1 Speed calculation
50
Each arc has a length of 1,000 nautical miles (nm) and the ship stays at each port
for 24 hours. Let lr denote the length of the entire rotation and let np denote the
number of port calls.
If the ship is to sail it its minimum speed, the duration of one round trip would
be.
dr = 24 · np +
lr
mv
7 · 24
= 24 · 2 + 2000
3
7 · 24
= 4.25
(5.1)
Where 24 is the port stay time. The statement is divided by 7 · 24 in order to get the
duration in weeks. The duration of the rotation is 4.25 weeks, meaning that 5 vessels
are needed to operate the rotation.
If the vessel sails at maximum speed, the duration is.
dr = 24 · np +
lr
M v
7 · 24
= 24 · 2 + 2000
4
7 · 24
= 3.26
(5.2)
Here the duration is 3.26 weeks and thus 4 vessels will be needed. Neither of these
scenarios are favorable however, since 0.75 or 0.74 weeks has to be spread out among
the ports as extra port stay time, in order to maintain weekly port call frequencies.
Therefore, the speed has to be any number between 3 and 4. Since the algorithm
favors a speed requiring the least amount of vessels, the target duration td is 4 weeks,
as in (5.2), where 4 vessels are needed. The final speed of the vessels is then.
sr = −
lr
−td · (7 · 24) + 24 · np
= −
2000
−4 · (7 · 24) + 24 · 2 = 3.2
(5.3)
Using this principle for the speed calculation, the duration dr is found as 672 hours
i.e. 4 weeks, the amount of required vessels qr is found as 4 and the vessel speed sr
is found as 3.2 knots.
It is important to note that the higher the speed, the greater the fuel burn and thereby
a higher fuel cost for the rotation. Therefore the speed calculation algorithm favors
solutions with higher fuel costs. This decision is made consciously as there are other
factors than fuel costs to consider, which are:
1. Available vessels: Sailing at a greater speed, will result in more vessels being
available for other rotations.
2. Time charter cost: Since the sailing speed is high, less vessel are needed on a
rotation and therefore the cost of chartering the vessels will reduce.
3. Transit time: All demands have a time it has to be delivered within. Allowing
the vessels to sail at a greater speed, will make it easier to comply with the
transit time restrictions of the demands.
==PAGE:58==
5.2.2 DefineRotation
51
In the rare cases where the amount of vessels needed to maintain weekly port call
frequencies while sailing at the vessels’ minimum speed is equal the amount of vessels
needed when sailing at maximum speed, the vessels’ minimum speed is chosen as
the final sailing speed. Here the minimum sailing speed is favored as the number
of remaining available vessels and the time charter cost will be equal when sailing
at maximum speed. In these cases it will not be possible to achieve a sailing speed,
resulting in a duration equating to an integer amount of weeks. The remaining time
is therefore spread across the port calls as extra port stay time. Taking equation (5.1)
into consideration, 0.75 weeks of extra port stay time is divided among the two port
calls as additional port stay time.
Algorithm 20 provides a brief overview of the above mentioned operations.
Algorithm 20 SpeedCalculation
1: Require: a rotations r
2: Require: a set of distances D
3: Determine distance distr of rotation r based on D
4: Determine target duration dur
5: Determine sr based on dur using least amount of vessels
6: qr = dur and dr = distr
sr
7: Output: qr and sr and dr
5.2.2
DefineRotation
Having described how the speed, as well as the duration and the amount of vessels
operating a rotation, is calculated, the DefineRotation function can be described.
This function uses the SpeedCalculation function and lastly calculates the total cost
of a rotation. The total cost cr of a rotation r is calculated as follows.
cr =
X
a∈tr

f oa + voa · cvr
|
{z
}
Port call cost
+ cf · dr −24 · nr
24
·
  sr
dvr
3
· f vr
!
|
{z
}
Fuel cost (sail)
+ cf ·

nr + 7 · 24 · qr −dr
24

· ivr
|
{z
}
Fuel cost (idle)
+
T vr · qr · 7
|
{z
}
Time charter cost
+
X
a∈tr
(sv · sa + pv + pa)
|
{z
}
Canal cost
(5.4)
Each term in (5.4) is described in detail below.
==PAGE:59==
5.2.2 DefineRotation
52
Port call cost
The port call cost is the sum of the fixed and variable costs related to calling a port
for all port calls of a rotation. Table 5.1 reiterates the parameters necessary to the
calculation.
Port call cost parameters
tr
The sequential set of arc used by rotation r
oa
The origin port of arc a
f oa
The fixed cost related to calling port oa
voa
The variable cost related to calling port oa
cvr
The capacity of vessel v operating rotation r
Table 5.1. Port call cost parameters
Calling a port incurs both a fixed cost and a variable cost depending on the size of
the vessel calling the port. The size of the ship is measured in FFE capacity, hence
the variable port calling cost is multiplied by the FFE capacity of the vessel calling
the port.
Fuel cost (sail)
This part of the cost equation relates to the fuel consumption cost, only when sailing
between ports. All ships use the same type of fuel and the cost of one metric tonne
of fuel is $600 as per Brouer et al. 2014a. Table 5.2 reiterates the parameters used in
the sailing fuel cost calculation.
Fuel cost (sail)
cf
The cost of one metric tonne of fuel, priced at $600
dr
The duration of rotation r
nr
The number of port calls made by rotation r
sr
The sailing speed of rotation r
dvr
The design speed of the vessel vr
f vr
The daily fuel consumption (tonnes) as design speed
Table 5.2. Fuel cost (sail) parameters
The term dr −24 · nr calculates the time spent on sailing during a round trip of a
rotation, excluding the time spent at ports. The term is divided by 24 in order to
convert the duration from hours to days, as the fuel consumption parameter f vr is
the daily consumption. Additionally, f vr only describes the fuel consumption as the
vessel’s design speed. Brouer et al. 2014a describes a cubic function for estimating the
fuel consumption for any other speed than the design speed, which is seen in (5.4).
==PAGE:60==
5.2.2 DefineRotation
53
Fuel cost (idle)
This term of the cost equation, relates to the fuel cost of idling at a port.
This
includes the standard 24 hours of berthing as well as any possible additional berthing
time. Table 5.3 reiterates the necessary parameters.
Fuel cost (idle)
cf
The cost of one metric tonne of fuel, priced at $600
dr
The duration of rotation r
nr
The number of port calls made by rotation r
qr
The number of vessels operating rotation r
ivr
The daily fuel consumption (tonnes) when idle
Table 5.3. Fuel cost (idle) parameters
The number of port calls nr is synonymous with the standard number of days idling
at ports during a rotation. The term 7·24·qr−dr
24
calculates the number of additional
days idling at a port.
If the rotation’s duration dr exactly equates to an integer
amount of weeks, then there are no additional idling days.
Time charter cost
T vr is the daily cost of chartering vessel vr. qr is the number of vessels operating the
rotation. The whole term is multiplied by 7 in order to convert the whole term into
weekly cost.
Canal cost
The last term, relates to the canal cost associated with a rotation.
If a leg of a
rotation uses a canal, the associated cost will be incurred. Table 5.4 summarizes the
parameters used in the canal cost calculation.
Canal cost parameters
tr
The sequential set of arc used by rotation r
sv
The Suez canal fee for vessel v
pv
The Panama canal fee for vessel v
sa
1 if arc a uses the Suez canal. 0 otherwise
pa
1 if arc a uses the Panama canal. 0 otherwise
Table 5.4. Canal cost parameters
Having formulated the cost equation, the DefineRotation function can be properly
defined in algorithm 21.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Simulated annealing
54
Algorithm 21 DefineRotation
1: Require: a rotations r
2: Require: a set of vessels V
3: Require: a set of ports P
4: Require: a set of distances D
5: qr, sr, dr = SpeedCalculation(r, D)
6: Calculate cr using (5.4)
7: Output: r with updates attributes
5.3
Simulated annealing
As mentioned, simulated annealing is implemented in order to make the LNS al-
gorithm search larger paths of the solution space, while avoiding reaching a local
optimum prematurely. Simulated annealing is inspired by a production process of
metals. In this process, the temperature is carefully controlled while it is lowered,
which minimizes defects in the metal and the result is a stronger product. Therefore,
a temperature variable T is introduced with a starting value of T0. The temperature
of exponentially decreasing as a function of algorithmic iterations. Simulated anneal-
ing searches for the global optimum by allowing for the possibility of hill climbing,
thus being able to escape local optima. Simulated annealing always accepts a better
solution than the current solution and will in some cases, with decreasing probabil-
ity over time, accept worse solutions. The probability of accepting worse solutions
greatly depends on the starting temperature T0, meaning that hill climbing is more
probable in the early stages of the search algorithm.
The probability of accepting a solution can be expressed in the following way.
probability = exp
c(x′) −c(xn)
T

(5.5)
Where T is the temperature variable, x′ is the current solution and xn is the solution
being evaluated. c(x′) and c(xn) are the objective values for x′ and xn, respectively.
If c(xn) < c(n′) the probability of acceptance will always be 100%, meaning that
better solution will always be accepted.
In each iteration of the LNS algorithm, the temperature variable T is cooled down
by a cooling constant α, as shown below.
T = T · α
(5.6)
The starting temperature T0 as well as the cooling constant α greatly impact the
success of the simulated annealing acceptance criterion. Therefore, these parameters
have to be selected appropriately. The selection of the parameter values is made based
on the experiments carried out by Røpke and Pisinger 2006. The starting temperature
==PAGE:62==
5.3 Simulated annealing
55
T0 is set such that a new solution that is 5% worse than the initial solution has a 50%
chance of being accepted. The calculation of T0 is shown below.
0.5 = exp
−0.05 · c(xin)
T0

⇒
T0 = −0.05 · c(xin)
ln(0.5)
(5.7)
Through parameter tuning they found that the cooling factor α should be set as
α = 0.99975, which is also used in this thesis.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Computational Results
The model presented in this thesis, has been tested on the base version of the fol-
lowing LINER-LIB instances: Baltic, WAF, Mediterranean, Pacific, AsiaEurope and
WorldSmall. The results obtained in this thesis are benchmarked with the following
results from Karsten et al. (2017).
Instance
Objective
$
Vessels deployed
FFE %
Vessels deployed
Vessels %
Demand met
FFE %
CPU time
Minutes
Best - Baltic
−14, 050
100.0
100.0
87.4
1.67
Average - Baltic
74, 480
100.0
100.0
86.7
1.80
Best - WAF
−5.59 · 106
83.3
85.7
97.0
4.25
Average - WAF
−4.87 · 106
83.3
85.2
94.3
5.9
Best - Mediterranean
2.42 · 106
91.9
95.0
86.9
11.83
Average - Mediterranean
2.70 · 106
90.5
94.0
78.9
12.28
Best - Pacific
3.81 · 106
95.5
96.0
94.7
60
Average - Pacific
4.62 · 106
92.2
90.0
92.1
60
Best - AsiaEurope
−1.76 · 107
87.1
95.5
90.7
240
Average - AsiaEurope
−1.45 · 107
84.8
92.3
88.4
240
Best - WorldSmall
−3.18 · 107
81.2
89.4
90.7
180
Average - WorldSmall
−2.80 · 107
81.9
88.4
90.2
180
Table 6.1. Results from Karsten et al. (2017)
Table 6.1 presents the results from the Karsten et al. (2017) paper. The table is
the result of running each instance 10 times, where the best and average result for
each instance is presented. For each instance, the table presents the objective which
is measured in dollars. Since the objective in Karsten et al. (2017), and this thesis,
minimizes cost, a negative objective means a profit.
The table also presents the
percentage of vessels deployed, both in terms of FFE capacity and in terms of amount
of vessels. Furthermore, the percentage of FFE demand met and lastly the time it
takes to reach the best solution are presented.
The table below presents the results obtained in this thesis.
==PAGE:64==
6 Computational Results
57
Instance
Objective
$
Vessels deployed
FFE %
Vessels deployed
Vessels %
Demand met
FFE %
CPU time
Minutes
Best - Baltic
−293, 919
100.0
100.0
92.1
1.07
Average - Baltic
−209, 400
97.7
98.3
90.1
0.57
Best - WAF
−5.63 · 106
72.7
71.4
94.8
4.53
Average - WAF
−5.35 · 106
73.0
68.8
93.6
2.85
Best - Mediterranean
2.97 · 106
86.5
90.0
78.9
19.88
Average - Mediterranean
3.23 · 106
85.7
84.0
75.8
16.98
Best - Pacific
1.50 · 107
64.9
69.0
70.6
59.72
Average - Pacific
1.80 · 107
76.3
77.6
72.8
44.77
Best - AsiaEurope
3.00 · 107
91.3
92.1
65.4
205.83
Average - AsiaEurope
3.10 · 107
78.8
85.4
61.9
106.93
Best - WorldSmall
2.77 · 107
74.3
76.0
67.9
75.19
Average - WorldSmall
4.00 · 107
79.1
82.3
68.5
90.36
Table 6.2. Results obtained in this thesis
Compared to the results from Karsten et al. (2017), the model formulated in this thesis
performs well on the three smallest LINER-LIB instances, finding better results for
the Baltic and WAF instances. The model finds a slightly worse solution for the
Mediterranean instance. The solution however, is nevertheless within a reasonable
range of the reference solution. For the three largest instances, the model is not able
to find good solution within the given time limit. The model’s performance will be
discussed in chapter 7.
The model seems to only be able to find profitable solutions for the Baltic and
WAF instances. Here the model finds a much better solution for the Baltic instance
than the reference model, and a slightly better solution for the WAF instance. Com-
paring the best WAF results, it is interesting that this thesis’s model ships a similar
amount of demand through a network comprising of a fleet size approximately 10
percentage points smaller than the reference result. This indicates that the rotations
are designed more eﬀiciently with respect to the demand composition of the WAF
instance. It could also be the result of the vessels sailing at a higher speed. On av-
erage, the vessels sail at a slightly higher speed for the WAF instance in this thesis’s
solution than in the solutions found in Karsten et al. (2017). However, the difference
in sailing speed is, on average, less than half a knot and therefore the sailing speeds
are not believed to have a large impact on the difference in vessel deployment between
the solutions.
A good initial solution can, as mentioned earlier, prove important to the LNS pro-
cedure.
Having a good initial solution, can provide a ”head start” in the search
procedure and potentially reduce the time it takes to reach high quality solutions.
The table below contains the initial solution for the best found solutions for each of
the considered LINER-LIB instances.
==PAGE:65==
6 Computational Results
58
Instance
Initial solution value
(dollars)
Time to find initial solution
(min)
Baltic
574,838
0.05
WAF
-259,384
0.07
Mediterranean
6.53 · 106
0.12
Pacific
3.21 · 107
0.64
AsiaEurope
4.50 · 107
5.02
WorldSmall
6.28 · 107
1.84
Table 6.3. Initial solution for the best found solutions
The time it takes to find the initial solutions includes, construction of the backbone
flows, generating routes based on the backbone flows and lastly, flowing containers
through the route in order to find the best initial solution, among the five candidates.
Only the WAF instance starts with a profitable initial solution. The initial solution
for the Baltic instance is not too bad, while the initial solution for the Mediterranean
instance is reasonable, based on the best found solution in Karsten et al. (2017). How-
ever, the initial solutions for the three largest instances are far from optimal. The
importance of the quality of the initial solution will be discussed in chapter 7.
The table below shows the different running times and the number of runs made for
each instance.
Instance
Number of runs
Running time [min]
Baltic
10
2
WAF
10
5
Mediterranean
10
20
Pacific
5
60
AsiaEurope
5
240
WorldSmall
5
180
Table 6.4. Number of runs and running times for the LINER-LIB instances
The running times are selected based on the running times used in Karsten et al.
(2017). For the Baltic and WAF instances a slightly lower running times is chosen,
as the model usually finds the best solution long before the time limit is reached.
Table 6.5 presents different KPI’s for the algorithmic performance of the best solutions
for each LINER-LIB instance.
==PAGE:66==
6 Computational Results
59
Instance
Iterations
Improving
iterations
Last improving
iteration
Avg. time per
iteration (sec)
Baltic
16,972
11
1,375
0.007
WAF
12,131
54
10,693
0.025
Mediterranean
9,035
82
8,976
0.133
Pacific
8,470
94
8,429
0.425
AsiaEurope
1,282
6
1,107
11.234
WorldSmall
2,648
28
1,127
4.079
Table 6.5. Algorithmic performance for different LINER-LIB instances
The average iteration time for the model is relatively fast for the smaller LINER-LIB
instances. An iteration includes altering the network and then evaluating it by flowing
containers through the network. However, for the AsiaEurope instance, especially, the
average iteration time is very high. Since the number of ports in this instance is much
higher than the other instances, more shortest path problems have to be computed in
each column generation iteration. Furthermore, size of the instance also affects the
column generation procedure such that it requires more iterations in order to generate
all negative reduced cost columns. Excluding the two largest instances, the number
of improving iterations usually increases with the size of the instance. This could
very well be the result of the smaller instances having a less extensive and complex
solution space.
The progression of the model’s search procedure can be illustrates using a scatter
plot, depicting accepted and rejected solutions. This is illustrated in the figures below
for the best Baltic and best Mediterranean instances. The progression for all instances
can be found in appendix A.
==PAGE:67==
6 Computational Results
60
Figure 6.1. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best Baltic Instance
Figure 6.2. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best Mediterranean Instance
==PAGE:68==
6 Computational Results
61
The figures illustrate the values of the found solutions in each iteration (y-axis) over
time in minutes (x-axis). Green points represent the accepted solutions, given the sim-
ulated annealing acceptance criterion and red points are unaccepted solutions. The
search progression for the two instances are very different. For the Baltic instance
in figure 6.1, a solution close to the last accepted solution is found very early on
in the search procedure. Furthermore, given a much smaller solution space for the
Baltic instance, than the Mediterranean instance, the unaccepted solutions are much
more scattered and does not seem to follow any structure. For the Mediterranean
instance however, the accepted solutions seem much more incremental. Additionally,
the unaccepted solution follow the structure of the accepted solutions much more in
this instance. This is likely due to the nature of the altering function, meaning that
the altering function does not alter the solution to a large degree in each iteration.
This will be discussed further in chapter 7.
Table 6.6 provides a more detailed insight into the rotations of the best solution for
the six LINER-LIB instances considered.
Instance
# rotations
Avg. rot. length
(nm)
Avg. # port
calls per rot.
Avg. sail speed
(knots)
Baltic
2
4,135.5
6.5
12.11
WAF
8
7,074.5
3.9
12.99
Mediterranean
4
6,557
12.3
14.23
Pacific
10
16,469.8
8.2
16.93
AsiaEurope
24
14,176.8
10.9
15.70
WorldSmall
25
21,264.5
9.3
18.21
Table 6.6. KPIs for the rotations of the best solutions for each instance
The average sailing speed for the rotations in the different instances seem to increase
depending on the instance size. This is expected, as the larger instances allow for the
usage of the larger types of vessel, which have a higher sailing speed. Furthermore,
the number of rotations seem to correlate fairly well with the size of the instances as
well.
The average length of the rotations is, unsurprisingly, shortest for the Baltic in-
stance, given the relatively small geographical area of the instance. As the Geograph-
ical area grows larger, so does the average length of the rotations. This outcome is
also to be expected. The average number of port call per rotations does not seem to
correlate with the size of the instances.
Lastly, the cargo flow of the best solutions for the different instances can be inspected.
==PAGE:69==
6 Computational Results
62
Instance
% cargo delivered
% cargo delivered
on direct service
Avg. # of
transshipments
Baltic
92.1%
100%
0.00
WAF
94.8%
91.7%
0.11
Mediterranean
78.9%
64.31%
0.74
Pacific
70.6%
73.55%
0.78
AsiaEurope
65.4%
21.26%
1.40
WorldSmall
67.9%
30.08%
1.06
Table 6.7. Information on cargo flow for best solutions
The percentage of cargo delivered is much higher for the smaller, single-hub instances
than for the larger multi-hub and trade lane instances. The instances where a lot of
cargo is delivered is, to no surprise, also the instances where good and profitable so-
lutions are found. As the size of the instances increase and the demand compositions
become more complex, the necessity for transshipments also increase. In the AsiaEu-
rope instance, which has the largest amount of ports, only around 21% of the cargo
is shipped on direct services. This instance has an average number of transshipments
of 1.40 transshipments per cargo path. Transshipments are generally undesirable, as
they can lead to issues such as risk of damage and delays and prolonged travel time.
Transshipments however, are usually necessary in order to construct profitable liner
shipping networks.
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter serves as a discussion of the formulated model, used to solve the Liner
Shipping Network Design Problem for the LINER-LIB instances.
The main concern of the formulated model is its inability to find good solutions for
the larger LINER-LIB instances, based on the reference solutions. As the complexity
of the instances, as well as the solution space, increases, the model struggles to find
good solution within a reasonable time.
An explanation for the model’s inability
to find high quality solution for the larger instances, could be due to the quality of
the neighborhood operators, these being the altering function described in chapter 5.
The LNS procedure relies heavily on the neighborhood operators, in order to explore
the overall search space. For the larger instances, the neighborhood operators might
not produce significant changes to the current solution in order to search different
parts of the solution space, in each iteration. In other words, the quality of the neigh-
borhood operators seem to hinder the search for good quality solutions. In fact, the
largest changes to the current solution are believed to happen during the construction
heuristic functions BuildRoute1 and BuildRoute2. Every other neighborhood oper-
ators more or less only changes a very small part of a single rotation for the entire
network. If the neighborhood operators were to change larger parts of the overall
current solution, the model might be able to explore larger parts of the solution space
in each iteration. For the smaller instances this does not seem to be an issue, since
the solution space is quite small compared to the larger instances.
The limited exploration capabilities of the neighborhood operators also begs the
question to whether or not method used to search the solution space, in this thesis,
can be classified as a true Large Neighborhood Search. The LNS procedure is charac-
terized by its ability to explore a large neighborhood of solution, where each iteration
usually makes significant changes to the current solution. Significant changes to the
current solution enable the exploration of several regions of the solution space and
also facilitates escaping local optima. Given the limited exploration capabilities of
the neighborhood operators used in the model, it may be more accurate to describe
the overall search procedure as a local search, with the ability to escape local optima
given the simulated annealing acceptance criterion.
However, the model is able to improve upon the initial solution quite a lot, even for
the larger instances. Considering the WorldSmall instance, the model finds a solution
==PAGE:71==
7 Discussion
64
with a reduced cost of $35 million compared to the cost of the initial solution. As
mentioned the quality of the initial solution can provide a head start to the search
procedure. The construction heuristic finds relatively good initial solution for the
three smallest instances where the model also finds good, or at least reasonable, final
solutions. The bottleneck of the model could very well be the construction of the
initial solutions, where the construction heuristic fails to capture the intricate nature
of the larger instances. This deficiency also seems to hinder the ability of the LNS
converging on a high quality final solution for the larger instances.
Considering the described issues related to the construction heuristic and the im-
provement heuristic, it might be the case that these two parts of the model does not
work well together. The incremental nature of the neighborhood operators might
not be suited for initial solutions where the starting point of the search procedure is
very far from a profitable network. However, having a good initial solution can be
beneficial for a true Large Neighborhood Search procedure, but should not always be
a strict requirement, which seems to be the case for this model.
The larger LINER-LIB instances might require more LNS iterations due to the in-
creased size and complexity of the solution space. This is however, diﬀicult to obtain
using this model, as the average iteration time for the larger instances are relatively
high. Take for instance the AsiaEurope instance and consider the algorithmic per-
formance KPIs from table 6.5. Even though the model is given 4 hours to improve
upon the initial solution, only 1,282 iterations are computed. Compared to the last
improving iteration number for the smaller instances, 1,282 iterations are not many.
And given that the AsiaEurope instance is much more complex, it is reasonable to
assume that more iterations are needed in order to find a good solution, especially
given the incremental nature of the model’s search procedure.
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis has been to formulate an optimization model, based in several
operation research techniques, in order to solve the Time Constrained Liner Shipping
Network Design Problem. The optimization model includes a path-flow formulation
for the Multi Commodity Flow problem. Since the number of variables, in general,
grows exponentially with the size of the graph, delayed column generation is applied
to the flow problem.
The Time Constrained Liner Shipping Network Design Problem is solved from scratch,
meaning that an initial network is not predetermined and is therefore generated. The
initial network is generated based on the backbone flow method presented in Krogs-
gaard et al. (2018). The initial solution is generated by flowing containers, one at a
time, through an auxiliary network connecting all port. The resulting backbone flow,
indicates which connections are attractive to sail. Based on the backbone flow, initial
rotations are generated. The construction heuristic finds good initial solution within
a short time for the smaller instances. However, for the larger instances the heuristic
struggles to find good initial solution, and the time to find the initial solution is rela-
tively long.
The network is optimized using a Large Neighborhood Search metaheuristic compris-
ing of 10 different neighborhood operators as well as a simulated annealing acceptance
criterion. The neighborhood operators perform a variaty of operations, including de-
stroying and repairing a solution as well as construction heuristics in order to intro-
duce new rotations to the solutions. They also include simple changes to the existing
network.
The computational results obtained when applying the optimization model to the
six considered LINER-LIB instances, clearly emphasize the model’s strengths and
weaknesses. The model formulated in this thesis finds better results for the Baltic
and WAF instances, while finding reasonable results for the Mediterranean instance,
compared to the reference results from Karsten et al. (2017). However, the model
struggles to find good solution for the three largest instances, namely the Pacific,
AsiaEurope and WorldSmall instances, within a reasonable amount of time. Several
bottlenecks are identified, which contribute to the model’s inability to converge to a
high quality final solution for the larger instances. Firstly, the neighborhood opera-
==PAGE:73==
8 Conclusion
66
tors, also called altering functions, perform very small changes to the current solution
in each iteration, which in turn limit their exploration capabilities of the overall so-
lution space.
This makes it diﬀicult for the model to fully explore large solution
spaces. Furthermore, the construction heuristic consistently finds low quality initial
solutions for the larger LINER-LIB instances. Given the incremental nature of the
improvement heuristic, these two components do not seem to interact well with ea-
chother. Lastly, the computational time to explore a neighborhood is very high for
the largest instances, meaning that fewer parts of the solution space can be explored
when solving the largest instances.
In conclusion, the model formulated in this thesis, definitely has the potential to find
good solution for several liner shipping instances. However, in order to consistently
find good solutions for a large variety of instances, the neighborhood operators should
be adjusted in order to introduce more diversity and exploration in the search process.
==PAGE:74==
Appendices
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Search progression
Figure A.1. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best Baltic Instance
==PAGE:76==
Appendix A Search progression
69
Figure A.2. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best WAF Instance
Figure A.3. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best Mediterranean Instance
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A Search progression
70
Figure A.4. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best Pacific Instance
Figure A.5. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best AsiaEurope Instance
==PAGE:78==
Appendix A Search progression
71
Figure A.6. Accepted and unaccepted solutions for the best WorldSmall Instance
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
Agarwal, R. and Ergun, O. (2008). Ship scheduling and network design for cargo
routing in liner shipping. Transportation Science, 42(2):175–196.
Brouer, B. D., Alvarez, J. F., Plum, C. E., Pisinger, D., and Sigurd, M. M. (2014a).
A base integer programming model and benchmark suite for liner-shipping network
design. Transportation Science, 48(2):281–312.
Brouer, B. D., Desaulniers, G., and Pisinger, D. (2014b). A matheuristic for the
liner shipping network design problem. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review, 72:42–59.
Brouer, B. D., Pisinger, D., and Spoorendonk, S. (2011).
Liner shipping cargo
allocation with repositioning of empty containers.
INFOR: Information Systems
and Operational Research, 49(2):109–124.
Christiansen, M., Hellsten, E., Pisinger, D., Sacramento, D., and Vilhelmsen, C.
(2020). Liner shipping network design. European Journal of Operational Research,
286(1):1–20.
Irnich, S. and Desaulniers, G. (2005).
Shortest path problems with resource con-
straints. Springer.
Karsten, C. V., Brouer, B. D., Desaulniers, G., and Pisinger, D. (2017).
Time
constrained liner shipping network design. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review, 105:152–162.
Karsten, C. V., Pisinger, D., Ropke, S., and Brouer, B. D. (2015). The time con-
strained multi-commodity network flow problem and its application to liner shipping
network design. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Re-
view, 76:122–138.
Koza, D. F., Desaulniers, G., and Ropke, S. (2020). Integrated liner shipping network
design and scheduling. Transportation Science, 54(2):512–533.
Krogsgaard, A., Pisinger, D., and Thorsen, J. (2018). A flow-first route-next heuris-
tic for liner shipping network design. Networks, 72(3):358–381.
Krogsgaard, A. and Thorsen, J. (2016). Route network design for liner shipping.
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
73
Maersk, 2013. Maersk annual report 2013. https://investor.maersk.com/static-
files/f9126c88-9da0-4b11-8960-a70056e5b5d8, accessed: 03/07/2023.
Meng, Q. and Wang, S. (2011). Liner shipping service network design with empty
container repositioning. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transporta-
tion Review, 47(5):695–708.
Mulder, J. and Dekker, R. (2014). Methods for strategic liner shipping network
design. European Journal of Operational Research, 235(2):367–377.
Røpke, S. and Pisinger, D. (2006). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic
for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation science,
40(4):455–472.
Unctad, 2021a.
Review of maritime transport 2021.
https://unctad.org/
publication/review-maritime-transport-2021, accessed: 03/07/2023.
Unctad, 2021b. World seaborne trade. https://hbs.unctad.org/world-seaborne-
trade/, accessed: 03/07/2023.
Álvarez, J. F. (2009). Joint routing and deployment of a fleet of container vessels.
Maritime Economics & Logistics, 11:186–208.
