==PAGE:1==
Modelling and characterization of acoustic
wave propagation in bent ducts
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Acoustic Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Fernando Javier Canalejo Vicedo
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Acoustic Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 343,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Acoustic Technology, De­
partment of Electrical and Photonic Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics.
Fernando Javier Canalejo Vicedo ­ s212735
Signature
Date
ii
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project studies acoustic wave propagation in and bent ducts under the low frequency
assumption, e.g. only plane waves can propagate. A method to compare a uni dimen­
sional sound field in a duct obtained from TMM with a three dimensional sound field ob­
tained from numerical simulations is developed to understand the behavior of the sound
field inside the bent duct. After characterizing the sound field in a bent duct with only
three parameters, an analytical framework is developed to model such a sound field with
a simplified analogy using TMM.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Fernando Javier Canalejo Vicedo, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
Toni Torras Rosell, Acoustics Technology Manager, DPA Microphones
Vicente Cutanda Henriquez, Associate Professor, DTU
iv
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Motivation
1
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Plane waves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The sound field in a duct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The Transfer Matrix Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
High­order modes: the low frequency assumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Understanding the problem
11
3.1
Understanding a straight duct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Understanding a bent duct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Understanding the inlet and the outlet of a duct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Analytical study
17
4.1
Study of the reference model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Coupled systems using TMM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Numerical study
27
5.1
Study of the reference model: a straight duct using FEM . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Study of a bent duct using FEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
A recipe for matched bends at a given frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Modelling bent ducts with TMM
49
6.1
The coupled­pipe analogy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Modelling the reflection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.3
Modelling the phase shift
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.4
Validation of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7
Experimental validation
61
7.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.3
Experiment setup 1: validity of using flush­mounted microphones . . . . . . 62
7.4
Experimental setup 2: characterizing the reflection of the bend . . . . . . . 64
8
Conclusions and future work
71
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Bibliography
73
A Calculation of the coefficients of the transfer matrix of a coupled system
75
B Difference of the sound field at the inner and outer side of the bend
76
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
v
==PAGE:8==
C Modelling a bent duct of Γ and βb
78
D Sound field difference between the model and the numerical solution for the
impedance tube method
80
vi
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:9==
1
Motivation
Sound propagation inside of ducts is a topic of relevance within acoustics given its prac­
tical importance. Sound travelling inside of ducts can be found in diverse applications,
from engine exhaust systems in ships or ventilation and air­conditioning installations in
buildings on a larger scale to hearing aid systems and a wide variety of musical instru­
ments on a smaller scale. Other applications of great importance for the study of acoustic
properties of transducers and materials also rely on duct acoustics.
The sound field in a straight uniform duct with rigid walls can be greatly simplified if the
cross sectional dimensions of the duct are much smaller than the wavelength of the wave
travelling inside it. Under a certain frequency that depends on the shape of the duct only
plane waves can propagate meaning that the sound field can be assumed to be one­
dimensional. This characteristic allows to model the behavior of the sound field inside
such a duct in a simple manner. More concisely, the sound field at the outlet of a duct
can be calculated knowing only the geometrical properties of the duct and the driving
frequencies using the Transmission Matrix Method (TMM). The assumption that the waves
propagating inside the tube under a certain frequency is referred to as the low frequency
assumption.
However, the analysis of the sound field in the duct gets more complicated at higher
frequencies. It is convenient to analyze the sound field as a superposition of different
wave modes (or simply, modes) that depend on the geometry of the duct and that are
increasingly complex with frequency. The plane wave that propagates at low frequencies
can be called fundamental mode. The first high­order mode, or first radial mode in a
cylindrical duct, imposes the theoretical limit of the low frequency assumption. Rostafinski
shows that a plane wave at the inlet of a bend will become non­plane in the bend and, for
that matter, it begins to be non­plane already in the straight duct feeding the bend [1] This
can be interpreted as high order modes being triggered inside the bend and propagating
outside it.
In spite of the many applications of a straight uniform duct there are many cases where
the duct needs to be bent for different reasons. The objective of this research work is to
analyze the behavior of the sound field in a duct that includes a bend of different bending
radii and bending angles, trying to determine the frequency limits of the low frequency
assumption for the ducts with different bends and implementing a model based on TMM
that allows to calculate the properties of the sound field at the outlet knowing only the
geometrical properties of the bent duct and the driving frequencies.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Plane waves
Plane waves are waves in which any acoustic variable is constant at a given time on any
plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation [2]. It is a key concept in acoustic and
is used widely to model sound fields such as the sound field radiated by a source in free
space at a large distance, i.e. far field, where the waves are assumed to be locally plane,
or waves that propagate in a duct at low frequencies.
A plane wave propagating in the x­direction with amplitude p+ can be expressed mathe­
matically as
ˆp = p+ej(ωt−kx)
(2.1)
using the polar form of a complex number, or as
ˆp = p+(cos(ωt −kx) + j sin(ωt −kx))
(2.2)
using its trigonometric form.
The general solution for the one­dimensional Helmholtz equation is the superposition of
two plane waves travelling in opposite directions and it can be presented as
ˆp = p+ej(ωt−kx) + p−ej(ωt+kz)
(2.3)
which leads to an interference pattern which is known as a standing wave pattern.
2.1.1
Standing waves
A standing wave pattern results from the interference of two plane waves travelling in
opposite directions. This phenomenon can happen at systems in which a forward propa­
gating plane wave is reflected back by a sudden change of impedance. Examples of such
systems are the string of a guitar or the pipe of an organ. They will have some points where
the interference is destructive, the wave will have minimum amplitude; some other points
where the interference will be constructive, the wave will have maximum amplitude. This
points are called nodes and antinodes, respectively. A standing wave is described by
Equation 2.3, and can be further expanded by introducing the reflection coefficient ˆR as
ˆp = p+(e−jkz + ˆRejkz)ejωt,
(2.4)
ˆuz = p+
ρc (e−jkz −ˆRejkz)ejωt.
(2.5)
introducing here the particle velocity in the x­direction ˆux. A perfectly rigid surface, also
know as rigid boundary, will reflect all the sound without a shift in phase yielding ˆR = 1.
The attached end of a string in a guitar is an example of such a boundary. A pressure­
release boundary, also known as open boundary, will reflect all the sound in antiphase
yielding ˆR = −1. The open end of the pipe of an organ is an example of open boundary.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
3
==PAGE:12==
Knowing the value of ˆR one can calculate the maximum and minimum values of the pres­
sure, i.e. the values at the nodes and antinodes, as
pmax = |p+|(1 + | ˆR|),
(2.6)
pmin = |p+|(1 −| ˆR|).
(2.7)
The ratio of this two values is called the standing wave ratio and it can be used to determine
the value of ˆR,
s = pmax
pmin
= 1 + | ˆR|
1 −| ˆR|
.
(2.8)
2.1.2
Theory of the impedance tube
It is possible to determine the reflection coefficient ˆR at the end of a duct by measuring
the transfer function between the signals from two pressure microphones mounted in the
wall of a duct [2]. Jacobsen shows how one can estimate the reflection coefficient ˆR of the
termination of a duct given the pressure at two positions separated by ∆x by calculating
the transfer function H12 between this two signals to obtain ˆR as
ˆR = e−j2kx ejk∆x −H12
H12ejk∆x −1.
(2.9)
2.2
The sound field in a duct
Consider a duct terminated at x = 0 by an arbitrary impedance ˆZa,t and driven by a
source at x < 0. Assuming that the source is radiating at a low enough frequency, a plane
wave will appear travelling from the source to the termination and a second plane wave
will be reflected by the termination and will travel in the opposite direction. The phase
and amplitude of the reflected wave will depend on the reflection coefficient ˆR and the
incident wave as p−= p+| ˆR|, as described earlier. Such a sound field can be described
by Equations 2.4 and 2.5.
The acoustic impedance at any given plane of the duct, which represents the local resis­
tance of the system to the propagation of the wave, is defined as the ratio between the
pressure and the volume velocity at that plane as
Za(x) =
ˆp
Sˆux
= ρc
S
e−jkx + ˆRejkx
e−jkx −ˆRejkx ,
(2.10)
and can be used to define the acoustic termination impedance of the duct when particu­
larizing at x = 0 obtaining
ˆZa(0) = ˆZa,t = ρc
S
1 + ˆR
1 −ˆR
,
(2.11)
which leads to the definition of the reflection coefficient ˆR as a function of the acoustic
termination impedance
4
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:13==
ˆR =
ˆZa,t −ρc/S
ˆZa,t + ρc/S
.
(2.12)
2.2.1
Analysis of the termination impedance
Equation 2.12 shows that the value of ˆZa,t will determine the value of ˆR and therefore
that of the reflected wave. It also proves the importance of the quantity ρc/S, namely
the characteristic impedance. For | ˆZa,t| >> ρc/S there will be a total reflection in phase,
| ˆR| ≈1; for |Za,t| >> ρc/S there will be a total reflection in antiphase, | ˆR| ≈−1; and for
| ˆZa,t| = ρc/S there will be no reflection ˆR = 0.
It follows that if the duct has a matched or anechoic termination, | ˆZa,t| = ρc/S, only the
incident wave will propagate inside the tube, modelling the behavior of a semi­infinite duct.
This implies that the acoustic energy will be constant throughout the duct.
However, if the duct has a rigid termination, | ˆZa,t| >> ρc/S, there will be a total reflection
in phase and the interference of the incident and reflected wave will generate a standing
wave. This implies that resonances will appear in the duct: nodal planes will appear where
the sound pressure is zero, i.e. destructive interference, and antinodal planes will appear
where the sound pressure is maximal with amplitude 2p+, i.e. constructive interference.
The nodal planes are found at lx = (2n + 1)λ/4, while antinodal planes are found at
lx = nλ/2, with n a natural number.
Similarly if the duct has an open termination, | ˆZa,t| << ρc/S, there will be a total reflec­
tion in antiphase and the interference of the incident and reflected wave will generate a
standing wave as well. The nodal planes are found at lx = nλ/2, while antinodal planes
are found at lx = (2n + 1)λ/4, with n a natural number.
A more thorough analysis of the sound field in a tube terminated by an arbitrary impedance
can be found in Chapter 7.2.1 of Jacobsen [2], on which this section was based.
2.2.2
Coupled ducts of different cross­section
Until now only a straight uniform duct of length l and cross­section S terminated by an
arbitrary termination impedance has been considered. In this section we will study the
effect of coupling a second duct with a different cross­section at the termination of another
pipe.
A system with two coupled ducts the termination impedance of the first duct will be be
equal to the input impedance of the second duct. Jacobsen [2] shows that the input
impedance of a duct with a matched termination impedance, i.e. the semi­infinite tube
case, equals the termination impedance of that tube.
Assuming that the second duct has an anechoic termination, the termination impedance
of the first duct will equal the termination impedance of the second duct ( ˆZa,t1 = ˆZa,t2 =
ˆZa,i2 = ρc/S2). Including this into Equation 2.12 we obtain
ˆRa,t1 = ρc/S2 −ρc/S1
ρc/S2 + ρc/S1
(2.13)
which leads to
ˆRa,t1 = S1 −S2
S1 + S2
.
(2.14)
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
5
==PAGE:14==
Equation 2.14 shows the reflection coefficient that results from a change in cross­section.
2.3
The Transfer Matrix Method
Under the low frequency assumption the sound field in a duct is formed by the interference
of two plane waves travelling in opposite directions. It is therefore possible to model this
system as an two­port system, such as a wave guide.
The Transfer Matrix (or TM) is composed of four coefficients, and relates the input and
the output variables.
ˆpi
ˆqi

=
A
B
C
D
 ˆpo
ˆqo

(2.15)
ˆpi = Aˆpo + Bˆqo,
(2.16)
ˆqi = C ˆpo + Dˆqo.
(2.17)
The value of the coefficients of the TM of a straight duct can be obtained in a simple
manner by assuming an open or a rigid termination where the parameters of the sound
field at the inlet and outlet of the duct can be expressed as
ˆpi = p+ej(ωt−kl) + p−ej(ωt+kl),
(2.18)
ˆqi = q+ej(ωt−kl) −q−ej(ωt+kl),
(2.19)
ˆpo = (p+ + p−)ejωt,
(2.20)
ˆqo = S
ρc(p+ + p−)ejωt,
(2.21)
respectively. Using Equations 2.16 and 2.17 and imposing a rigid boundary at the end of
the duct, i.e. ˆqo = 0 and therefore p+ = p−, one can define the coefficients A and C as
the ratio of complex variables
A = ˆpi
ˆpo

ˆqo=0 = p+(e−jkl + ejkl)
2p+
= cos(kl),
(2.22)
C = ˆqi
ˆpo

ˆqo=0 =
S
ρcp+(e−jkl + ejkl)
2p+
= j S
ρcsin(kl).
(2.23)
Parameters B and D can be calculated imposing an open boundary at the end of the duct,
i.e. ˆpo = 0 and therefore p+ = −p−, obtaining
B = ˆpi
ˆqo

ˆpo=0 = p+(e−jkl + ejkl)
2 S
ρcp+
= j ρc
S sin(kl),
(2.24)
6
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:15==
D = ˆqi
ˆqo

ˆpo=0 =
S
ρcp+(e−jkl + ejkl)
2 S
ρcp+
= cos(kl).
(2.25)
Inserting these results into Equation 2.16 one can represent mathematically how the TM
transforms the sound field variables at the inlet as a function of the variables at the outlet.
The value of ˆpo can be calculated as
ˆpi = ˆpocos(kl) + j ρc
S ˆqosin(kl),
(2.26)
having the second addend to be a value in Pascal, given that one can express volume
velocity as ˆqo =
S
ρc ˆpo. Closer examination of Equation 2.26 shows that ˆpi is essentially
being expressed as the product of ˆpo and a complex number in trigonometric form, see
Equation 2.2, of module 1 and phase kl, as
ˆpi = ˆpo(cos(kl) + jsin(kl)) = ˆpo ejkl,
(2.27)
showing that the TM is equating unattenuated wave propagation along a duct of length l.
The same holds true for Equation 2.17, yielding
ˆqi = ˆqo(cos(kl) + jsin(kl)) = ˆqoejkl.
(2.28)
Equations 2.27 and 2.28 show that the TM defines the sound field variables at
the inlet of the duct as the sound field variables at the outlet of the duct with a
phase shift that depends only on the wave number k and on the length of the
duct l. This models the change in the sound field in a semi­infinite duct.
Highlight 1
2.3.1
The Transfer Matrix of a reciprocal system
Until now we have considered a duct terminated at x = 0 by an arbitrary impedance ˆZa,t
and driven by a source at x < 0 and we have obtained the coefficients of the TM of such a
system. Given the geometrical properties of the system analyzed until now, i.e. a straight
uniform cylindrical duct, it can be assumed that such a system is reciprocal. This means
that if the duct is excited by the same source at x = 0 and the arbitrary impedance ˆZa,t
is placed at x < 0 the sound field variables at the the termination should be the same
as in the original case. Therefore, the TM must have a reciprocal system that allows
exchanging the input and the output like
ˆpi
ˆqi

=
A
B
C
D
 ˆpo
ˆqo

−→
A
B
C
D
−1 ˆpi
ˆqi

=
ˆpo
ˆqo

.
(2.29)
Equation 2.29 shows that the inverse of the original TM is the TM of the reciprocal system.
The TM of the reciprocal system (TMr) can be calculated applying the definition of inverse
matrix as
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
7
==PAGE:16==
AR
BR
CR
DR

=
A
B
C
D
−1
=
1
AD −BC
 D
−B
−C
A

=
 D
−B
−C
A

,
(2.30)
with AD −BC being the determinant of the TM, and being equal to 1 if the system is
reciprocal. In such a way it can be proved that the TM of the reciprocal system can be
defined as a function of the coefficients of the original TM, and can be use to calculate
the sound field variables at the outlet of a duct knowing the sound field at the inlet of the
duct.
AR = D, BR = −B, CR = −C, DR = A
(2.31)
Equation 2.31 shows the coefficients of TMr, and can be calculated using a form of Equa­
tions 2.22, 2.24, 2.23 and 2.25 changing the variables at the input by those at the outlet.
2.3.2
The transfer matrix of a coupled system
For a system composed by different subsystems one can make use of the fact that the
output variables of one subsystem are the input variables of the next one to cascade the
transfer matrix of each subsystem [2].
pi
qi

=
A1
B1
C1
D1
 A2
B2
C2
D2
 po
qo

(2.32)
Appendix A shows how to calculate coefficients A and B of the TM of two coupled systems.
2.4
High­order modes: the low frequency assumption
The properties of the sound field in a duct explained previously are true when under the
low frequency assumption, but it gets more complicated at higher frequencies. It can be
shown that the sound field inside a duct is composed of a sum of different wave modes with
different shapes or nodal lines. For straight uniform ducts with rigid walls it is possible to
obtain these solutions analytically by solving the Helmholtz equation in the corresponding
coordinate system.
Equation 7.124 in Jacobsen [2] shows how the general solution for the wave equation
in a cylindrical duct can be expressed as a superposition of modes which can be radial
or axisymmetrical, i.e. they appear at radial planes or at planes perpendicular to the
boundary of the duct. Jacobsen explains how each of these modes has an associated
cut­off frequency fmn that defines if the mode will propagate unnatenuated or will decay
exponentially with frequency. If the duct is driven at a frequency f < fmn the mode (m, n)
will decay exponentially, being an evanescent mode; if the duct is driven at a frequency
f > fmn the mode (m, n) will propagate unnatenuated.
One can find that the cut­off frequency in a cylindrical duct is the cut­off frequency of the
first radial mode f10, defined as
f10 = 1.84c
2πri
,
(2.33)
with ri the radius of the duct. Below this frequency only plane waves will propagate, also
known as the fundamental mode [3].
8
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:17==
An evanescent mode transports no net acoustic energy [3]. Pierce shows that for an
evanescent mode the time average of the acoustic intensity in the direction of propagation
¯Ix is zero, as well as the acoustic power transported through the duct. Therefore, for a
duct driven at f < fmn one can assume that all the net acoustic energy being transported
is due to modes propagating unnatenuated.
A duct of ri will have a cut off frequency of the first high­order mode f10, de­
fined in Equation 2.33. Under this frequency, only plane waves will propagate
and they will transport all the net acoustic energy provided that an evanescent
mode transports no net acoustic energy [3].
Highlight 2
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:19==
3
Understanding the problem
3.1
Understanding a straight duct
A straight duct will be used as a reference model throughout the report. The sound field in
a straight duct can be modelled analytically because of its simplicity. One of the methods
that can be used is the Transfer Matrix Method (TMM), see Section 2.3. As explained in
Section 2.1 the sound field in a duct can be described as a plane wave if the frequency
of excitation is low enough.
The two geometrical parameters for a straight duct that are important to understand the
sound field are the total length l0 and the radius ri. The total length will determine the
change in phase at the outlet of the duct as compared to the phase at the inlet, governed
by e−jkx. The radius of the duct will determine f10, the frequency below which the sound
field can be considered uni­dimensional, i.e. only plane waves can propagate, see Section
2.4. Figure 3.1 shows these two geometrical parameters.
Figure 3.1: Straight duct defined by the radius ri and length l0, with inlet at x = −l0 and
outlet at x = 0.
3.2
Understanding a bent duct
3.2.1
Geometry of a bent duct
Bent ducts are the key element under study in this project. This section of the report aims
to explain the geometry of any bent duct and the characteristics of the sound field that
can be expected inside such bent ducts.
A bent duct of total length l0 is divided in three separate stretches. The first part of the
duct is a straight duct that connects the inlet of the duct, placed at x = −l0, with the bend.
The length of this part is described by the parameter l1. Moving forward this part of the
duct will be called ”Stretch 1”.
The second part of the duct is the bend itself and it is described by the bending radius rb
and the bending angle βb. The bending radius can be defined as a function of the radius
of the duct and a bending factor Γ as
rb = Γri,
(3.1)
having Γ to describe the abruptness of the bend, from very abrupt when Γ −→1 to less
abrupt when Γ −→∞in the case of a straight tube. Defining the abruptness of a bend in
this way allows to have bent ducts with same abruptness regardless of the value of ri. A
condition that follows for the geometry to be viable is that Γ > 1. Knowing both rb and βb
one can calculate the length of the bend lb as
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
11
==PAGE:20==
lb = rbβb,
(3.2)
describing the length of the bend at the axis of the cylinder. One can calculate the length
of the outer side or inner side of the bend by adding or subtracting ri to rb in Equation 3.2.
Moving forward this part of the duct will be named ”Stretch 2” or ”the bend”.
The third part of the duct is another straight duct that connects the bend with the outlet
of the duct, placed at x = 0. This part is of length l3, as the first part. It is apparent that
l0 = l1 + lb + l3. Moving forward this part of the duct will be named ”Stretch 3”.
Figure 3.2: Diagram of a bent duct of radius ri and total length l0, divided into Stretch 1 of
length l1, Stretch 2 (the bend) defined by the bending radius rb and the bending angle βb,
and Stretch 3 of length l3. The inlet is placed at x = −l0 and the outlet is placed at x = 0.
Throughout the project several different ducts will be studied to understand the effect
of changing the values of some of the parameters described above. The general case
studied to understand the overall behavior of the sound field in a bent will be a bent duct
of l0 = 15m, ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦. Unless stated otherwise, this will be the
bent duct under analysis.
3.2.2
Sound field in a bent duct
It is the purpose of this project to understand and characterize the behavior of the sound
field inside a bent duct. As one can imagine, the presence of the bend will affect the plane
wave that propagates inside the duct in some way. Hereunder some hypothesis that aim
to explain the behavior of the sound field are formulated.
The bend impedance, ˆ
Zb(f)
The bend poses a change in the impedance that the wave experiences, which is dis­
tributed along the bend. To understand the effect of this impedance it can be assumed to
be a concentrated property at one point and referred to as the bend impedance, ˆZb(f) and
its corresponding reflection coefficient ˆRb, see Section 2.12, without entering into detail
on what happens inside the bend itself.
As explained in 2.1.1, when a wave is exposed to a sudden change in impedance some
energy of the incident wave can be reflected backwards, generating a standing wave
pattern. It follows that the energy that travels through the bend will be reduced depending
on how much energy was reflected back on the bend, i.e. depending on | ˆRb|. This change
in impedance will be more sudden as the abruptness of the bend increases, therefore it
is expected that for smoother bends, i.e. with increasing values of Γ, the bend will reflect
12
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:21==
less energy. It is also expected to have a frequency dependant behavior of the impedance
at the bend because different wavelengths should interact differently with the geometry of
the bend.
Figure 3.3: Sound field distribution in a bent duct.
Figure 3.3 shows how the sound field may be distributed in a bent duct. The sound field in
Stretch 1 is composed of a forward­ and a backward­travelling wave generating a standing
wave pattern governed by ˆRb, see Section 2.1.1, as
ˆp1 = ˆpi(e−jkx + ˆRbejkx).
(3.3)
The sound field in Stretch 3 is composed by a plane wave that has the energy that travels
through the bend with amplitude governed by Rb as
ˆp1 = ˆpi(1 −ˆRb)e−jkx.
(3.4)
The sound field in the bend
Section 2.4 shows that high order modes can be triggered due to irregularities in a straight
duct. However, a bent duct has a more complicated behavior due to the presence of the
bend. A plane wave at the inlet of the bend will become non­plane in the bend; for that
matter, it begins to change to non­plane already in the straight duct feeding the bend [1].
Rostafinski’s research [1] implies that high­order modes will be triggered inside a bent duct
due to its inability to carry plane waves. However, this high­order modes will not propagate
very far if the radius of the duct is small enough to allow only the fundamental mode to
propagate. Therefore, it is expected to find a plane wave travelling from the inlet to the
bend, a sum of high­order modes appearing in the bend that will then decay as sound
propagates towards the outlet of the duct. Rostafinski formulates that the attenuation of
the non­propagating modes strongly depends on frequency and that [...] the more abrupt
the bend, the less attenuation may be expected [1]. This means that the high­order modes
will propagate farther out of the bend as the abruptness of the bend increases.
Thinking about the direction of propagation of the plane wave travelling in Stretch 1, one
could intuitively argue that the plane wave is reflected by the outer side of the bend into
the inner side of the bend. Due to the curved surface this reflections go on along the bend,
affecting the sound field at the inlet and outlet and decaying exponentially in the straight
parts coupled to the bend. In other words, one can imagine that the plane wave will
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
13
==PAGE:22==
bounce back and forth inside the walls in the bend. This reflections can potentially affect
the acoustic effective length of the bend, given that the path that the plane wave follows
is prolonged by these wall­to­wall reflections. According to Rostafinski [1], curved ducts
constitute a dispersive medium; in other words, wave velocity in bends is a function of the
frequency, meaning that this acoustic effective length is in fact frequency dependant.
A plane wave at the inlet of a bend will become non­plane, beginning to
change to non­plane already in the straight duct feeding the bend. Higher or­
der modes are expected to appear in the bend, propagating farther out of the
bend with increasing abruptness of the bend. The bend will have an acoustic
effective length that will depend on the frequency, making the bend a disper­
sive medium.
Highlight 3
The fact that high­order modes appear inside a bent duct means that the method used
to analyse the sound field has to allow comparing a one­dimensional sound field that
follows from the low frequency assumption, which can be modelled analytically, and a
three­dimensional sound field.
3.3
Understanding the inlet and the outlet of a duct
All the ducts modelled in this report have an inlet at x = −l0 and an outlet at x = 0.
Figure 3.2 shows the position of inlet and outlet for a bent duct. However, given that all
simulations have been performed with positive values of distance, all results that involve
spatial analysis of the sound field will have x = 0 as the inlet and x = l0 as the outlet.
The surface at the inlet of any duct presented in this report acts as the sound source. This
is true both for analytical and numerical studies carried out in the project. However, the
boundary condition defined at the outlet will change throughout the report depending on
what the objective of a particular study is.
3.3.1
Source characterization
The sound source that will drive every duct presented in this project will be a volume
velocity source of infinite source impedance, having a sound source independant of the
acoustic load of the system [2], meaning that regardless of the boundary condition im­
posed at the outlet of the duct the source condition will remain unchanged. The source
is modelled to radiate with constant amplitude and equal phase at all frequencies. This
source condition correspond to an ideal piston vibrating at the inlet of the duct, it being
the only cause of the sound field in the duct following causality [3].
It is also a convenient choice for this particular application because it is fairly simple to re­
late a volume velocity source of a three­dimensional system with a particle velocity source
of a one­dimensional system. The relation between both depends purely on the cross­
section of the duct. It also allows to compare with a simple relation a three­dimensional
duct with a one­dimensional equivalent system, which are comparable under the low fre­
quency assumption, see Section 2.4.
ˆq =
Z
S
ˆu dS
(3.5)
Equation 3.5 shows the relation between the volume velocity ˆq, a three­dimensional vari­
able, and the particle velocity ˆu, regarded as a one­dimensional variable under the low
14
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:23==
frequency assumption as there is only propagation in one variable, see Section 2.1.
3.3.2
Three different boundary conditions
Depending on the termination impedance of the duct the sound field in a duct will behave
differently. This is a property that will be used to characterize different aspects of the
sound propagation inside the ducts under study.
In order to understand the propagation of a plane wave along a duct it is convenient to
ignore the reflections that may be caused by the termination impedance at the outlet.
Moreover, if one wished to observe the effect of the reflections that a bend causes in a
bent duct it would be convenient to have those reflections alone and not combined with the
termination impedance. For this purposes the outlet will be characterized as a Perfectly
Matched Layer, hereunder PML, also referred to as ”matched termination” or ”anechoic
termination”, an ideal termination characterized by having no reflection. ˆZa,t = ρc/S for
such condition, see Equation 2.12.
In order to calculate the coefficients of the TM using Equations 2.22 and 2.23 a rigid
boundary is required; Equations 2.24 and 2.25 require an open boundary.
3.4
Research questions
After having explained the theoretical principles behind the problem and the geometry
of the setup one can establish some research questions to which this project will try to
provide some answers.
The first objective of this project is to model the behavior of a bend in a cylindrical duct,
modelling it as a bend impedance ˆZb that depends on frequency and the geometrical
parameters of the bend.
Provided some understanding of the acoustic impedance posed by the bend, the second
objective of the project is to understand the behavior of the sound field in a bent duct and
model it using TMM. It will be important to evaluate the accuracy of this model against
some reliable source such as a numerical simulation or some measurements inside a
bent duct.
Another objective of this project is to develop an analytical framework that allows to de­
sign bent ducts such that the bend generates no reflections at the chosen frequencies.
Combined with a TMM model, one will be able to predict the sound field inside a duct
knowing only the geometrical parameters of the duct.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:25==
4
Analytical study
4.1
Study of the reference model
This section will discuss the sound field in a straight duct like the one presented in Figure
3.1. This straight duct will be used throughout the project as a reference duct by analyzing
it from a theoretical standpoint, using the conclusions derived from the solutions of the
wave equation presented in Section 2.1 and the modelling tools presented in Section 2.3.
Throughout the project it will be referred to as ”straight duct”, ”reference duct” or simply
”reference”.
4.1.1
Low frequency assumption
As noted in Section 2.4, a higher­order mode will only propagate in the duct above its
cut­off frequency fmn. Equation 7.128 in Jacobsen [2] shows how the cut­off frequency
of a high order mode is inversely proportional to the radius of the duct ri.
To ensure plane wave propagation only, one must assume that the driving frequency is
lower than the cut­off frequency of the first high order mode, f < f10. As detailed in
Section 2.4 the sound field in a duct can be modelled as a superposition of infinite modes,
each of them contributing differently to the sound field depending on the driving frequency
and contributing the most at and just above its cut­off frequency fmn [2]. This means that
just below fmn the contribution of the mode will also be of importance, so it is necessary
to define a frequency range where this contribution is negligible.
Equation 7.128 in Jacobsen [2] can be rearranged to define a ratio between the wave­
length associated to the cut­off frequency of the first high order mode λ10 and the radius
of the duct ri as
Mr = λ10
ri
= 2π
η10
= 3.4125,
(4.1)
which allows to express the low frequency assumption as λ << ri/Mr. From Equation
4.1 an interesting property follows. Given two ducts with radii r1 and r2 and with a first
high order mode with a cut off frequency f10,1 and f10,2, respectively, the sound field will be
comparable at frequencies f1 and f2, respectively, as long as f1/f10,1 = f2/f10,2. This will
be important if one is to compare ducts of different diameters in which high order modes
are triggered. This will be relevant for the study of the sound field in a bent duct, as shown
in Section 3.2.2.
4.1.2
Transfer Matrix of a straight tube
As stated in Section 2.3 it is a simple matter to characterize the sound field at the outlet of
a duct under the low frequency assumption given the sound field at the inlet and the geo­
metrical properties of the duct. One can analytically calculate the value of the coefficients
of the TM making use of Equations 2.22, 2.24, 2.23 and 2.25.
Figure 4.1 shows the coefficients of a Transfer Matrix of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3m
and length l0 = 15m. The module, on top, phase normalized by π, in the middle, and
determinant of the matrix, on the bottom, are represented.
It is apparent that A and D have the same module and phase as they are defined equally,
see Equations 2.22 and 2.25, whereas B and C have the same phase but different mod­
ule given that the factor that defines the amplitude of the coefficients is inverse for each
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Coefficients of a Transfer Matrix of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3m and
length l0 = 15m. The magnitude, on top, phase normalized by π, in the middle, and
determinant of the matrix, on the bottom, are represented.
coefficient, as seen in Equation 2.24 and 2.23. Closer inspection of the module of the
coefficients reveals that the dips in the magnitude of A and D are shifted with respect to
those of B and C. This dips represent the resonance frequencies of the duct when for the
closed and open boundary condition, respectively, see Section 2.2.1.
It can also be observed that the phase of A and D oscillates between 0 and π. Knowing
that both coefficients A and D are defined as cos kl this makes perfect sense, as the
values of A and D will oscillate between positive and negative values, being both always
only real­valued. On the other hand the phase of B and C oscillates between π/2 and
−π/2, which also makes sense knowing that B and C can take positive or negative purely
imaginary values. The determinant of the TM is found to be 1 at all frequencies ensuring
that the system is reciprocal and symmetric, see Section 2.3.1. One can also calculate
analytically the coefficient of the reciprocal TM (hereafter, TMr) using Equation 2.30.
Figure 4.2 shows the coefficients of the TMr of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3m and
length l0 = 15m. The magnitude, on top, phase normalized by π, in the middle, and
determinant of the matrix, on the bottom, are represented.
Comparing Figure 4.2 with Figure 4.1 one can see that the module of the coefficients is the
same: it is expected from a symmetric system to have the resonances frequencies at the
same frequencies. However, the phase is slightly different. Its values are still oscillating
between π/2 and −π/2 but its distribution such that allows to compensate for the phase
shift that a plane wave experiences when travelling through a duct of length l0. Once
18
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.2: Coefficients of the reciprocal Transfer Matrix of a straight duct of radius ri =
0.3m and length l0 = 15m. The magnitude, on top, phase normalized by π, in the middle,
and determinant of the matrix, on the bottom, are represented.
again the determinant of the TMr equals 1 at all frequencies, proving that the system is
reciprocal.
4.1.3
Frequency analysis of the sound field in a straight tube using TMM
The coefficients of the TMr in Equation 4.2 describe the propagation of the sound field for
all frequencies under study given the length and the cross­section of the duct. Making use
of the analytical expression of the TMr, see Equation 2.29, and knowing that the sound
field at the inlet is governed by a source of infinite impedance and constant volume velocity
with equal phase at all frequencies, see Section 3.3.1, one can characterize the sound
field at the outlet of a duct as
po
qo

=
AR
BR
CR
DR
 pi
qi

(4.2)
Figure 4.3 shows the sound field at the outlet of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3 and
length l0 = 15m represented in magnitude, above, and phase normalized by π, below,
calculated using the TMr.
The sound field at the outlet is found to be of constant amplitude, as expected given the
characteristics of the source and knowing that the wave travels unattenuated along the
duct, and with a phase shift that increases with frequency, which also makes sense given
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.3: Sound field at the outlet of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3 and length l0 = 15m
represented in magnitude, above, and phase normalized by π, below, calculated using the
TMr.
that all frequencies have equal phase at the inlet and that they travel the same distance
with a phase shift governed by e−jkl0.
One could retrieve the sound field at the inlet using the TM described in Equation 2.15.
This would serve as a validation of the reciprocity of the TMM as a modelling tool for
propagation of sound in a duct.
Figure 4.4 shows the sound field at the inlet of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3 and
length l0 = 15m represented in magnitude, above, and phase normalized by π, below,
calculated using the TM and the sound field at the outlet, proving reciprocity of the TMM.
It can be observed that the sound field that the source introduces in the duct is of constant
amplitude and zero phase at all frequencies, as described in Section 3.3.1.
4.1.4
Spatial analysis of the sound field in a straight tube using TMM
It can also be interesting to characterize the sound field at different points of the duct at a
given frequency. To do so one can make use of the concept explained in Section 2.3.2.
Knowing the termination impedance Za,t of the duct one can calculate the sound field at
any point x = −lx by back­propagating the sound field at the output, previously calculated
with Equation 4.2, using the TM coefficients of a subsystem of length lx in Equations 4.3
and 4.4, presented in Equations 7.46a and 7.46b in Jacobsen [2], as
px = po(Ax + Bx/Za,t),
(4.3)
qx = qo(Cx + Dx/Za,t).
(4.4)
By making these calculation at different points of the duct, i.e for different values of lx,
one can represent the sound field as a function of the position in the duct. It is worth
20
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.4: Sound field at the inlet of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3 and length l0 = 15m
represented in magnitude, above, and phase normalized by π, below, calculated using
the TM and the sound field at the outlet, proving reciprocity of the TMM.
mentioning that in order to perform a spatial analysis of the sound field Za,t should be
equal to the characteristic impedance of the termination of the duct ρc/S. This means
that the duct has a matched termination, see Section 3.3.2, modelling an semi­infinite
duct.
Figure 4.5: Sound field at different points of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3 and length
l0 = 15m at f = 100 Hz and f = 200 Hz represented in magnitude, above, and phase
normalized by π, below, calculated using Equations 4.3 and 4.4.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.5 shows the sound field at different points of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3
and length l0 = 15m at f = 100 Hz and f = 200 Hz represented in magnitude, above,
and phase normalized by π, below, calculated using Equations 4.3 and 4.4.
It can be observed that the amplitude of the pressure is equal regardless of the frequency,
as expected given the description of the sound source, and that the phase shift is greater
as the frequency increases, which is also expected given that the phase shift is governed
by e−jklx, having lx be the distance from the inlet to the different positions of the duct, and
k increases with frequency. Another way of visualizing the phase is to compensate for
the propagation factor e−jklx, obtaining for this simple case that the compensated phase
is zero at all points of the duct.
Figure 4.6: Sound field at different points of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3 and length
l0 = 15m at f = 100 Hz and f = 200 Hz represented in magnitude, above, and phase
compensated by the propagation factor e−jklx, below, calculated using Equations 4.3 and
4.4.
Figure 4.6 shows the sound field at different points of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3 and
length l0 = 15m at f = 100 Hz and f = 200 Hz represented in magnitude, above, and
phase compensated by the propagation factor e−jklx, below, calculated using Equations
4.3 and 4.4. It can be observed that by compensating the phase by the propagation factor
the value of the phase is zero at all points if the only phase shift is introduced by travelling
across the duct. This method of representing the phase will be used hereafter.
4.2
Coupled systems using TMM
4.2.1
Transfer matrix of a multi­duct system
It has been shown how the concepts explained in Section 2.3.2 can be used to character­
ize the sound field along the duct. These same concepts can be applied also to calculate
the TM of a system composed of multiple ducts with different geometrical properties, as
presented in Figure 7.11 in Jacobsen [2].
Figure 4.7 shows a system composed by two pipes of different diameter and length and its
22
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.7: A system composed by two pipes of different diameter and length and its
transmission matrix, showing a conceptualization of how to characterize the sound field
at any point in a coupled duct using the TMM.
transmission matrix, showing a conceptualization of how to characterize the sound field at
any point in a coupled duct using the TMM. One can obtain the total TM of a system of two
coupled pipes of different cross­section by cascading the different TM that characterizes
each of the ducts.
From Figure 4.7 it follows that for a given position in the duct x = −lx one can calculate
the TM of the subsystem that exists between x = −lx and x = 0, and calculate the
subsystem that lays between x = −lx and x = −lx. By iterating this calculation over
different positions, and taking into consideration the different subsystems that compose
the multi­system duct, one can calculate the sound field at different points of a multi­
system duct.
Let us imagine a multi­system duct composed by a duct of length l1 = 7.5m and radius
r1 = 0.3m, namely System 1, and a duct of length l2 = 7.5m and radius r2 = 0.28m,
namely System 2. Attending to Section 2.2.2 it is expected to have a reflection as a result
of the change of cross­section in the ducts, generating a standing wave pattern on System
1 and a plane wave in System 2. This change in cross­section implies that the value of the
coefficients B2 and C2 of the TM of System 2 will have a different value than the analogous
coefficients of the TM of System 1, see Section 2.3, modelling in this way the change in
impedance seen by the sound field.
Figure 4.8 shows the coefficients of the reciprocal Transfer Matrix of a multi­duct system
composed by a duct of radius ri = 0.3m and length l0 = 7.5m and another duct of radius
ri = 0.28m and length l0 = 7.5m. The magnitude, on top, phase normalized by π, in the
middle, and determinant of the matrix, on the bottom, are represented.
It is not easy to understand how the sound field will behave inside such a duct by looking
at the information represented in this graph. It is also not straightforward to derive ana­
lytically the result of multiplying two TM: the resulting coefficients would be a combination
of products of sines and cosines. Appendix A shows how to calculate coefficients A and
B of a TM of a coupled system such as the one discussed in this section.
Figure 4.9 shows the sound field at different points of a multi­duct system composed
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.8: Coefficients of the reciprocal Transfer Matrix of a multi­duct system composed
by a duct of radius ri = 0.3m and length l0 = 7.5m and another duct of radius ri = 0.28m
and length l0 = 7.5m. The magnitude, on top, phase normalized by π, in the middle, and
determinant of the matrix, on the bottom, are represented.
by a duct of radius ri = 0.3m and length l0 = 7.5m and another duct of radius ri =
0.28m and length l0 = 7.5m at f = 100 Hz and f = 200 Hz represented in magnitude,
above, and phase compensated by the propagation factor e−jklx, below, calculated using
Equations 4.3 and 4.4. For reference, a duct of equal total length but constant cross­
section represented by the black line. A standing wave can be observed in System 1 and
a plane wave is found in System 2, as expected.
It is clear that there is a reflection at the interface between the two subsystems that gen­
erates a standing wave pattern in the first half of the system and a plane wave in the
second half of the system, having a different amplitude than the reference duct due to the
reflection at the interface. The phase has oscillating values as corresponds to a standing
wave pattern. This oscillation may have gone unnoticed if the phase had not been repre­
sented as compensated by the propagation factor e−jklx, proving to be a valid method to
represent the phase. It can also be seen that the phase at System 2 is different for each
frequency.
It can be observed that the magnitude and phase of the plane wave propagating in System
2 are not the same for the two frequencies under study. This is because the reflection at
a change of cross­section and characterized by a reflection coefficient ˆR is complex and
frequency dependant, yielding a different result for every frequency.
24
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.9: Sound field at different points of a multi­duct system composed by a duct of
radius ri = 0.3m and length l0 = 7.5m and another duct of radius ri = 0.28m and length
l0 = 7.5m at f = 100 Hz and f = 200 Hz represented in magnitude, above, and phase
compensated by the propagation factor e−jklx, below, calculated using Equations 4.3 and
4.4. For reference, a duct of equal total length but constant cross­section represented by
the black line.
It has been found that representing the coefficients of the TM does not bring
any understanding on the behavior of the sound field. Therefore, the coeffi­
cients of the TMs derived hereunder are not represented but used to calculate
the sound field at any frequencies and at any given point in the duct.
Highlight 4
Summary
In this section some analytical methods to analyze sound propagation in ducts under the
low frequency assumption have been studied, together with some ways of visualization
of the results obtained. Some theoretical concepts have been observed using this model,
such as unattenuated plane wave propagation in the duct as seen Figure 4.5, or coupling
of duct systems using TMM. Understanding this basic concepts will allow to develop a
more complicated model that builds upon them.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:35==
5
Numerical study
5.1
Study of the reference model: a straight duct using FEM
Up to this point the sound field inside a duct has been analyzed making use of analytical
methods. This section will study the same problem making use of numerical simulations
based on FEM, using Comsol as a simulation engine. It is important to compare the
analytical and numerical results so that the simulation framework can be confirmed to be
trustworthy.
A straight duct will be the reference model and it will be studied first to validate that the
results from the numerical simulations match the analytical solutions obtained previously.
The sound source for this simulations is equivalent to the one used for the analytical study
and it follows the properties described on Section 3.3.1. The geometry of the duct will
also be comparable to that of the analytical study, being a cylindrical duct of total length
l0 = 15m and radius ri = 0.3m.
Figure 5.1: 3­D model of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3m and length l0 = 15m.
Figure 5.1 shows a 3­D model of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3m and length l0 = 15m.
Notice that the duct is defined from xnum = 0 to xnum = lx in this model. This is due to a
mistake when setting up the simulations but will not affect the development of the project,
as the result files will be exported and processed in Matlab.
The inlet at x = 0 is defined as the source, see Section 3.3.1, and the outlet at x = l0
will have different boundary conditions, see Section 3.3.2. As mentioned earlier, all the
simulations were performed with this convention and from here on this will be the way of
representing the sound field in space.
5.1.1
Low frequency assumption: a numerical validation
Using Comsol, one can run an Eigenfrequency study to calculate numerically which are
the eigenfrequencies of a duct. These eigenfrequencies correspond to the cut­off frequen­
cies of the modes of the duct fmn. It is expected that the first purely real eigenfrequency
with non­zero value is f10, which imposes the frequency limit as studied in Sections 2.4
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 5.1: Cut­off frequency of the first high­order mode, f10, for several duct radii calcu­
lated analytically and numerically as well as a mean square error relative to the frequency
and a verification of the result of Equation 4.1.
ri/m
f10,anal/Hz
f10,num/Hz
Mr
MSEr/%
0.3
335.03
335.24
3.412
0.06
0.25
402.04
402.29
3.412
0.06
0.2
502.55
502.88
3.412
0.064
0.15
670.07
670.59
3.412
0.076
0.1
1005.1
1006.3
3.412
0.118
and 4.1.1. It is important to check if this frequency limitation is validated by the numerical
simulation as well as the conclusion derived from Equation 4.1, see Section 4.1.1.
Table 5.1 shows the cut­off frequency of the first high­order mode, f10, for several duct
radii calculated analytically and numerically as well as a mean square error relative to
the frequency. Lastly, it shows the value of MR as defined in Equation 4.1 but calculated
using the numerical result of f10. It can be seen that the result is almost identical and
it is in agreement with the conclusion of Section 4.1.1 which states that two ducts with
radii r1 and r2 and with a first high order mode with a cut off frequency f10,1 and f10,2,
respectively, the sound field will be comparable at frequencies f1 and f2, respectively, as
long as f1/f10,1 = f2/f10,2 .
5.1.2
Spatial analysis of the sound field in a straight duct
One of the main challenges in this research project is to compare a one­dimensional sound
field in a duct modelled with TMM with a three­dimensional sound field in a duct like the one
found in real­life cases and in numerical simulations. In this section the method used to
compare the analytical model and the numerical simulations is introduced and illustrated
by comparing the analytical solution and the simulation of a straight tube.
The theory behind sound propagation in a duct has been explained previously, introducing
how if the frequency is lower than the cut­off frequency of the first radial mode, see Section
2.4, the sound field in a duct can be assumed to be one­dimensional and modelled by a
plane wave, see Sections 2.1 and 2.2. However, the numerical study performed in this
project is based on a 3­D model of a duct, yielding the value of pressure and particle
velocity at all points of a three­dimensional domain.
Knowing that the value of any acoustic variable is constant at a given time on any plane
perpendicular to the direction of propagation for a plane wave, see Section 2.1, it follows
that the standard deviation of any acoustic variable on any plane perpendicular to the
direction of propagation will have a value very close to zero. On the other hand, if the
sound field on any plane in the duct does not behave as a plane wave the standard
deviation of any acoustic variable would be larger than zero, meaning that high­order
modes are present in the duct and the low frequency assumption is not valid in that plane.
If the sound field on any plane in the duct does not behave as a plane wave
the standard deviation of any acoustic variable would be larger than zero,
meaning that high­order modes are present in the duct and the low frequency
assumption is not valid in that plane.
Highlight 5
28
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:37==
The spatial analysis of the sound field in a duct is therefore based on taking the surface
average and standard deviation of the acoustic variables at different planes perpendicular
to the direction of propagation.
Figure 5.2: 3­D model of a straight duct of radius ri = 0.3m and length l0 = 15m with 150
planes defined perpendicular to the direction of propagation.
Figure 5.2 shows the reference duct with 150 planes defined perpendicular to the direction
of propagation. The number of planes is in practice a spatial sampling frequency, fx. The
value of fx will pose a high­frequency limitation on the spatial analysis of the sound field.
∆lx = l0
fx
< λf10
2
(5.1)
The spatial sampling theorem, formulated in Equation 5.1 and thoroughly explained in
McCowan [4], the distance between planes ∆lx must be smaller than half of the smallest
wavelength under study , it being the wavelength of the cut­off frequency of the first high­
order mode f10, in order to avoid spatial aliasing. This means that ∆lx must be closer than
the zero­crossing of the acoustic wave so that the oscillation can be estimated reliably.
Knowing the radii of the ducts under study ri, one can calculate f10 and derive minimum
∆lx to prevent spatial aliasing.
Figure 5.3 shows the spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase com­
pensated by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a straight duct of
ri = 0.3m and l0 = 15m calculated analytically and numerically at 100Hz.
It can be observed that the numerically­obtained module of the pressure and the analytically­
obtained module of the pressure match perfectly, proving that the source characterization
is comparable in both methods.
Looking at the phase compensated by the propagation factor one can see a difference
between the numerical and the analytical result. The analytical result has a value of zero
at all positions, as expected after compensating by the propagation factor. However,
the numerical result increases from zero at the inlet to 0.02 at the outlet due to a wrong
compensation. It has been found that there is an approximation error in the estimation
of the positions of the planes defined in the simulations when postprocessing in Matlab.
The error can be quantified studying the phase error at the outlet, x = 15m =, is of 0.02
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.3: Spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase compensated
by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a straight duct of ri = 0.3m and
l0 = 15m calculated analytically and numerically at 100Hz. The phase has an error in the
compensation.
at 100Hz. Knowing that ∆φ = k∆x it follows that ∆x = 0.01m, later found to be exactly
∆x = 0.009387m. This is the error distributed along all the tube, meaning that for each
of the 150 positions there was an estimation error of ∆xdif = 6.25 10−5m. Ironically, one
can fix this by adding a compensation for the error in the phase compensation term.
Figure 5.4: Spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase compensated
by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a straight duct of ri = 0.3m and
l0 = 15m calculated analytically and numerically at 100Hz.
30
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.4 shows the spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase com­
pensated by the propagation factor and with the position estimation error corrected, below,
at different positions of a straight duct of ri = 0.3m and l0 = 15m calculated analytically
and numerically at 100Hz. This result proves that the simulation framework is comparable
to the analytical model, confirming that it can be used to analyze the sound field in a bent
duct.
From here on, all representations of the spatial analysis of a duct will include the correction
factor that accounts for the position estimation error.
5.2
Study of a bent duct using FEM
This section will study the behavior of the sound field in a duct that has a bend in its
geometry. As explained in depth in Section 3.2, the ducts under study are divided in three
stretches. Stretch 1 and Stretch 3 are straight and of equal length, and Stretch 2 is the
bend itself with a length dependant on the angle and the bending radius as defined in
Equation 3.2.
The analysis of the numerical simulations performed on this section will try to explain
the nature of the bend impedance Zb(f) and to confirm or prove wrong the hypothesis
formulated on Section 3.2.2, like understanding the effect of the abruptness of a bend or
the influence of high­order modes.
The bent duct under analysis will have a total length of l0 = 15m and a radius ri = 0.3m.
The geometrical variables that will be altered are the bending radius rb by modifying the
bending factor Γ, see Equation 3.1, and the bending angle βb.
Figure 5.5: Four different ducts. On the top­left, a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and
βb = 180◦and on the bottom­left a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 5 and βb = 180◦. On the
right, a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 90◦and another one of of ri = 0.3m,
Γ = 3 and βb = 135◦.
Figure 5.5 shows four different ducts of different abrupness and bending angle. On the
top­left, a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦and on the bottom­left a bent
duct of of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 5 and βb = 180◦. On the right, a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3
and βb = 90◦and another one of of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 135◦.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
31
==PAGE:40==
5.2.1
Low frequency assumption: a numerical validation
The low frequency assumption has been broadly discussed along the report, and it has
been made clear that the cut­off frequency of the first high­order mode f10 depends on the
radius of the duct ri, see Section 2.4 for a deeper explanation. However, when changing
the geometry of the duct by introducing a bend it is legitimate to question if the modes of
the duct have changed.
The eigenmodes of bent duct are hard to calculate analytically due to its complex geom­
etry. In the same fashion as in Section 4.1.1, the eigenfrequencies can be calculated by
running an Eigenfrequency study in Comsol.
Table 5.2: Cut­off frequency of the first high­order mode, f10, for several duct radii calcu­
lated analytically and numerically (straight duct and bent duct) as well as a mean square
error relative to the frequency and a verification of the result of Equation 4.1.
ri/m
f10,anal/Hz
f10,num/Hz
f10,num,bend/Hz
Mr
MSEr/%
0.3
335.03
335.24
335.2
3.412
0.06
0.25
402.04
402.29
402.26
3.412
0.06
0.2
502.55
502.88
502.85
3.412
0.064
0.15
670.07
670.59
670.57
3.412
0.076
0.1
1005.1
1006.3
1006.4
3.412
0.118
Table 5.2 shows how the real­valued eigenfrequencies resulting from an Eigenfrequency
study performed on a straight duct, a bent duct with Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦. One can observe
that the eigenfrequencies of a bent duct match the ones of straight duct, meaning that f10
is found at the same frequency and therefore the low frequency assumption holds valid
for the bent tube.
The eigenfrequencies of a bent duct match the ones of straight duct, meaning
that f10 is found at the same frequency and therefore the low frequency as­
sumption holds valid for the bent tube.
Highlight 6
It is worth mentioning that the results of the eigenfrequency study included a number
of complex frequencies below and above f10. This complex frequencies are associated
with evanescent modes that are triggered inside the bend in agreement with the analytical
observations of Rostafinski [1], see Section 3.2.2. To represent this result in a more visual
way one can conduct a Frequency Domain simulation to calculate the sound field at all
points of the bent duct.
Figure 5.6 shows the SPL at all points of the bent duct obtained from a Frequency Domain
simulation in Comsol in a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦at 100Hz. One can
see that on Stretches 1 and 3 the wave propagates with constant amplitude, as a plane
wave, whereas on Stretch 2 there are fluctuations on the SPL at the inner and outer sides
of the bend. This fluctuations on the pressure are high­order modes being triggered at the
bend and decaying very fast after it, proving that there are higher order modes appearing
only inside the bend. Therefore, one can conclude that those complex eigenfrequencies
found in the Eigenfrequency study correspond to modes that are evanescent and that are
located exclusively on the bend.
Appendix B shows some of the work that was done in this project to characterize the
32
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.6: SPL at all points of the bent duct obtained from a Frequency Domain simulation
in Comsol in a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦at 100Hz.
behavior of the sound field inside the bend, studying the build up in pressure at the outer
side of the bend and the drop at the inner side of the bend.
5.2.2
Spatial analysis of the sound field in a bent duct
After having performed a Frequency Domain simulation one can analyze the sound field
at different planes in the duct. This spatial analysis follows the same method used for the
straight duct, explained in Section 5.1.2.
As discussed previously, it is important to bear in mind the spatial sampling frequency in
Stretch 1 to assess the high frequency limit of the study. Attending only to the bent duct of
ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦one can determine the high frequency limit by rearranging
Equation 5.1 as
λup > fx
2 l1
−→λup > 0.3043m −→fup = 1127 Hz,
(5.2)
for l1 = 6.086m and fx = 40. The bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦is the bent
duct with longest l1 out of all the bent ducts that will be studied in this project. Knowing
that fx will be the same for all ducts and that f10 << fup it is safe to assume that this
method will resolve all the frequencies under study correctly.
There is an additional challenge when performing this spatial analysis on a bent duct, and
that is defining the planes understanding that the spacing between them will vary with Γ if
the number of planes, i.e. the spatial sampling frequency fx, is kept constant being one
plane every 5 degrees.
Figure5.7 shows three bent ducts with Γ = 3, 5 and 8. The planes defined at the bend
are more separated in the wider bend, as the spatial sampling frequency is kept constant,
being one plane every 5 degrees. Note that the oblique planes that appear on the straight
parts of the bends depicted in Figure5.7 are artifacts that result from the planes defined
every 5 degrees in the bend and will not affect the result of the simulation or the post­
processing.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.7: Three bent ducts with Γ = 3, 5 and 8. The planes defined at the bend are
more separated in the wider bend, as the spatial sampling frequency is kept constant,
being one plane every 5 degrees.
It follows from this different positioning that, when representing the pressure as a function
of position, the points on the graph will be closer together for a more abrupt bend, i.e.
smaller Γ. Going forward a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦will be studied
to illustrate the way of analyzing the spatial distribution of the pressure in a duct and
visualizing the first results.
Figure 5.8: Spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase compensated
by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3
and βb = 180◦and a reference duct at f = 100 Hz.
Figure 5.8 shows the spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase com­
34
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:43==
pensated by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a bent duct of ri =
0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦and a reference duct at f = 100 Hz.
It can be observed that in Stretch 1, from x = 0m to x = 6.08m, there is a standing
wave pattern in the bent duct case (in blue), visible both in the module and the phase
of the pressure. This is due to the reflection associated to the bend impedance ˆZb(f).
Another evidence of this oscillatory pattern being a result of a combination of plane waves
propagating in opposite directions, see Section 2.1.1, is that the standard deviation of the
pressure in the planes along Stretch 1 is very close to zero. However, very close to the
bend the standard deviation of the pressure starts to increase. This indicates that there
is not only plane wave propagation but some high­order modes that are present in those
planes: evanescent modes that propagate outside of the bend before decaying.
The sound field in Stretch 1 has a standing wave pattern formed by two plane
waves travelling in opposites directions due to a reflection in the bend.
Highlight 7
In Stretch 2, namely the bend, it can be observed in the module of the pressure that
there is an oscillatory pattern in average with a large standard deviation. This tells us that
there are high­order modes inside the bend and that plane wave propagation cannot be
assumed in this part of the duct. However, it is found that they decay fast in agreement
with the expectation defined in Section 3.2.2. A closer look to the phase of the pressure
indicates that, as well as an oscillatory pattern, there is a linear increase in the phase as
the wave travels forward through the bend. This could mean that the bend is acoustically
longer than the geometrical length of the bend: the bend has an effective length different
than its geometrical length.
The sound field in Stretch 2 has a standard deviation greater than zero, mean­
ing that there are high­order modes being triggered inside the bend. This
evanescent modes propagate outside the bend but decay fast.
Highlight 8
Looking at Stretch 3 it is found that all high­order modes that were triggered in the bend
decay rapidly, leaving only the plane wave to propagate. The module of the pressure of
the bent duct is different than that of the reference duct (in red) due to the reflection of the
bend: some energy travels back and some is transmitted forward following Equation 3.4.
The phase of the pressure of the bent duct is also different of that of the reference duct.
The phase has been compensated with a propagation factor e−jklx, having lx to be the
distance from the inlet to each of the positions of the bent duct under study, as shown in
Section 4.1.4. After such compensation, it is expected to have it being zero at all points of
the duct. A difference in the phase would mean that the acoustical effective length of bent
duct is different from the geometrical length of the bent duct: the bend has an effective
length that makes the total effective length of the tube be different from the geometrical
length of the duct, confirming again the hypothesis defined in Section 3.2.2.
Figure 5.9 shows the spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase com­
pensated by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a bent duct of ri =
0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦at f = 65 Hz and f = 100 Hz. The first graph shows the
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
35
==PAGE:44==
The bend has an acoustical effective length which is different that its geometri­
cal length.
Highlight 9
Figure 5.9: Spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase compensated
by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3
and βb = 180◦at f = 65 Hz and f = 100 Hz.
module of the pressure as a function of position at different planes in the duct. The second
graph shows the phase of the pressure compensated by the propagation factor e−jklx at
different points in the duct, just as shown in Section 4.1.4.
From the previous analysis it has been established what happens on every stretch in the
bend duct at a single frequency. Comparing two different frequencies comes to show how
ˆZb(f) behaves differently depending on the frequency. For f = 100Hz (in red) we can
observe a standing wave pattern in Stretch 1, some high­order modes in Stretch 2 and
plane wave propagation in Stretch 3. The reasons for this spatial distribution have been
explained in the analysis of Figure 5.8, and makes sense with the expected behavior of
the sound field in a bent duct anticipated in Section 3.2.
However, for f = 65Hz we can see a plane wave in Stretch 1 instead of a standing wave
pattern. Going back to the general case, see Equation 3.3, this behavior of the sound
field can be explained if ˆRb ≈0 for f = 65Hz. This case illustrates clearly that the net
acoustic energy is transported by the plane wave and not by the high order modes [3].
For such a case, the effective length of the bend still affects the phase of the sound field
as it propagates forward.
From the spatial analysis of the sound field in a bent duct there are three key elements
that need to be explained. The first question that raises is to try to understand how ˆZb(f)
behaves at different frequencies, and which are the frequencies that generate no reflec­
tions. This will allow to model the reflection of the bend. The second question is how the
36
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:45==
The bend impedance ˆZb(f) has a frequency dependant behavior. Some fre­
quencies have stronger reflections than others in the bend, and some frequen­
cies are not reflected. However, all frequencies have a phase shift due to the
acoustic effective length of the bend.
Highlight 10
effective length of the bend behaves with frequency. This will allow to model the phase
increase in Stretch 3. Last but not least, the third question is how do high­order modes
propagate outside the bend, giving an increase in the standard deviation at planes of
Stretches 1 and 3 close to the bend. This will allow to understand how far outside the
bend we can assume plane wave propagation.
5.2.3
Estimation of the reflection coefficient
Using the standing wave ratio method
It has been proven that the bent is seen as an impedance with value dependant on the
frequency, namely the bend impedance ˆZb(f), that generates a reflection of the forward­
propagating wave creating a standing wave pattern in Stretch 1. This result was antici­
pated in Section 4.2.1, and has now been validated using a numerical simulation as seen
in Figures 5.8 and 5.9.
In order to quantify the reflection generated by ˆZb(f) one can use the theoretical concepts
introduced in Section 2.1.1 to estimate the module of the reflection coefficient transforming
Equation 2.8 to obtain
| ˆRb| = s −1
s + 1.
(5.3)
The result of Equation 5.3 does not include the sign of Rb, which is very important to
understand if the reflection is in phase or in antiphase. To obtain the sign information, one
can calculate the difference between the plane wave that travels through Stretch 3 in the
bent duct and compare it to the plane wave that travels through Stretch 3 in the reference
duct, i.e. the straight duct, see Figure 5.8. Knowing that the pressure of a plane wave
that travels in Stretch 3 of a bent duct can be expressed as ˆp3+,b = ˆpi(1 −ˆRb) and that in
the reference duct the pressure of that same plane wave is ˆp3+,r = ˆpi, one can estimate
the value and sign of ˆRb.
To estimate the absolute value ˆRb the standing wave method is found to be more pre­
cise, but to obtain the signed value of ˆRb it is necessary to use the reference comparison
method. Both combined yield the final estimated value of ˆRb. Note that ˆRb will not re­
garded as a complex number any more, as this estimation method does not allow to
obtain its complex value.
Figure 5.10 shows the estimated value of Rb as a function of frequency for a bent duct of
ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦obtained from the numerical simulation, having a bend
length of lb = 2.827m, see Section 3.2. It can be observed that Rb = 0 at f = 65, 130, 194
and 255Hz. Moving forward, the frequencies that yield Rb = 0 will be referred to as
matched frequencies, fm.
It is worth noting that as the estimation of Rb tends to f10 its value increases dramatically.
This is due to the fact that the first high­order mode has a strong contribution as the
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.10: Rb as a function of frequency for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and
βb = 180◦, estimated using the standing wave ratio method.
frequency approaches f10, see Sections 2.4 and 4.1.1.
One can model the reflection of the bend as the equivalent change in cross­section that
yields the same reflection. Transforming Equation 2.14 one can define the ratio between
two cross­sections as
S2
S1
= 1 −Rb
1 + Rb
.
(5.4)
Figure 5.11: Equivalent change in cross­section between two coupled ducts that yields
the same Rb as a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦as a function of frequency.
Figure 5.11 shows the equivalent change in cross­section between two coupled ducts that
yields the same Rb as a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦as a function of
frequency.
It follows from Figure 5.10 that at fm there should be no change in cross­section, having
the ratio of cross­sections to be 1. For Rb < 0 it makes sense that S2 > S1. Thinking
38
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:47==
about it from the extreme case where S2 ≈∞there would be an open boundary condition
that would yield Rb = −1. For Rb > 0 it makes sense that S2 < S1. Thinking about it from
the extreme case where S2 ≈0 there would be a closed boundary condition that would
yield Rb = 1.
Using the impedance tube method
An alternative to this method would be to use the theory of the impedance tube, see
Section 2.1.2. The method must be reinterpreted before being used in this study. In
this case, there will not be a specimen of an absorption material at the end of the duct.
The bend is considered the termination of the impedance tube and the standing wave
generated by the reflection at the bend is what will allow to characterize the reflection
coefficient.
By calculating the transfer function between two planes one can estimate the reflection
coefficient ˆRb.
Figure 5.12: Rb as a function of frequency for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and
βb = 180◦, estimated using the impedance tube method.
Figure 5.12 shows Rb as a function of frequency for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3
and βb = 180◦, estimated using the impedance tube method. Only the module of ˆRb is
represented in this figure. It can be found that by using the impedance tube method a
very similar result is obtained but the fluctuations of the signed ˆRb are found to be much
smoother, giving a result much closer with the real behavior of ˆRb with frequency.
The reflection coefficient at the bend ˆRb can be estimated using the standing
wave ratio method or the impedance tube method. The latter is found to be the
most accurate.
One can model the equivalent change in cross­section that would yield the
same ˆRb.
Highlight 11
Figure 5.13 shows the spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase
compensated by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a bent duct of
ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦at f = 65 Hz and f = 130 Hz.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.13: Spatial analysis of the pressure in module, above, and phase compensated
by the propagation factor, below, at different positions of a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3
and βb = 180◦at f = 65 Hz and f = 130 Hz.
It can be observed that at f = 65Hz, with a wavelength of λ65Hz = 5.277m, the oscillation
of the pressure on average in the bend is an oscillation of a half­wavelength and that
at f = 130Hz, with a wavelength of λ130Hz = 2.638m, shows that the oscillation of the
pressure on average in the bend is an oscillation of a full wavelength. Bearing in mind
that lb = 2.827m one could argue that for a frequency to be matched, i.e. Rb ≈0, the
wavelength of such frequency should be related to lb in a way. However, it has been found
that the wavelengths of the matched frequencies and lb are not directly proportional, but
need to be corrected by a length correction factor Λcorr defined as
Λcorr = lb/λm
(5.5)
Table 5.3: Frequencies that yield Rb = 0 and their wavelengths, which are n­multiples of
a half­wavelength of length lb when corrected by a factor Λcorr.
f /Hz
λ/m
n
Λcorr
65
5.277
1
0.933
130
2.638
2
0.9332
194
1.768
3
0.938
255
1.345
4
0.951
Table 5.3 shows the frequencies that yield Rb = 0 and their wavelengths, which are n­
multiples of a half­wavelength of length lb after being corrected by a factor Λcorr. n indi­
cates the multiple of a half­wavelength that oscillates in the bend, and Λcorr = lb/λ for a
bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦.
The reason why λ is not a perfect multiple of lb and it needs to be corrected by a factor Λcorr
is that the bend impedance ˆZb(f) may not be seen as soon as the wave enters the bend,
but a bit further into the bend. Let us remember that ˆZb(f) is a distributed impedance,
40
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:49==
not a concentrated property in one point, and there is no reason to assume that ˆZb(f)
is evenly distributed from the beginning to the end of the bend or equally distributed for
all frequencies. The values of Λcorr in Table 5.3 back this theory, showing that ˆZb(f) is
effective closer to the start of the bend as the frequency increases.
It can be observed that he values of Λcorr tend to 1 as the frequency increases, meaning
that the wave is affected by ˆZb(f) earlier in the bend. This makes sense if one thinks
about it in terms of the wavelength. As frequency increases the wavelength is smaller,
and therefore a wave will be more sensible to changes in the geometry of a comparable
size.
The wavelengths of the frequencies that yield ˆRb = 0 are related to the length
of the bend and a correction factor Λcorr. The correction factor Λcorr accounts
for the fact that ˆZb(f) is a distributed impedance that is not necessarily dis­
tributed linearly along the bend or equally at all frequencies.
Highlight 12
Taking into consideration the correction factor Λcorr one can formulate that the frequencies
that yield Rb = 0, hereafter matched frequencies fm and their matched wavelengths λm,
as a function of the multiples of a half­wavelength n, the length of the bend lb and the
length correction factor Λcorr,
n
2 λm

min(Rb) = lb Λcorr(f).
(5.6)
From Figure 5.10 one can also derive for which frequencies the reflection is greatest.
Applying the same reasoning as before, one can obtain the length correction factors for
the frequencies that yield the greatest values of Rb and define the unmatched frequencies
fum and the wavelengths λum as a function of the multiples of a full wavelength n, the
length of the bend lb and the length correction factor Λcorr,
2n −1
4
λum

max(Rb) = lb Λcorr(f).
(5.7)
Figure 5.14 shows the values of Λcorr as a function of frequency defined at the matched
frequencies fm in blue and at the unmatched frequencies fum in red, and a polynomial
fitting of order n=3. It can be observed a general trend that increases with frequency. This
parameter will be studied more in depth when analyzing different ducts.
5.2.4
Effective length of a bend
Figure 5.8 shows that there is a phase difference in Stretch 3 between the sound field in a
bent duct and the sound field in a straight duct due to the fact that the bend has an effective
length that makes the total effective length of the duct different from the geometrical length
of the duct, see Section 3.2.2.
The phase difference ∆φ can be found by looking at the difference between the phase of
the bent duct and that of the reference duct at any point of Stretch 3.
The impedance tube method does not give us any information on the phase difference at
Stretch 3 because it only uses information in Stretch 1, where a standing wave is found.
A modified version of the impedance tube method could be developed for this purpose
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.14: Λcorr as a function of frequency defined at the matched frequencies fm in
blue and at the unmatched frequencies fum in red, and a polynomial fitting of order n=3.
comparing sound fields at the inlet and outlet of the bend, but comparing with a reference
duct was found to be suficient for the scope of the project.
Figure 5.15: ∆φ at the end of Stretch 3 for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
compared to a straight duct.
Figure 5.15 shows the phase difference ∆φ at the end of Stretch 3 for a bent duct of
ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦compared to a straight duct.
Knowing ∆φ one can calculate the difference between the effective acoustical length of
the duct and the geometrical length of the duct, ∆leff, which can be used to model the
behavior of the bent duct. It is worth noting that ∆φ is a measure that is relative to the
wavelength and it is a more representative measure of the phase difference that ∆leff: at
very low frequencies, even small shift in phase requires an additional length larger than
the same shift in phase at a higher frequency.
One can calculate the difference between the acoustical effective length of the bend lb,eff
and the geometrical length of the bend lb as ∆leff = lb,eff −lb knowing that the phase
42
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:51==
shift relates wavenumber and length of the duct as
ejk∆x −→∆φ = k∆leff.
(5.8)
Figure 5.16: Additional effective length ∆leff required to model the phase shift ∆φ intro­
duced by a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦compared to a straight duct as a
function of frequency.
Figure 5.16 shows the additional effective length ∆leff required to model the phase shift
∆φ introduced by a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦compared to a straight
duct as a function of frequency.
The difference between the effective acoustical length of the duct and the geo­
metrical length of the duct, ∆leff, can be calculated given the phase difference
between the sound field in the bent duct and the sound field on the straight
duct on Stretch 3. ∆leff is frequency dependant, proving that the bend is a
dispersive medium where certain frequencies travel faster than others in agree­
ment with Rostafinski [1].
Highlight 13
This is the additional length that should be included to the geometrical length of the duct
if one was to model the sound field in the bent duct. It is worth noting that ∆φ gives a
more representative understanding of the phase shift, given that it is a measure relative
to the frequency, see Equation 5.8. However, if one was to calculate the additional length
required to yield the same phase shift, ∆leff would be a better representation.
Summary
This section has studied a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦based on results of
numerical simulations obtaining some insight on how to predict the matched frequencies
fm and the frequencies that yield highest reflection fum making use of a length correction
factor Λcorr(f) for a given geometry.
It has been shown how the reflection of the bend looks as a function of frequency and
how it can be modelled as a change in cross­section of two coupled pipes, and how the
bend introduces a phase difference with respect to a straight duct that can be modelled
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
43
==PAGE:52==
by introducing an acoustic effective length of the bend lb,eff. The sound field inside a bent
duct can be characterized with these three parameters.
Figure 5.17: Acoustical parameters that represent the influence of a bent duct of ri =
0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦compared to a straight duct, obtained from the numerical
simulations. Rb, on the left, is the reflection coefficient of the bend, estimated with the
standing wave ratio method (swr) and the impedance tube method (it); ∆φ, in the center,
is the phase shift; Λcorr is the length correction factor.
Figure 5.17 shows the acoustical parameters that represent the influence of a bent duct of
ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦compared to a straight duct, obtained from the numerical
simulations. Rb, on the left, is the reflection coefficient of the bend, estimated with the
standing wave ratio method (swr) and the impedance tube method (it); ∆φ, in the center,
is the phase shift; Λcorr is the length correction factor.
This representation summarizes the acoustical parameters that characterizes the behav­
ior of a bent duct as opposed to a straight duct, having an analogous geometrical repre­
sentation as shown in Figures 5.11 and 5.16.
After having analyzed in depth a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦, it follows
naturally to ask oneself how modifying the bending factor Γ and the bending angle βb will
affect the sound field inside a bent duct.
5.2.5
The effect of the bending factor Γ
Until now the bent duct under study has been the same, having geometrical parameters
with values ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦. This section will focus on studying the effect
of changing the value of Γ, the parameter that defines the abruptness of the bend. See
Section 3.2 for a detailed explanation of the geometry of a bent duct.
Equation 3.1 describes the bending radius rb as a function of Γ. At the same time, Equa­
tion 3.2 describes the length of the bend lb as a function of the bending angle βb and rb.
Therefore, it is expected to have bends longer bends as the bend becomes less abrupt,
i.e. as Γ becomes larger.
Equation 5.6 shows how λm is defined as a function of lb times a correction factor Λcorr.
With increasing values of lb it is expected to have the first λm at a higher value, and all
the multiples of half­wavelength following. This means that for increasing values of Γ the
first matched frequency fm will be found at a lower frequency.
44
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:53==
Intuitively, it is expected that the absolute value of the reflection coefficient of the bend Rb
decreases with an increasing value of Γ. An abrupt bend presents a more sudden change
of impedance than a smoother bend, yielding larger Rb.
Performing the same analysis as for the bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦,
included in Section 5.2, one can represent the acoustical parameters that characterizes
the behavior of the bend, as seen in Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.18: Modelled values of |Rb| on the left, ∆φ in the center and Λcorron the right, of
a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m and βb = 180◦with values of Γ = 3, 4, 5 and 8 as well as the
value for a reference straight duct
Figure 5.18 shows modelled values of |Rb| on the left, ∆φ on the center and Λcorr on the
right, of a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m and βb = 180◦with values of Γ = 3, 4, 5 and 8 as well
as the value for a reference straight duct. It is worth noting that this values have been
modelled using Equations 6.5 and 6.7 introduced in Section 6, so some differences with
reality are expected and will be stated in the analysis of each of the graphs.
As expected |Rb| decreases with the abruptness of the bend. The first fm, corresponding
with the frequency of λm/2, appears at a lower frequency as the abruptness of the bend
decreases, i.e. as the length of the bend lb decreases. The actual value of |Rb|, see
Figure 5.17, has an exponential increase rather than a linear one as used in this model.
The main takeaway from this graph is that |Rb| tends to zero as the abruptness of the
bend decays. The extreme case of a totally smooth bend is a straight tube, represented
as the reference case with a dashed black line.
It can be observed in the graph on the center that the phase shift ∆φ also decreases
as the abruptness of the bend does, with the extreme case of a reference straight tube
having no phase shift represented with a black dashed line. It can be concluded that the
bend poses an increasingly different acoustic length as the bend grows more abrupt, i.e.
decreasing values of Γ.
Lastly, the graph on the right shows values of Λcorr as a function of frequency for different
bends, representing the difference between λm and its multiples and b. It can be seen
that a more abrupt bend has values λm more difficult to predict, having to correct for a
value of Λcorr that is further from 1. However, as the bend becomes smoother the value
of Λcorr becomes closer to 1 making it easier to predict λm knowing only the geometrical
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
45
==PAGE:54==
parameters of the bend. It is worth noticing that the lines that define Λcorr for the different
frequencies have been calculated using the modelled values introduced in Section 6. This
model does not account for the increasing trend of Λcorr that can be observed in Figure
5.17.
An abrupt bend will have a higher value of |Rb| and a greater ∆φ. The first fm,
corresponding with the frequency of λm/2, appears at a higher frequency as
the abruptness of the bend decreases, i.e. as the length of the bend lb de­
creases. As the bent becomes smoother it approximates more to a straight
duct (reference), having smaller values of |Rb| and ∆φ and values of λm eas­
ier to predict, i.e. closer to the ones that can be derived directly from lb.
Highlight 14
5.2.6
The effect of the bending angle Bb
Until now the bent duct under study has been the same, having geometrical parameters
with values ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦. This section will focus on studying the effect
of changing the value of βb, the parameter that defines the angle of the bend. See Section
3.2 for a detailed explanation of the geometry of a bent duct.
Equation 3.2 describes the length of the bend lb as a function of the bending angle βb and
rb. Therefore, it is expected to have bends longer bends as the bending angle increases,
i.e. as βb becomes larger.
Equation 5.6 shows how λm is defined as a function of lb times a correction factor Λcorr.
With increasing values of lb it is expected to have the first λm at a higher value, and all the
multiples of half­wavelength following. It follows that for increasing values of βb the first
matched frequency fm will be found at a lower frequency.
Figure 5.19: Modelled values of |Rb| on the left, ∆φ on the center and Λcorr on the left,
of a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m and Γ = 3 with values of βb = 180◦, 135◦, 90◦as well as the
value for a reference straight duct.
Figure 5.19 shows modelled values of |Rb| on the left, ∆φ on the center and Λcorr on the
left, of a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m and Γ = 3 with values of βb = 180◦, 135◦, 90◦as well
46
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:55==
as the value for a reference straight duct. It is worth noting that this values have been
modelled using Equations 6.5 and 6.7 introduced in Section 6, so some differences with
reality are expected and will be stated in the analysis of each of the graphs.
The values |Rb| do not have a smaller amplitude as βb decreases, but it stays somewhat
constant regardless of the value of βb. The first fm, corresponding with the frequency of
λm/2, appears at a higher frequency as the bending angle decreases, i.e. as the length of
the bend lb decreases, which is expected. The actual value of |Rb|, see Figure 5.17, has
an exponential increase rather than a linear one as used in this model. The main takeaway
from this graph is that |Rb| has the same maximum values regardless the bending angle.
It can be observed in the graph on the center that the phase shift ∆φ does decreases with
the bending angle, with the extreme case of a reference straight tube having no phase
shift represented with a black dashed line. It is understood that the bend poses a less
different acoustic effective length as the bending angle is shorter, i.e. decreasing values
of βb.
Lastly, the graph on the right shows values of Λcorr as a function of frequency for different
bends, representing the difference between λm and its multiples and b. It can be seen that
bend with smaller bending angle has values λm more difficult to predict, having to correct
for a value of Λcorr that is further from 1. However, as the bending angle tends to βb = 180◦
the value of Λcorr becomes closer to 1 making it easier to predict λm knowing only the
geometrical parameters of the bend, having a limitation defined by the abruptness of the
bend. Again, it is worth noticing in this point that the lines that define Λcorr for the different
frequencies have been calculated using the modelled values introduced in Section 6. This
model does not account for the increasing trend of Λcorr that can be observed in Figure
5.17.
A bend will have a maximum value of |Rb| independent of its bending angle.
The first fm, corresponding with the frequency of λm/2, appears at a higher
frequency as the bending angle decreases, i.e. as the length of the bend lb de­
creases. ∆φ becomes smaller as the bending angle decreases, i.e. the bend
becomes shorter. Predicting the values of λm is a difficult task for bends with
changing bending angle and more work should be done on this line to obtain a
more conclusive result.
Highlight 15
5.3
A recipe for matched bends at a given frequency
Putting together all the findings of Section 5, that come to validate many of the analytical
results studied in Section 4, some conclusions have been put together that have allowed
to establish a generalized formula to design bent ducts that do not generate any reflections
at a given frequency fm.
For a bent duct of radius ri, bending factor Γ and bending angle α one can calculate the
length of the bend as defined in Equation 3.2. According to Equation 5.6, one can relate
lb with multiples of λm/2. From these two relations it follows that one can calculate fm
knowing the geometry of a bent duct, or calculate the geometrical parameters of the bent
duct knowing fm using
ri Γ α Λcorr(f) = n
2 λm,
(5.9)
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
47
==PAGE:56==
having the challenge of knowing the value of Λcorr(f) for a bent duct of with a given
geometry at a given frequency. For now, the method to obtain the values of Λcorr(f) is to
use numerical simulations to find λm and then compare that with lb to find the correction
factor as
Λcorr = lb/λm
(5.10)
48
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:57==
6
Modelling bent ducts with TMM
After having understood how the sound field behaves inside a bent duct, it is time to model
it using TMM. Many theoretical concepts that will be used to model the sound field in a
bent duct have been developed in Section 2 and will be combined with the insight gained
in 5.2.
6.1
The coupled­pipe analogy
To model the bent duct using TMM, a simplified analogy is introduced that aims to replicate
the sound field inside such a duct. The coupled­pipe analogy of a bent duct transforms the
complex three­dimensional problem into a one­dimensional problem, modelling Stretches
1 and 3 as a straight duct of cross­section S1 and length l1 and Stretch 2 as a straight
duct of cross­section S2 of length l2.
Looking at Figure 5.10 and 5.11 it becomes apparent that the ratio S1/S2 changes with
frequency. Keeping S1 constant as S1 = πr2
i one can model S2(f) as frequency depen­
dant. Figures 5.15 and 5.16 show that the acoustic effective length leff,ac(f) also varies
with frequency.
Figure 6.1: Diagram of the frequency­dependant coupled­pipe analogy.
Figure 6.1 shows the coupled­pipe analogy including S2(f) and ∆leff(f) to have the
change in cross­section and the acoustical effective length of the duct like frequency de­
pendant.
Attending to Equations 3.3 and 3.4, see Section 3.2.2, it is expected to have a standing
wave in Stretch 1 and plane wave in Stretch 3, governed by the reflection coefficient Rb
that depends on the change in cross­section between Stretches 1 and 2 and Stretches
2 and 3. However, the frequency dependant behavior of S2(f) and ∆leff(f) must be
included in the TM model.
Developing Equation 6.1 the matricial equation that defines the sound field at the outlet
of the coupled­pipe model presented here can be obtained as
pi
qi

=
A1
B1
C1
D1
 A2
B2
C2
D2
 A3
B3
C3
D3
 po
qo

(6.1)
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
49
==PAGE:58==
with
A1
B1
C1
D1

=
 
cos kl1
j ρc
S1 sin kl1
j S1
ρc sin kl1
cos kl1
!
,
(6.2)
A2
B2
C2
D2

=
 
cos k(l2 + ∆leff(f))
j
ρc
S2(f)sin k(l2 + ∆leff(f))
j S2(f)
ρc sin k(l2 + ∆leff(f))
cos k(l2 + ∆leff(f))
!
,
(6.3)
A3
B3
C3
D3

=
 
cos kl3
j ρc
S3 sin kl3
j S3
ρc sin kl3
cos kl3
!
.
(6.4)
Note that the additional effective length of the bend ∆leff only needs to be added in one
of the matrices. The total acoustic effective length of the bent duct leff,ac is defined as the
geometrical length of the bent duct plus the additional effective length of the bend.
Using the knowledge included in Sections 2.3.2 and 4.2.1 one can obtain the value of the
pressure at any point in the duct, see Figure 4.9. Equations 4.3 and 4.4 can be used to
back­propagate the value of the sound field variables backwards by using the TM, see
Section 4.1.4. The calculation of px and qx requires of a dynamic calculation, both in
position and in frequency, of the TM between any given point in the duct x = lx and the
outlet, namely TMx(S, l).
For positions such that lx < l0 −l1 −l2, i.e. positions in Stretch 3, TMx is calculated
using S = S1 and l = lx + ∆leff(f). When back­propagating the sound field at the outlet
to points in Stretch 3 it is necessary to include ∆leff(f) because these points are placed
after the bend ­ they have already travelled the additional effective length that is accounted
for by adding this term in the TM.
For positions such that lx < l0 −l1 and lx > l0 −l1 −l2, i.e. positions in Stretch 2,
TMx is calculated as the product of TM3(S1, l3) that models Stretch 3 and TM x
2 using
S = S2(f) and l = −l1 + lx + nx,2∆leff(f)/Nx,2, where Nx,2 represents the total number
of positions to be calculated in Stretch 2 and nx,2 is the number of the position in Stretch 2,
ranging from Nx,2 at the interface with Stretch 3 to 0 at the interface with Stretch 1. In this
way the added length to lb necessary to achieve the acoustic effective length of the bend
leff,ac(f) is distributed linearly along all the bend. A more intuitive way of understanding
the distribution of the additional length is thinking that positions in the bend that are closer
to Stretch 3 have travelled a longer distance than those closer to Stretch 1, therefore
the additional effective length of the bend added should be larger for those points closer
to Stretch 3. Note that TM3 does not include ∆leff(f) because the pressure at points in
Stretch 3 already have the influence of the acoustic effective length of the bend, while now
points inside Stretch 2 are being calculated having its proportional part of the influence of
the acoustic effective length of the bend in nx,2∆leff(f)/Nx,2.
For positions such that lx > l0 −l1, i.e. positions in Stretch 1, TMx is calculated as a
product of TM3(S1, l3) that models Stretch 3, TM2(S2(f), l2) that models Stretch 2 and
TM x
1 using S = S1 and l = lx −l3 −l2. Again, both TM3 and TM2 dont include any
additional effective length term. It is more intuitive now, as the positions that are being
calculated are before the bend and therefore are not influenced by its acoustic effective
length.
50
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:59==
6.2
Modelling the reflection
The modelling of Rb has been thoroughly discussed in Section 5.2.3, concluding that
one can extract some curves with the values of Rb as a function of frequency and then
relate them to a change in the cross­section of Stretch 2, see Figures 5.10 and 5.11.
The intention of this subsection is to obtain some analytical expressions such that Rb(f)
so that one can estimate the value of S2(f) without needing to perform any simulations
beforehand.
Using the standing wave ratio method
Looking at Figure 5.10 it can be observed that |Rb| is the absolute value of a sine wave
of increasing amplitude with zero­crossings at frequencies that yield no reflection, fm,
being a sine wave of period Tfm,2, and having a certain phase shift that allows to have
the zero crossings aligned at those points. It can also be observed that the signed value
Rb is the result of multiplying a square signal with that sine, giving those jumps between
positive and negative values. The modelled value of Rb, hereunder Rb,mod, can be defined
therefore as
Rb,mod(f) = A(f) sin(2π
1
Tfm,2
(f −∆f)) sgn(sin(2π
ϕ
Tfm,2
(f −∆f))),
(6.5)
with values of A(f) linearly distributed from 0.013 to 0.022, Tfm,2 = 128.3 1
Hz = fm,2 τT ,
fm,2 = 130Hz, τT = 0.986
1
Hz2 , ϕ = 5.625, ∆f = 0 to model the reflection of the bend in a
bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦.
Figure 6.2: Comparison between Rb obtained from the numerical simulations estimated
using the standing wave ratio method and Rb,mod in absolute value, to the left, and in
signed value, to the right, for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦, fitted to the
results obtained with the standing wave ratio method.
Figure 6.2 shows a comparison between Rb obtained from the numerical simulations esti­
mated using the standing wave ratio method and Rb,mod in absolute value, to the left, and
in signed value, to the right, for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦, as well as
a MSE relative to the frequency in percentage of the difference between Rb and Rb,mod.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
51
==PAGE:60==
It can be observed that the fitting is quite good except at some particular frequencies
where peaks are found in the MSE most likely due to lack of frequency resolution in the
numerical simulations. All in all, the MSE stays under 0.1% at all frequencies, which is
a very good result. One shortcoming of the model is that the values of Rb do not grow
linearly with frequency, but in an exponential manner which is harder to fit. The linear
increase is found to be sufficient for the scope of the project.
It is worth noting that the matching in the estimation of fm is worst as the frequency in­
creases. The model oscillates with constant frequency defined by (f −∆f)/Tfm,2, and
has not been modelled as a frequency dependant parameter. This will have an effect in
the estimation of Λcorr by not showing an increasing tendency with frequency.
Lastly, one can use Equation 5.4 to obtain the ratio of cross­sections that can be then fed
into Equations 6.3 and 6.4.
Using the impedance tube method
Looking at Figure 5.12 it can be observed that |Rb| is the absolute value of a sine wave of
increasing amplitude with zero­crossings at frequencies that yield no reflection, fm, being
a sine wave of period Tfm,2, and having a certain phase shift that allows to have the zero
crossings aligned at those points. It can also be observed that the signed value Rb is
the result of a sinusoidal modulation at a higher frequency, yielding an organic fluctuation
between positive and negative values. The modelled value of Rb, hereunder Rb,mod, can
be defined therefore as
Rb,mod(f) = A(f) sin(2π
1
Tfm,2
(f −∆f)) sin(−2π
ϕ
Tfm,2
(f −∆f)),
(6.6)
with values of A(f) linearly distributed from 0.013 to 0.022, Tfm,2 = 128.3 1
Hz = fm,2 τT ,
fm,2 = 130Hz, τT = 0.986
1
Hz2 , ϕ = 6.5, ∆f = 0 to model the reflection of the bend in a
bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦.
Figure 6.2 shows a comparison between Rb obtained from the numerical simulations and
Rb,mod in absolute value estimated using the impedance tube method, to the left, and in
signed value, to the right, for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦, as well as a
MSE relative to the frequency in percentage of the difference between Rb and Rb,mod.
It can be observed that the fitting is overall significantly better than the one obtained with
the standing wave ratio estimator. This is due to the fact that waves with many transients
are hard to fit whereas sinusoidal functions are easier to adjust. Once again, the values
of Rb do not grow linearly with frequency, but in an exponential manner which is harder to
fit. The linear increase is found to be sufficient for the scope of the project.
It is worth noting once again that the matching in the estimation of fm is worst as the fre­
quency increases. The model oscillates with constant frequency defined by (f−∆f)/Tfm,2,
and has not been modelled as a frequency dependant parameter. This will have an effect
in the estimation of Λcorr by not showing an increasing tendency with frequency.
It is worth noting that only one parameter of Equation 6.6 has changed with respect to
the standing wave ratio estimator case, and that is ϕ. The modulation frequency is higher
when the function is estimated using the impedance tube method.
Again, one can use Equation 5.4 to obtain the ratio of cross­sections that can be then fed
into Equations 6.3 and 6.4.
52
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.3: Comparison between Rb obtained from the numerical simulations estimated
using the impedance tube method and Rb,mod in absolute value, to the left, and in signed
value, to the right, for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦, fitted to the results
obtained with the standing wave ratio method.
6.3
Modelling the phase shift
Section 5.2.4 focused on understanding the phase difference of the sound field between
a bent and a straight duct at positions in Stretch 3, concluding that a bend in a bent duct
has an acoustic effective length lb,eff different from the geometrical length of the duct lb
characterized by ∆leff. Equation 5.8 shows how ∆leff relates to the phase difference.
Figure 5.16 shows the additional length required to achieve the same phase shift to model
the sound field while Figure 5.15 shows the actual phase shift between a bent duct of
ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦and the reference duct, the later being a measure relative
to frequency.
To model the behavior of the functions shown in Figures 5.16 and 5.15, it is necessary to
take a closer look to the shape of these functions. Closer observation of Figure 5.16, a
measure not relative to the wavelength, shows a function composed of a inverse parabolic
shape that oscillates at a certain frequency, having complete phase shifts close to the
frequencies that yield no reflections fm.
Only the standing wave ratio method is used to model the phase shift, as the impedance
tube was not found suitable to characterize this phenomenon.
Figure 5.16 shows that the estimated ∆leff derived from the numerical results follows
an inverse parabolic trend oscillating at a given frequency and changing phase at fm =
64, 130, 193 and 256 Hz. The modelled value of the additional length, hereunder ∆leff,mod
can be formulated as
∆leff,mod(f) = [−( f
F )2 + σ] + B sin(2π
ϕ
Tfm,2
(f + ∆fosc)) λ(f) sin(2π
1
Tfm,2
(f −∆f))
(6.7)
with values of F = 850, σ = 0.04, B = 0.0021, Tfm,2 = 128.3 1
Hz = fm,2 τT , fm,2 = 130Hz,
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
53
==PAGE:62==
τT = 0.986
1
Hz2 , ϕ = 5.625, ∆fosc = −5,∆f = 0 to model the reflection of the bend in a
bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦. Note that for the same bent duct we obtain
the same values of Tfm,2 and ϕ in the standing wave ratio estimator: the sine functions
that govern these expressions are the same to model the change in cross­section and the
change in effective length. Also, the value of B can be derived from the maximum value
of the amplitude of the parameter that governs the amplitude of the reflection coefficient
as B ≈max(A)/10.
Figure 6.4: Comparison between ∆leff obtained from the numerical simulations and
∆leff,mod in absolute value, to the left, and in signed value, to the right, for a bent duct of
ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦.
Figure 6.4 shows a comparison between ∆leff obtained from the numerical simulations
and ∆leff,mod in absolute value, to the left, and in signed value, to the right, for a bent
duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦, as well as a MSE relative to the frequency in
percentage of the difference between ∆leff and ∆leff,mod. It can be observed that the
error is quite small except for the oscillations at the very low frequencies, still being well
below the 0.1%.
It can be observed that the parameter B, which controls the amplitude of the oscillation,
would be a better fit for the model if its value increased with frequency. This result was
found to be good enough for the scope of the project.
The modelled phase difference can be calculated by applying Equation 5.8 to ∆leff,mod(f).
Summary
This section has been established this far how the proposed analogy looks, using a three­
system coupled pipe to model the reflection and the additional acoustic effective length
introduced by the bend in a bent duct like the one showed in Figure 6.1.
It has also described how a TMM model can be implemented introducing in the matri­
cial system frequency dependant parameters, namely S2(f) and ∆leff(f), calculating
the sound field at different points of a bent duct analytically using Equation 6.1.
An analysis of the reflection and the phase shift in a bent duct with respect to a straight
duct, used as a reference, has been performed obtaining as a result values of Rb(f) and
∆φ(f) that can be used to fit some functions, see Equations 6.5 and 6.7, that can be fed
to Equation 6.1 to calculate the sound field in the duct analytically.
Figure 5.17 shows all the acoustical parameters that are relevant to model the sound field
54
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:63==
in a bent duct using the proposed model, compering the data extracted from numerical
simulations with the modelled functions for a duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦.
Figure 6.5: Geometrical modelling of a coupled­pipe analogy of a bent duct. Modelled
values of S2/S1 on the left estimated using the standing wave ratio method, ∆leff,mod on
the center and Λcorr on the left, of a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m and Γ = 3 with values of
βb = 180◦compared to the values obtained in the numerical simulations.
Figure 6.5 shows the geometric parameters that can be directly fed to Equation 6.1 com­
pering the data extracted from numerical simulations with the modelled functions for a
duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦.
Figure 6.6: Geometrical modelling of a coupled­pipe analogy of a bent duct. Modelled
values of S2/S1 on the left estimated using the impedance tube method, ∆leff,mod on the
center and Λcorr on the left, of a bent duct of of ri = 0.3m and Γ = 3 with values of
βb = 180◦compared to the values obtained in the numerical simulations.
Figure 6.6 shows the geometric parameters that can be directly fed to Equation 6.1 com­
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
55
==PAGE:64==
pering the data extracted from numerical simulations with the modelled functions for a
duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦.
Appendix C shows the values of the parameters included in Equations 6.5 and 6.7, allow­
ing the reader to estimate the behavior of the sound field in a bent duct as a function of
its abruptness, defined by Γ, and the bending angle βb.
The behavior of the sound field in a bent duct can be characterized with the
reflection coefficient at the bend Rb, the effective length of the bend ∆leff
and the length correction factor Λcorr. These parameters can be modelled as
shown in Equations 6.5, 6.6 and 6.7.
Highlight 16
6.4
Validation of the model
The TMM model based on a couple­pipe analogy has been thoroughly explained through­
out this section. The last part is to compare the sound field in a bent duct obtained from
numerical simulations and modelled with TMM to characterize the performance of this
model. In order to perform such comparison the difference of the pressure in module and
phase have to be performed at every point in the bent duct and for the whole frequency
range under study.
Several things have to be taken into consideration before comparing the numerical and
the analytical results. First of all, the average of the pressure will be used to perform
this comparison only, leaving aside the information from the standard deviation. It has
been found in Section 5.2 that the standard deviation outside the bend is very close to
zero, therefore it is fair to compare the sound field obtained analytically and numerically
on Stretches 1 and 3. Inside the bend, however, one must understand that in a three­
dimensional study some high­order modes will be triggered, meaning that the sound field
obtained analytically and numerically are not directly comparable. Having this in mind,
the average of the pressure will be compared with the analytical model.
Secondly, one has to bear in mind that the analytical result has been calculated using the
fitted functions to model the reflection coefficient and the phase shift, see Figures 6.2 and
6.4. These fitting functions are not perfectly matching the numerical simulation results so
some error is expected ­ greater error is expected at frequencies that generate greater
reflection and lesser error is expected at frequencies that generate smaller reflections, see
Figure 5.10 and Equations 5.6 and 5.7. Finally, greater error is expected at frequencies
closer to the cut­off frequency of the first higher­order mode, f10.
Using the standing wave ratio method
Figure 6.7 shows the comparison of the modelled, in red, and numerical, in blue, module
and phase of the pressure at 40, 80, 150 and 200Hz using the standing wave ratio method.
Analyzing the pressure in Stretch 1 it can be seen that the module of the standing wave
pattern do not match perfectly in amplitude, having a larger difference close to the antin­
odes but coinciding in the nodes. This is expected as the model is fed with a change
in cross­section that does not fit perfectly with the numerical result. This mismatch will
also affect the sound field in Stretch 3, being governed by the change in cross­section.
However, the mismatch is found to be much larger than expected looking at the results of
the model, see Figures 6.2 and 6.3.
56
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:65==
(a) 40 Hz
(b) 80 Hz
(c) 150 Hz
(d) 200 Hz
Figure 6.7: Comparison of the modelled, in red, and numerical, in blue, module and phase
of the pressure at 40, 80, 150 and 200Hz using the standing wave ratio method.
Looking at the pressure in Stretch 2, the fitting of the modelled sound field with the aver­
aged sound field is quite close as well. The most important finding is that as the frequency
increases the evanescent modes travel farther outside the duct ­ the standard deviation
at planes just outside the duct increases with frequency. This fact proves the analytical
results of Rostafinski [1] stating that at higher frequencies the high order modes propagate
farther outside of the bend.
However, this representation does not give a clear overview of the performance of the
model. To illustrate such comparison a three­dimensional color plot is chosen that shows
frequency on the x­axis, position in the duct on the y­axis and values with a color scale.
Figure 6.8 shows the difference between the numerically obtained average pressure and
the analytically obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dB, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the standing wave ratio method. The white dashed lines indicate interfaces between
Stretches 1, 2 and 3. Limited to differences larger than 40dB, i.e. ≈0.001 Pa. This
representation allows a better assessment of the performance of the model.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.8:
Difference between the numerically­obtained average pressure and the
analytically­obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dB, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the standing wave ratio method. The white dashed lines indicate limits of Stretch 2.
Limited to differences larger than 40dB, i.e. ≈0.001 Pa.
Looking at the difference in dB, on the left, there are several things to understand. Looking
at Stretch 1, it can be observed that the difference varies in a oscillatory manner both with
position and with frequency. This makes sense knowing that this is the representation of
two standing waves that are not perfectly matched. The oscillation with position shows
lower difference, in deep blue, at the zero­crossings, i.e. nodes, and higher difference, at
the points of maximum amplitude, i.e. antinodes, of the standing wave pattern. The nodes
and antinodes get closer together as frequency increases. The oscillation with frequency
shows that the difference is greater at frequencies closer at fum = 98, 164, 229, 291 Hz
and lesser at fm =
65, 130, 193, 255 Hz. Overall, the difference increases with fre­
quency.
The difference in Stretch 3 shows how the oscillation matches best at some frequencies
without any oscillation with position, which make sense considering that there is a plane
wave propagating at positions in Stretch 3. The difference also follows two oscillatory
patterns most likely related to the oscillation defined in Equation 6.5.
The difference in Stretch 2 does not give a lot of information other than one being able to
see how many multiples of a half­wavelength are present in the bend at each frequency
range ­ 2 around 100Hz, 3 around 160Hz, 4 around 210Hz.
The match between the model and the numerical is found to be quite poor, having differ­
ences of around 65dB in many positions and at many frequencies. The error is bigger in
the antinodal lines as one would expect. Nevertheless, the modelled parameters showed
a very good fit, see Figures 6.2 and 6.3, so this big of a difference was not expected.
Further work needs to be done to assess whether the proposed analogy is valid to model
a bent duct or if there was a mistake in the implementation.
A figure with the difference in Pascal and a figure with the difference in dB ranging from
0 to 90dB are found in Appendix D.
58
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:67==
Using the impedance tube method
The analysis that should be performed is analogous to the one for the standing wave ratio
method. Therefore, the comparison between this model and the analytical result will be
shown as a three­dimensional color plot is chosen that shows frequency on the x­axis,
position in the duct on the y­axis and values with a color scale as well. For this instance,
the difference between the sound fields will be displayed only in dB.
Figure 6.9:
Difference between the numerically­obtained average pressure and the
analytically­obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dB, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the impedance tube method. The white dashed lines indicate limits of Stretch 2.
Limited to differences larger than 40dB, i.e. ≈0.001 Pa.
Figure 6.9 shows the difference between the numerically obtained average pressure and
the analytically obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dB, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb =
180◦. The white dashed lines indicate interfaces between Stretches 1, 2 and 3. Limited
to differences larger than 40dB, i.e. ≈0.001 Pa. This representation allows a better
assessment of the performance of the model.
Once again it can be seen that the difference varies in an oscillatory fashion with position
and frequency. The difference is smaller at frequencies close to the matched frequencies,
at which the model seems to be more accurate. However, for frequencies that yield a
greater Rb the error is considerably big, around 65dB in all the frequency range. This was
not expected looking at the modelled parameters, see Figures 6.2 and 6.3.
The frequency variation is found to be greater in this model, being able to yield a smaller
difference at more frequencies. However, the overall performance is very similar to that
of the standing wave ratio method.
A figure with the difference in Pascal and a figure with the difference in dB ranging from
0 to 90dB are found in Appendix D.
Summary
A simplified analogy has been proposed to model the sound field in a bent duct using
TMM. The analogy consisted on a three­way coupled duct system with different cross­
sections and lengths, the second duct having a frequency dependant cross­section and
additional effective length.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
59
==PAGE:68==
The match between the model and the numerical solution is found to be around
65dB in many positions and at many frequencies both for the standing wave
ratio method and for the impedance tube method. Further work needs to be
done to assess whether the proposed analogy is valid to model a bent duct or
if there was a mistake in the implementation.
Highlight 17
To model the behavior of the reflection and the phase shift some functions where derived
looking at the estimation from the numerical simulations, and characterized with several
parameters defined in Equations 6.5 and 6.7. Appendix C show how this parameters
change with the abruptness of the bend Γ and with the bending angle βb.
There is a difference between the numerical results and the analytical results obtained
using the model, and it has been quantified as a difference in dB. This difference was
found to be significantly large so the model has not been validated. It is believed that
further work needs to be done to assess whether the proposed analogy is valid or there
was a mistake in the implementation. There is room for improvement, but a theoretical
basis have been set for future work to develop the model further.
60
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:69==
7
Experimental validation
The last part of this project consists on validating all the results derived from the analytical
models and numerical simulations by setting up an experiment.
This experiment has been proposed taking into account practical limitations and the time
frame in which it had to be prepared and performed. The objective is to have some
empirical data that can be compared with the simulations so that some parts of the model
can be validated.
In particular, this experimental setup will try to proof that one can calculate the frequencies
that will not generate a reflection for a given duct.
7.1
Setup
To perform this experiment, several parts of engine exhaust were purchased in Biltema,
a DIY and workshop goods. These parts can be assembeled together to form a bent duct
with a turn of 180 degrees.
Figure 7.1: Several parts of engine exhaust were purchased to put together a bent duct
of ri = 0.0365m, Γ = 3.89 and βb = 180◦.
Figure 7.1 shows the parts of engine exhaust that were purchased to put together a bent
duct of ri = 0.0365m, Γ = 3.89 and βb = 180◦. The total length of the bent duct l0 will be
specified for each different experiment setup, as it varies from one to another.
One end of the bent duct, namely the inlet, is coupled to a speaker that is fed by an ampli­
fier connected to the computer via a National Instruments sound card. The same sound
card has several microphones connected, which change depending on the experiment
setups. The microphones used will be a B&K 4939­L­002 with its external polarization
unit and several DPA 4062 microphones. These microphones are flush­mounted on the
bent duct at different points.
Figure 7.2 shows the diagram of the measurement setup. A speaker is coupled to the
inlet of the duct fed by an amplifier, several microphones are inside or flush­mounted on
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 7.2: Diagram of the measurement setup. A speaker is coupled to the inlet of the
duct fed by an amplifier, several microphones are inside or flush­mounted on the duct. All
the transducers are connected to the computer through a sound card.
the duct. All the transducers are connected to the computer through a sound card. The
computer controls the measurement using Matlab.
It is worth noting that the outlet of the bent duct is not perfectly matched, but a non­ideal
open boundary. Therefore, a very strong reflection from the outlet is expected. As well,
the source is a non­ideal piston and will introduce some challenges.
7.2
Method
As stated before, the outlet of a duct is not a perfectly matched boundary, but a non­ideal
open boundary that will generate a very strong reflection. This setting makes finding a
standing wave generated by the bend impedance a bit cumbersome given that there will
be a standing wave in the whole tube generated by the outlet impedance. A simpler option
is to use short pulses at a desired frequency and assess how much of the total energy is
reflected back and transmitted through the bend. The latter option is the chosen method
to characterize the reflection coefficient.
When playing short pulses in a duct with a brusque change of impedance at its outlet, like
is the case, one should be mindful of the time of arrival of the reflections. It will be important
to have the lengths of Stretch 1 and Stretch 3, see Section 3.2, chosen carefully in order
to avoid overlapping of reflections from the bend impedance and the outlet impedance.
The length of the pulse has to be fine­tuned taking into consideration frequency of the
pulses, the length of each stretch and the measurement position.
The first expermiental setup will try to prove that a flush­mounted microphone is as valid
to measure the sound field inside the duct as a microphone place inside the duct, which is
very convenient for practical purposes. It will also serve as a proof of concept to compare
the estimated times of arrival, ETAs, of the reflections caused by the bend and by the
outlet. The second experimental setup will aim to characterize the impedance of the bend
by comparing the input energy of a pulse with the reflected energy of the pulse.
7.3
Experiment setup 1: validity of using flush­mounted
microphones
To estimate the reflection of the bend it is important to avoid any disturbance in the sound
field before and after it. For that purpose, flush­mounting 5mm microphones is a very
good option because they occupy very little space inside the duct and its very easy to
62
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:71==
place. Knowing that the pressure is constant at any point in a plane perpendicular to
the direction of propagation, see Section 2.1, it should make no difference whether the
measurement is performed in the center of the duct or at the boundary.
However, it is important to verify that this is true and that the microphones that are to be
used are reliable for this particular application. For this purpose, a reference measurement
needs to be performed before diving into the characterization of the bend.
Figure 7.3: Measurement setup of Experiment Setup 1.
Figure 7.3 shows a picture of the setup for the validation experiment. The bent duct is
formed by Stretch 1, of length l1 = 2.915m, the bend of Stretch 2 of length lb = 0.446m,
and Stretch 3 of length l3 = 1.02m. Because of the limited lengthof the cable of the
reference microphone, see Figure 7.2, l1 and l3 are not as long as they could be, most
likely resulting on overlapping of the pulses. This will not affect the purpose of this first
experiment, which is to compare a reference microphone placed inside the duct with one
flash­mounted on the boundary.
The reference microphone is a B&K 4939­L­002 reference microphone is placed inside
Stretch 1, at a distance of 1.08m from the speaker, 1.835m from the inlet of the bend and
1.466m from the termination of the duct. The test microphone DPA 4062 is placed at the
same plane but flush­mounted on the surface of the duct.
Figure 7.4 shows a preliminary measurement of the setup at fp = 751 Hz and Np = 6 with
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 7.4: Preliminary measurement of the setup at fp = 751 Hz and Np = 6 with a
reference microphone, in red, and a DUT, in yellow.
a reference microphone, in red, and a DUT, in yellow. It can be observed that the reference
microphone and the test microphone have a certain difference in amplitude and a π/2
shift in phase, but the waveform is very similar. The shift in amplitude can be explained
by having compensated by a sensitivity of the microphone that was slightly off, so it is not
a big issue and it is good enough. The phase shift is also considered good, as these two
microphones can have a different phase response and that is not a problem. This proofs
using flush­mounted DPA 4062 microphones as a valid measurement microphone for this
application.
Taking a closer look to the measured signal, one can observe that there is a small decaying
oscillation after the excitation pulse has travelled through the measurement position. This
phenomenon is most likely due to the inertia of the loudspeaker after emitting the pulse,
that needs some time to stop vibrating. It will be necessary to add a security parameter
to guarantee that the reflected pulse does not overlap with the inertial oscillation of the
loudspeaker.
7.4
Experimental setup 2: characterizing the reflection of the
bend
Once the setup, its limitations and the method are understood the characterization of the
reflection of the bend can be performed. By exciting the duct with short pulses of frequency
fp and number of periods Np and measuring the reflection generated at the bend one can
estimate the energy that is reflected back and transmitted through the bend. To do so,
the RMS value of the reflected pulse can be compared with that of the excitation pulse.
Figure 7.5 shows the measurement setup for the experimental characterization of the
reflection of the bend. In this case the bent duct is formed by Stretch 1, of length l1 =
3.935m, the bend of Stretch 2 of length lb = 0.446m, and Stretch 3 of length l3 = 2.075m.
l1 and l3 were chosen to be as long as possible to maximize the difference of ETA from the
bend and ETA from the outlet, separating both as much as possible from the excitation
64
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:73==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.5: Measurement setup of Experiment Setup 2.
pulse.
Four microphones DPA 4062 are flush­mounted on the duct at a distance of the inlet
lx,1 = 1.08m, lx,2 = 1.18m, lx,3 = 1.28m and lx,4 = 1.38m. This position was chosen to be
close very close to the inlet, maximizing the distance between the measurement position
and the bend lx,b but keeping away from the coupling of two of the ducts in case there are
irregularities generate any high­order modes.
Taking the distance between the first measurement position and the bend, lx1,b = 2.885m
one can calculate the ETA of a reflection from the bend as tx1,b = 2 lx1,b/c = 0.0166s.
Knowing that after the microphone has been excited the membranes of both the micro­
phone and the loudspeaker still move for a period of time due to inertia, a security time
interval ∆t = 0.006s is defined to allow the membrane to settle before the reflection of
the bend arrives. The value of ∆t has been determined based on previous experiments,
see Figure 7.4. One can calculate the maximum excitation pulse duration tp in seconds
for which there will not be overlapping of forward­ and backward­travelling pulses. The
duration of a pulse for this experiment is defined as
tp = Np
fp
(7.1)
with fp being the frequency of the pulse and Np the number of periods. Adjusting this two
parameters one can make sure to avoid overlapping of forward­ and backward­travelling
pulses. Calculating the duration of a pulse tp following Equation 7.1, one can calculate the
overlapping time of the reflection from the bend with the excitation pulse as tp−(tx1,b−∆t).
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 7.6: Overlapping time in seconds, calculated as tp −(tx1,b −∆t) as a function of
frequency..
Figure 7.6 shows the overlapping time of that an excitation pulse with Np and f0 will have
with the reflection from the bend, leaving a security time interval of ∆t = 0.006s to allow
the inertial movement of membrane of the loudspeaker to settle down. It can be observed
that excitation signals with Np > 4 will generate overlap at some frequencies between
350 and 1000Hz.
Given that the bend is of ri = 0.0365m, Γ = 3.89 and βb = 180◦, see Section 3.2, one
can estimate the frequencies that will yield no reflection and the frequencies that will have
maximum reflection based on the results in Section 5.2.3 and Section 5.3. Using Equation
5.9 one can estimate the frequencies that will yield no reflection for different multiples of
the wavelength λ′
m.
Figure 7.7: Acoustical parameters that represent the influence of a bent duct of ri =
0.0365m, Γ = 3.89 and βb = 180◦, obtained from the numerical simulations. Rb, on the
left, is the reflection coefficient of the bend; ∆φ, in the center, is the phase shift; Λcorr is
the length correction factor, obtained from a numerical simulation.
66
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:75==
Figure 7.7 shows the acoustical parameters that represent the influence of a bent duct of
ri = 0.0365m, Γ = 3.89 and βb = 180◦, obtained from the numerical simulations. Rb, on
the left, is the reflection coefficient of the bend; ∆φ, in the center, is the phase shift; Λcorr
is the length correction factor, obtained from a numerical simulation.
From Rb, on the left, one can clearly see which frequencies will generate no reflections
and which will generate a maximum reflection. These frequencies are 406 and 8011Hz,
and 616 and 989Hz, respectively. The other two figures provide information that is not
relevant for the experiment, but give an understanding on how this particular bent duct
behaves in this frequency range. This frequencies are the ones chosen to characterize
the bent duct in the experiment.
(a) 406Hz
(b) 616Hz
(c) 811Hz
(d) 989Hz
Figure 7.8: Measurement of four different pulses at 406, 616, 811 and 989Hz respectively.
The excitation pulse’s and the reflection of the bend’s start time and end time are marked
with a black dashed line. The red dashed line marks the time of arrival of the reflection
on the loudspeaker of the reflection on the bend.
Figure 7.8 shows the measurement of four different pulses at 406, 616, 811 and 989Hz
respectively. The excitation pulse’s and the reflection of the bend’s start time and end
time are marked with a black dashed line. The red dashed line marks the time of arrival
of the reflection on the loudspeaker of the reflection on the bend.
In order to obtain a measure of how much energy is reflected relative to the energy injected
by the loudspeaker. The way of doing such measure is to select a given length of the
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
67
==PAGE:76==
excitation pulse and select the same length of the relfected pulse from the bend, to then
perform the ratio between the RMS values of both pulses.
First of all, it is necessary to assess the validity of these measurements in terms of how
reliable they are. It is found that the measurement at 406Hz has the time of arrival from
the reflection of the bend just at the same point, or slightly before, than the point where
the inertia of the loudspeaker has totally dissipated. Also, it is found that the reflection on
the loudspeaker of the reflection of the bend overlaps with the end of the pulse reflected
on the bend. Therefore, the measurement at 406Hz will be of a slightly higher energy in
the defined window. The rest of the measurements are found to be more reliable than the
one at 406Hz.
Closer inspection of Figure 7.8 shows that the length of the reflected pulse at the bend is
longer than that of the excitation pulse. This is true at all frequencies. This phenomenon
could be explained by the longer effective acoustical length of the bend at those frequen­
cies, see Section 5.2.4. This phenomenon was not studied in depth and could be affecting
the result by not considering all the energy reflected in the bend.
Figure 7.9: Experimental validation: ratio between the energy of the excitation pulse and
the energy of the reflected pulse at the bend, in RMS
Figure 7.9 shows the ratio between the energy of the excitation pulse and the energy
of the reflected pulse at the bend, in RMS. The results do not show that the unmatched
frequencies have a much higher reflected energy, giving an inconclusive result.
One can observe that the measured energy at 406 and 616Hz is higher than at 811 and
989Hz. Also it is found that at 406Hz, a matched frequency, the measured reflected
energy is lower than at 616Hz; this trend repeats for 811 and 989Hz.
Looking at Figure 7.5 one can argue than having the outlet of the duct so close to the
measurement position could affect the measurement, knowing that the time it takes for
the pulse to travel to the duct is the same time it takes to the pulse to travel to the bend
and back to the measurement position.
The conclusion is that there is a certain trend that shows that the energy reflected is lower
at matched frequencies as compared to the closest unmatched frequencies, assuming
the radiation conditions of the loudspeaker and the cross­talk from the outlet of the duct
68
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:77==
are the same for these two. It has been found that the energy reflected from a bend is
very low, around 0.02 in the ratio of RMS values.
However, a better proof of concept should be conducted to clearly asses the influence of
the bent duct. A setup with standing waves could be a more reliable way of assessing the
reflection at the bend, as well as having a tube with larger separation between the source,
the measurement position, the bend and the outlet.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:79==
8
Conclusions and future work
This project has covered a wide range of topics to understand the behavior of the sound
field in a bent duct. Building upon some of the theoretical concepts that underlie duct
acoustics, included in Section 2, some analytical tools that allow to study the sound field
in a bent duct were implemented.
It has been found that the cut off frequency of the first higher order mode f10 for a duct
of radius ri is found at the same frequency regardless of the presence of a bend in the
duct. In a straight duct only the fundamental mode, i.e. plane waves, will propagate when
the driving frequency is lower than f10. It has been found, on the other hand, that higher
order modes will appear in the bend of a bent duct and will propagate outside the bend
for a certain distance decaying exponentially, travelling farther as frequency increases in
agreement with the analytical findings of Rostafinski [1].
The analysis of the sound field in a bent duct, first based on theoretical concepts as
included in Section 3.2.2 and later relying on numerical simulations as shown in Section
5.2, has shown that the bend has an influence on the propagation of the plane wave.
Firstly, the change in geometry seen by a plane wave when arriving to a bend poses
a change in the acoustic impedance and has been defined in this project as the bend
impedance, ˆZb. It has been proven that ˆZb is a property that is distributed along the bend,
not in an even manner from the inlet to the outlet of the bend, but with a distribution that
is frequency dependant. The bend impedance has an associated reflection coefficient
ˆRb that has been estimated using a standing wave ratio method and an impedance tube
method, having a good match between them in absolute value but finding the impedance
tube method to be more accurate. It has been found that some frequencies can propagate
through the bend without any reflections. Those frequencies are related to the geometri­
cal length of the bend corrected by a length correction factor Λcorr that accounts for the
particular distribution of ˆZb at a given frequency. Knowing Λcorr for a bend with a given
geometry one can calculate the frequencies that will travel through the bend unreflected,
defined in Equation 5.9.
The second interesting finding has to do with the acoustic effective length of a bent duct.
It has been shown that there is a build up of acoustic energy on the outer face of the
bend and a drop of acoustic energy on the inner face of the bend. This was intuitively
thought of as a back­and­forth bounce of the plane wave entering the bend in a direction
perpendicular to the plane defined by the inlet of the bend, triggering higher order modes.
This complex phenomenon that happens in a bend has the effect of introducing a phase
shift of the plane wave that propagates past the bend compared to the straight duct case,
meaning that the bend has an acoustic effective length different from the geometrical
length of the bend.
Having such an understanding of the behavior of the sound field in a bent duct reliant
on numerical simulations, some analytical expressions where developed to model the
reflection coefficient of the bend and the effective length of the bend. Some values where
derived to define a first set of values that characterizes the behavior of bends with different
abruptness and bending angles.
With the modelled parameters of the bend, an simplified one­dimensional analogy was
proposed to model the behavior of the sound field inside the bent duct based on three
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
71
==PAGE:80==
coupled ducts, the second of them having cross­section and additional length dependant
on the frequency. Sadly, the model was found to be inaccurate, having a difference of
around 65dB between the modelled sound field and the numerical simulations at many
points of the duct and at many different frequencies.
8.1
Future work
8.1.1
The limits of the low frequency assumption
Despite the several attempts throughout the different methods to analyze the sound field
in a duct, it was not possible to establish the limit to the low frequency assumption: which
is the frequency from which the first high order mode has enough contribution to alter
plane wave propagation? The methods developed in this project were not the correct
ones to establish this. Nevertheless, this was a side goal that drifted from the central
objectives of the project, but the question is still open!
8.1.2
The influence of the sharpness of the bend on propagation of higher
order modes outside the bend
Throughout the course of this project many different numerical simulations of sound field
in a bent duct have been performed and analyzed, and not all of them have made it to the
report. However, some of those results showed that the abruptness of the bend has an
important effect on the distance that a higher order mode propagates outside the bend,
i.e. how far from the bend can the sound field be affected by the bend.
8.1.3
The influence of the radius of the bend
Figure 7.7 shows the acoustical parameters that represent the influence of a bent duct of
ri = 0.0365, much smaller than the general case that has been studied in this project. It
is found that the oscillation that governs the reflection coefficient and the phase shift is
much faster than that of the general case. It would be interesting to find some figures like
those included in Figure C.1 and Figure C.2 as a function of the radius of the duct.
8.1.4
A precise model of the sound field inside a bent duct using TMM
Despite the many attempts of obtaining a modelled sound field comparable to that result­
ing from the numerical simulations, it has not been achieved. Thus, further work should
be done to pinpoint any mistakes on the implementation or find an analogy that allows to
obtain a better matching.
An educated guess would be to propose a simpler analogy based on a two­coupled­duct
system with a frequency dependant change in cross section and an additional effective
length after the change in cross­section. Knowing that the ratio between cross­sections
have been found to be greater than 0.9 smaller than 1.1 in all instances studied, it is safe
to say that the low frequency assumption would be acceptable in the second duct, even if
its bigger than its geometrical shape. The downside would be that the sound field inside
the bend would not be obtained, but one could calculate the sound field at a reasonable
distance outside of the bend.
Lastly, it would have been nice to have more time and resources to make a more robust
proof of concept. The results of the experimental validation are not very satisfactory and
it would be interesting to see if a better setup would yield more significant results. A
measurement that would have been interesting to make is one at the bend to somewhat
characterize the behavior of the sound field inside the bend empirically.
72
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
W. Rostafinski. “Acoustic systems containing curved ducts”. In: Nineteenth Meeting
of the Acoustical Society of America (1975).
[2]
Finn. Jacobsen and Peter Møller Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics.
Wiley, 2013. ISBN: 9781118346419.
[3]
Allan D. Pierce. Acoustics ­ An Introduction to Its Physical Principles and Applica­
tions. Springer Cham, 2019. ISBN: 978­3­030­11213­4.
[4]
Iain Mccowan. “Microphone Arrays : A Tutorial”. In: (July 2023).
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:83==
A
Calculation of the coefficients of the
transfer matrix of a coupled system
A
B
C
D

=
A1
B1
C1
D1
 A2
B2
C2
D2

(A.1)
A = A1A2 + B1C2 = cos(kl1)cos(kl2) + j ρc
S1
sin(kl1)j S2
ρc sin(kl2) =
(A.2)
1
2[cos(k(l1 −l2))[1 −S2
S1
] + cos(k(l1 + l2))[1 + S2
S1
]
(A.3)
B = A1B2 + B1D2 = cos(kl1)j ρc
S2
sin(kl2) + j ρc
S1
sin(kl1)cos(kl2) =
(A.4)
j ρc
2
S1 + S2
S1S2
sin(k(l1 −l2))
(A.5)
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
75
==PAGE:84==
B
Difference of the sound field at the
inner and outer side of the bend
This study shows the result from comparing the SPL along the line placed at a height
ri of the outer side and inner side of the bend. The outer line is longer than the inner
line, therefore distances will be represented as a normalization from 0 to 1, being 0.5 the
middle of the bend. This means results are compressed or expanded, biasing the result
but it has been considered enough to include in the report.
Figure B.1: SPL difference of a bent duct of ri = 0.2m, with different values of Γ, called
Rb in the legend, and a bending angle of 180 degrees.
Figure B.1 shows the SPL difference of a bent duct of ri = 0.2m, with different values
of Γ, called Rb in the legend, and a bending angle of 180 degrees with a straight duct at
20Hz, which has the same value at all points of the duct.
It can be seen that the SPL in the outer side, e.g Edge 2, here represented with dashed
lines, has an increase compared to the reference. The inner side, e.g. Edge 1, here
represented with solid lines, has a drop comparable to the increase on the other side of
the bend.
This shows that there are higher order modes triggered inside the bend, and explain that
when performing spatial analysis of the sound field an increased standard deviation is
found.
Figure B.2 shows different SPL values along the inner and outer arc of ducts with different
radii. It can be seen that bends of different radii are comparable at frequencies that keep
the same proportion with f10. A duct of ri = 0.1m has a f10 = 1005Hz, so f/f10 = 0.6 for
f = 600Hz. A duct of ri = 0.15m will have f10 = 670Hz, so f/f10 = 0.6 for f = 400Hz.
76
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:85==
Figure B.2
These two ducts have comparable behavior at these frequencies, or others with the same
ratio f/f10.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
77
==PAGE:86==
C
Modelling a bent duct of Γ and βb
Equations 6.5 and 6.7 show how to obtain accurate modelling of the acoustical parameters
that characterizes the behavior of the sound field inside a bent duct. In this section the
values of the parameters included in these equations are shown, allowing the reader to
estimate the behavior of the sound field in a bent duct as a function of its abruptness,
defined by Γ, and the bending angle βb.
Figure C.1: Parameters A, fm,2 τT , fm,2, τT , ϕ, F and σ used in Equation 6.5 to model
the reflection coefficient of a bent duct of βb = 180◦.
Figure C.1 shows parameters A, fm,2 τT , fm,2, τT and ϕ used in Equation 6.5 to model
the reflection coefficient of a bent duct of βb = 180◦. By selecting the values of these
parameters from these curves for a bent duct of βb = 180◦with a given Γ one can estimate
the reflection coefficient between 20Hz and the cut­off frequency of the first high­order
mode f10.
Figure C.2 shows parameters F and σ used in Equation 6.7 to model the additional ef­
fective length of a bent duct of Γ = 3. By selecting the values of these parameters from
these curves for a bent duct of βb = 180◦with a given Γ one can estimate the phase shift
between 20Hz and the cut­off frequency of the first high­order mode f10.
78
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:87==
Figure C.2: Parameters A, fm,2 τT , fm,2, τT , ϕ, F and σ used in Equation 6.7 to model
the additional effective length of a bent duct of Γ = 3.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
79
==PAGE:88==
D
Sound field difference between the
model and the numerical solution for
the impedance tube method
Using the standing wave ratio method
Figure D.1:
Difference between the numerically­obtained average pressure and the
analytically­obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in Pascal, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the standing wave ratio method. The white dashed lines indicate limits of Stretch 2.
Figure D.1 shows the difference between the numerically obtained average pressure and
the analytically obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in Pascal, and
phase (on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and
βb = 180◦using the standing wave ratio method, with the white dashed lines indicate
interfaces between Stretches 1, 2 and 3. It can be observed that the differences in Pascal
are very small, making it difficult to assess the performance of the model. In order to
visualize the difference between the model and the numerical solution, one can represent
the difference of SPL.
Figure D.2 shows the difference between the numerically obtained average pressure and
the analytically obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dB, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the standing wave ratio method.
This method allows to visualize the difference between the modelled sound field and the
numerical solution of the sound field. Having a very wide the dynamic range may be
misleading ­ most of the surface is blue or green, i.e. below 40dB which correspond to a
difference smaller than approximately 0.001 Pa. Assuming that a difference smaller than
40dB can be negligible, one can represent the difference with a limited dynamic range.
Using the impedance tube method
80
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:89==
Figure D.2:
Difference between the numerically­obtained average pressure and the
analytically­obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dB, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the standing wave ratio method. The white dashed lines indicate limits of Stretch 2.
Figure D.3 shows the comparison of the modelled, in red, and numerical, in blue, module
and phase of the pressure at 40, 80, 150 and 200Hz using the impedance tube method.
The difference in between the model and the numerical results can be predicted from the
geometrical parameters in Figure 6.6.
Figure D.4 shows the difference between the numerically­obtained average pressure and
the analytically­obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in Pascal, and
phase (on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and
βb = 180◦, with the white dashed lines indicate interfaces between Stretches 1, 2 and 3. It
can be observed that the differences in Pascal are very small, making it difficult to assess
the performance of the model.
Figure D.5 shows the difference between the numerically obtained average pressure and
the analytically obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dBSPL, and
phase (on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and
βb = 180◦.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
81
==PAGE:90==
(a) 40 Hz
(b) 80 Hz
(c) 150 Hz
(d) 200 Hz
Figure D.3: Comparison of the modelled, in red, and numerical, in blue, module and phase
of the pressure at 40, 80, 150 and 200Hz using the impedance tube method.
Figure D.4:
Difference between the numerically­obtained average pressure and the
analytically­obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in Pascal, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the impedance tube method. The white dashed lines indicate limits of Stretch 2.
82
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
==PAGE:91==
Figure D.5:
Difference between the numerically­obtained average pressure and the
analytically­obtained pressure in module (on the left) as a difference in dBSPL, and phase
(on the right) as a difference in radians for a bent duct of ri = 0.3m, Γ = 3 and βb = 180◦
using the impedance tube method. The white dashed lines indicate limits of Stretch 2.
Modelling and characterization of acoustic wave propagation in bent ducts
83
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Acoustic Technology
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
