==PAGE:1==
Optimization in automation design for labora-
tory liquid handling with a robotic arm
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Ivan Serrano Subtil
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads
Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six and a half months at NovoNordisk, Department
of Technology Engineering, with the collaboration of DTU Electro, within the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Ivan Serrano Subtil - s212477
Signature
Date
ii
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
16.07.2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Laboratory automation has fastly become a transformative technology with enormous po-
tential to revolutionize scientific research and development by emulating laborious and
repetitive tasks performed by humans.
This report describes the implementation of a particular automation solution designed
to aid in the daily routines of laboratory technicians by automating repetitive tasks. New
technologies will be implemented alongside traditional automation techniques to maximize
the value provided by the deployment of the product.
Newer technologies are emerging in the laboratory environment with great momentum,
as they offer alternative techniques to solving challenges in this environment. One such
technology is robotics, which will be explored thoroughly in the current state of the industry
as well as in the particular implementation this project is based around.
Furthermore, this project explores the future of laboratory automation within a particular
framework and vision of total and end-to-end laboratory automation, describing the par-
ticular steps needed to reach such a paradigm as well as implementing certain aspects
within the product detailed throughout the report.
The effectiveness of the proposed product will also be exhaustively evaluated, while also
being subjected to rigorous tests along the development process, which will also be dis-
cussed. The final results indicate the great potential and relevance of projects such as the
one presented, as it provides significant value in terms of lightening personnel’s workload.
Overall, this report aims to provide value to the field of laboratory automation as well as
tackling the immediate needs of laborants at NovoNordisk.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Xinxin Zhang, my Supervisor from the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, and Diego Olivares, my Co-supervisor from NovoNordisk
Denmark, for their invaluable guidance and support throughout this project. I would also
like to acknowledge the Technology Engineering team at NovoNordisk, for their assis-
tance and collaboration. Thank you to all those who have supported and contributed to
this endeavor.
iv
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State of the art
5
2.1
Robotic applications in laboratory environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Gripping labware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Human-Robot interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Full laboratory automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Communication protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2.2
Plug and Play solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3
Emerging trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.1
Labware Ontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.2
Device digital twin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Methodologies
21
4
System analysis
23
4.1
Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Requirements overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
MoSCow prioritization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
Use cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Mechanical solution
29
5.1
Gripper and fingers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.2
Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Decapping station
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4
Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.5
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.5.1
Virtual Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.5.2
Experimental Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Software solution
47
6.1
Robot command scripting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.2
PLC programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.3
SiLA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.3.1
Feature implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.3.2
UI/UX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.4
Labware ontology and DT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7
Results
65
7.1
Full system testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
7.2
Interface prototype validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.3
LAPP integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Discussion
73
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
9
Conclusions
79
Bibliography
83
A Appendix
87
vi
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Automation technologies have proven to be reliable and efficient tools to maximize pro-
ductivity, enabling the replacement of workers performing repetitive and tedious tasks in
their daily routines for faster and more precise machinery.
In the pharmaceutical industry, given the necessity for standardization and approvals from
regulatory entities, new technologies are developed and implemented at a slower pace
than in other industries [1]. A report by McKinsey & Company [2] revealed that it ranks
only behind the public sector in the digital maturity index, being hugely outperformed by
other industries.
However, there is a significant acceleration in the evolution towards adopting Industry 4.0,
as COVID-19 has served as a catalyst for the adoption of automation technologies [1].
The advantages posed by the implementation of these tools are quite evident, as ramping
up manufacturing rates increases total revenue and reduces personnel costs.
The industry faces several drawbacks in implementing these technologies. One major
challenge is the significant integration efforts required, which is a common issue across all
industries. Additionally, the industry must adhere to Good Manufacturing Practice (GmP)
requirements imposed by regulatory authorities. This is particularly important because the
solutions implemented often interact with pharmaceutical products that are consumed by
the public or used in trial processes. Consequently, there are a plethora of manual tasks
which are not easily replaceable.
However, in the specific context of laboratories that are typical for research purposes,
certain procedures within the experimental process can be automated with the help of
stand-alone automation or robotics solutions.
NovoNordisk prides itself in the cross-
departmental implementation of these tools to increase efficiency and facilitate the worker’s
routines. With the wide adoption of robotics and new technologies alongside traditional
automation tools, manual tasks can be replaced without the tedious regulatory require-
ments faced in other areas of production or manufacturing.
Such is the case with the processes automated for this project, which are vial preparation
tasks for posterior experiments based on liquid color comparison.
1.1
Motivation
As it currently stands, the laboratory processes this project attempts to automate are per-
formed manually in an unnecessarily repetitive and monotonous manner. Such tasks
consist of decapping cylinder vials named Penfills (Figures A.1 and A.2) using a special-
ized tool (seen in Figure 1.1) to subsequently pour the liquid into another two bigger vials
(named Anton and Appearance).
Moreover, these cartridges are widely used across the organization besides these par-
ticular applications, which generates the demand for creating solutions able to decap the
vials by themselves and without any further processing.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Penfill decapping tool
On the other hand, pre-filled syringes (PFS), as seen in Figure A.3, are also used for
similar purposes, meaning that the liquid inside the vials needs to be extracted by pouring
it into the same vials referenced earlier. In this case, however, automation solutions have
been implemented to address the manual handling of these syringes within the company,
which will serve as inspiration for the solution presented in this paper.
These stand-alone solutions, which refer to the isolated and mono-purpose nature of the
product, are capable of processing PFS in bulk with the assistance of human workers
providing a rack filled with these vials. Anyhow, the efficiency and robustness of the
stand-alone automated solutions can be improved significantly.
1.2
Objectives
The objectives of this project are aligned with the motivations previously discussed, aiming
to address the repetitious and dull nature of the manual tasks performed in the laboratory.
By automating the decapping process for Penfills and merging it with the existing stand-
alone pre-filled syringe (PFS) units, the aim is to enhance productivity by reducing the
workload of laborants in the pharmaceutical industry.
The primary aim is to develop a robotic module that seamlessly integrates the function-
ality of the stand-alone PFS units with a solution for processing Penfills. This integration
will empower laboratory technicians to automate both decapping tasks as well as pouring
the vials’ liquid within a single module, providing them with a comprehensive automation
solution. To achieve this, the project will leverage the versatility and adaptability of a Uni-
versal Roots (UR) arm, which will be programmed to perform various actions necessary
to accomplish the desired outcomes.
In order to fulfill this objective, the robotic module will consist of multiple components
adjacent to the UR arm. These components will enable the execution of different sub-
tasks essential for the automation process.
Expressly, the solution will incorporate a dedicated sub-module equipped with decapping
functionalities for both Penfills and PFS.
Additionally, the project will entail the design and implementation of two other sub-modules
that serve as key components of the overall system. The first sub-module will provide a
designated area where the initial vials, both Penfills, and PFS, can be securely placed
before undergoing the decapping process. The second sub-module will serve as an output
unit where the initial vials’ liquid will be poured into the Anton or Appearance glasses,
ensuring their safekeeping until further use (see Figure 1.2). By incorporating these sub-
modules, the project aims to create a cohesive and integrated robotic system capable of
handling the complete workflow from vial placement to decapping and pouring.
2
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Complete robotic module, with intro sub-module (red), decapping sub-module
(yellow) and output sub-module (blue).
Beyond the immediate scope of the project, there is a broader objective to explore and
embrace the potential of laboratory automation. By studying current trends and advance-
ments in the field, this project contributes to the ongoing pursuit of a fully automated,
end-to-end laboratory paradigm.
Consequently, special attention will be given to the
integration of the developed solution within this larger framework, enabling a seamless
connection to other automated processes and fostering a more efficient and productive
laboratory environment.
1.3
Overview
This section will provide a structural summary of the remaining chapters:
• Chapter 2 delves into the current state-of-the-art research of the laboratory automa-
tion field and intricacies of the relevant niches within the sector, with the purpose
of establishing a solid foundation for the subjects and methods utilized in further
chapters.
• Chapter 3 details the exact methodologies followed during the development of this
project, focusing on the productivity practices established to ensure an efficient and
streamlined workflow across every participant in the project.
• Chapter 4 analyzes with further specificity the system and the challenges it poses,
detailing the exact requirements and prioritizing strategies followed to ensure a sat-
isfactory outcome for every stakeholder, which will also be discussed.
• Chapter 5 focuses on the mechanical components designed to achieve the stated
objectives, as well as the interaction with each other. Additionally, the complete pro-
totype will be presented and analyzed in detail via various validation methodologies.
• Chapter 6 describes the software architecture for the proposed solution, detailing
each layer as well as the integration with the mechanical design. Ultimately, a com-
prehensive review of each interaction of this multi-faceted solution is offered to form
a cohesive product.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
3
==PAGE:12==
• Chapter 7 contains the results and findings derived from the conducted tests, with
the intention to validate the design processes previously detailed and gain an un-
derstanding of the outcomes of the presented solution, highlighting the contributions
to the stated field of research.
• Chapter 8 serves as a reflection-focused space where the entirety of the project will
be scrutinized in the context of the current state of the industry, placing a spotlight
on the immediate and long-term improvements and considerations for the solution
offered.
• Chapter 9 concludes the paper by summarizing and highlighting the main aspects
and findings of this project, contextualizing the outcomes with the proposed objec-
tives and challenges.
4
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:13==
2
State of the art
In this chapter, the current research in robotic applications within the laboratory environ-
ment is explored, which has witnessed significant advancements in recent years, driven
by the growing demand for increased efficiency, accuracy, and reproducibility in various
scientific and industrial processes. Robotic systems have emerged as invaluable tools for
automating tasks in laboratory settings, enabling scientists and researchers to streamline
their workflows and achieve enhanced productivity.
Robotic applications in laboratory environments have revolutionized the way scientific re-
search and industrial processes are conducted. These applications encompass a wide
range of tasks, from sample handling to the discovery of new drugs, their production
and everything attached to it. By leveraging the capabilities of robotics, laboratories can
achieve higher precision, throughput, and consistency in their processes, ultimately lead-
ing to improved scientific outcomes and more efficient industrial operations.
Understanding the current landscape of robotic applications in the laboratory setting is es-
sential for identifying the gaps and opportunities for further advancements. In this chapter,
a comprehensive overview of the state of the art in this field is provided, highlighting the
key developments, trends, and challenges that shape the landscape of laboratory au-
tomation.
By exploring the diverse range of robotic applications in laboratory environments, we gain
insights into the specific tasks that can be automated using robotic modules. These mod-
ules offer precise and reliable performance, reducing the risk of human errors and en-
hancing overall experimental reproducibility. Gripping labware is another critical aspect
of laboratory automation, and advancements in this area have led to the development of
specialized end-effectors and grippers capable of safely manipulating delicate and irreg-
ularly shaped objects.
Efficient communication protocols and ”Plug and Play” solutions are emerging to ensure
seamless integration between robotic systems and other laboratory equipment or software
systems. Current solutions will be explored, the benefits offered by their implementation
will be discussed as well as future improvements and present shortcomings.
However, despite the progress made in laboratory automation using robotic systems,
there are still challenges and limitations to overcome. Technical constraints, regulatory
considerations, and cost implications are among the factors that need to be addressed
for wider adoption and further advancements in the field.
By gaining a comprehensive understanding of the state of the art in robotic applications
within the laboratory environment, we can identify the gaps and opportunities for further
research and development. This knowledge sets the stage for the subsequent chapters,
where an innovative robotic application in the laboratory setting will be presented, lever-
aging this collective wisdom to develop a novel solution for lab automation.
2.1
Robotic applications in laboratory environment
With the introduction of robotics in the setting of a laboratory in the early 1980’s via the
one-armed chemist [3] (see Figure 2.1) produced by Zymark Corp., as named by Forbes
magazine, the evolution of the field has rapidly advanced while integrating adjacent tech-
nologies along the way. A testament to this was the widespread adoption of the Zymate
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
5
==PAGE:14==
system, as 700 units were in place just four years after its release, making robotics the
fastest growing technology for laboratories [3].
Figure 2.1: Zymate
A depiction of the evolution of this revolutionary company through its early years up to
1993 can be found in a publication by M. Sasaki [4], where one can find certain building
blocks of the foundations upon which modern lab automation was built.
Robotic modules play a crucial role in automating specific tasks within the laboratory envi-
ronment. These modules are designed to perform precise and repetitive actions, reducing
the risk of human errors and enhancing overall experimental reproducibility. By exploring
the diverse range of robotic applications in laboratory environments, one gains insights
into the tasks that can be effectively automated using these modules.
One of the primary applications of robotic modules in the laboratory is sample handling.
Robotic arms equipped with specialized grippers can efficiently pick and place various
types of labware, such as microplates, test tubes, vials, and petri dishes. These modules
offer precise positioning and handling, ensuring consistent and accurate sample manipu-
lation. By automating sample handling, laboratories can significantly increase throughput
and reduce the time required for manual sample preparation, thereby improving overall
efficiency.
Liquid handling is another critical area where robotic modules have revolutionized labo-
ratory processes. Automated liquid handling systems can accurately dispense liquids in
precise volumes, eliminating variations caused by manual pipetting. These systems utilize
advanced technologies such as syringe pumps, peristaltic pumps, and air displacement
techniques to achieve high-precision liquid transfers. Robotic liquid handling modules en-
able the execution of complex protocols, such as serial dilutions, plate reformatting, and
cherry-picking, with minimal user intervention.
Moreover, integration with laboratory information management systems (LIMS) allows for
seamless tracking and documentation of liquid handling steps, enhancing data integrity
and traceability. In an article by Prasad et al. [5], the authors provide a history of the
development of LIMS, with its major technological milestones being depicted in Table 2.1.
In addition to sample and liquid handling, robotic modules are employed in various other
laboratory tasks. For instance, automated plate readers and imaging systems equipped
6
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.1: LIMS technological milestones
Year
Milestones in development of LIMS
1980–1995
In-house development of LIMS
1996–2002
Web enabled LIMS [6]
2004
LIMS model based on modern and open-source web-oriented software
technologies [7]
2010-
User-friendly focus and integrated data management solution
with robotic arms enable high-throughput screening and imaging of samples, facilitating
drug discovery, genomics, and proteomics research. Robotic modules can also be in-
tegrated with analytical instruments such as mass spectrometers, chromatographs, and
spectrophotometers, enabling automated sample preparation and analysis. These ad-
vancements in robotic modules have paved the way for increased productivity and effi-
ciency in a wide range of scientific and industrial applications.
The continuous development of robotic modules is driven by the need for higher preci-
sion, reliability, and versatility in laboratory automation. Ongoing research focuses on
improving the speed and accuracy of robotic movements, enhancing sensor integration
for real-time feedback, and expanding the range of tasks that can be automated. By
harnessing the capabilities of robotic modules, laboratories can achieve consistent and
efficient workflows, ultimately leading to improved scientific outcomes and accelerated
research and development processes.
2.1.1
Gripping labware
Gripping labware is a critical aspect of laboratory automation. Advancements in this area
have led to the development of specialized end-effectors and grippers capable of safely
manipulating delicate and irregularly shaped objects. Robotic grippers with adjustable
force and compliant mechanisms can adapt to different types of labware, ensuring secure
and damage-free handling. This flexibility in gripping technology allows robots to interact
with a variety of laboratory tools, such as pipettes, centrifuges, and microscopes, enabling
seamless integration and collaboration between robotic systems and existing laboratory
equipment.
In a review of gripper design processes for robotic applications, the authors M. Honarpar-
daz et al. [8] identify three distinct core categories for finger design processes, which
are:
• Grasp
• Finger design
• Experimental verification
Grasp refers to the way a robot holds an object, as it is crucial to design a robust grasp to
prevent task failure or damage to the parts involved. According to the author’s review [8],
there are two main types of grasps, form-closure and force-closure. The former refers to
the position of the fingers’ contacts on the workpiece fixes the object’s position in space
(see [9] for a detailed analysis), while the latter means that the fingers can resist the motion
of the workpiece by applying arbitrary wrenches (forces and moments) through the set of
contacts on the object. A complete analysis on form-closure grasps was carried out by H.
Liu et al. [10] and D. Ding et al. [11].
Informed by these publications, a classification breakdown of these terms can be seen in
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2
Figure 2.2: Grasp classification [8]
Focusing on finger design, grippers are the only mechanical interface between the robot
and its surrounding environment, making their design highly important to ensure the cor-
rect functioning of any robotic module.
When reviewing existing literature on design
methodology and variability, one can find many categories under which different fingers
can be classified. In the aforementioned review ([8]), a simple five-way classification is
proposed:
Figure 2.3: Finger design categorization [8]
Delving into multi-function fingers specifically, the research presents a scattered form
without any major concepts gaining widespread traction. The more insightful pieces of
literature are authored by M. Honarpardaz et al. [8] [12]. In the publication titled Finger
design automation for industrial robot grippers: A review [8], the authors also recommend
earlier work carried out by Velasco and Newman [13].
The article titled Fast finger de- sign automation for industrial robots [12] proposes a novel
methodology for designing multi-function fingers, the Generic Optimized Finger Design
(GOFD), which can be divided into four separate steps as seen in 2.4:
8
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: GOFD process flow
On the other hand, studies such as [14] base the design of fingers for robotic grippers on
a trial-and-error basis. This iterative process would start with analyzing the CAD models
of the parts to be grasped and grouping the maximum amount of features together to find
a satisfying design for these goal functionalities.
2.1.2
Human-Robot interaction
In the collaborative environment of robots and humans, it is paramount to implement effec-
tive human-robot interaction (HRI) mechanisms to ensure safe and efficient collaboration.
HRI plays a crucial role in laboratory automation, enabling scientists and researchers to
work alongside robotic systems safely and intuitively. According to Zhang et al. [15], it
can be defined as “a technique, which is used for controlling machines with human ac-
tivities” with the intention of “control, monitor, and collect data, and can also be used to
program the system”.
Various approaches are being explored to facilitate the natural interaction between hu-
mans and robots. One such approach is the development of advanced sensor technolo-
gies that enable robots to perceive and interpret human actions and intentions. These
sensors, including cameras, depth sensors, and force/torque sensors, provide real-time
feedback to the robot about the presence and movements of humans in the vicinity. This
information allows the robot to adapt its behavior accordingly, ensuring safe and collab-
orative operation. An example of such an approach was developed by Maurtua et al.
[16].
In addition to sensor technologies, advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) have significantly contributed to improving HRI in laboratory settings. AI
algorithms can enable robots to understand and respond to human commands, gestures,
and expressions, facilitating effective communication and collaboration, as in the case
of the Sherlock project [17]. ML techniques can be used to train robots to recognize and
predict human behavior, enhancing their ability to anticipate and respond to human needs
and intentions.
Furthermore, the design of robot interfaces and control systems plays a crucial role in
HRI. User-friendly interfaces that provide clear and intuitive instructions enable scientists
and researchers to interact with robots easily. These interfaces can range from graphical
user interfaces (GUIs) on computer screens to voice-based command systems or even
physical interfaces such as haptic devices. The goal is to create interfaces that minimize
the cognitive load on the user and allow for seamless control and monitoring of robotic
systems.
Wächter et al. [18] outline the key concepts for GUI design for their robotic application,
ArmarX:
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: ArmarX design pillars [17]
Another example is presented in the RAFCON GUI [19], a Python application developed to
intuitively design and implement robotic programs. Both examples presented offer more
advanced functionalities and capabilities in comparison to the standard Teach Pendants
that most industrial robots include. Figures 2.6 and 2.7 present an illustration of each:
Figure 2.6: RAFCON GUI screenshot, showing a simple state machine for a robotic task
[19]
10
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.7: Universal Robots Teach Pendant
Most applications in this field entail the design of an interface for human use, which opens
the door for User Experience (UX) principles frequently utilized for modern web and mo-
bile application development to be included and taken into account in the development
process.
2.2
Full laboratory automation
In the ever-evolving landscape of laboratory automation, the integration of advanced
robotics and smart technologies has brought forth a new era of possibilities. This section
explores the fascinating realm of robotic applications within the laboratory environment,
focusing on the concept of Laboratory 4.0.
Prior to discussing its applications, it is essential to understand the evolution and princi-
ples that gave rise to Industry 4.0, as they share the same building blocks and pursuit of
digitization through modern technologies. which can be understood as a paradigm shift in
manufacturing and industrial processes driven by advancements in digital technologies.
Industry 4.0 is built upon the foundations of mechanization (Industry 1.0), mass produc-
tion (Industry 2.0), and automation (Industry 3.0) by incorporating IoT concepts, with the
purpose of enhancing productivity, efficiency, and flexibility in manufacturing operations
by leveraging these new technologies.
The recent nature of this field of research results in a lack of established guidelines and
terminology, as many other design principles arise when discussing the fundamentals of
Industry 4.0.
Enabling this revolution are fast-rising technologies with considerable potential. A liter-
ature review carried out by Ting Zheng et al. [20] suggests these are the technologies
driving and facilitating innovation:
• Cyber-physical systems (CPS): These transformative technologies connect physical
assets with computational capabilities, allowing for real-time monitoring and creating
virtual replicas of physical systems. CPS can improve operational efficiency and
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
11
==PAGE:20==
enable advanced analytics for decision-making [21].
• Internet of Things (IoT): An interconnected network of physical objects, such as
sensors, machines, and buildings, that can collect and exchange data. IoT enables
intelligent monitoring, automation, and coordination of various devices, leading to
improved productivity and enhanced services [22].
• Big data and analytics (BDA): The process of collecting, analyzing, and deriving in-
sights from large volumes of diverse data. BDA techniques, such as data filtering,
capture, and reporting, enable organizations to gain valuable insights for optimiz-
ing processes, improving customer experiences, and making data-driven decisions
[23].
• Cloud technology: Online storage and computing services that provide flexible and
scalable resources. Cloud technology eliminates the need for physical infrastruc-
ture, reduces costs, and enables seamless access to applications, programs, and
data from anywhere [24].
• Artificial intelligence (AI): An area of computer science focused on creating intelligent
systems that can perform tasks requiring human-like intelligence. AI encompasses
technologies like natural language processing, knowledge representation, machine
learning, and computer vision. AI enables automation, predictive analytics, and
intelligent decision-making [25].
• Blockchain: A decentralized and tamper-proof digital ledger that records transac-
tions across multiple participants.
Blockchain technology ensures transparency,
security, and trust in various applications, including supply chain management, fi-
nancial transactions, and digital identity verification [26].
• Simulation and modeling: Techniques that replicate real-world data and scenarios in
virtual environments. Simulation and modeling allow organizations to simulate and
test complex systems, optimize designs, and evaluate performance before imple-
mentation. It helps in reducing costs and risks associated with physical prototypes
[26].
• Visualization technology (augmented and virtual reality): Augmented Reality (AR)
and Virtual Reality (VR) are interactive technologies that enhance human perception
and interaction with the virtual world. AR overlays digital information onto the real
environment, while VR creates immersive virtual experiences. These technologies
have applications in training, design, visualization, and enhancing user experiences
[27].
• Automation and industrial robots: Machinery and robots that automate operational
processes, reducing manual labor, increasing efficiency, and improving produc-
tivity. Collaborative Robotics involves humans and robots working together in a
shared workspace, combining their respective strengths for enhanced productivity
and safety [28].
• Additive manufacturing (AM): Also known as 3D printing, it is a process of creating
objects by adding successive layers of material based on digital models. AM en-
ables rapid prototyping, customization, and the production of complex shapes with
reduced material waste. It has revolutionized manufacturing processes in various
industries [29].
Having established the basis for Industry 4.0, a special focus will be placed on laboratory
12
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:21==
automation and the topic of Laboratory 4.0, which follows similar principles and technolo-
gies as the ones detailed above, as is described by G. Gauglitz [30].
Lab 4.0 envisions a network of laboratory elements encompassing processes, data anal-
ysis, equipment integration, and extensive data collection. It strives to create an efficient,
intelligent laboratory environment that facilitates quality assurance and digitization of lab
processes. An illustrative example is the central labs in hospitals, where analytical equip-
ment is arranged along a conveyor belt, allowing bar-coded samples to be examined—a
preliminary glimpse into Lab 4.0 concepts inspired by Industry 3.0.
Traditionally, laboratory information management systems (LIMS) have played a vital role
in controlling instruments and collecting data. However, the evolution of LIMS has grad-
ually expanded to encompass modern aspects of chemoinformatics, workflow manage-
ment, and data tracking. Despite these advancements, challenges remain, such as limited
instrument cross-talk and compatibility issues between different instruments and software.
In recent years, efforts to integrate diverse pieces of equipment have resulted in the
creation of laboratory process scheduling software which, combined with state-of-the-
art communication protocol technologies, are able to create customized workflows by
successfully managing and operating equipment from any origin. Moreover, by offering
standardized interfaces, these software platforms are able to enhance and facilitate the
operator’s experience.
Exploring the current market, one can find many providers with wide-ranging function-
alities and rich interfaces that enable the aforementioned processes, such as Green-
ButtonGo [31] and niceLAB [32]. These schedulers also provide real-time monitoring
and tracking of samples, allowing researchers and laboratory personnel to stay informed
about the progress and status of each experiment. By integrating with laboratory infor-
mation management systems (LIMS) and other data management tools, it is possible to
automatically capture and organize all experimental results.
On the other hand, this approach presupposes the existence of Application Programming
Interfaces (API) for each device to be controlled or operated. In cases where this is not
possible due to limited available technology, Robotic Process Automation (RPA) scripts
enable the automation of multi-device interactions, as was achieved in the work of Xi-
anghua Chu et al.[33].
Lab 4.0 proposes a paradigm shift by digitizing laboratory processes and leveraging the
communication capabilities of instruments. It seeks to establish standardized protocols,
enabling seamless connectivity and interaction among instruments. With this approach,
fully automated laboratory activities become possible, fostering quality assurance and
reliable data throughput. Standardized interfaces facilitate the combination of diverse
instruments and the integration of both centralized and decentralized laboratories. Fur-
thermore, complex data evaluation and trend analyses can be performed efficiently.
To realize the vision of Lab 4.0, efforts are being made to standardize interfaces, data
formats, and communication protocols, which will be discussed in the coming sections.
2.2.1
Communication protocols
In the context of laboratory automation, communication protocols play a crucial role in
enabling seamless integration and interoperability among various devices produced by
different vendors. This section delves into the importance of standardizing communication
protocols and provides a review of the current state of literature on different protocols.
In a fully automated laboratory, where multiple devices and systems are involved, such as
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
13
==PAGE:22==
robotic arms, analytical instruments, and data management systems, effective communi-
cation becomes essential. However, a major challenge arises when these devices come
from different manufacturers, each employing their own proprietary communication proto-
cols. This lack of standardized communication hampers the integration of these devices,
limiting the potential for a truly autonomous and interconnected laboratory environment.
Standardizing communication between devices produced by different vendors holds sig-
nificant benefits for laboratory automation. Firstly, it promotes compatibility and ensures
that devices from different manufacturers can seamlessly communicate and exchange
data. This allows laboratories to choose the best devices for their specific needs without
being restricted by vendor-specific limitations.
Moreover, standardized communication protocols enhance flexibility and scalability. Lab-
oratories can easily expand their automated systems by adding new devices or replacing
outdated ones, as long as they adhere to the established protocols. This flexibility em-
powers laboratories to adapt to evolving research needs and technological advancements
without incurring significant costs or disruptions.
To address the challenge of standardization, the scientific community and industry have
undertaken initiatives to establish common communication protocols. These protocols
define the rules and formats for exchanging data and commands between devices, pro-
moting compatibility and interoperability.
A review of the current state of literature reveals several notable communication protocols
employed in laboratory automation. Some widely adopted protocols include SiLA (Stan-
dardization in Lab Automation) and OPC UA (Open Platform Communication – Unified Ar-
chitecture). SiLA aims to simplify integration between platforms from different providers,
facilitating data exchange across instruments and systems. OPC-UA, on the other hand,
is a significantly more complex framework for secure and reliable communication in in-
dustrial automation, including laboratory applications, with a plethora of functionalities to
go along with it.
By standardizing communication protocols, laboratories can overcome the challenges
posed by device heterogeneity and vendor-specific interfaces. The adoption of common
protocols enables efficient data exchange, system integration, and collaboration across
different laboratory automation solutions, ultimately paving the way for a fully automated
and interconnected laboratory environment.
The following sections will delve deeper into the characteristics and specificities of differ-
ent communication protocols and explore their applications in laboratory automation.
SiLA
SiLA is an open-source standard for laboratory automation, developed and maintained
by a collaborative community of scientists, engineers, and industry professionals who
contribute to its ongoing improvement and advancement while ensuring vendor neutrality.
Built upon server-client relations, SiLA provides a structure to define the functionalities and
features of each device that are to be triggered on command. SiLA Servers are composed
of SiLA Features exposing the functionalities, data and capabilities of any device, while
SiLA Clients serve as the user interface or control interface for interacting with SiLA-
compliant devices or servers.
Features can be interpreted as the API definition of a server, where the commands and
properties that said features are defined in Extensive Markup Language (XML) files. When
14
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:23==
these files are processed, code is automatically generated to translate the XML descrip-
tion into the language of the developer’s choice.
The result of this architecture is a simple and generalized framework enabling developers
to create definitions for any device in a standardized and neutral form, creating a path for
unification across the industry.
In terms of the intricacies of the technology behind the software framework, the commu-
nication between SiLA clients and servers is enabled by Google Remote Procedure Call
(gRPC)
gRPC is an open-source high-performance remote procedure call (RPC) framework origi-
nally developed by Google to enabling efficient communication between client and server
applications in a distributed system environment. Built upon the HTTP/2 protocol as its un-
derlying transport mechanism, gRPC leverages Protocol Buffers to describe the structure
and interfaces of the API.
gRPC offers language-independent bindings, allowing developers to generate client and
server code in various programming languages, such as C++, Java, Python, Go, and
more. With its support for bidirectional streaming and efficient serialization, gRPC facili-
tates the development of fast and scalable distributed systems.
The SiLA standard also includes the development of the SiLA Universal Client (UC), a
SiLA-compliant User Interface (UI) capable of executing and monitoring the implemented
features of any server by establishing secure connections to them via complex API inter-
faces.
By offering a user-friendly solution, non-technical customers can operate complex de-
vices, as the features exposed to the interface incorporate detailed explanations and de-
scriptions for the commands and properties associated with them, all of which are enabled
by adhering to the SiLA standard. Automation devices such as robotic arms often provide
custom solutions to enable their operation, but developing SiLA drivers would unify the
experience for non-technical users.
Furthermore, the SiLA UC being an open-source project enables individual development,
which results in allowing users to tailor the interface to their specific requirements. It
provides flexibility in terms of layout, visualizations, and data representations, enabling
users to optimize their workflow and enhance their productivity.
As for the current state and future objectives of SiLA, the standard is actively used and
implemented in various laboratory automation projects worldwide. The SiLA community
continues to enhance the standard by developing new features and extending its capabil-
ities. The SiLA community is focused on expanding the library of SiLA-compliant devices,
including Servers and Features, enabling integration with a broader range of laboratory
devices and workflows. For example, there is a growing emphasis on implementing SiLA-
compliant pick and place capabilities, which are essential for automated sample handling
and robotic systems.
Overall, SiLA offers a promising solution for laboratory automation, providing a standard-
ized framework for device integration, data management, and scalability. With ongoing
development and a growing community, SiLA is expected to play a significant role in
shaping the future of Lab 4.0 and advancing the digitization and efficiency of laboratory
processes.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
15
==PAGE:24==
2.2.2
Plug and Play solutions
As previously mentioned, the long-term objectives in laboratory automation include achiev-
ing a process free of human intervention. In order to reach this ambitious goal, the industry
must tackle the challenges present in the current state of laboratory automation. This sec-
tion will focus on describing a specific framework developed with this exact intention, the
Laboratory Plug & Play (LAPP) solution [34].
The LAPP framework envisions an end-to-end automated laboratory, specifically with
R&D laboratories rather than batch-producing laboratories. Mobile Manipulators (MoMa)
will be required in order to manipulate labware and transport it between static devices such
as the one described in this project. To overcome the limitations stated in the previous
sections, the author proposes a solution to seamlessly integrate devices and machines
from different vendors.
Each device will display its information via a bar-code in a visible place where any MoMa
with the appropriate sensors can read its content, which will be related to its functionalities,
capabilities, and general information about the machine.
In an attempt to tackle the concerns related to precision and localization, multiple fidu-
cial markers would be placed around the laboratory and on the different devices present
inside, displaying relevant poses for the MoMa (see [35] for a comparison on multiple
markers). For example, ArUco markers are widely used for this exact purpose in similar
applications regarding mobile robots, see [36] and [37]. These were invented in 2014 by
the University of Cordoba, Spain [38], with the capability of conveying poses in an environ-
ment with multiple frames of reference with the ultimate purpose of the reader gathering
sufficient information to reach the stated pose. In relation to the LAPP framework, fiducial
markers would be placed on each device, transferring all the relevant poses the MoMa
should be aware of.
The process flow defining the LAPP framework can be described as follows, according to
[34] (seen in Figure 2.8):
1. Firstly, the MoMa will generate a map of the laboratory using cutting-edge tech-
niques such as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), used to generate
digital representations of a physical space based on data gathered from sensors on
a mobile robot.
2. The barcode on the device is detected, and the MoMa gathers the information from
the barcode via the integrated vision system.
3. The barcode identification details are uploaded to the scheduler.
4. Scheduler requests the device’s details from a cloud database, linking the barcode
identification uploaded to the corresponding device information.
5. A digital twin of the device gets initiated via the same cloud database.
6. Constant updates are uploaded to the digital twin with the help of the scheduler
software.
7. The appropriate commands are sent to the device, fulfilling its main functionality.
8. At the same time, the MoMa is controlled by the same software, receiving the signal
to perform the corresponding actions.
9. The autonomous robot navigates the pre-processed environment mapping and op-
erates the devices.
16
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.8: Complete LAPP process flow representation
An integrated system capable of performing each step would require no external inter-
vention, which becomes especially useful when it comes to the often high equipment
integration efforts seen in the industry, as has been mentioned before.
2.3
Emerging trends
This section will delve into new trends and technologies that are being adopted in the
realm of laboratory automation. The overall narrative described so far is the movement
towards end-to-end automation in this particular setting of the laboratory, without any hu-
man intervention required and fully equipped with monitoring capabilities and the highest
degree of modularity possible to facilitate the arrival of new devices or equipment.
However, there are two noteworthy components that need further discussion in this con-
text. The first one arises from the modularity aspect of a certain device. Complications
may arise if all devices integrated in the system include hard-coded programs for how to
operate in a particular environment, as it is often the case that the labware required for one
specific operation changes or is modified in time. As such, the more accurate approach
is keeping a certain degree of decoupling in the main programs of devices to ensure their
correct functioning with multiple types of labware, varying in size or specifications.
On the other hand, in previous sections the notion of a digital twin has been mentioned,
there are many implementations of this concept possible, which will be explored and dis-
cussed further.
2.3.1
Labware Ontology
Ontologies are formal representations of knowledge, used to define concepts along with
their attributes and properties. In the context of lab automation, a labware ontology pro-
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
17
==PAGE:26==
vides a standardized and structured representation of laboratory equipment and its char-
acteristics. It captures information such as the type of equipment, its specifications, ca-
pabilities, operating parameters, interfaces, and relationships with other labware entities.
The labware ontology helps in achieving interoperability and compatibility between dif-
ferent lab automation systems and instruments. It allows for seamless integration and
communication between software applications and laboratory equipment by providing a
common understanding of the labware entities and their functionalities.
The potential use cases for this framework are as follows:
• Labware management: Labware can be stored in a labware management system.
• Labware identification: Labware can be identified by a barcode.
• Labware tracking: Labware can be tracked through the different steps of an exper-
iment.
• Labware documentation: Labware can be documented with a picture, a description,
a link to a protocol, etc.
• Labware interoperability: Check a certain labware fit into a specific instrument or
device.
• Labware recommendation: A LIMS system can recommend labware based on the
desired experiment.
A notable community actively working to standardize this exchange of information is the
Biological Protocols Working Group [39], having developed a free and open standard for
the representation of biological protocols, which has been named the Laboratory Open
Protocol language or LabOP.
A noteworthy property of labware ontology is integration with other frameworks, most no-
tably SiLA. When coupled together, management systems can make use of standardized
commands or workflows designed to retrieve specific data from available labware for any
specific purpose, enabling the management of that data to dynamically operate the de-
vices or machinery seen in a particular lab environment.
An example of a framework intending to integrate the LabOP standard with SiLA is being
developed by Mark Doerr [40], leveraging the micro-services provided by SPARQL end-
points by querying the labware ontology and a SiLA server with the ultimate purpose of
furthering lab automation processes.
2.3.2
Device digital twin
The last component of this paradigm of total laboratory automation is the integration of a
digital twin for all devices present in a specific environment.
First introduced by NASA [41], the technology of a Digital Twin (DT) can be described
as a virtual representation of a physical laboratory or its components, processes, and
workflows. It combines real-time data from sensors, instruments, and other sources with
advanced analytics and modeling capabilities to create a virtual replica or simulation of
the environment attempted to replicate.
With the addition of DTs, operators and developers can monitor the behaviour and perfor-
mance of any device placed in the laboratory environment. Moreover, when bi-directional
communication is implemented, the initialization of testing and optimization operations is
enabled.
18
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:27==
The general application of a DT is accompanying a product or device through its entire
life cycle, being fed key data and parameters from the device to be replicated. A literature
review conducted by Jones et al. The author Jones et al. [42] remarks the following
elements as key components in DTs across the industry:
• Form: Geometric structure and dimensions of the entity, including wear and toler-
ances.
• Functionality: Movement and purpose of the entity, including control and machine
parameters.
• Health: Actual state of the entity compared to its ideal state, analyzed and managed.
• Location: Geographic position of the entity, including layouts and manufacturing.
• Process: Activities the entity is engaged in, including scheduling parameters and
logistics.
• Time: Duration of activities and timeliness, including idle/working time and expo-
sure.
• State: Measured state of the entity and its environment, including completeness
and processes.
• Performance: Measured operation of the entity compared to its optimal operation.
• Environment: Physical and virtual surroundings in which the entity exists.
• Miscellaneous Qualitative: Non-measurable information, such as product orders,
requirements, and employee qualifications.
These components form the foundation of a DT, providing a comprehensive representa-
tion of the entity and its associated data throughout its lifecycle. By incorporating these
key elements, DTs enable enhanced monitoring, analysis, and optimization of the entity’s
performance, leading to improved decision-making and operational efficiency.
The authors of the LAPP framework continue their work focusing on DTs in laboratory
automation [43], more specifically in the framework described in Section 2.2.2
The LAPP DT enables the automation of laboratory robot setup, from map generation to
coordinate frame transformations. Positions are defined in relation to a marker frame in
Cartesian space, allowing for the robot-independent implementation of movements and
facilitating position sharing among multiple robots. The vendor of the laboratory device
is responsible for including the marker in the device’s design, and specific parameters
related to functionality, location, geometry, and precision requirements are provided as
part of the DT prototype. The DT instance may also be calibrated and adjusted to account
for deviations in device geometry.
Hence, an example of a pick and place task is detailed by referencing Figure 2.9:
1. The operator drives the robot to the station and makes sure the marker is in the
camera’s field of view.
2. This pose of the mobile robot is stored as a point of interest (PoI) with the station’s
name T0(w →PPoI).
3. The vision system determines the transformation from the camera frame to the
marker frame: T1(c →m).
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
19
==PAGE:28==
4. The operator moves the arm to the hand-over position so that the TCP and the site
coordinate systems align: T2(g = s).
5. Based on the robot kinematics model, the relation between the camera frame and
the TCP (T3(c →g)) is determined.
6. The relation between the marker and the hand-over site is calculated: T4(m →s).
Figure 2.9: Coordinate system transformations for a mobile robot and passive device pick
and place task [34]
Overall, the implementation of the digital twin allows for the autonomous setup of labora-
tory robots and plug-and-play functionality, minimizing the need for manual intervention.
20
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:29==
3
Methodologies
This chapter will delve into the methodologies used to develop this project in an efficient
manner, ensuring a prosperous workflow and enabling an iterative, and incremental, de-
velopment process. The main project management tools discussed are Agile and, specifi-
cally, Scrum methodologies, as they represent the greater part of the strategies employed
throughout.
The Agile framework emphasizes close collaboration between team members, customer
involvement, and iterative development cycles. It aims to deliver functional and stable
versions of the product regularly, ensuring continuous improvement and customer satis-
faction [44]. Furthermore, Agile also focuses on task distribution among team members,
establishing constant communication in order to support the project in all regards and
phases.
Within the Agile framework, the Scrum methodology is implemented to manage the au-
tomation project. Scrum is a widely adopted framework that provides a structured ap-
proach to project management and promotes efficient teamwork [45].
The development team is usually organized into cross-functional and self-organizing Scrum
teams, consisting of individuals with diverse skills relevant to the project’s objectives.
These teams collaborate closely throughout the project, fostering effective communica-
tion, knowledge sharing, and collective decision-making.
As part of this framework, several Scrum ceremonies are conducted throughout the de-
velopment process [45], in which a few crucial aspects are discussed:
• Sprint Planning: Before each sprint, the team holds a planning session to determine
the sprint goals, select user stories or backlog items to be worked on, and estimate
the effort required for each task.
• Daily Stand-up Meetings: The team gathers daily for brief stand-up meetings to
discuss progress, identify any impediments or challenges, and coordinate their ac-
tivities. This promotes transparency, alignment, and rapid issue resolution.
• Sprint Review: At the end of each sprint, a review session is held to demonstrate
the completed work to stakeholders and gather feedback. This allows for regular
evaluation of the product’s features and facilitates timely adjustments based on user
input.
• Sprint Retrospective: Following the sprint review, the team conducts a retrospective
meeting to reflect on the sprint’s outcomes, identify areas for improvement, and
discuss strategies to enhance the development process in subsequent sprints.
The development team (author and supervisor) held recurring weekly meetings in which
the agenda included the bullet points listed above: the first items to always be discussed
were the retrospective review of the past week’s sprint and its results, followed by a sprint
planning where the next week’s tasks would be detailed and defined.
Additionally, during the planning phase of the development, the other faction of the stake-
holders, i.e. laboratory technicians and scientists, were called for meetings in which the
requirements and priorities defined in 4.3 were discussed. Thereon after, biweekly meet-
ings were intended to be held to update the stakeholders and receive their valuable feed-
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
21
==PAGE:30==
back, modifying the route if necessary or making any additions as well as removals from
the initially planned tasks. However, due to availability limitations, among others, these
meetings were not held with the planned regularity.
Parallel to it, one-on-one interviews were conducted on a sparse basis where the software
prototypes were discussed with technicians, as a discussion informed by the Thinking
Aloud methodology ensued [46]. This method enables the user to go through the interface
as well as the robotic process and its features while voicing their desired actions and inner
thoughts, with the purpose of the user being able to highlight areas to improve as well as
any additional features that should be considered for integrating into the product.
In terms of tasks division, while most of the designing and software development was
carried out by the author, some specialized teams were in charge of secondary tasks such
as 3D printing, validating mechanical designs proposed by the main developer (author), or
creating the necessary documentation for electrical circuitry found in some components.
Moreover, valuable insight from experienced colleagues was also gathered throughout
the development process, as is the case in many design choices presented in Chapter 5.
The development team concluded that the aggregate of all these methodologies greatly
contribute to the success of the project, as the purposes that these tools set out to achieve,
such as streamlining development and creating an effective communication pipeline, were
fulfilled. It is worth mentioning, however, that the design methodology for mechanical
parts, especially the fingers described in Section 5.1, have been left out of this section as
it relates greatly to the methodologies specific to such field and described previously in
Subsection 2.1.1.
22
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:31==
4
System analysis
This chapter will dive into the system from a user-oriented perspective, outlining the main
requirements as well as prioritizing the tasks to carry out and describing the resulting use
cases.
The approach on which this project relies is an Agile framework [44], implemented through-
out its duration and the different stages of development. Consequently, the stakeholder’s
input will be highly regarded and gathered on a frequent basis, ensuring the alignment of
priorities and end-result expectations. As previously mentioned, the availability of some
of these stakeholders was not conducive to the stated goal, devolving in insufficient and
scarce feedback compared to initial standards. Consequently, the limited feedback was
highly valued and taken into account to the highest possible degree.
4.1
Stakeholders
The roles adjacent to this project can be divided into two groups: users and system main-
tenance/developers.
The first type of role is attributed to non-technical laboratory technicians whose day-to-
day work is the main target to be automated and facilitated through the proposed solution.
Assuming the successful implementation of the project described in this report, the system
operators will make use of the robotic module to aid in the daily tasks and improve their
efficiency significantly. This group will be actively involved in the development phase
as well as the testing, given that their feedback, as primary users of the tool, will be of
significant importance for tuning the project to the specific needs and requirements.
On the other hand, automation engineers can take the lead in the development of this
project taking into account the work described in Section 8.1 as well as previous sections,
aiming for the concept of full laboratory automation as described in Subsection 2.2.2.
The input received from automation developers will also be taken into account in order
to ensure the prosperity and scalability of the system in the future as well as facilitate the
development process or any required maintenance.
Lastly, apart from the two roles, the department this system is aimed for will see benefits in
terms of job automation and efficiency, which entails solving new challenges and creating
a product with great potential in the future of laboratory automation. Specifically, designing
solutions for particular sub-tasks such as modelling fingertips for multiple purposes or
merging both PFS and Penfill solutions has the potential to offer great value.
4.2
Requirements overview
As mentioned before, the motivation behind this project is the need to handle two different
types of vials to conduct experiments on the liquid inside them. Starting with the pre-filled
syringes (PFS for short), which are comprised of a protective cap and a plunger at its
end that can be pushed to extract the liquid inside, or removed to expose it and allow its
extraction via the use of a pipette.
Thus, the first challenge for this project is devising a strategy to draw the fluid out. There
are 4 different types of PFS the system should be able to handle, which, while quite similar,
differ in sizing and, most relevantly, in the dimensions of the cap protecting the needle.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
23
==PAGE:32==
On the other hand, Penfills are a type of cylindrical cartridge containing 1.5ml or 3ml
of liquid, depending on the size of the vial, which will only differ in length. Whilst the
liquid found in both PFS and Penfills is contained with a protective cap, in the case of the
latter the force required to extract it is significantly higher, to the point where a special
tool is needed to achieve this manually, unlike the former. Consequently, the system
must include a different solution capable of performing this task independently of PFS.
Technical drawings for this labware can be found in Figures A.3 and A.1, A.2
As such, the system’s main objective is two-fold: extracting the protective cap for both
categories of vials and transferring their liquid into another container. When it comes to
these output vials where the fluid will be poured into, they can present two distinctive
shapes depending on the resulting experiment to be conducted with the liquids inside
PFS and Penfills.
These experiments are called Anton and Appearance, and the corresponding vials for
each method will follow the same nomenclature. As can be observed in the technical
drawings for these vials, despite both of them presenting a cylindrical shape, they differ
in both length and diameter. Hence, the solution must be able to dynamically adjust to
achieve the same results for different output vials.
Moreover, the final product developed should be able to extract the cap of the Penfills and
return them to the same rack they were picked from without extracting its liquid, which
poses its own complications as will be discussed in future chapters.
In terms of hardware, the robot arm used for this project is the model UR3e from Universal
Robots. The reasoning behind this decision is spatial constraints: given its relatively
small size compared to other models from the same brand, it can be utilized within the
limited space provided inside of the lab to fit the solution. Every robotic arm possesses a
surrounding tolerance area that it can not reach due to joint restraints, as collisions among
different joints would arise.
The arm will be standing on top of an 80x80x85.1cm Technicon table, which is specifically
designed for the robot arm used for this project. The final piece of indispensable hardware
is the glass container surrounding the robotic module, which will significantly reduce the
risks of accidental injuries when manual interaction is necessary from technicians.
Given that the solution does not implement a vision system, it is required for an external
user to explicitly communicate the number of vials that the system must process per run.
As such, a User Interface is necessary to act as an intermediary in the process.
4.3
MoSCow prioritization
Conversations with the stakeholders, mainly with end-users, were held during the initial
phase of the project. The objective of these first meetings was to determine the scope
of the project, lay out the specific tasks it must be able to accomplish as well as any
additional features that could be useful. Distilling the entirety of the project into smaller
sub-tasks was key in establishing a clear vision of the task to solve, along with the overall
scope of the project.
This prioritization process can be encapsulated in the MoSCow framework, which can be
defined as a project management tool used to organize and categorize the requirements
for a specific project [47]. These categories are described below:
• Must-have refers to items that are indispensable and non-negotiable for the project
to achieve its primary goals.
24
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:33==
• Should-have indicates those requirements that would provide great impact and value,
despite not being essential.
• Could have encompasses all features that while providing some value, serve only
as compliments to the main work.
• Will not have represents initiatives that are not feasible to implement regardless of
the added value to the overall product.
With the theoretical framework established, the following Figure 4.1 categorizes the main
features and functionalities using the aforementioned scale:
Decapping PFS
Decapping Penfills
Pooling liquid into Anton and
Appearance
Process all type of vials
simultaniously
Operating driver
Must have
Custom UI
SiLA integration
Configure only decapping
program
Integration of advanced
decapping tools
Should have
Could have
Will not have
Labware ontology
Process HPLC vials
LAPP integration
Custom scheduler
Data-reading capabilities
GxP readiness
LIMS API
Figure 4.1: MoSCow prioritization chart
As can be observed in the figure above, the non-negotiable items are those that com-
pose the main program described in Section 4.2, as it is the main purpose of this project.
Consequent meetings revealed that laboratory technicians would also benefit greatly from
an only-decapping program, which entails further analysis, design and challenges to be
tackled. The UI, while not indispensable, it provides great value to the overall project in
terms of integration with the other components (SiLA for example).
While decapping vials is essential, incorporating advanced tools to increase efficiency is
not, even if it provides significant value.
As far as the labware ontology paradigm, it would unlock great potential only if the module
is integrated with advanced frameworks such as LAPP (see 2.2.2), which could be of use
further down the line. Its potential cannot be understated, even though technicians will
not be affected in the short or medium term.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
25
==PAGE:34==
Finally, for these same reasons, applying the complete LAPP framework is unfeasible
with the technology available in the department, as well as the time constraints of this
project. Similarly, a custom scheduler would provide some value in saving money from
buying software from outside providers. However, it would prove to be a hard assign-
ment to develop, maintain and integrate in a cohesive manner with the devices already
existing around the organization. Time constraints are also to blame for not incorporat-
ing data-reading capabilities, as it would enable real-time tracking of specific samples
and integrating the system with LIMS software. It would entail, however, a need for GxP
approval and rigorous testing and validation that can not be accomplished for the time
being.
4.4
Use cases
From the perspective of the end-users, which will be mainly laboratory technicians, the
developed custom interface will be the main tool utilized to operate the system. As has
been mentioned, two different use cases are present: running the whole system to pool
the vial’s liquid into different glasses or only decapping Penfills. The only difference as it
concerns these actors is which trays to fill and the way it should be done, meaning which
pattern should they follow to place the vials in order for the system to function correctly.
Both programs can be encapsulated in the following diagram 4.2, representing the pro-
cess flow of the system with detailed steps.
While this represents the system’s functionality from the manipulator side, the software
required to operate the entire robotic module and the working flow necessary to properly
utilize it is not depicted in the diagram below, as it will be explained in the following sections
of this report.
26
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:35==
Input tray gets filled
with vials
Run is executed
through UI
No
Yes
Is the sample a PFS?
Use Penfill de-capper
to extract vial cap
Use PFS de-capper
to extract vial cap
No
Re-grip Penfill
Draw support tray via
actuator
Place vial and pour
liquid
Withdraw support tray
via actuator
Move to position and
push syringe
No
Yes
Input tray empty?
Extract output tray
Return to input tray
Yes
Only decapping?
Figure 4.2: Detailed process flowchart
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:37==
5
Mechanical solution
In order to solve the task defined in the previous section, a tailored solution with multiple
working parts must be designed and tested. Given the millimetric precision required to
analyze the feasibility of each component, CAD software will be used to design each part
to fulfil the requirements, alongside an assembly of all the parts to visualize their overall
integration.
Among all the possibilities, SolidWorks was deemed to be a satisfactory option due to
the author’s previous experience working with the software. An overview of the complete
working station can be seen in figure 5.1, presenting a CAD replica. Dividing the module
into four distinct sections depending on its intended purpose, one will find the robot arm
with a gripper and proprietary fingers (1), designed exclusively and meticulously for this
module, an input station (2) where the user will place a rack containing all the vials that
are to be processed by the UR arm, a decapping station (3) responsible for extracting
the caps from the vials and, lastly, an output section (4) where the liquid from the vials
will be poured into. A complete breakdown of each component will ensue in the following
sections, where each feature will be defined and examined.
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.1: Full assembly
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
29
==PAGE:38==
5.1
Gripper and fingers
Before examining the fingers, the gripper used for this project must be examined in order
to understand their design.
There are a few requirements the gripper must adhere to in order to achieve a successful
outcome, which come in the form of:
• Compactness: additional physical constraints coming from the gripper should be
avoided.
• Integration difficulty: must be equipped with special software that allows easy inte-
gration with UR arms.
• Stroke, which should not be a limiting factor when designing the rest of the assembly.
The Gripkit Pro-L from Weiss Robotics offers great specifications when it comes to the
aforementioned factors as well as a sufficient gripping force for the tasks at hand. Tech-
nical drawings can be seen in A.5.
Having defined the gripper used for this application, the fingers attached to the gripper
are to be examined, which is the most critical part of the entire assembly, as it defines
constraints and design parameters for all other parts.
The starting point for their design is the dual functionality of gripping both types of vials,
Penfills and PFS, as it constitutes the most essential part of the operation. However, one
must also take into consideration the method of extraction of the liquid inside of each vial
in relation to the shape and the different possibilities for gripping.
On one hand, PFS (seen in figure A.3) offers a gripping surface at the top without the need
for an actuating motor to hold onto it, as it can be held with a fixed structure. As a result,
the motor from the gripper is free to be utilized for other purposes. As a drawback, there
will be some stability concerns when using an open-ended and fixed part to grip, since it
provides no compensating force for accelerating motions from the manipulator arm.
Consequently, the fingers will also incorporate a pushing rod simulating the movement of
the thumb when using a syringe to inject the liquid, which in conjunction with the fixed sy-
ringe holder will employ the gripper’s actuator to push the thumb into the vial and reverse.
On the other hand, Penfills (see Figure A.1) display no protuberant surface which could be
used analogously. Thus, the gripper’s actuator must be used to grip each vial by the use
of force. Whilst the PFS’ liquid can be extracted via the same gripper part, the Penfill’s
requires an additional structure to drive a similar rod into the vial to achieve the same
outcome, as the gripper is already in use. This process will be explained in the output
section.
Additionally, there are other factors impacting the design of the fingers, such as the decap-
ping process. As has been explained before, both vials present different types of caps
that need to be removed in order to expose the liquid inside. The difference in shape
and force required for each one makes the implementation of different solutions for Pen-
fills and PFS a necessity. As far as it impacts the design of the fingers, the latter vial type
needs a compensating force in the direction of gravity to compensate for an external force
coming from the PFS decapper, which will be explained in detail shortly.
The inclusion of an exclusively decapping program entails the fingers should be able to
extract Penfills from the rack in all of its internal positions. The functionalities and features
30
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.2: Example of a collision error with initial fingers
described up to now only enable gripping vials on the first non-empty row of the rack since
it would be obstructed by previous rows in its defect, as can be seen in Figure 5.2.
Hence, an additional set of fingers orthogonal to the previously described ones, will be
designed in order to grip vials by addressing them from above, which solves the proposed
challenge (see Figure 5.6).
Furthermore, the overall finger design should not be significantly wider or taller than the
gripper itself, as to avoid spatial constraints when manoeuvring through crowded areas
of the workspace.
Summing up, the fingers should present a compact design capable of performing four
different tasks:
1. Pushing a thin rod through the PFS while holding it, making use of the gripper’s
single motor.
2. Gripping Penfills with sufficient force in order to produce sufficient friction force and
overcome gravity’s pull as well as accelerating movements from the UR arm.
3. Gripping the PFS such that it can be moved freely in the z direction and withstand
external forces from the decapping station opposite of gravity’s direction, meaning
that they should be able to push down a PFS through resistance.
4. Gripping Penfills from the top, allowing to pick and place vials in any position of the
rack, regardless of the number of vials in previous rows of the rack.
Delving into the development process, the methodology employed to arrive at the final
design was based on an iterative process. As is the case for the literature mentioned in
Section 5.1 (see [8] [12] [14]), the fingers to be designed are multi-function fingers, which
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
31
==PAGE:40==
allows for the integration of similar ideas into this section of the project. Consequently,
the approach followed here will embrace the same foundational pillars for finger design,
which on a high level is based on a four-step process, as previously described in Figure
2.4.
However, since there are multiple workpieces to be analyzed, this process will be repeated
for each one of them.
Geometry analysis and grasp planning
Import 3D model
Analyze geometric
features
Generate grasping
requirements
Recognize functionality
requirements
Group similar features
loop
[for each workpiece]
Figure 5.3: Grasp ideation process flow
The topics of geometry analysis and grasp planning have been grouped together analo-
gously to the study conducted by D.T Pham et al. [14], where the initial steps for finger
design are software-based. In the case of this project, the workpieces’ 3D model of inter-
est, PFS and both small and large Penfills, were imported and analyzed using SolidWorks,
which provides a multitude of functionalities in order to fulfil this purpose.
Subsequently, the geometric features of each vial were scrutinized, which proves to be
a trivial task in the case of Penfills since these are simple cylinders. On the other hand,
the PFS’ surface offers distinct features and options to grasp. Taking into account the
items listed above as requirements for the gripper’s functionalities, one can group different
features from the previous step to generate the necessary grasping requirements and
design the fingers accordingly.
As a result, a set of suitable grasps for all workpieces according to the robot’s requirements
will be generated and used for the design of the finger, as can be seen in Figure 5.8.
32
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:41==
Finger design and validation
Once the grasps set has been defined, the design process seen in Figure 5.7 can com-
mence using the same SolidWorks software. As a starting point, a block of material that
attaches to the designated orifices on the gripper will be created.
Thereafter, the first grasp from the set can be converted into fingertips based on the cor-
responding requirements. The same process will apply for each grasp in the resulting set
from the previous analysis with the added complication of the spatial constraints provided
by the creation of the previous features.
In some cases, it is possible to incorporate two grasps into the same fingertips, as is the
case for requirements number 2 and 3 from the previous tasks list.
In the event of not being able to incorporate the newest grasp into the pre-existing config-
uration, new features will be added to the design, taking into account the corresponding
constraints as well as those from previous grasps.
An example of each scenario can be provided with subsequent iterations of the prototype.
Figure 5.4 shows an early-stage prototype with items 1 and 2 from the previous task list
integrated into different fingertips. The following design seen in Figure 5.5 includes item
number 3 into the same fingertips designed for the first task, integrating the grasp into an
existing one. Finally, the opposite is true for the final design seen in Figure 5.6, where
the grasp generated to fulfil the fourth and final task cannot be integrated into any of the
previous fingertips, hence it will be necessary to create a new set of fingertips.
Figure 5.4: Initial finger design prototype Figure 5.5: Intermediary finger prototype
design
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.6: Final finger design prototype
Once every element in the grasp set has been incorporated into the fingers’ design, the
validation process shall begin, which is comprised of two separate tests: virtual and ex-
perimental validation.
As is the case in the works of Roa et al. [48] and A. Caldas et al. [49], virtual validation
is employed in order to minimize the errors induced by wrongful design. As it pertains to
this project, the virtual validation was carried out simulating the movement patterns of the
physical robot. Throughout this process, multiple areas for improvement were found as a
result of spatial limitations. For example, the width of the fingertips responsible for picking
up both types of vials was too large since it would not allow for enough margin between
adjacent vials when attempting to pick one up from the input rack.
Every single sub-module and the actions involved were virtually replicated to test the
validity of the fingers’ dimensions and features. Since SolidWorks is capable of importing
smaller models into a bigger assembly, once the finger parts were modified, the entire
assembly would reflect those changes and the areas of interest would be re-analyzed to
validate the results.
Finally, contingent upon the successful virtual validation of the design, this one would be
sent to be 3D printed by an expert team (as defined in Section 3). The physical model
would be then mounted on the robot to be tested. As each section of the module would
be tested with the newly mounted design, every feature would perform its corresponding
actions under rigorous supervision to ensure an optimal result.
Not only does this process refine the actual design, but it also enables the improvement
of the process itself. In case of a malfunction caused by the fingers, the virtual validation
would have overseen an actual error, which would result in the enhancement of this step.
34
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:43==
Design gripper
attachment
Incorporate grasp
from grasp set
Generate according finger
attachment
Incorporate according finger
attachment
No
Yes
Can it be included in
current design?
Virtual Validation
3D print
Experimental
validation
Final result
Yes
No
Acceptable
result?
No
Yes
Last grasp?
Yes
No
Acceptable
result?
Figure 5.7: Finger design process flow
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
35
==PAGE:44==
The final prototype, with annotations for which part solves each one of the previous chal-
lenges, can be seen attached to the gripper in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Final design of fingers
5.2
Input
This section will attempt to describe the part involved in importing the vials that need to
be processed by the UR arm.
Given that there are only two types of vials that can be handled, the rack where the vials
will be placed into by an external user will be designed with the principle of adaptabil-
ity primarily in mind, meaning that the process will be optimized for the least amount of
different parts to be used.
A few considerations before discussing the final solution, regarding the primary challenges
to overcome and established practices at the company:
• The rack should ideally be able to fit either a Penfill or a PFS on each matrix spot as
it would limit the amount of racks to be used to only one, providing an easy to use
solution for technicians. The importance of this feature is exacerbated by the fact
that a run should be able to incorporate any type of vial simultaneously and process
them dynamically regardless of the amount or size of batches.
• The size of the rack should be adequate for the number of batches, and samples
per batch, that should be processed per each round in order to maximize the value
of the product. This amount is dependent on the type of vial, with Penfills batches
being composed of up to six samples per batch and PFS batches amassing up to
twelve samples, despite falling in the same range as Penfills on most occasions.
Regardless, this must be accounted for in the final solution. The amount of vials
per batch will be constant for each vial per run, meaning that there can not be one
PFS batch of four samples while the next one, during the same run, introduces three
samples.
• Current standards dictate that each batch represents one row on the rack. This
practice will be respected to minimize confusion among technicians when working
36
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:45==
with multiple automated solutions. Thus, in the case of a batch being comprised of
fewer samples than there are spots in a row of the rack’s matrix, there will be unoc-
cupied spots in that particular row. On the other hand, if a PFS batch is composed
of more than six vials, the corresponding columns will be filled in succession and
the following batch would start at the next free row.
• The size between rows and columns should adequate to the fingers’ size to avoid
collision with adjacent vials when gripping. A reasonable margin of error should also
be considered when adjusting these parameters in conjunction with the distance
between fingertips when approaching the gripping position.
Having established the necessary requirements and restrictions to properly design this
part of the assembly, the solution proposed is a single rack comprised of a 12x13 matrix
where each hole can hold both PFS and Penfills.
Figure 5.9: Final design of input rack
As can be seen in 5.9, the design of the rack solves all the challenges mentioned above,
with the primary characteristic of each spot in the matrix being comprised of two separate
holes. The tighter one is designed to hold PFS while the larger one is designed for Penfills.
A standout feature of this implementation is the significant difference in resulting height
protruding from the rack, which is explained by the different methods of gripping each vial.
As has been discussed before, PFS will be gripped from the top surface, meaning that as
long as that part is within reach of the gripper the implementation can be a success.
On the other hand, Penfills need to be gripped with force, which will be made easier by
doing so from a middle point instead of any edge, in case of slippage. Hence, Penfills
need to expose much more surface to the gripper. Moreover, previous sections have
discussed how there are two different sizes to be handled for Penfills, with the smaller
one providing an extra constraint in terms of the minimum height of a Penfill to expose
enough surface area.
5.3
Decapping station
As has been the case thus far for every previously described part in the solution, this
section can be divided into two main sub-tasks: decapping the PFS and Penfills.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
37
==PAGE:46==
When it comes to the former, the established practice in achieving this purpose was insert-
ing a thin piece of plastic through the small slit found between the cap and the PFS’ body.
Thus, first attempts at solving this challenge revolved around this concept, which resulted
in the design of a small and protruding fixed surface which the UR arm could make use
of in order to slide the PFS into it via the mentioned gap between the interested parts, as
can be seen in Figure 5.10. Nonetheless, the precision required to perform this operation
could compromise the robustness of the solution, which in addition to the introduction of
new variations of PFS shapes render this implementation obsolete.
Figure 5.10: First PFS decapper iteration
It is possible, however, to carry the successful elements of this solution to a new, more
robust one, which comes in the form of the notion of sliding a thin piece in between the
PFS’ body and cap. Therefore, the improvements to the design will be concentrated on
the precision required for the arm to complete the task.
The solution found is significantly less demanding in terms of accuracy. In fact, this ob-
stacle is totally subdued when substituting it for the design seen in 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Final design of PFS decapper
Figure 5.12: Cross-section view of PFS de-
capper
The mechanism driving this solution relies on magnets: Each flap in contact with the vial
contains one magnet with opposite polarity with another magnet placed inside the outer
casing of the solution, which drives the flaps to pull towards each other. When a PFS is
pushed through the hole in the center with enough force, the flaps are pulled apart due
to the contact force applied by the vial. However, as soon as the gap between the body
and the cap is fully through the capsule, the magnets pull the flaps together once again
towards the PFS’ body. Hence, the cap is trapped beneath the case the contact surfaces
38
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:47==
are perpendicular to each other and any force acting in the opposite direction will result
in separating the PFS from the cap, which will fall through a hole in the Technicon table
towards a disposing garbage collector.
Retracing back to the section describing the design of the fingers, it now becomes appar-
ent why there must be a feature capable of exerting both pushing as well as pulling when
confronted with external resistance, since both of these actions are required to fit the vial
through the center hole and pulling away from it while simultaneously removing the cap.
By contrast, removing the cap form Penfills proves to be a substantially more demanding
task in terms of tooling required. Since the cap is not threaded through to the Penfill’s body,
it must be extracted by brute force which given the dimensions of the cap, an external actor
is required.
The system devised to fulfill this particular assignment is comprised of a powerful linear
actuator connected to a nozzle specifically designed for this purpose, that can perfectly
fit the cap at its end. When the actuator is activated, the nozzle will extrude its end to
tightly grip the cap without enacting any damage to the Penfill’s body. Subsequently, the
actuator is commanded to return to its initial position, suctioning the cap out of the body of
the vial and exposing the liquid inside, meaning that it is set to perform all actions leading
to its extraction into the output vials. Figures 5.14 and 5.15 show the actuator in action in
its two states while successfully removing the cap from a Penfill.
The 3D model for this component can be seen in Figure 5.13.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.13: Penfill decapper model
40
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.14: Penfill decapper model
Figure 5.15: Penfill decapper model
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
41
==PAGE:50==
The communication between the actuator and the UR arm is handled by the latter, in
particular the digital output signals available in its control box. The wiring of the system
can be seen in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: Wiring diagram for decapper and UR connection
As can be observed, the electrical diagram is comprised of two other peripheral electronic
components in the form of relays. Their use facilitates the inversion of the actuator’s
direction of action, on top of a switch responsible for providing electrical current to it or
otherwise, turn it off. As such, DO0 is responsible for the direction of extrusion and DO1
provides the latter feature mentioned, with both digital output signals being controlled and
triggered through a UR program.
5.4
Output
The final piece in the mechanical solution section is the output section of the assembly,
which is comprised of a simple rack where both Anton and Appearance glasses will be fit
as well as a support structure driven by yet another linear actuator.
42
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:51==
Starting with the former, an analogous design to the input rack, seen in Figure 5.9, has
been followed, since it provides flexibility and simplifies the operation of the system by
only necessitating one rack instead of multiple single-purpose racks.
In order to design a product agnostic to the experiment conducted afterwards, and there-
fore the vials placed inside the rack, both will protrude the same amount from the top
surface. This effect can be seen in Figure 5.17:
Figure 5.17: Final design of the output rack
However, the supporting structure driven by an actuator requires significantly higher atten-
tion. Firstly, its inclusion is born out of the previously described challenge of extracting the
Penfill’s liquid when the gripper’s motor is already being used to grip the vial. Therefore,
the proposed solution will result in placing the vial on a fixed rack upside down, exposing
the bottom of the vial, where the fingers will drive a rod through it, pouring the liquid in the
process. It is important to note that the liquid does not fall out of the vial despite gravity’s
pull due to air resistance.
Having established the need to place the Penfills on top of the desired corresponding
Anton or Appearance glass, this structure sitting on top of the output rack would impede
the movement of the UR arm and the liquid extraction process for PFS. As has been
clarified before, it is possible that a run incorporates both PFS and Penfills and therefore
the system must be able to handle both of them simultaneously.
In order to solve this newly-found challenge, the rack is moved out the working area of the
arm to facilitate the execution of its movements via the linear actuator mentioned before.
Among all models studied and analyzed, the actuator ELGS pertaining to the Simplified
Motion Series from Festo was chosen to carry out this action due to its versatility and
reliability.
Additionally, it commands low integration efforts, making it simple to connect and oper-
ate. With the use of Festo’s Automation Suite proprietary software, commissioning the
main PLC controller to command custom controls to the actuator results in a streamlined
integration process.
In order to incorporate the actuator, a frame designed to contain and support the plastic
rack sitting on top of the output rack will be screwed into the guiding block’s threads
provided with the actuator. Opposite to the actuator, and on the other side of the output
rack, an additional linear guide comprised of a rail and a block will be integrated to provide
additional support and a smooth parallel motion of the guided rack.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
43
==PAGE:52==
Specifically, both products will be provided by Igus, a manufacturing company specializing
in industrial automation solutions that offer robust and meticulously crafted, which, in this
case, manifest in a product with minimal friction, which is the main factor considered for
this solution.
Aggregating all the components in this subsystem, the assembly can be seen in 5.18 and
5.19 in the closed and open positions, exposing and covering the output rack respectively.
Figure 5.18: Output module with Festo actuator in the closed position
The complete electrical diagram for both actuators can be seen in Figure A.4
44
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.19: Output module with Festo actuator in the open position
5.5
Validation
The validation process is crucial to ensure that the mechanical solution meets the desired
requirements and functions as intended. It involves both virtual validation, performed
through simulations and analyses, and experimental validation, carried out with the phys-
ical assembly.
5.5.1
Virtual Validation
Virtual validation serves as an initial step to identify potential design flaws and optimize
the performance of the mechanical solution before proceeding to physical testing. Solid-
Works, the CAD software used for designing the components, provides simulation capa-
bilities that enable virtual validation.
During the virtual validation process, the assembly of the mechanical solution was im-
ported into SolidWorks one component at a time and the appropriate restrictions were ap-
plied in order to replicate the real model to the maximum degree possible, which means
fixing every component to its corresponding place on the Technicon table and applying the
proper inter-component restrictions. Thereafter, simulations were conducted to evaluate
the functionality, robustness, and ergonomics of the design. The movement patterns of
the robot arm, the gripping action of the fingers, and the interactions between different
components were all simulated to validate the design.
The virtual validation helped identify spatial limitations, potential interferences, and areas
for improvement. For example, it highlighted the need to refine the width of the fingertips to
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
45
==PAGE:54==
allow sufficient clearance between adjacent vials in the input rack. Additionally, it allowed
for fine-tuning the design parameters of the fingers to ensure optimal gripping force and
stability during various tasks.
By iteratively refining the design based on the virtual validation results, the mechanical
solution was optimized to enhance its performance and reliability.
5.5.2
Experimental Validation
Once the virtual validation phase was completed, the physical assembly of the mechanical
solution was constructed and mounted on the UR arm for experimental validation. This
involved conducting tests and observations to verify the functionality and effectiveness of
the design in a real-world environment.
Experimental validation focused on evaluating the performance of each component and
their integration within the complete working station. The following aspects were assessed
during the validation process:
• Gripping and manipulation: The fingers’ ability to grip and handle both PFS and
Penfills was tested with different samples. The gripping force, stability, and precision
of the fingers were evaluated to ensure successful manipulation of the vials.
• rack loading and unloading: The input rack’s capability to accommodate the vials
and allow for easy loading and unloading was assessed. The compatibility of dif-
ferent vial sizes and types with the rack was verified, and any issues or constraints
were addressed.
• Decapping: The decapping station’s functionality, specifically the mechanism for
removing the caps from PFS and Penfills, was tested. The reliability and efficiency
of the decapping process were examined to ensure proper extraction of the caps.
• Overall integration: The complete working station, including the robot arm, gripper,
fingers, input rack, and decapping station, was evaluated for seamless integration
and synchronization of operations. The coordination between the components, the
accuracy of movements, and the overall performance of the system were analyzed.
During the experimental validation, data and observations were recorded to assess the
performance of the mechanical solution objectively. Any issues, malfunctions, or areas
requiring further optimization were identified and addressed.
The results obtained from the experimental validation were compared to the desired re-
quirements and specifications defined in the initial stages. If the mechanical solution
demonstrated successful performance and met the established criteria, it would be deemed
valid and ready for further deployment and use.
46
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:55==
6
Software solution
This section encompasses all software-related aspects of the project, from sending com-
mands to the robot to developing a UI capable of communicating with the arm via the
SiLA framework, which will be detailed and discussed in relation to the requirements of
the system, highlighting the contribution to the overall system, in addition to the benefits
provided by the implementation proposed in this thesis to a generalized and standardized
way of controlling UR robots.
Furthermore, the integration of these features will be displayed in a UI in order to facilitate
the execution of all relevant programs for working lab technicians operating the system
A general overview of the architecture employed can be seen in Figure 6.1, where one can
observe the main components incorporated to bring about a robust and efficient solution:
Figure 6.1: Software architecture
Starting with the SiLA-encapsulated elements, these have been divided into client (blue)
and server (red). On the client side, the SiLA Universal Client (UC) [50] provides a web
application capable of communicating with any SiLA-compliant device or server.
The back-end enabling this functionality is entirely scripted in JAVA, while the UI enabling
access and control to the devices’ features was developed using React.js [51], an open-
source Javascipt [52] library offering powerful tools for creating interfaces in an agile and
efficient manner. In the case of the UC, Typescript [53] was used in place of Javascript
providing the additional benefits of a statically-typed programming language, as well as
improved code maintainability. The library Material UI [54] has also been widely used to
integrate responsive and rich components into the app. Whilst the server-side component
(back-end) of this web application remains unmodified, the interface will be subject of
extensive further development in order to comply with this application’s needs.
The UC’s requests will be met on the other side by the SiLA server via the gRPC com-
munication protocol, leveraging Protocol Buffers to define the structure of the API and
the server’s features. The definition for the device will take into account the LAPP frame-
work and the active-passive dichotomy for labware transfer, and will be fully laid out in the
following sections.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
47
==PAGE:56==
Enclosed in the SiLA server and its features will be the robot’s main program, along with
any useful functions and declarations to carry out a successful run. These programs will
make use of UR’s Real-Time Data Exchange (RTDE) protocol, which in turn will enable
the trigger for different PLC programs to control the before-mentioned actuators via the
robot’s Digital I/O, as well as providing commands to move the robot’s joints in the desired
fashion.
6.1
Robot command scripting
Two distinct methods have been utilized when it comes to sending commands to the
robot: leveraging UR’s RTDE protocol and the incorporated teach pendant, on which it is
possible to write scripts auxiliary to the main program.
The former was developed by Universal Robots for real-time communication with their
products and a third-party user or controller, allowing for easy access to live data updates
on joint positions, torques, and tool positions among others, as well as commanding cus-
tom signals. Furthermore, integrating the robot with other systems is enabled with this
solution, with the incorporation of the SiLA framework made possible by it being the main
reason behind its utilization, as both can be deployed with Python. The RTDE protocol
possesses built-in capabilities to read data from the robot in real-time, which facilitates
the extraction and manipulation of data for creating the necessary functions to execute
this task, but also any analysis or further work on that data.
An additional layer to the software hierarchy, sitting in a higher level, is created with the
use of the Python library ur_rtde developed by SDU Robotics [55], which packages UR’s
RTDE protocol into an accessible software interface capable of controlling and receiving
data from the Universal Robot in real-time. The architecture of the SDU Robotics’ solution
can be seen in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: SDU Robotics’ RTDE architecture
This API will be responsible for sending the actual commands to the robot in conjunction
with its sibling in the software hierarchy: UR’s Polyscope.
Polyscope is a Graphical User Interface (GUI) developed in-house by UR that offers an
intuitive and user-friendly alternative for programming and operating UR’s robots. Its low-
code approach based on drag-and-drop functionality provides user all the tools necessary
to create complex programs without previous programming experience.
As described previously, Gripkit’s gripper provides an integration tool with UR’s software,
more specifically Polyscope, as it can send commands to close and open the fingers on
an incremental movement base at the user’s behest with many customizable parameters
such as speed and force, on top of immediate feedback on whether a part has been
successfully gripped or not by detecting the resistance encountered. However, it is not
48
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:57==
possible to do the same with Python and RTDE, as Weiss Robotics is yet to develop an
API for its products, which requires the use of custom Polyscope programs.
Fortunately, UR’s RTDE does yield a product capable of executing Polyscope’s programs
remotely. As such, a signal will be sent to the robot to start a Polyscope script with .urp
format similarly to how movement-based commands are sent via RTDE.
Finally, the digital I/O of the robot’s control box will also be manipulated via RTDE, which
will be used to control both the Penfill’s de-capper as well as the Festo actuator. Moreover,
since this programming interface is capable of reading the state of the robot’s I/O, an
available output will be used to read the finger’s execution result by setting a different
state to it depending on whether the gripper detects that a part is being gripped or not.
This workaround will allow to read the gripper’s state and detect any execution errors,
improving the robustness of the solution.
Before describing the commands that constitute the main script, it is paramount to define
the methodology followed to read and send positions to the robot. Due to the limited
amount of physical components, the number of positions that are essential to be stored
as independent variables is low. Hence, it is not necessary to compute the transformation
matrices between the robot’s Tool Center Point (TCP) and the station reference frames,
with the position of the TCP in the base of the robot’s reference frame being the only
information needed to send every position-based command.
The structure of the control script can be divided into labware classes, looping functions
and auxiliary functions. At the highest level. based on the amount of each vials present
on the input rack a matrix will be created holding class instances of each vial, which the
program will use to determine the type of vial that needs to be processed next and its
corresponding movements.
Each piece of labware, in this case racks and vials, will be represented by a Python class,
whose parameters stem from the labware ontology defined in 6.4.
On the other hand, both input and output rack, represented by the classes Rack() and
OutRack() respectively, will store physical variables useful for palletizing functions such
as the row and column separation in m, along with other practical information in the form
of the position of the first spot on the rack in the base reference frame, in the same units.
The two most crucial auxiliary functions are performing arm movements and initiating a
Polyscope program, which can be done as follows:
1
def check_AND_moveL(self, pose: np.array, joint: bool = False, vel = 0.1):
2
if joint:
3
if self.connection.isJointsWithinSafetyLimits(pose):
4
pose = self.connection.getInverseKinematics(pose)
5
else:
6
return False
7
8
if self.connection.isPoseWithinSafetyLimits(pose):
9
print("moving", pose)
10
self.connection.moveL(pose, vel)
11
return True
12
else:
13
print("not safe")
14
return False
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
49
==PAGE:58==
1
def select_n_play(self, program: str, execution_time: int):
2
self.dashboard.loadURP(program)
3
try:
4
self.dashboard.play()
5
except:
6
print("error:trying again")
7
time.sleep(1)
8
self.dashboard.play()
9
print(f"[INFO]: Executing {program}. ")
10
time.sleep(execution_time)
11
self.dashboard.stop()
12
self.connection.reuploadScript()
13
time.sleep(0.2)
These two functions enable the execution of every necessary movement to carry out more
complex patterns such as de-capping a vial, pouring its liquid, or disposing of it. Conse-
quently, one can build looping functions that perform these actions repeatedly in order to
complete a full run, meaning that every vial placed on the starting rack will be processed
accordingly. Given the different steps required to achieve a single vial run, there will be
two different looping functions (one for PFS and Penfills). Based on the parameters en-
tered when executing the program these looping functions will be called the amount of
times necessary to process the whole rack:
1
def syringe_loop(self, target_row:list, target_col: list, i: int ,j: int):
2
"""Args:
3
target_row: row position of the PFS in input rack
4
target_col: column position of the PFS in input rack
5
i: batch number
6
j: sample number"""
7
self.closed_fingers()
8
self.release_syr()
9
self.get_labware(target_row ,target_col)
10
self.grip_syr(target_col+offset_moveL ,3)
11
self.move_to_decapper(self.Lmat[i][j])
12
self.decap_syr()
13
self.move_to_output_syr(i)
14
self.pour_syringe()
15
self.dispose_syringe()
16
17
def pen_loop(self, target_row:list, target_col: list, i: int ,j: int,large
: bool, only_decap):
18
"""Args:
19
target_row: row position of the Penfill in input rack
20
target_col: column position of the Penfill in input rack
21
i: batch number
22
j: sample number"""
23
threading.Thread(target = self.reset_decapper).start()
24
current_pos = self.get_labware(target_row ,target_col ,large,only_decap ,
i)
25
self.grip_pen(0.15,current_pos ,3)
26
if not only_decap:
27
self.move_to_decapper(self.Lmat[i][j])
28
self.decap_pen(large)
29
self.regrip_pen(only_decap ,large)
30
pour_pos = self.move_to_output_pen(i)
31
self.dispose_pen(pour_pos)
32
else:
33
if i>1:
50
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:59==
34
self.regrip_pen_inverse(large)
35
self.move_to_decapper(self.Lmat[i][j])
36
self.decap_pen(large)
37
self.regrip_pen(only_decap ,large)
38
self.move_to_input_pen(i,j,large)
39
pass
40
else:
41
self.move_to_decapper(self.Lmat[i][j])
42
self.decap_pen(large)
43
self.regrip_pen(only_decap ,large)
44
self.move_to_input_pen(i,j,large)
Grouping these building blocks, all the necessary components are present to carry out an
execution run to process any amount of vials within the available range.
6.2
PLC programming
As previously mentioned, the Festo linear actuator will move from end to end in order to
fulfill its purpose of positioning the elevated rack on top of the output rack or otherwise
expose it, enabling the act of pouring the PFS’s liquid.
To achieve such task, a PLC is necessary to commission the actuator and load the nec-
essary parameters onto it, which is further complicated by the fact that it needs to move
between two different intermediate positions. Without delving into the intricacies of the
system topography of the particular connections necessary to connect the actuator to
the controller, a diagram of the electrical system with all relevant parties (actuator, PLC
controller and IO-Link master) can be seen in Figure 6.3.
By relating the corresponding digital signals to the UR arm, this one will be able to control
the positioning of the linear actuator by switching its DOs. Essentially, alternating the true
state of the two Digital Outputs (one of them true and the other, false) will command the
desired movement, which can be achieved via Python scripting as explained in section
6.1
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.3: Electrical diagram for Festo actuator connection to UR arm
6.3
SiLA
This section aims to explore the implementation of features and the design of a user-
friendly interface in a SiLA server for integrating a Universal Robots (UR) robot module.
The focus is on understanding the strategies used to represent the robot’s behavior ac-
curately and establish effective communication channels with clients.
The discussion begins by examining different approaches to implementing SiLA features,
considering the level of specificity needed and the seamless exchange of data between
components. The goal is to create robust mechanisms that enable clients to interact with
the UR robot module in a standardized manner.
Furthermore, this section examines the challenges faced in developing an intuitive UI that
surpasses the limitations of the robot manufacturers’ standard interface. By enhancing
the SiLA Universal Client (UC) project, the aim is to create a UI that improves usability
and functionality. Key considerations include streamlining workflows, designing intuitive
controls, and providing advanced monitoring and visualization capabilities.
52
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:61==
Throughout the discussion, the importance of scalability and standardization in modeling
device components is emphasized.
6.3.1
Feature implementation
The specifics of the SiLA Features designed to model the behaviour of this robotic module
is of the utmost importance, as it dictates the functionalities and interactions between
every component. When devising a strategy to achieve this, one must select the level of
specificity to implement. In the case of this project, each component could be modelled as
its own feature forming part of the all-encompassing device. The drawback to this strategy
is the exchange of unnecessary data and information, as the interaction between the UR
arm and the decapper is mostly irrelevant as it relates to data exchange, for example.
Consequently, it becomes evident that the main component to model as part of the communication-
enabled devices is the UR module as a whole, as it takes the role of the passive actor in
the transfer of labware in conjunction with the potential MoMa described in Section 2.2.2.
The basic definition for a labware transfer has already been defined in the SiLA commu-
nity, with its structure being as depicted in Figures 6.4 and 6.5.
Figure 6.4:
Workflow for basic labware
transfer when the active device is also the
source
Figure 6.5:
Workflow for basic labware
transfer when the active device is the des-
tination
In addition to this, the actuator module encompassing the support rack, actuator and linear
guide will also be modelled as its own separate feature within the parent device. The
reason behind this chosen path stems from scalability and the proposal for establishing a
standard moving forward in modelling children-parent (actuator-UR module) interactions.
As one ponders on the potential future use of this module as technology and integration
with other laboratory technologies scales up, new components can arise leading to an
increase in complex interactions as well as in data exchange. A practical use case for this
scenario is the integration with LIMS (see Section 2.1), where each batch and vial within it
is processed through an IT management system and necessitates the communication of
information such as the vial identification between devices. Therefore, a bar-code reading
system might be necessary to implement and model with the SiLA framework analogously
to the actuator in this project.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
53
==PAGE:62==
With the totality of the UR module taking priority in order to provide a more generalized
context, this one shall be defined first. As described before, the module takes part in two
different interactions, one with the mobile manipulator and another with its child compo-
nent actuator. Whilst the UR module acts as the passive device when interacting with the
former, it takes the role of the active device with the latter. Thus, both sides of the labware
transfer feature definitions described in Figures 6.4 and 6.5 are present in the description
of the UR module.
Another feature providing the robot commands will be implemented in order to act as an
interface with the SiLA server, enabling the execution of every functionality not encom-
passed in the labware transfer process as a SiLA command. This particular approach
brings all the benefits of the SiLA protocol to the intermediary actions, such as decapping
or pouring syringes among others. As a result, it will be possible to monitor and exchange
data in those processes too. Despite this functionality not providing any immediate ben-
efit to the described setup, it is clear to imagine how scaling the functionalities of this or
any other module would necessitate of these attributes. As laboratory automation edges
closer to the paradigm described in Section 2.2.2, the integration of other technologies
and tools will be enabled with this described approach.
Finally, the interaction between the actuator module and the UR module shall be defined.
Akin to the previously described labware transfer between the UR module and the mobile
manipulator, the same definitions and schemas have been utilized for this use-case. In
this instance, however, the UR arm acts as the active device responsible for delivering
the initial labware and retracting the processed counterparts.
This process will be carried out for each Penfill to be processed, meaning that this last
interaction will be executed inside of the main program on a loop, contrary to the first
labware transfer, which will be only done so once at the beginning and termination of the
same.
Given the complexity of the proposed architecture, a proprietary scheduler such as the
ones described in 2.2 must be utilized to act as the client, as the SiLA UC does not
include such functionalities. A proof of concept experiment has been carried out to test
and validate this model and is described in 6.6, where a Python SiLA Client is programmed
to schedule the necessary SiLA commands in the corresponding order.
Nonetheless, having established the necessity to integrate the described robotic module
in the current state of laboratory automation, an alternative structure is proposed as a
standalone solution in order to tackle the short-term challenges described in Section 4.2.
With the UC offering an excellent web-based solution to process fully defined SiLA fea-
tures and execute single commands, especially after the modifications introduced to suit
this particular environment, the entirety of each main robot program will be encompassed
under one single SiLA feature, discarding the more advanced yet minimally useful as a
standalone solution including labware transfer feature definitions.
The two main programs that the robot must be able to perform, independently of each
other, are decapping the Penfills and running the complete program to pool the liquid
into the output glasses. Consequently, each one’s corresponding robot commands will
be wrapped under one unique SiLA Command, composing a single SiLA Feature that,
similarly to before, acts as an interface between SiLA communication and low-level robot
commands.
Structuring the commands in such a way enables the execution of the complete programs
with a single click, while preserving the functionalities of SiLA communication. The ob-
54
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:63==
jective for this solution is developing a SiLA driver that, when executed, will generate and
start the corresponding SiLA Server with the described feature. Finally, this one can be
executed via the custom client application that is described in the following Subsection.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
55
==PAGE:64==
MoMa
Scheduler
UR Module
PrepareForOutput
Finished OK
PrepareForInput
Finished OK
Finsihed OK
Finshed OK
PutLabware
LabwareDelivered
PrepareForInput
Finished OK
PrepareForOutput
Finished OK
Finished OK
PutLabware
Finished OK
Actuator module
LabwareDelivered
Loop
PrepareForIntput
Finished OK
[for each Penfill]
MoMa
UR module
Actuator Module
PrepareForOutput
Finished OK
Finished OK
LabwareRemoved
Finished OK
GetLabware
PrepareForOutput
Finished OK
PrepareForInput
Finished OK
Finished OK
GetLabware
Finished OK
LabwareRemoved
Figure 6.6: Process diagram for SiLA features interaction
56
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:65==
6.3.2
UI/UX
Aspiring to offer a fully functional UI, the SiLA UC will be modified accordingly to achieve
this purpose. Firstly, the inner workings and structure of the UC project must be discussed
and understood.
The software architecture of the SiLA UC project follows a client-server model, where
the back-end server is responsible for handling communication, data processing, and
interaction with SiLA2 servers. It acts as the intermediary between the front-end UI and
SiLA-compliant devices, enabling seamless control and monitoring capabilities. The back-
end receives requests from the UI, executes the necessary operations, and communicates
the results back to the front-end.
To realize this architecture, a robust technology stack has been employed in the original
application. Key technologies include Spring, React, Material UI, and TypeScript.
The back-end of the SiLA UC makes extensive use of the Spring framework, a widely
adopted Java-based framework known for its versatility and comprehensive feature set. It
provides modules and features for building web applications, including support for REST-
ful APIs, dependency injection, and database integration. Leveraging Spring ensures the
back-end’s scalability, maintainability, and adherence to best practices. The back-end is
primarily implemented using the Java programming language, known for its robustness,
platform independence, and extensive ecosystem of libraries and frameworks.
The back-end exposes a set of endpoints that enable seamless communication between
the front-end UI and the back-end server. These endpoints follow RESTful API principles,
allowing the front-end to interact with the back-end using standard HTTP methods such
as GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE. The endpoints handle specific requests from the front-
end and return appropriate responses.
For example, the /api/calls/execute endpoint is configured to handle POST requests and
executes a SiLA call, which could be a command or a subscription to a parameter’s value.
This request indicates to the server that it should perform the corresponding actions to
initialize the action. The following code is an extract of an API call to the server to execute
a command with the parameters of the function being the user’s input to the UI and the
identifiers for the desired command:
1
export function executeServerCallModel(callModel: SiLACallModel): Promise <
Response > {
2
return fetch(getBackEndpoint('/api/calls/execute '), {
3
method: 'POST',
4
headers: {
5
'Content -Type': 'application/json',
6
},
7
body: JSON.stringify(callModel)
8
})
9
}
Other endpoints may be configured to handle operations such as stopping a running ex-
ecution call, adding a particular SiLA Server to the UI or fetching the server’s information
to display it neatly onto the UI.
By establishing these endpoints, the SiLA Universal Client ensures a clear separation
between the front-end and back-end components, enabling a modular and maintainable
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
57
==PAGE:66==
architecture. The front-end can easily interact with the back-end by making HTTP re-
quests to the appropriate endpoints, while the back-end handles the request processing,
device communication, and data retrieval.
Continuing with this project’s objectives, the subsequent section will delve into the specific
modifications and enhancements planned for the SiLA UC, ensuring a cohesive integra-
tion between the front-end and back-end components.
Front-end
To achieve a fully functional and cohesive UI, significant modifications will be made to the
front-end component of the SiLA UC project. The front-end is responsible for presenting
the user interface and facilitating user interactions with SiLA-compliant devices.
The front-end technology stack includes React, TypeScript, and Material-UI (MUI). React,
as a JavaScript library for building user interfaces, provides a powerful foundation for
creating interactive and dynamic components. Its component-based architecture allows
for reusability and modularity, making it easier to manage complex UI elements and their
associated functionality.
TypeScript is employed in conjunction with React to enhance the development process.
With TypeScript, static typing is introduced, enabling early detection of potential errors and
providing improved code documentation. The compiler checks for type inconsistencies,
reducing bugs and improving overall code quality.
Finally, MUI [54] is utilized to design visually appealing and user-friendly interfaces, as it
offers a comprehensive set of pre-designed UI components such as buttons, input fields,
navigation menus, and cards.
These components ensure consistency and familiarity
across the application, providing a cohesive user experience. MUI also offers theming
capabilities, allowing customization of the UI’s visual aspects to match the desired style
and branding in a consistent manner across components.
Most visible components in this UI was created using the MUI library and customizing its
style to fit the overall theme. As such, the modifications and additions to the UI will follow
the same pattern to preserve thematic consistency.
Before describing these, the default application must be examined to identify improvement
areas. Figure 6.7 displays the unmodified interface, where the most apparent pattern to
be modified is the proprietary company branding. If this interface is to be used widely
across NovoNordisk, it should represent the company’s brand accordingly. This does not
only apply to the company logo but the color scheme as well. For the latter, NN provides
a guideline and custom swatches to customize any app to fit the company’s brand.
Following this basic modification, the interface’s layout is still cluttered and displays an
abundance of information that will not be utilized or simply complicates the technician’s
job. The most relevant aspects to identify and improve are as follows:
• First item on this list is the starting screen once a SiLA Server is selected. Per de-
fault, the user would be redirected to a page where they can select the features
in this server that should be executable. Since this can only lead to mishandling
the functionality and deselect the desired features containing the executable com-
mands, the starting screen will be the executing page.
• Once the user is at the execution page, the response container takes half of the
screen’s page to display information that is irrelevant at this step since no program
has been run yet. As a result, it will be hidden until the execution of any program
58
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:67==
starts, at which point it will display the ongoing information in the same layout as the
original layout.
• The fields containing the program’s parameters comprise the entire screen’s width,
often to exhibit as little details as a simple number. Hence, their width will be halved,
fitting two parameters per row of its container.
• Lastly, the sidebar menu contains largely irrelevant information, as it is mostly about
the interface’s settings and general information such as the specific version of it,
release date and more. therefore, the sidebar will be completely removed from the
interface. The button to toggle between night and regular mode can be useful to
the user as it provides comfort and adaptability to the user, and as a result will be
placed on the top right of the screen, where the top bar is found, following the style
of most applications users are familiar with.
Finally, a new component will be introduced in order to facilitate the technicians’ work by
minimizing the margin of error when it comes to human induced mistake. The specific
process that can introduce variation which can not be handled by the robot is the vial
layout on the rack, since the robot expects the vials to be placed in a specific pattern and
order and due to the lack of a vision system, it would not be able to account for deviations
from that expectation.
The solution found to this challenge is the introduction of a warning pop-up screen right
before the final click to execute the command with a visual representation of the correct
and expected layout of the input rack with a color scheme representing each type of vial,
which, if followed by the technician, will lead to a error-free execution of the main program.
The pattern displayed on screen will be dynamically adjust to the parameters entered on
the interface, meaning that rather than representing a general guideline on how to position
each vial and cartridge, it is a one to one depiction of the expected resulting input rack
layout.
The component, named PopUp (see Figure 6.9, will be composed of multiple baseline
components from the library MUI described eariler, mainly the Paper and Grid component.
The first one comprises the overlaying screen and its theme, that is color scheme and
styling while the latter maps each vial in the parameters of the execution call into a thirteen
by twelve grid following the according logic. Interestingly, there are two distinct rationales
to map the parameters onto the grid, depending on which program is called. For the
main program, the process has been described before in Section 4.2, but the decapping
program will vary from it in order to avoid empty spaces and limit the amount of labware
that can potentially be processed per run. Consequently, these should be placed in a
sequential order starting from left to right and filling up completely each row before moving
to the next one.
This variability in the logic behind the functional component means that it must take as
an argument the type of command that is about to be executed, achieved by analyzing
the properties of the corresponding SiLA Command. Among all other parameters for the
PopUp component, two of them stand out in terms of functionality. Firstly, since the pur-
pose of this component is to serve as an overlaying screen, it must be closed once the
user confirms that the digital and real layouts are identical. Lastly, the component display-
ing the SiLA Server’s response to the command becomes relevant once the execution has
started. As such, the confirm button triggers two functions that are introduced to PopUp
as parameters that in turn set the corresponding parameters for its visibility as well as the
server responses.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
59
==PAGE:68==
Summarising, the sequence that the interface displays starts with the main screen with the
available commands and its parameters, followed by the PopUp component ensuring the
correct formation of the input rack and finalizing with a split screen with the initial screen
and the server’s response to the executed command.
Figure 6.7: Initial UI
Figure 6.8: Modified UI
60
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.9: PopUp component
6.4
Labware ontology and DT
Having created the according programs to perform the required functionalities, and en-
capsulating these via the SiLA framework, the next step towards full parametrization of
the UR module as a whole is implementing the labware ontology framework. Coupled
with the creation of a basic DT architecture, the purpose of this chapter is automating
the movement patterns of the robot arm, since in its absence the robot would require
hard-coded positions and movements to follow.
The basis for labware ontology structure has been described in Section 2.3.1, which at
its core intends to store and share relevant information about the pieces of equipment
involved in a certain laboratory process. For the purposes of this project, the data will
be stored in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) files. The use of this notation facilitates
constructing schemas that model the desired labware’s physical appearance and func-
tionality. The following table 6.1 displays the implemented architecture:
Once every piece of labware is modelled in accordance to its properties, the information
can be extracted at any point by parsing the file as follows:
1
def _parse_json(file_path):
2
""" Parse json file and create structure """
3
with open(file_path , 'r') as f:
4
file = json.load(f)
5
id = file['id']
6
manufactures = file['manufactures ']
7
description = file["description"]
8
type = file['type']
9
assoc_functions = file["assoc_functions"]
10
assoc_labware = file["assoc_labware"]
11
if type == "rack":
12
rows = file["rows"]
13
columns = file["columns"]
14
sep_rows = file["sep_rows"]
15
sep_columns = file["sep_columns"]
16
dimensions = file['dimensions ']
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
61
==PAGE:70==
Table 6.1: Labware Parameters and Characteristics
Parameter
Characteristics
id
The ID of the labware
manufacturer
Manufacturer of the labware (e.g., custom, external...)
description
Labware description: non-technical name and other relevant informa-
tion
type
Type of labware (e.g., rack, workpiece...)
assoc_functions
The functionalities associated with this labware (SiLA features)
assoc_Labware
Labware associated with this one (id)
rows
Number of rows and separation between each one (if applicable)
columns
Number of columns and separation between each one (if applicable)
dimensions
Dimensions of the object
By gathering this information, the UR arm will be able to pull the necessary data from the
catalogue and move accordingly in relation to the labware specified for each functionality.
However, while it enables to navigate positions with respect to the labware’s coordinate
system (CS), the direct transformation from the base of the robot (which, as explained
earlier, is the one used for commanding the robot) to the labware CS origin is unknown
so far.
The process followed to determine the position of interest, namely the workpiece gripping
position, will depend on the nature of the action being performed. Since this project ex-
plores both a passive device, for the labware transfer involving the MoMa and UR module,
and active (UR module - Festo actuator interaction), it offers a great opportunity to explore
the intricacies of each case.
When it comes to defining the handover position for a passive device, it is the designated
vendor or developer who will determine this parameter. As such, the positions will be
defined as a simple 6D array in the robot’s base CS.
On the other hand, the active device must be able to calculate the correct handover posi-
tion by transforming the position read from the device DT, which is stored in a bar-code,
and reading the fiducial marker [34]. The pose of interest is expressed in the marker’s
CS, which means that it first must find it to process the data through the appropriate CS
transformations. This will be explored further in 8.1, as it has not been implemented in
this UR module.
Focusing on the implemented strategy, Figure 6.10 displays the transformations per-
formed in order to reach the final point of interest, or gripping point for the workpiece
in question. Firstly, the coordinates of the handover site (s) are fetched as explained
earlier, which corresponds to the position where the active device (MoMa) will put the
labware via the process explained in Figure 6.6 (T1). Then, the correct rack position will
be computed according to the index of the vial to be gripped as well as the dimensions
and distance between rows and columns defined in the JSON file for that specific labware
as specified in Table 6.1 (T2). Finally, the dimensions of the labware will be fetched from
its corresponding file and the final position of interest will be calculated (T3), which will be
62
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:71==
used to send a command to the robot arm to move the TCP in the base reference frame
(annotated as r in the figure).
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.10: CS transformations to labware gripping point
64
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:73==
7
Results
With the implementation sections having delineated the intricacies of the robotic module
along with all of its components, this chapter will focus on the outcomes of such imple-
mentation. Quantifying and evaluating the robustness and efficiency of the product is a
worthy endeavour to undertake in order to measure the value provided by its deployment.
The ultimate objective is to gauge the ability of the product to automate the required tasks.
On the other hand, a complete overview of the user experience will be examined by as-
sessing the perception and validity of the software implementation, specifically the inter-
face and its related components.
7.1
Full system testing
The main metrics to evaluate the performance of the robotic module are the frequency
of errors and the efficiency, meaning the number of vials capable of being processed per
unit of time.
Firstly, however, it is paramount to present the result of the mechanical design which, de-
spite being offered in virtual form in previous sections, is translated into a physical module
as seen in Figure 7.1. As such, not only is the design of each component validated, but
the process itself as well as the workflow employed can be seen to have successfully
achieved their objectives.
Figure 7.1: Physical module
Delving into the performance metrics of the robotic module, a series of test runs were
conducted to measure the failure rate as well as the duration of each vial processing task.
Execution times results
The duration of each task was broken down by vial and program, as each program (only
decapping and full run) was independently examined.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
65
==PAGE:74==
It is worth mentioning that the speed was limited to 250mm/s and 3.14rad/s for linear
and angular velocities respectively, as this is the recommended upper limit per Universal
Robots specifications in order to avoid major imprecision in the arm’s movement.
On that account, table 7.1 breaks down the duration of the full program’s processing time
of a single vial by type.
Processing time is understood as the time required for the robot arm to grip, decap, pour
and dispose of the vial. In order to obtain this data, the robot was commanded perform
test runs on an empty rack, given that the presence of a vial is indifferent to the duration
of the program, while writing specific timestamps of interest to a .csv file. For consistency
sake, the times recorded were:
• The instant the command was sent to the gripper to close the fingers, thus gripping
the vial in question.
• When the release command was executed, disposing of the vial. However, the sub-
task of disposing of a PFS does not involve the gripper, hence the timestamp will be
placed at the end of a singular vial loop, as seen in Section 6.1.
The sample size for these experiments is the size of the rack itself, meaning that for each
type of vial (PFS and Penfill) there are 12*13 samples to analyze.
Both small and large Penfills are merged into the same experiment, as there is no mean-
ingful difference in terms of total duration between the two. Hence, when the robot was
commanded to process Penfills, a random boolean was drawn in order to determine
whether it would be a large or small one.
Having recompiled all the necessary information, the average duration was computed,
along with the minimum and maximum processing times. The resulting variations are due
to the positioning of each vial and the unequal travelling distance from the corresponding
index on the input rack to the decapper or to the output rack. Nonetheless, it can be
observed that the range in this deviation is not significant given that standard deviation
for this dataset is 1.3s and 1.14s for PFSs and Penfills respectively.
Table 7.1: Duration of each task
Vial
Processing time[s]
Longest time
Shortest time
Average time
PFS
47.49
41.19
43.47
3ml Penfill
61.33
55.63
58.4
1.5ml Penfill
61.53
55.56
58.97
Additionally, adjusting the data to a Gaussian distribution may provide clarity to the results,
as it offers a visual representation of the tie required to complete the task (see Figures
7.2 and 7.3):
66
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:75==
Figure 7.2: Gaussian distribution for PFS’
processing time
Figure 7.3: Gaussian distribution for com-
bined Penfills’ processing time
Some sub-tasks within the program necessitate a closer examination, as their duration
may impact the total run time and is excluded from the processing time described earlier.
Table 7.2 displays these parameters and corresponding values:
Table 7.2: Duration of each sub-task
Sub-task
Duration[s]
Finger resetting (avoiding collisions when
approaching vial)
8
Robot arm moves to next rack index
3.12 (average)
On the other hand, the decapping program does show more deviation in processing time,
as by design the first row on the rack requires fewer movements to process a single vial.
Thus, the processing duration has been divided to reflect these deviations in Table 7.3.
Similarly to the previous test, both large and small Penfills were randomly assigned, vir-
tually, since no physical vials are used, to the rack until it was full. The experiment was
repeated multiple times for the first row alone in order to avoid outliers having a significant
impact on the final results:
Table 7.3: Duration of each task in the decapping program
Row
Vial
Longest time [s]
Shortest time [s]
Average time [s]
First row
3ml Penfill
18.04
15.22
16.77
1,5ml Penfill
19.04
15.5
17.14
Rows 2-13
3ml Penfill
48.82
41.5
44.31
1,5ml Penfill
48.45
42.06
44.74
Once again, the data utilized to compute these parameters was gathered in a similar
manner to the previous experiment, where a timestamp was placed at the beginning and
end of each vial processing task, with the gripping and release of the vial marking the
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
67
==PAGE:76==
specific instants to capture respectively.
Figures 7.4 and 7.5 present the Gaussian distributions for each process, where it is evident
that the small increments in travel distance by the robot arm when handling small Penfills
cause the same effect on the duration.
Figure 7.4: Gaussian distribution for Penfill
decapping time (first row)
Figure 7.5: Gaussian distribution for Penfill
decapping time (rest of rows)
Furthermore, the actuators’ execution time was also evaluated, as seen in Table 7.4.
Table 7.4: Duration of each actuator’s task
Actuator
Task
Duration[s]
Simultaneous
Decapper
Grip
2
No
Release
2.5
Yes
Festo
Close
0.9
Yes
Open
5
Yes
It is worth noting that despite the high duration of some of the actions described, in these
particular cases, the total duration time of the program will be unaffected as they can be
performed simultaneously with any other action involving the robot arm. On the other
hand, the robot must keep the vial in place and wait for the decapper to extract the cap,
preventing any simultaneous action from the arm.
Performance testing
Trial runs to gather data on the reliability of the system, and thus evaluate the robustness
of the solution were conducted in a similar manner to the previous section. However,
these tests must be performed with real vials, as evaluating the movement patterns alone
would not give an accurate indication of the system’s error frequency.
Given that the design process detailed in Section 5 differentiates between types of vials, in
so far as different components were designed for one vial exclusively, the metrics should
reflect this categorization.
Consequently, the results for this section are broken down per program and per vial, as
seen in Table 7.5:
68
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:77==
Table 7.5: Failure test
Vial
Program
Sample size
Failures
Failure rate (%)
PFS
Decapping + pouring
156
0
0
3ml Penfill
Decapping + pouring
90
2
2.22
Decapping
87
0
0
1.5ml Penfill
Decapping + pouring
86
0
0
Decapping
89
1
1.12
Having established the overall reliability of the product, further examination into the source
of error may provide insightful information of potential areas for improvement, which will
be discussed in the next chapter.
Hence, a rundown of the different failures’ source of error can be observed in 7.6:
Table 7.6: Source of error frequency
Action
Count
Lost grip on vial
2
Unsuccessful decapping (actuator)
1
Some observations to extract from this data are the need for improvement in the robust-
ness of the fingers, which will be explored in future chapters. Another observation refers
to the reliability of the robot arm’s movement patterns, which did not cause a single error
in the entire sample size.
7.2
Interface prototype validation
In order to assess the success of the UI prototype built to facilitate the execution of the
programs for the end-users, one must retrospectively consider the initial objectives set
out to achieve.
The first objective to be analyzed is in relation to the goal of creating a bridge between the
lowest level of code commanding the UR arm to follow certain movement patterns and
executing SiLA commands from the front-end, amassing multiple UR arm commands.
As such, given the success of the implementation, this report can pave the way for fu-
ture work and serve as a foundation upon which to build more complex applications, both
from the mechanical and the software perspectives. As far as larger frameworks are con-
cerned, such as LAPP (2.2.2, this project demonstrates the ability of UR arms to behave
as LAPP devices and be integrated into large-scale fully automated laboratories, which
will act end-to-end autonomously. By encapsulating the UR module in a SiLA server as
achieved in this project, seamless inter-device communication and operation is enabled.
Secondly, the UX was evaluated by conducting a series of one-on-one interviews with
potential users by employing the Think Aloud methodology in order to gauge the level of
success of the prototyped UI. The results proved to be encouraging, as every intervie-
wee was able to correctly identify the functionalities of every component present in the
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
69
==PAGE:78==
interface without any prior explanation on how to operate it, as only the general context
of the application was provided. Positive feedback was received in relation to the added
features, in particular the PopUp component previously explained in Section 6.3.2, as it
was perceived to prevent potential human errors in dealing with the set-up of the program.
While there are obvious areas for improvement, as will be discussed in later sections,
users responded favorably to the proposed UI in comparison to the default GUI offered
by UR (as seen in Figure 2.7), given that the latter offers a less intuitive and complex inter-
face when performing similar tasks to the former, which is stripped down of unnecessary
features and provides exclusive features to facilitate its navigation.
7.3
LAPP integration
The last component to be analyzed in terms of results is the potential integration of such
a device into a larger laboratory framework, specifically LAPP [34], discussed in Section
2.2.2. This integration aligns with the vision of achieving a fully automated laboratory
environment, where human intervention is minimized.
To realize this integration, several steps have been taken. Firstly, a set of SiLA features
and corresponding commands have been developed and integrated within the Universal
Robot (UR) module. These SiLA Features facilitate the exchange of labware between
the Mobile Manipulator (MoMa) and the stationary robot, enabling seamless interaction
and coordination. The complete architecture of the interaction as seen in Figure 6.6 can
be tested from the side of the UR module and Festo sub-module, without replicating the
exact scenario where a MoMa would be present in the labware exchange.
Consequently, a simple Python script was created to initialize a SiLA client capable of
connecting to the server comprising the full set of features. Within the script, the appro-
priate code to execute the corresponding SiLA Commands, which will essentially act as
a scheduler between the UR module and Festo sub-module, was initialized to assess the
response of both modules.
Given the success of the robot’s movement patterns seen in the previous sections in this
chapter, it is not surprising that the behaviour is not dissimilar, as it essentially re-packages
the same lines of code in a larger number of functions. To paint a clearer picture, the
commands corresponding to the pick and place interaction between the UR module and
Actuator (following Figure 6.6) where the former acts as an active device, are as follows:
• PrepareForOutput command is sent to the arm, which moves to the corresponding
handover position on the rack.
• PrepareForInput is executed for the Festo actuator, which triggers the appropriate
DOs to adopt the corresponding state in order to reach desired position.
• PutLabware will open the fingers, releasing the Penfill onto the rack sitting on the
actuator.
• LabwareDelivered will be left empty, as for the purposes of this module the actuator
does nothing with the received labware. In its place, one could potentially link it
to trigger the corresponding commands to read the bar-code on the vial, if such a
capability were to be integrated, for example.
As a result, each SiLA command was correctly executed, triggering the related actions
from each module. As a drawback, enabling this interoperability requires time delays to
be implemented to ensure there are no overlaps in the execution of each command.
70
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:79==
Additionally, the labware ontology framework proposed in Section 6.4, which aims to au-
tomate the computation or discovery of gripping positions for different labware within the
robot’s frame of reference, was tested on the UR arm to validate its architecture.
The conducted test is based on reaching the desired vial gripping position on a specific
index on the rack and comparing the TCP’s pose, in the robot’s base CS, to the computed
value arrived at through the implementation of the labware ontology. Given that the rest
of the positions on the rack will be reached through palletizing, meaning that fixed param-
eters will determine the corresponding position, only the first row and column are worth
analyzing. Table 7.7 presents the results for each vial:
Table 7.7: Gripping position comparison
Vial
Axis
Real pose (experimental) [mm]
Computed (labware ontology) [mm]
PFS
x
-154.62
-155
y
-265.8
-266
z
109.2
109.15
Penfill
x
-154.62
-154.5
y
-265.8
-266
z
91.65
91.25
The variation in parameters was not significant enough for the gripper to not complete the
gripping of any vial. However, for the specific test of only decapping vials, the pliability of
the fingertips introduced enough deviation for the robot arm to not be able to achieve the
correct handover position to return the Penfill to the same input rack. Increased rigidity in
the fingers, via design optimization or fabrication methods, would subdue this error.
In conclusion, both labware ontology and the particular SiLA features show great potential
in terms of compatibility with larger solutions such as LAPP, with some of the initial steps
being successfully implemented.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:81==
8
Discussion
Previous sections have analyzed both the mechanical and software implementation of the
solution developed to address the challenges posed in Section 4.2, as well as discussing
the results obtained from them in detail and quantifying the achievements attained when
testing and deploying such a solution.
The standout feature of this project is the amalgamation of cross-functional disciplines to
form an enhanced and holistic solution to the stated challenges. By combining expertise
in robotics, automation, software development, and laboratory processes, this project has
successfully tackled the complexities involved in laboratory liquid handling with a robotic
arm. This cross-functional approach has allowed for a comprehensive understanding of
the requirements and constraints of both the mechanical and software aspects of the
solution.
The mechanical implementation, involving the integration of the UR robot with its periph-
eral components, has provided a reliable and efficient solution for transferring labware.
The passive device, with its defined handover positions and the ability to handle different
types of labware, offers flexibility and adaptability to various laboratory setups. It stream-
lines the workflow by automating the transfer of labware, reducing the need for manual
intervention and the associated risks of errors or contamination. Furthermore, the active-
passive device interaction involving the UR module and the Festo actuator showcases
the potential for more complex and dynamic movements in laboratory automation. This
enables the system to perform tasks that require precise positioning and manipulation of
labware, expanding the scope of applications for this solution.
On the software side, the SiLA UC project has demonstrated its capability to provide a
standardized and inter-operable interface for controlling SiLA-compliant devices. SiLA
standards enable seamless integration and communication between different devices,
regardless of their manufacturers. The modifications made to the front-end component,
including the user interface improvements and the introduction of the PopUp component,
have enhanced the user experience and minimized human-induced errors. The intuitive
and user-friendly interface allows operators to interact with the system efficiently, reducing
the learning curve and increasing productivity. Additionally, the labware ontology and
data transformation have automated the movement patterns of the robot arm, providing
seamless integration with the laboratory workflow. The system can interpret and execute
commands based on predefined labware configurations, eliminating the need for manual
programming for each specific task.
When comparing the achieved results to the state-of-the-art solutions, several advan-
tages of this project become evident. The integration of the UR robot arm with the MoMa
passive device offers a cost-effective alternative to more complex and specialized liquid
handling systems. Traditional laboratory automation solutions often require significant up-
front investment and customization to accommodate different types of labware or work-
flow changes. In contrast, the modular design of this solution allows for scalability and
adaptability, with the capability to handle various labware formats without extensive recon-
figuration or additional hardware. The use of SiLA standards ensures compatibility with
a wide range of laboratory devices, facilitating interoperability and future scalability. This
compatibility enables laboratories to integrate the solution seamlessly into their existing
setup and expand it with other SiLA-compliant devices as needed.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
73
==PAGE:82==
The user-centered design improvements in the front-end component enhance usability
and reduce the learning curve for operators. Human factors and ergonomics have been
taken into account during the development process to ensure that the system is intuitive
and easy to use. The user interface improvements, such as clear and informative visual
feedback, error notifications, and streamlined navigation, contribute to a more efficient and
error-free operation. By prioritizing the user experience, this solution empowers laboratory
personnel with a tool that enhances their productivity and reduces the likelihood of errors,
ultimately improving the overall efficiency of laboratory processes.
However, it is important to acknowledge some limitations and areas for future improve-
ment, which will be explored further in detail, focusing on the path towards full laboratory
automation and the LAPP vision.
8.1
Future work
Significant progress needs to be made across the fields of robotics, computer vision and
automation in order to realize the full laboratory automation vision described in Section
2.2. Nonetheless, this section will focus on the immediate steps necessary in order to
move towards such a vision, while maintaining the solution described in this project as
the main focal point in relation to a fully automated laboratory paradigm.
Firstly, the automated solution presented requires the assistance of laboratory technicians
or operators to feed the input racks to the module as well as commencing the correspond-
ing program via the proposed interface. Ideally, however, this task would be handled by a
mobile robot with access to the device’s capabilities and specifications, or in other words,
a SiLA-compliant MoMa.
In order for the mobile robot to have access to this data, a bar-code would be placed
on the surface of the UR module ensuring clear visibility for the MoMa’s camera system.
Once the mobile robot is made aware of the device’s capabilities, functionalities and re-
quirements by fetching the information stored in the barcode, it can be commanded to
perform the corresponding task to deliver the labware to the passive device, via the same
process and steps previously explained in Section 2.2.2. Figure 8.1 depicts this scenario
in an analogous manner as Figure 2.8:
74
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:83==
Figure 8.1: Integration of UR module with the LAPP framework
Delving deeper into the interaction between the MoMa and the device’s pose marker as
well as barcode, the latter should follow the following structure:
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
75
==PAGE:84==
Table 8.1: Parameters of Digital Twin [43]
Parameter
Characteristics
Form
The geometric structure of the entity
Can contain dimensions, CS definitions and 3D models
Functionality
The entity’s capabilities, movement or purpose
Definition of the control interface and parameters
Health
State of the entity with respect to its ideal state
Location
Position and orientation (pose)
With respect to the environment, layout or other entity
Process
Activities in which the entity is engaged
Scheduling parameters and models
Time
Duration to complete an activity
Timestamp
State
Measured (live) values of entity and environment parameters
Performance
Measured operation with respect to the optimal operation
Environment
The physical and virtual environment as a parameter
Miscellaneous
Requirements Qualification
Table 8.2: Parameters of device Digital Twin prototype [43]
Piece of information
As digital twin parameter
Robotic tasks,
sub-tasks,
and motion se-
quences e.g., transport by pick & place
Functionality
Type of workpiece:
ANSI/SLAS micro-plate,
Falcon tube, etc.
Functionality
Location of the marker (m) in relation to the de-
vice CS (d)
Form
Simplified collision geometry of the device, de-
fined in d
Form
Positions.
e.g., Hand-over site (s), Site ap-
proach (ss), Device approach (sd)
Form
Precision requirements
Miscellaneous
76
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:85==
As such, the MoMa will be able to read the hand-over sites positions from the device’s DT
in Table 8.2, which will be in the marker’s frame of reference, and create the appropriate
CS transformations to reach the hand-over position in the MoMa’s base reference frame.
The complete breakdown of the process for these CS transformations has been explained
in Section 2.3.2.
When aggregating every component, the process seen in Figure 6.6 from the MoMa’s
perspective can be summarized as follows:
1. The robot moves in front of the marker and processes the information.
2. Hand-over positions are fetched from the passive device’s (UR module) DT.
3. The corresponding hand-over position w.r.t the MoMa’s base reference frame is
calculated.
4. PrepareForOutput command is instantiated from the scheduler, the mobile robot
moves its end-effector to position.
5. PutLabware command is instantiated and the MoMa releases the labware.
6. Once the UR module processes all the vials, a PrepareForInput command is sent
to the MoMa, which performs step three.
7. PrepareForInput command is initiated, which commands the robot to move the end-
effector to the computed hand-over site
8. GetLabware commands the robot to pick up the output rack.
Another aspect that would bring significant value to this project is the integration of the
module with LIMS, which was marked as a will not have during the initial stage of the
planning phase according to the prioritisation described in Section 4.1. The added value
brought by the integration of a LIMS API is the end-to-end tracking of individual vials,
accompanying the piece through every stage of its life cycle.
Moreover, this also represents a crucial step towards full laboratory automation, as the
LAPP framework makes use of LIMS for asset management [34]. However, significant
integration efforts would have to be made in order to achieve such purpose, as not only
is it an intense software development task but it also requires the addition of a bar-code
reading system within the proposed UR module.
Taking advantage of the solution proposed in Figure 6.6, this new bar-code reading mod-
ule could be inserted into the existing one since the solution introduced is designed for
scalability of this sort. As such, the necessary steps to replace the existing actuator mod-
ule with another one with bar-code reading capabilities can be summed up as follows:
1. Develop the bar code module and the code required to perform the corresponding
actions once a vial is placed.
2. Create a SiLA wrapper for the functions enabling the discovery of functionalities and
hand-over positions w.r.t the base of the UR robot.
3. Create a Client program that can instantiate both modules (scheduler).
On the other hand, improvements could be introduced to the mechanical design of the
prototype, starting with the fingers. As explained, the methodology employed to achieve
a satisfactory finger design was based on an iterative process, which was terminated at
the point where time restrictions did not allow for any further considerations.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
77
==PAGE:86==
However, the first element to be improved is the structural strength of the fingers. Given
the thinness of some of the fingertips in the design (Figure 5.8), some bends were found
when gripping workpieces, which could be ameliorated with further analysis and fine-
tuning. Furthermore, despite the added cost, manufacturing the designed pieces in metals
such as steel could significantly improve the robustness of the final product.
Similarly, the support piece for the rack moved by the actuator (see Figure 5.19) allows
for minimal deviations as it can bend when force is applied by the moving actuator piece,
which could also be easily solved by cutting a sheet of steel to increase rigidity. In this
case, the costs to create such a metal piece are significantly lower than in the previous
example.
Finally, the input rack could be designed in a modular manner in order to save material
when printing new designs, as the current design calls for tedious waiting periods for each
re-print, which inhibit the agile development and testing of alternative solutions.
On the software side, novel features could be introduced to the UI to create a more com-
prehensive and all-encompassing experience for the user by assimilating functionalities
seen in Teach Pendant or in the exhaustive interfaces seen in Section 2.1.2. Implement-
ing functionalities such as teaching modes or resetting buttons could provide value to the
end user.
Most importantly, however, data storage is a challenge worth tackling in the short term,
given that most parameters used for the development of this project were locally stored
on the developer’s machine. Hence, the usage of a database could prove to be useful for
future data management purposes. Moreover, in the case that interfaces such as the one
proposed in this project are utilized, platforms such as MongoDB [56] provide a plethora of
functionalities to facilitate its use and integration with other commonly used technologies
such as Python or web-development technologies like React.js, with the employment of
the MERN tech stack (MongoDB, Express.js, React.js and Node.js) [57].
As a result, extra functionalities could be added to the interface as well as in order to
advance towards the full automation paradigm and they do require the use of a database
in which to store and easily disseminate information and data.
78
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:87==
9
Conclusions
The proposed topic of discussion for this dissertation revolves around the field of robotics
in the laboratory environment, as it comprises one of the main technologies employed
for automating manual processes with great potential and rapid growth. The adoption of
new robotic technologies enables the automation of tedious and repetitive tasks in favor
of liberating personnel and ultimately increase productivity, as employees would be freed
from these tasks and able to focus on activities relying on human-specific capabilities such
a critical thinking, emotional intelligence, innovation, etc.
Ranging from liquid-handling to sample processing, laboratory robotics encompass a
wide range of tasks with a plethora of different approaches and methodologies.
For
NovoNordisk, this field is of great interest as there is a myriad of manual processes per-
formed by employees that would benefit greatly by the implementation of automation so-
lutions. This is the case for this projects’ product, a robotic module capable of processing
multiple vials at the user’s command. Given the demand for solutions such as the one
described in this report, similar products have been developed over the years attempt-
ing to solve similar challenges. However, the module developed merges and combines
individual processes to create a new and more capable solution for sample-handling.
The success of this project hinges on the ability of the proposed solution to process three
different kind of vials, PFS and both small and large Penfills, which entails the ability of
decapping, pouring and disposing of said vials in a single and compact solution. This will
prevent workers from being forced to use single-purpose machines with different opera-
tional methods and simplify the workflow.
Consequently, a new set of challenges arise when integrating various solutions, as each
one is designed to solve its unique challenge and integrating every component is not
feasible. Hence, the resulting solution will merge and combine different aspects from
these previous products along with offering novel designs and strategies to adequately
integrate all required functionalities, as was explained in Section 4.2.
The process for achieving such a solution commences with planning the development
phases of the project taking into account the stakeholders’ priorities and requirements, as
has been described in Section 4. With the main task recently discussed, the list of key
goals to achieve is as follows:
1. Design and prototype a robotic solution capable of processing both Penfills and
PFS. Consequently, the integration of decapping and pouring functionalities must
be included in the solution. The module should also be adaptable to two different
type of vials, Anton and Appearance, into which the liquid inside of PFS and Penfills
will be poured.
2. Develop a program capable of decapping the maximum amount of Penfills possible
for each run, as this task by itself is also in high demand and would add great value
to laboratory technicians.
3. Integrate the solution within a larger laboratory automation framework. In this case,
the SiLA framework will be integrated into the software architecture of the solution.
4. Facilitate the execution of the developed programs by developing an intuitive and
easy-to-use user interface, incorporating clear instructions on how to operate the
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
79
==PAGE:88==
module.
These four goals will provide the foundation upon which the development process will be
focused on.
Agile methodologies [44] were adopted throughout the course of the development of the
project, employing concepts from Scrum to plan and execute tasks in an efficient and
productive manner. These concepts include holding weekly meetings where upcoming
sprints would be planned and past sprints would be scrutinized and evaluated.
Furthermore, in so far as stakeholders’ availability allowed it, regular meetings were con-
ducted with end-users in order to evaluate the progress made by integrating the received
feedback as well as re-analyze the priorities established and plan accordingly. The latter
was carried out via the MoSCow prioritization method [47].
Having established the workflow foundations and objectives, the development process
can be divided into two sections: mechanical design and software architecture.
The former intends to achieve a prototype of every component necessary to perform the
tasks listed earlier. As such, each one needs to be scrutinized meticulously to arrive at
a harmonious design prototype where every sub-module complements the next one and
works seamlessly with the robot arm and the custom fingers attached to it.
The fingers (as seen in Figure 5.8) particularly deserve further study, as they represent the
only mechanical interface between the physical world and the robot. The design process
was based on a variety of studies [8] [14], as key concepts from each were adopted to
carry out the corresponding grasp planning and finger design analysis. The proposed
methodology for finger design constitutes a slight novelty as it pertains to multi-purpose
fingers, due to its approach of combining multiple fingertips sketched based on a trial and
error heuristic built on top of the aforementioned methods independent to this report 5.7.
The rest of the physical components were designed in accordance with the finger’s capa-
bilities and limitations, as it is imperative to achieve a cohesive design, free of misalign-
ments. Hence, the subsequent components intend to maximize the margin of error for
the robot’s movements as well as simplify the workflow.
Such is the case with the decapping sub-module, where the PFS decapper depicted in
Figure 5.11 component was improved from analogous solutions within the company to
achieve a higher level of robustness and reliability. Along with the actuator incorporated
to achieve the same purpose for Penfills (Figure 5.13), the crucial challenge of decapping
both types of vials is successfully achieved.
Finally, the output module (Figure 5.19) incorporates a linear actuator from Festo as well
as a linear guide parallel to it, acting as a support for a 3D-designed rack on which Penfills
will rest to be poured with the help of the fingers. This solution allows for both Penfills and
PFS to be processed in the same output rack and vials, fulfilling the main requirement of
the project.
On the other hand, the software architecture (displayed in Figure 6.1) employed for the
prototype is comprised of a client-server relation. Its main functionality is being able to in-
terface both the front-end and the SiLA Features created to encapsulate relevant functions
in relation to the interaction among different components, as well as the main programs
described earlier (decapping and decapping + pouring).
The presented SiLA Features were designed to illustrate the behaviour of the device in the
environment of an end-to-end automated lab, describing every interaction with the robotic
80
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:89==
module in SiLA-compatible terminology 6.6, with the proposed commands fulfilling the
same requirements as the isolated programs.
Due to limited software availability, the full range of functionalities can not be tested, as a
laboratory scheduler [32] [31] is necessary to carry out the complete cycle. Nonetheless, a
proof of concept was achieved via a Python client commanding the execution of the same
SiLA Commands, proving the potential for the proposed framework and SiLA architecture.
For the time being, however, the low-level robot commands necessary to perform the
main tasks, decapping and pouring of the vials, were successfully integrated within the
SiLA framework as lone commands to be executed at the user’s request. Making use of
the open-source Universal Client [50], these can be presented to the lab technicians in
an intuitive UI, facilitating the correct execution of the programs and minimizing human-
induced errors in the form of incorrectly positioning the initial vials on the rack, for example.
This approach offers an alternative to complex GUI presented by manufacturers, elimi-
nating unnecessary features and simplifying the experience for the end-user. As a result,
a prototype of an intuitive and SiLA-enabled interface was integrated with the low-level
robot scripting.
The final element in the software solution is the proposal for a labware ontology imple-
mentation, with similar intentions and methods employed by Mark Doerr in his work [40].
The purpose of this component is to automate the computation or discovery of gripping
positions for the corresponding labware in the robot’s frame of reference. Figure 6.10
illustrates the appropriate CS transformations to arrive at the desired position, enabling
the robot’s TCP to be aligned with the final coordinates. The full implementation of this
feature, while feasible, does not improve the final product presented to stakeholders, as
it only enhances the integration of new devices in the LAPP context 2.2.2.
Nevertheless, the proposed framework was tested as a proof of concept to validate its
structure. It was able to arrive at all gripping positions for any vial within the input rack by
storing and sharing the dimensions and composition of each component, showing great
potential for future applications in the realm of full laboratory automation.
Having instituted the bases for the final prototype, the entire system can be tested from
end to end. Hence, both the SiLA Server representing the robotic module and the custom
Universal Client will be initiated to assess the performance of the prototype. Both the
speed and reliability were tested on a large number of samples showing promising results
in terms of robustness and efficiency.
Starting with the vials processing time, the duration of a single cycle (seen in Tables 7.1
and 7.3) for all types of vials in both programs (decapping and decapping + pouring)
was measured via software for maximum consistency. The minimal deviations from the
average demonstrate the regularity and robustness of the coded movement patterns.
On the other hand, a similar sample size was employed to gauge the amount of failures
seen in the prototype. With the results being available in Tables 7.5 and 7.6, the developed
product shows great promise for a future potential deployment. Still, improvements can
and should be incorporated into both the mechanical and software prototypes to enhance
the final product’s robustness, as is discussed in Section 8.1 depicting future work.
Returning to the theoretical framework of laboratory automation, throughout the last forty
years, the field has evolved rapidly from its roots [3], with new advancements edging to-
wards a full laboratory automation paradigm. As such, innovative solutions and proposals
are emerging to ideate the ideal framework in which no human intervention will be needed
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
81
==PAGE:90==
to operate the laboratory beyond supervision.
The LAPP framework [34] revolves around the idea of systematically designing and inte-
grating laboratory devices with inter-communication capabilities, enabling the exchange
of data and remote operability. A basic illustration is presented in Figure 2.9 of a mo-
bile robot, similar to the ones proposed in the same publication, that interacts with the
described robotic module. It is important to understand the roadmap describing the nec-
essary steps to undertake in order to realize this vision, as is described in Section 8.1.
As previously described, some of these have already been developed and integrated
within the UR module, most relevantly the set of SiLA Features and the commands com-
prised within each of them required to operate the exchange of labware from the MoMa
to the stationary robot or vice-versa 6.6.
Moreover, the initial steps towards a fully-fledged labware ontology framework have been
conceptualized in 2.3.1, proving the validity of such a strategy for integration with SiLA or
even LAPP. Further development can approximate this use case to its great potential, with
additional technologies being imaginably integrated to enhance the functionalities offered,
which is also described in Section 8.1.
Overall, this project aims to provide a viable prototype for sample handling in Novo-
Nordisk’s laboratories while establishing the basis for a potential integration of the module
in a fully automated laboratory. The immense potential for this solution as well as similar
products has been established via the proposed software and mechanical architecture
and design. Future work will undoubtedly generate great value for NovoNordisk in terms
of productivity and workforce availability.
In conclusion, this project has successfully addressed the challenges in laboratory liq-
uid handling with a robotic arm by integrating mechanical and software components in a
cross-functional manner. The achieved results demonstrate the potential for cost-effective
and flexible automation solutions in laboratory environments. By leveraging SiLA stan-
dards and user-centered design principles, this project sets a solid foundation for future
advancements in laboratory automation and robotics. The amalgamation of expertise
from different disciplines has resulted in a comprehensive solution that streamlines lab-
oratory processes, reduces manual intervention, and enhances overall efficiency. With
further developments in vision systems and advanced algorithms, this solution has the po-
tential to revolutionize laboratory automation, enabling more precise, reliable, and adapt-
able liquid handling processes.
82
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Brian Buntz. Pharma’s been slow to adopt Industry 4.0 — but that could change.
Feb. 2021. URL: https://www.pharmaceuticalprocessingworld.com/pharmas-been-
slow-to-adopt-industry-4-0-but-that-could-change/.
[2]
Lucia Darino Laura Bremme. Automation and the future of work in the US biopharma
industry. Aug. 2020. URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/life-sciences/our-
insights/automation-and-the-future-of-work-in-the-us-biopharma-industry.
[3]
James N. Little Ph.D. “The Zymate Laboratory Automation Systems”. In: Journal of
Liquid Chromatography 9.14 (1986), pp. 3197–3201. DOI: 10.1080/01483918608074177.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/01483918608074177. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
01483918608074177.
[4]
Masahide Sasaki. “A fully automated clinical laboratory: The history of the sys-
temic and robotic automated clinical laboratory at the Kochi Medical School”. In:
Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 21.2 (1993). 2ND INTERNA-
TIONAL CONFERENCE ON ROBOTICS IN LABORATORY MEDICINE, pp. 159–
168. ISSN: 0169-7439. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-7439(93)89006-V. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/016974399389006V.
[5]
Poonam J. Prasad and G.L. Bodhe. “Trends in laboratory information management
system”. In: Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 118 (2012), pp. 187–
192. ISSN: 0169-7439. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemolab.2012.07.001. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169743912001438.
[6]
T. W. Steele, Alain Laugier, and François Falco. “The impact of LIMS design and
functionality on laboratory quality achievements”. In: Accreditation and Quality As-
surance (Mar. 1999). ISSN: 1432-0517. DOI: 10.1007/s007690050324. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s007690050324.
[7]
J.E.H. Stafford. “LIMS: an automating or informating technology?” In: Laboratory
Automation & Information Management 33.3 (1998), pp. 163–168. ISSN: 1381-
141X. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1381 - 141X(98 ) 80002 - 6. URL: https : / /
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1381141X98800026.
[8]
M. Honarpardaz et al. “Finger design automation for industrial robot grippers: A re-
view”. In: Robotics and Autonomous Systems 87 (2017), pp. 104–119. ISSN: 0921-
8890. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2016.10.003. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889015303171.
[9]
Van-Duc Nguyen. “Constructing force-closure grasps”. In: The International Journal
of Robotics Research 7.3 (1988), pp. 3–16.
[10]
Yun-Hui Liu, Miu-Ling Lam, and D. Ding. “A complete and efficient algorithm for
searching 3-D form-closure grasps in the discrete domain”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Robotics 20.5 (2004), pp. 805–816. DOI: 10.1109/TRO.2004.829500.
[11]
Dan Ding, Yun-Hui Lee, and Shuguo Wang. “Computation of 3-D form-closure grasps”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 17.4 (2001), pp. 515–522. DOI:
10.1109/70.954765.
[12]
Mohammadali Honarpardaz, Johan Ölvander, and Mehdi Tarkian. “Fast finger de-
sign automation for industrial robots”. In: Robotics and Autonomous Systems 113
(2019), pp. 120–131. ISSN: 0921-8890. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2018.
12.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889018304123.
[13]
Virgilio Velasco, Wyatt Newman, and Yong Zheng. “Computer-Assisted Gripper and
Fixture Customization via Rapid Prototyping”. In: (Sept. 1998).
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
83
==PAGE:92==
[14]
D T Pham, N S Gourashi, and E E Eldukhri. “Automated configuration of gripper
systems for assembly tasks”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical En-
gineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture 221.11 (2007), pp. 1643–1649.
DOI: 10.1243/09544054JEM878SC. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1243/09544054JEM878SC.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1243/09544054JEM878SC.
[15]
P. Zhang. “Advanced Industrial Control Technology”. In: Advanced Industrial Control
Technology (Jan. 2010). DOI: 10.1016/C2009-0-20337-0.
[16]
Iñaki Maurtua et al. “Natural multimodal communication for human–robot collabora-
tion”. In: International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems 14.4 (2017), p. 1729881417716043.
DOI: 10.1177/1729881417716043. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/1729881417716043.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/1729881417716043.
[17]
Nikos Dimitropoulos, George Michalos, and Sotiris Makris. “An outlook on future
hybrid assembly systems - the Sherlock approach”. In: Procedia CIRP 97 (2021).
8th CIRP Conference of Assembly Technology and Systems, pp. 441–446. ISSN:
2212-8271. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2020.08.004. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827120314876.
[18]
Mirko Wächter et al. “The ArmarX Statechart Concept: Graphical Programing of
Robot Behavior”. In: Frontiers in Robotics and AI 3 (2016). ISSN: 2296-9144. DOI:
10.3389/frobt.2016.00033. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frobt.
2016.00033.
[19]
Sebastian G. Brunner et al. “RAFCON: A graphical tool for engineering complex,
robotic tasks”. In: 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS). 2016, pp. 3283–3290. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2016.7759506.
[20]
Ting Zheng et al. “The applications of Industry 4.0 technologies in manufacturing
context: a systematic literature review”. In: International Journal of Production Re-
search 59.6 (2021), pp. 1922–1954. DOI: 10.1080/00207543.2020.1824085. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1824085. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2020.1824085.
[21]
Rasim Alguliyev, Yadigar Imamverdiyev, and Lyudmila Sukhostat. “Cyber-physical
systems and their security issues”. In: Computers in Industry 100 (2018), pp. 212–
223. ISSN: 0166-3615. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.04.017. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166361517304244.
[22]
Luigi Atzori, Antonio Iera, and Giacomo Morabito. “The Internet of Things: A survey”.
In: Computer Networks 54.15 (2010), pp. 2787–2805. ISSN: 1389-1286. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1389128610001568.
[23]
Alejandro Vera-Baquero, Ricardo Colomo-Palacios, and Owen Molloy. “Towards a
Process to Guide Big Data Based Decision Support Systems for Business Pro-
cesses”. In: Procedia Technology 16 (2014). CENTERIS 2014 - Conference on
ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN 2014 - International Conference on
Project MANagement / HCIST 2014 - International Conference on Health and So-
cial Care Information Systems and Technologies, pp. 11–21. ISSN: 2212-0173. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.protcy.2014.10.063. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2212017314002904.
[24]
Xun Xu. “From cloud computing to cloud manufacturing”. In: Robotics and Computer-
Integrated Manufacturing 28.1 (2012), pp. 75–86. ISSN: 0736-5845. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2011.07.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0736584511000949.
[25]
Christopher Naugler and Deirdre L. Church. “Automation and artificial intelligence
in the clinical laboratory”. In: Critical Reviews in Clinical Laboratory Sciences 56.2
84
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:93==
(2019). PMID: 30922144, pp. 98–110. DOI: 10.1080/10408363.2018.1561640. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408363.2018.1561640. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
10408363.2018.1561640.
[26]
Mohammadreza Ghobakhloo. “The future of manufacturing industry: a strategic
roadmap toward Industry 4.0”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Technology Manage-
ment 29.6 (2018), pp. 910–936. DOI: 10.1108/JMTM-02-2018-0057.
[27]
A.W.W. Yew, S.K. Ong, and A.Y.C. Nee. “Towards a griddable distributed manu-
facturing system with augmented reality interfaces”. In: Robotics and Computer-
Integrated Manufacturing 39 (2016), pp. 43–55. ISSN: 0736-5845. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2015.12.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0736584515301605.
[28]
Andrea Cherubini et al. “Collaborative manufacturing with physical human–robot
interaction”. In: Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing 40 (2016), pp. 1–
13. ISSN: 0736-5845. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2015.12.007. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0736584515301769.
[29]
Luiz Fernando C.S. Durão et al. “Distributed Manufacturing of Spare Parts Based
on Additive Manufacturing: Use Cases and Technical Aspects”. In: Procedia CIRP
57 (2016). Factories of the Future in the digital environment - Proceedings of the
49th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems, pp. 704–709. ISSN: 2212-8271.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.11.122. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2212827116312823.
[30]
Günter Gauglitz. “Lab 4.0: SiLA or OPC UA”. In: Analytical and Bioanalytical Chem-
istry 410.21 (Aug. 2018), pp. 5093–5094. DOI: 10.1007/s00216-018-1192-6.
[31]
Biosero. GreenButtonGo. URL: https://biosero.com/software/green- button- go-
scheduler/.
[32]
Equicon. Nicelab. URL: https://www.equicon.de/en/laboratory-automation/scheduling-
software-nicelab.
[33]
Xianghua Chu et al. “A LC-MS integration approach in life science automation:
Hardware integration and software integration”. In: 2015 IEEE International Con-
ference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE). 2015, pp. 979–984. DOI:
10.1109/CoASE.2015.7294226.
[34]
Ádám Wolf et al. “Towards robotic laboratory automation Plug & Play: The “LAPP”
framework”. In: SLAS technology 27.1 (2022), pp. 18–25.
[35]
Michail Kalaitzakis et al. “Fiducial Markers for Pose Estimation”. In: Journal of In-
telligent & Robotic Systems 101.4 (Mar. 2021), p. 71. ISSN: 1573-0409. DOI: 10.
1007/s10846-020-01307-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-020-01307-9.
[36]
Sara Roos-Hoefgeest, Ignacio Alvarez Garcia, and Rafael C. Gonzalez. “Mobile
robot localization in industrial environments using a ring of cameras and ArUco
markers”. In: IECON 2021 – 47th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Elec-
tronics Society. 2021, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/IECON48115.2021.9589442.
[37]
Andrej Babinec et al. “Visual Localization of Mobile Robot Using Artificial Markers”.
In: Procedia Engineering 96 (2014). Modelling of Mechanical and Mechatronic Sys-
tems, pp. 1–9. ISSN: 1877-7058. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.12.091.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877705814031427.
[38]
Sergio Garrido-Jurado et al. “Automatic generation and detection of highly reli-
able fiducial markers under occlusion”. In: Pattern Recognition 47 (June 2014),
pp. 2280–2292. DOI: 10.1016/j.patcog.2014.01.005.
[39]
Bioprotocols. The Laboratory Open Protocol Language (LabOP). URL: https : / /
bioprotocols.github.io/labop.
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
85
==PAGE:94==
[40]
Mark Doerr. LabOP / SiLA Labware Databank and Ontology. URL: https://github.
com/Bioprotocols/labware-databank/.
[41]
Michael Grieves and John Vickers. “Digital Twin: Mitigating Unpredictable, Undesir-
able Emergent Behavior in Complex Systems”. In: Transdisciplinary Perspectives
on Complex Systems: New Findings and Approaches. Ed. by Franz-Josef Kahlen,
Shannon Flumerfelt, and Anabela Alves. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2017, pp. 85–113. ISBN: 978-3-319-38756-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-38756-7_4.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-38756-7_4.
[42]
David Jones et al. “Characterising the Digital Twin: A systematic literature review”.
In: CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 29 (2020), pp. 36–52.
ISSN: 1755-5817. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2020.02.002. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1755581720300110.
[43]
Ádám Wolf et al. “Towards robotic laboratory automation Plug & play: Survey and
concept proposal on teaching-free robot integration with the lapp digital twin”. In:
SLAS Technology 28.2 (2023), pp. 82–88. ISSN: 2472-6303. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.slast.2023.01.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S247263032300002X.
[44]
Agile 101. 2023. URL: https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101/.
[45]
Valpadasu Hema et al. “Scrum: An Effective Software Development Agile Tool”.
In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 981.2 (Dec. 2020),
p. 022060. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/981/2/022060. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1757-899X/981/2/022060.
[46]
Jakob Nielsen. Thinking Aloud: The #1 Usability Tool. Jan. 2012. URL: https://
www.nngroup.com/articles/thinking-aloud-the-1-usability-tool/.
[47]
Eduardo Miranda. “Moscow Rules: A Quantitative Exposé”. In: Agile Processes in
Software Engineering and Extreme Programming. Ed. by Viktoria Stray et al. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 19–34. ISBN: 978-3-031-08169-9.
[48]
Máximo A. Roa and Raúl Suárez. “Finding locally optimum force-closure grasps”. In:
Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing 25.3 (2009), pp. 536–544. ISSN:
0736-5845. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2008.02.008. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0736584508000240.
[49]
A. Caldas et al. “New metric for wrench space reachability of multifingered hand with
contact uncertainties”. In: 2014 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced
Intelligent Mechatronics. 2014, pp. 1236–1242. DOI: 10.1109/AIM.2014.6878251.
[50]
SiLA group. SiLA Universal Client. URL: https://gitlab.com/SiLA2/universal-sila-
client/sila_universal_client.
[51]
Meta Open-source. A JavaScript library for building user interfaces. URL: https:
//legacy.reactjs.org/.
[52]
Javascript. Javascript.com. URL: https://www.javascript.com/.
[53]
Microsoft. Typescript. URL: https://www.typescriptlang.org/.
[54]
Material UI SAS. Move faster with intuitive React UI tools. URL: https://mui.com.
[55]
SDUrobotics. Universal Robots RTDE C++ Interface. URL: https : / / sdurobotics .
gitlab.io/ur_rtde/.
[56]
Simplilearn. Why Use MongoDB: What It Is and What Are the Benefits. Feb. 2023.
URL: https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/mongodb-tutorial/what-is-mongodb.
[57]
bocasay.com. What are the MERN stack’s advantages? Mar. 2020. URL: https:
//www.bocasay.com/what-mern-stacks-advantages/.
86
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:95==
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
87
==PAGE:96==
A
Appendix
 
Figure A.1: 1.5ml Penfill technical drawing
88
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:97==
 
Figure A.2: 3ml Penfill technical drawing
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
89
==PAGE:98==
 
Figure A.3: PFS technical drawing
90
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
==PAGE:99==
Title
Author
File
Revision
Document
Date
Sheets
Electrical design
IGVE
1.0
1 of 1
24-05-2023
MCB
2 poles
MCB
2 poles
MCB
2 poles
Robot controller
MCB
1 pole
MCB
1 pole
MCB
1 pole
L1N I1 I2 I3
I5 I6
I4
I7 I8
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
PLC
Actuator 1
A2
A1
C1
B1
B2
C2
Relay 1
Vcc
0 V
PE
A2
A1
C1
B1
B2
C2
Relay 2
+
-
-
+
M +
M -
Vcc
GND
DO_0
DO_1
GND
PWR
0 V
24 V
L
N
Festo Linear actuator
Vcc
GND
C/0
Vcc
GND
iolink master
Vcc & GND
C/0
Vcc
GND
POWER SUPPLY
+L
M
N
L1
PE
AC IN
DC OUT
Vdc
A
24V Power supply
POWER SUPPLY
+L
M
N
L1
PE
AC IN
DC OUT
Vdc
A
24V Power supply
Figure A.4: Complete electrical diagram
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
RPG 120-020
Produkt/Product:
Mastab/Scale: 1 : 1
www.weiss-robotics.com       Copyright Weiss Robotics GmbH & Co. KG, all rights reserved
WEISS ROBOTICS
Anwenderzeichnung/Customer Drawing
50
120
32,5
18
20 B0,02
47 ... 67
11,5
1
86
18,5
17
13,5
13,5
38
108 B0,02
55
4
14
10
P H7
6,5
P
G 1/8 -8 TIEF/DEEP
4
14
10
P H7
6
M
4x M6 -12 TIEF/DEEP
Position: geschlossen/closed
Figure A.5: Gripkit Pro L grrpper technical drawing
Optimization in automation design for laboratory liquid handling with a robotic arm
91
==PAGE:100==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
