==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
M. Sc. Thesis
June 23, 2023
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and
comparison
Author:
Andreas Bønnelykke de Reus
Supervisors:
Supervisor: Nicola Dragoni1
Co-supervisor: Tyge Tiessen2
Co-supervisor: Rune Hillebo Wiinberg3
1Professor, Head of Section, DTU Compute, Building 322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
2Assistant Professor, DTU Compute, Building 322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
3Head of Cybersecurity, Prevas A/S, 2730 Herlev, Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Embedded systems must work effectively and reliably. Sandboxing applications help these
systems work reliably and improve security by providing an isolated environment for appli-
cations to run in. They are used to mitigate system crashes and potential adversaries in
breaching the system. We used a Raspberry Pi 4 Model B as a test bench to determine the
influence of various sandboxing techniques. A baseline without sandboxing was compared to
SELinux, AppArmor, and Firejail. All of the sandboxes were subject to various benchmarks,
in this case, whetstone, dbench, IObench, and cyclictest. Variations in performance were
small, but AppArmor performed 4% better in the dbench benchmark and SELinux 5% worse.
All embedded systems vary widely with the resources available and recommendations are
given for different uses. The implementations that should be used are SELinux and AppAr-
mor. SELinux is recommended since it is able to create a system following a least privilege
principle. AppArmor is recommended since it is able to target a few specific applications
and isolate them while having methods for easily setup restrictions for applications.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Prevas A/S for the opportunity to work with them. Rune Hillebo
Wiinberg came up with the original idea for the project and participated in many helpful
discussions and provided feedback on ideas and concerns. The open atmosphere at Prevas
resulted in various discussions with colleagues at the desk or during lunch breaks.
I enjoyed the weekly discussions with my supervisor Jens Tyge Tiessen, who helped me
structure and plan the project. On various occasions, he created food for thought.
I would like to thank Christopher Bonnevie Henriksen for the weekly lunch meetings. Lastly,
I thank my family for their huge support.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
General concepts
2
2.1
Access control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Application Sandboxing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Linux kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Sandbox technologies
12
3.1
Android . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Linux Security Modules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
SELinux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
AppArmor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Firejail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
System Description
18
5
Benchmarking tools
19
5.1
Whetstone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Dbench
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
IOBench . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Cyclictest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Results
21
6.1
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
Security Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Discussion
33
7.1
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Faults and errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8
Conclusion
35
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
References
36
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1
The Bell-Lapadula model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Example of Namespaces in Linux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Virtual machine layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Example of applications running in a container . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
LSM architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6
Results of Whetstone benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Results of dbench benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
8
Results of IObench write benchmark without cache . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
9
Results of IObench write benchmark with cache . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
10
Results of IObench read benchmark with dropped caches . . . . . . . . . . .
26
11
Results of IObench read benchmark with cache
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
12
Results of minimum latency with cyclictest benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
13
Results of average latency with cyclictest benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
14
Results of maximum latency with cyclictest benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
15
Comparison of the different systems relative to the baseline . . . . . . . . . .
29
iv
==PAGE:6==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
List of Figures
Acronyms
ACL
-
Access Control List
ACM
-
Access Control Matrix
API
-
Application Programming Interface
BPF
-
Berkeley Packet Filter
CBAC
-
Context-Based Access Control
CPU
-
Central Processing Unit
CVE
-
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
CVSS
-
Common Vulnerability Scoring System
DAC
-
Discretionary Access Control
eBPF
-
extended Berkeley Packet Filter
GID
-
Group Identifier
IPC
-
Inter-Process Communication
IoT
-
Internet of Things
LSM
-
Linux Security Module
MAC
-
Mandatory Access Control
MWIPS
-
Millions Whetstone Instructions Per Second
OS
-
Operating System
POSIX
-
Portable Operating System Interface
RBAC
-
Role-Based Access Control
RSBAC
-
Rule-Set-Based Access Control
SUID
-
Set User ID
SELinux
-
Security-Enhanced Linux
UID
-
User Identifier
v
==PAGE:7==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
1
Introduction
An embedded system is a computer system specifically designed to perform dedicated func-
tions within a larger device, machine, or system.
It is a combination of hardware and
software components integrated into a single unit to carry out specific tasks or functions.
They are the core of many products ranging from digital watches to smartphones, smart
TVs, various Internet of Things (IoT) devices, large machinery in production lines, cars,
and avionics in aircraft. They are widespread and exist in products with huge variations in
available resources such as available memory, processing capabilities, and network interfaces.
A universal sandboxing- or isolation technique that fits all the different existing embedded
systems does not exist. With the increased usage of embedded systems from IoT and smart
devices, more and more systems get connected to the internet. When a system is connected
to the internet, it creates a whole new set of attack vectors, presenting hackers with the op-
portunity to target and compromise the system. As embedded systems are everywhere from
cars to smart devices, the impact of an attack can be critical. It could affect human lives
or production lines, which would need a vast amount of resources to be expended to resolve
such issues. The security aspect of such systems is of high importance. Previous reports
show that, e.g., cars have previously been hacked, where the attacker had full control of the
car. Sandboxing provides an isolated and controlled execution environment for applications,
enhancing security and minimizing potential risks.
Therefore this thesis seeks to explore the possibilities of sandbox and isolation techniques
for embedded systems using Linux to create an overview of the possibilities. The goal is to
provide a comprehensive understanding of their inner workings and evaluate their impact on
the performance of embedded systems when utilizing one of these techniques.
1.1
Thesis Outline
The structure of the thesis is as follows. First, the general concepts and fundamentals used
in Linux sandboxing and methods for isolation will be presented. After the general concepts,
the sandbox technologies analyzed in this thesis will be given an in-depth explanation of how
they function and which techniques are used to isolate applications. Then a description of the
system used for testing will be given. An introduction will be given to the benchmarking tools
used to test performance. It will contain information on what the different benchmarking
tools are testing and why it is useful in the context of embedded systems. The results will
show the performance impact the different sandboxing methods have on the system used.
The thesis also contains a security evaluation that goes into analyzing the attack surface of
each system and which vulnerabilities have been previously reported. The discussion leads
to recommendations for the utilization of each sandbox, exploring potential scenarios where
each sandbox can be applied. We will also go into what faults and errors could impact the
results of the performance test. Lastly, a conclusion to the thesis is given with some ideas
for future work.
1
==PAGE:8==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2
General concepts
As security has been increasingly focused on in the last decade, various mechanisms have
been set in place to make systems more robust and secure to hinder malicious actions and
prevent system crashes. The different security mechanisms help secure different layers of
the system. This section will focus on the general concepts behind the security of sandbox
environments.
2.1
Access control
Part of the security for any sandbox or virtual container is the access control mechanism.
Access control is a layer of security that restricts access to files and permissions of what
processes are allowed. These permissions consist of read, write and execute abbreviated as
rwx in Linux. E.g., when one process is allowed to read data from a file but not allowed to
write data or is allowed to write but not read. The purpose of access control is to determine
the privileges of processes and threads. On a higher level, it determines the privileges of
groups and users. There is a variety of ways to handle access control depending on where it
is used e.g. in a military context where a Bell-Lapadula model [1] can be used. The model
assumes that there is a set of security levels that is hierarchical and uses two principles. The
first principle states that users cannot write to lower classified documents than the user’s
clearance level, but users are able to write to a higher classified document. The second
principle states that users cannot read higher classified documents but are able to read
documents at their clearance level or below. This is just one example of access controls, but
there exist many different types of access controls. Just to name a few, there is Role-Based
Access Control (RBAC), Mandatory Access Control (MAC), Context-Based Access Control
(CBAC), and Rule-Set-Based Access Control (RSBAC). Some of these more complex access
controls can be combined with Discretionary Access Control (DAC) as a component for their
underlying access control.
2.1.1
Discretionary Access Control
The DAC is a simple form of access control that is commonly used as a component by more
complex access controls. It functions as users or groups are given a set of permissions. It
is discretionary in the form that users or objects can pass these permissions to other users
or objects, thus granting the users or objects these permissions and the ability to further
pass the permissions to other entities. This system requires trust between the one granting
the privileges and the one receiving them, as privileges might then escalate and be used for
malicious intent.
2.1.2
Mandatory Access Control
MAC is a strict form of access control commonly used in systems. MAC is based on a
strict access policy using labels and rules.
It functions as giving a subject, typically a
process, thread, or user a set of constraints for trying to perform an interaction with the
2
==PAGE:9==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.1
Access control
files or objects. The MAC’s security policy is handled by a security policy administrator,
who defines the rules. Unlike DAC’s ability to pass permissions, MAC restricts users from
making any modification to the constraints or rules forced by the MAC, thus disallowing
the ability to grant other users or objects permissions. This form of access control is more
strict when compared to DAC and relies heavily on the security policy administrator to be
a trusted entity.
2.1.3
Access Control List
An Access Control List (ACL) works by having a list of permissions for each user privilege
for accessing a file or performing an operation such as read, write, or execute. The ACL is
simply a list of one user and their privileges for all the files. This can also be implemented the
other way to show a single file and which users are allowed to access or perform operations
on the file. A collection of ACLs is called an Access Control Matrix (ACM) where all the
users and all the files are put in a matrix so that each column of the matrix represents an
ACL.
2.1.4
Type Enforcement
Type Enforcement (TE) is a form of access control mechanism. A set of rules is specified for
TE to handle the access control between a subject, where a subject is a user or a process, and
an object, which consists of a file, sockets, or other resources on the system. It gives priority
to MAC over DAC so that the MAC rules can override the DAC rules. The subjects and
objects are associated with a type identifier where a rule set or policy can be enforced. By
using the type identifiers it is possible to control the permissions of processes instead of just
users. It works by creating a domain where subjects of a specific type can act on objects of
specific types.
2.1.5
Multi-level security
The concept of Multi-level Security (MLS) in computer systems is to have a system with
a set of guidelines for users, usually called subjects, that have different security clearances.
The guidelines for the system consist of specifying the authorization of subjects for accessing
specific objects where an object is a resource in the form of a file, socket, or process accessing
one of these resources or a network interface. The idea is to prevent subjects from obtaining
information from an object that they are not authorized to access. One such system is the
Bell-Lapadula model mentioned in 2.1. The model ensures that the flow of information from
objects is not leaked to subjects who do not have the authorization to access such objects
with a higher security level, or that a subject does not leak information to an object with a
lower security level [2].
3
==PAGE:10==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.2
Application Sandboxing
Figure 1: The Bell-Lapadula model
The Bell-LaPadula model is an MLS model which can be seen in Figure 1, where the arrows
indicate the subject’s security levels that can read and write to objects with a specific security
level. This means that a subject with a confidential security level can read unclassified and
confidential objects but not objects with a security level of secret or higher. The subject is
also able to write to confidential, secret, and top secret objects, but is not allowed to write
to unclassified objects as information from the confidential area would leak into unclassified
objects and therefore allow subjects with a lower security level to obtain information from
a confidential security level.
2.1.6
Multi-category security
A Multi-Category Security (MCS) system is an adaption of MLS and uses categories that
are attached to objects and granted to subjects. This makes a non-hierarchial model that
relies on the categories the objects have been labeled with. The subjects are granted one
or more categories by a system administrator in such a manner that the subjects are only
authorized to access what is needed to fulfill their duties. MCS does not follow the Bell-
LaPadula model as there is no restrictions on writing to a lower security level. This can be
thought of as root not being able to write down to a lower security level on a Linux system.
Since a MCS system does not follow the Bell-Lapdula model it cannot be used in systems
that require the sensitivity of MLS such as in a military or in a intelligence service context.
2.2
Application Sandboxing
To strengthen the security of systems, the systems need a way to restrict each application’s
access to data while running on the system. This is where application sandboxing comes in,
as they are used to isolate applications by setting up the application’s own environment they
can run in. This restricts access from the filesystem as one application cannot access the data
of another application unless the permissions are met by using access control. This ensures
that sensitive data cannot be accessed by unauthorized processes. Typically an application
4
==PAGE:11==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.3
Linux kernel
can ask for permission from the user to be able to access the data of another application,
but this is dependent on the operating system on which the application run. It is then up
to the user to decide if they want to grant this access to the application.
2.2.1
Sandbox evasion
Sandbox evasion is a technique used by malicious actors to detect sandboxes, and, if detected,
acts as a benign application. The idea behind sandbox evasion is to analyze the system the
code is running on and to detect if it is running in an emulator. When running in an emulator,
the system is typically a clean factory image, where system data has not been updated or
changed by user interaction. This allows malicious actors to identify the system the executing
the code through the use of Application Programming Interface (API) calls which return
the properties of the system, e.g., the Central Processing Unit (CPU) temperature [3]. If
the malicious code does not detect any sandbox environments, it will execute the malicious
code and successfully infect the system.
However, if it is in fact running in a sandbox
environment without detecting it, the system has isolated the malicious act and has thus
prevented potential access to sensitive data. A way to combat sandbox evasion is to generate
fake data that makes it look like a user has interacted with the system, thus mimicking a
real-life system and tricking the malware.
2.2.2
Sandbox escaping
Sandbox escaping is when a malicious actor is able to break out of the isolated environment.
This is usually done by an exploit found in the isolated environment that allows malicious
code to be executed from outside the sandbox. This exploit grants the malicious actor access
to information outside the isolated environment and therefore has gained privileges to the
host system. These types of attacks can be used in an exploit chain and can potentially lead
to an exposed system that an attacker can have unauthorized control of.
2.3
Linux kernel
The Linux kernel is the heart of a Linux Operating System (OS). The kernel is the link
between software and hardware that manages all the communication between those on a
system. The Linux kernel is a monolithic kernel, meaning that the entire OS works in the
kernel space and separates it from the user space by the use of system calls. The Linux ker-
nel itself has built-in tools to help isolate and separate processes and resources such as the
network stack, Inter-Process Communication (IPC) CPU, memory, files, and mount points.
The core access control used by the Linux kernel is DAC, which is explained in section 2.1.1.
While it is not the only form of access control used, it also uses ACL for Portable Operating
System Interface (POSIX) allowing for a more fine tuned set of access controls.
As all the system calls made by processes and users get handed over to the kernel it has to
make decisions on whether or not the request should be denied or allowed access. There is a
variety of system calls that each makes specific requests. Over 400 system calls exist in Linux
5
==PAGE:12==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.3
Linux kernel
[4]. The system calls each relate to different areas of control, such as file management, process
control, and device management. The most important ones in regard to sandboxing and
isolation are cgroups, seccomp, Linux namespaces, and kernel patches for security modules
which are described in the next sections. Although the tools provide enhanced control and
security they are not adequate on their own and further security measures are advised by
combining multiple layers and forms of access controls [5].
2.3.1
Cgroups
Control groups, also known as cgroups, is a Linux kernel feature that allows resource manage-
ment of the CPU, system memory, and network bandwidth. The cgroups are able to control
the amount of time given on the CPU and handle the prioritization of processes, thus allow-
ing some groups to gain a larger CPU utilization. Cgroups are organized in a hierarchical
manner, much like that of processes where the child processes inherit some attributes from
the parent. A process, or a group of processes can, be assigned to a cgroup that controls
the resources available for the single process or the whole group. When a process forks and
creates a child process, they automatically inherit the cgroup membership of the parent but
can be assigned to different cgroups [6]. When a child process is moved to a different cgroup,
the forked child process now works as being completely independent of the parent process
when seen through the cgroup hierarchy. However, it is still related when viewed from the
process tree. When this happens and a process is moved to a different cgroup it does not
affect the parent or child process in any way. It is important to note that a process in the
context of cgroups only can be associated with one cgroup at a time but is able to move to
another cgroup.
Cgroups are often used by containers as they provide means to manage resources that each
container can have and therefore can give a better utilization of the available resources of a
system.
2.3.2
Seccomp
Seccomp or Secure Computing mode has been in the Linux kernel since version 2.6.12 [7].
Seccomp is a built-in sandboxing tool with all its dependencies in the Linux kernel. It filters
the system calls and limits which system calls can be used to reduce the attack surface of the
kernel. The only system calls allowed when using seccomp are read(), write(), exit() and
sigreturn() [8]. When enabled seccomp could only be used on already-open file descriptors
and would terminate the calling thread with SIGKILL if any other system calls were made
except for the other mentioned above. It can be used with the extension of a Berkeley Packet
Filter (BPF).
BPF was originally created as a method to filter network packets at a user level. The newer
version of BPF called the extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF), is working at the kernel
level. This helps to ensure that no harm would be done to the system by letting the kernel
do a static analysis of the network packets before they were processed.
6
==PAGE:13==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.3
Linux kernel
The seccomp-bpf is used as a system call filter. Seccomp-bpf provides the ability to configure
the filtering of system calls. This ability gives seccomp-bpf more flexibility and control than
the original seccomp as it can be used to select which system calls should be accepted and
is not restricted to only using read(), write(), exit() and sigreturn(). The filtering
is done by using a configurable policy using BPF rules. Seccomp in itself is not an entire
sandbox but a tool that can be used in the extension of others to help the development of
sandboxes.
2.3.3
Linux namespaces
The introduction of namespaces made it possible to isolate global system resources and tie
them to a namespace. This gave the ability to create nested process trees in contrast with
the single process tree before the introduction of namespaces. Namespaces were originally
introduced in kernel version 2.4.19 but it was first in kernel version 2.6.24 that namespaces
for network process IDs were introduced [9]. This was a turning point for containers in Linux,
as it gave the ability to isolate processes in a single namespace. The namespaces create a
container such that a process only has a view of its own instance of the global resources
but in fact, only sees a subset of them. The namespaces are very useful for isolating and
separating processes and are often used in containers for Linux. One thing that namespaces
do not isolate, is access to physical resources such as CPU and memory. This is done by
cgroups, and must not be confused with cgroup namespaces which are explained later in this
section.
Figure 2 is a visual representation of how the namespaces work. It shows how the different
processes are separated from each other by using different namespaces. It can be seen that
P1 and P2 can communicate with each other but P3 cannot interact with either P1 or P2
as it can only see what is inside namespace 2. This means that it can see the child process
P4. We also see how namespace 2 is separated from namespace 4 and the processes inside
namespace 2 do not have any knowledge that namespace 4 exists.
7
==PAGE:14==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.3
Linux kernel
Figure 2: Example of Namespaces in Linux
There are currently eight different types of namespaces for the Linux kernel that can be used
for isolating and separating different aspects of a system.
• Cgroup namespaces are used to hide which control group a process is a member of.
It is used to set the root directory of the namespace to an arbitrary system path. This
hides the true identity and position of the actual control group.
• Mount namespaces are used to isolate filesystem mount points that can be seen by a
group of processes. This is used to create a different view of the filesystem hierarchy
for processes in different namespaces. The system calls mount() and umount() can be
used by processes without affecting the global mounting points but only affecting the
namespace related to the process doing the system call.
• UTS namespaces provide the ability to set a different hostname and domain name
than the system. This gives processes the ability to let them have their own unique
hostname different from the system they are running on.
• IPC namespaces are used to isolate IPC resources such as System V IPC and POSIX
message queues. For each IPC namespace there is a corresponding set of System V
IPC objects and POSIX message queues, which is visible for a process only if they are
in the same namespace. Processes with a different namespace are not able to see the
System V IPC objects and POSIX message queues within a different namespace.
• PID namespaces are used to isolate the process ID number space. This means that
processes in different namespaces are able to have the same PID. When a child process
is created in a different namespace than that of the parent, the parent process is not
visible for the child process and cannot be interacted with from the child process point
8
==PAGE:15==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.4
Virtualization
of view, but the parent process is able to have a complete view of the child process. This
is also the case if the child process spawns a new child process with a new namespace
and so on. The result of this is nested namespaces where only the root namespace is
able to view the whole process tree.
• Network namespaces are used to isolate and separate system resources related to
networking. A network namespace has its own separate network stack that includes IP
addresses, IP routing tables, port numbers, etc, which gives a process its own unique
network interface. This makes it possible to have multiple applications bound to the
same port.
• User namespaces are used to isolate the user and group ID (UID and GID) number
space. User namespaces give the ability for a process within a namespace to have root
privileges inside this namespace but do not have root privileges outside of that specific
namespace [10].
• Time namespaces are used to set different system times for processes. It gives the
ability to offset the system monotonic and boot-time clocks in different namespaces
[11][12].
2.4
Virtualization
The concept of virtualization is to create a virtual version of a physical resource or system.
This virtual version could be storage devices, hardware platforms, network resources or in
combination to create a virtual OS to form an entire virtual machine. Virtualization is the
abstraction of the physical layer between a physical machine or device and their virtual coun-
terparts. A virtual machine called the guest machine sits on top of a physical machine, called
the host machine. Although the virtual machine runs on a host machine all the resource
layers have been abstracted from the physical parts and are therefore isolated from the host
machine and not able to view its resources. It shares the host’s physical resources, but a new
environment for the guest machine is created which includes the kernel, network interface,
and storage device. To separate the guest machine from the host machine, a hypervisor is
used to control the abstraction of the physical layers of the host machine. This enables a
host machine to have multiple guest systems where they are all independent from each other
as the hypervisor controls the resources available from the host machine.
The performance of virtualized systems is impacted by the overhead that comes with the
virtualization [13]. With many forms of virtualization, the most relevant ones in the con-
text of application sandboxing in embedded systems are OS virtualization and application
virtualization.
When running one or more virtualized OS’s the hypervisor controls all of them in controlled
virtualized environments, where it simulates the hardware layer and distributes the resources
needed for the guest systems. The virtual OS believes it is running on actual hardware and
can see all system resources that are available but in reality, is unaware of all the resources
9
==PAGE:16==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.5
Containers
Figure 3: Virtual machine layout
available to the host system. An example of how the architecture of a virtual OS can be
seen in Figure 3. It is clear to see that the hypervisor resides between the guest OS and the
host OS as a layer. The added layer provides a separation between the guest and the host
which increases security for the host machine as malicious or unstable applications cannot
affect the host machine. Although this is not entirely correct as there have been reports of
virtual machine escapes but these kinds of attacks require a lot more resources and exploit
chaining to attack the host system.
Application virtualization is used to create a virtual instance of an application, which runs
in a virtualization layer located between the application and the OS. The application is
under the impression that it interacts directly with an OS. However, it operates within
its own isolated environment, encapsulated into a self-contained package, and managed by
the hypervisor. Application virtualization also has the ability to be system independent as
it is possible to run without dependencies through another OS, so a Microsoft Windows
application would be able to run on a Linux machine [14].
2.5
Containers
Containerization has been gaining a lot of traction in the market and is used more and more,
finding its way everywhere in computer science. It is now being used in all fields of computer
science from big data servers to small embedded devices. The concept of containers relies
on lightweight virtualization, which, instead of having its own dedicated system resources,
is sharing the resources with the host system, where some of the elements from a system
have been virtualized. Containers are able to isolate applications by providing applications
with their own isolated runtime environment. The container includes the application and its
dependencies bundled together in an image.
As containers are lightweight, use very few resources, and containers bundle all required
dependencies, it makes them easily portable and able to distribute the application in the
10
==PAGE:17==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
2.5
Containers
Figure 4: Example of applications running in a container
container. Unlike application virtualization mentioned in section 2.4, it does share the same
kernel as the host OS. In Linux systems, containers take advantage of the kernel’s namespace
implementations and cgroups to separate and isolate applications running in the container
from the host system. A detailed overview of the different namespaces is found in section
2.3.3. Containers are able to restrict access to files, network, and runtime environments as it
creates an isolated namespace for the application running inside the container, so it is only
able to view its own instance of the global resources but not the host’s system.
Figure 4 is an example is given of how the containerization software sits as a layer between
the host OS and multiple applications. Some of the most prominent container software at
the moment are Docker and Kubernetes but others exist as well, such as Podman, RKT,
and LXC [15]. A Linux Foundation project called The Open Container Initiative (OCI) is a
project that aims to create open industry standards for container formats and runtimes. It
was started by Docker, CoreOS, and other leading companies in the container industry [16].
11
==PAGE:18==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
3
Sandbox technologies
Various forms of sandbox and isolation technologies exist. Some reside in the kernel and
others are standalone applications that create an isolated environment or container for an
application to run in. Existing sandbox technologies that are compatible with Linux will be
looked into. Some of which are already in use in the industry. This section covers sandbox
technologies usable in an embedded environment.
3.1
Android
Android’s method for creating sandbox environments to isolate applications, relies heavily on
the Linux kernel security features, as it takes advantage of the Linux user-based protection
to isolate and identify the resources of the application [17]. All code running above the
Linux kernel on Android is restricted by the application sandbox except a small amount of
Android OS code, which runs as root. The Linux kernel uses DAC to manage the privileges
of processes and applications. Android makes use of Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux),
which is a Linux kernel security module that enforces a MAC mechanism [18]. The MAC
rules are checked after the standard DAC rules have been checked and thus work as another
layer of security that helps ensure that processes are only given the rights needed for them
to function correctly and therefore gives them least privileged access.
An application sandbox is created for each application. By default, applications on Android
are only allowed to access a limited amount of the system resources. There exists a set of
protected APIs for resources such as GPS, Bluetooth, SMS/MMS, and telephony.
Android assigns a unique user ID (UID) to every application and then runs the application
in its own process. The UID is used to setup the application’s own kernel sandbox and to
identify the owner of processes running.
3.2
Linux Security Modules
The Linux Security Module (LSM) is a framework developed for the Linux kernel to sup-
port third-party security implementations of MAC. The LSM architecture provides hooking
functions into the kernel. The hooking functions work by the kernel receiving an action,
which then is sent as a request to the security module that makes a decision based on the
security policy and sends the decision back to the kernel, so it can proceed with the action.
12
==PAGE:19==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
3.3
SELinux
Figure 5: LSM architecture
The LSM architecture seen in Figure 5 shows how a system call is processed before a process
is allowed to access the resource. The security policy in the LSM architecture refers to one of
the security modules that utilize the LSM framework, such as SELinux, AppArmor, Smack,
Yama, or TOMOYO.
3.3
SELinux
SELinux is a Linux Security Module (LSM) originally developed by the United States Na-
tional Security Agency (NSA), Red Hat, and other Linux developers, as a series of patches
to the Linux kernel using the LSM framework. It was released as open source in 2000 under
the GNU GPL license and was integrated into Linux in 2003. It is now maintained and
developed by Red Hat as well as through contributions from the SELinux developer com-
munity.
SELinux is currently used in multiple systems such as Android, Red Hat Enterprise Linux
(RHEL), and other Linux distributions affiliated with Red Hat, and is available for any op-
erating system using the Linux kernel.
SELinux is a kernel-level sandbox, which uses MAC to isolate and restrict access to resources
such as files, devices, network sockets, IPC for processes, and even processes running with
root privileges [19]. The MAC is defined by a policy file containing the set of policies specified
by the security policy administrator. The kernel policy in SELinux is compiled into a binary
and loaded into the kernel at system startup. The policy file states the actions allowed by
the different domains specified in the policy. For identifying files and processes, they are as-
13
==PAGE:20==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
3.3
SELinux
signed a security context label. This is done by using the xattr field in the filesystem. There
are four security contexts associated with every process, including user processes, which are
called subjects, and accessible resources, which are called objects. The four security contexts
are user, role, type, and range. User identity in the SELinux context is associated with one
or more roles that the SELinux user is allowed to use where an SELinux user is either a user
or daemon. The role security context is associated with one or more types the SELinux user
is allowed to access where the role is equivalent to groups in traditional Linux. The type con-
text is associated with a process or resource defined as a domain the subject or SELinux user
can access. The last field in the security context is range, which is only present if the policy
supports MLS or MCS, where it defines a sensitivity level with one or more categories, or it
consists of two security levels, a high and low. A domain in the SELinux context is a label
that identifies a subject or a set of subjects and objects. It resembles that of namespaces
mentioned in 2.3.3 where subjects and objects in the same domain can interact. When a
process performs an action that is not defined in the policy file, it uses a default deny policy
and therefore does not perform the action unless it is specified in the policy file. However, if
a system frequently changes, it can be hard to maintain the policy file as new rules have to be
added in order for an application to access the necessary resources to be able to run properly.
The ability to customize the policy file enables the opportunity to create a least privilege
setup which differs from conventional DAC systems where child processes usually inherit
the parent’s privileges. In a system not interested in creating a least privilege setup, the
child process inherits the labels from the parent process. When creating a least privilege
setup, it adds more complexity to the policy file as child processes must be included in the
policy file for the child process to enable access to their necessary resources, such as files
or network, as the policy follows a default-deny policy. This is done through domain tran-
sition, where the domain transition is stated in the policy file. A domain transition in the
SELinux context is when a child process is created or forked by a parent process. The labels
required to access the resources needed by the child process must be stated in the policy
file. However, if the program is not aware of SELinux, a type_transition statement can be
used to automatically perform the domain transition. Before any domain transition can be
done, there are three requirements that need to be fulfilled. First, the source domain needs
to have permission to transition into the target domain. Secondly, the application needs to
be executable in the source domain. And lastly, the application needs a target entry point,
which is a file with an entry point attribute.
To minimize the time required for recomputing decisions, SELinux utilizes an Access Vector
Cache (AVC) to store access decisions made during previous access attempts.
In regards to information leakage from information stored in memory by a terminated pro-
cess, SELinux does not clean up the information and thus does not prevent other processes
to access the stored information. As SELinux was not designed to prevent this, it is the
process itself that is responsible to clear the information before terminating. SELinux can
be run in two different modes. The first mode is the permissive mode, where permission
denials are not enforced but rather logged instead. The other mode SELinux can be applied
is the enforcing mode. This mode, as the name suggests, enforces permission denials so that
14
==PAGE:21==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
3.4
AppArmor
all disallowed actions are prevented and then the attempted actions are logged by the ker-
nel. However, SELinux does support a per-domain permissive mode, which places a specific
domain under the permissive mode. The rest of the system is placed under enforcing mode.
SELinux makes use of TE and RBAC. It also supports MLS and MCS models [20]. The
MLS and MCS is done by adding an optional level or range entry to the security context.
The security levels are conducted in a hierarchical manner that fulfills the Bell-LaPadula
model, as described in section 2.1.5, where the process can write to its own and higher secu-
rity levels, as well as read to its own and lower security levels. The information flow ensures
no confidential information will flow to lower security levels.
As SELinux is one of the LSMs, it utilizes the hooking functions provided by the LSM
framework as described in section 3.2.
The hooking functions allow system calls to be
processed by SELinux to make a decision on whether or not the action requested should be
accepted or denied. The hooking functions are used to handle system calls which are used
to control access to kernel objects such as networking sockets, files, tasks, devices, and IPC.
SELinux provides the ability to customize the policy file to give a high level of isolation and
separation of processes and their resources. This, however, can be very complex compared
to other alternatives but does provide very in-depth customization not available in other
LSMs. Worth mentioning is that for a system to be compatible with SELinux the filesystem
has to support file labeling.
3.4
AppArmor
Application Armor, also known as AppArmor started as a graduate project called SubDo-
main and was commercialized in 1999 by WireX, which later rebranded as Immunix [21]. In
2005 Immunix got acquired by Novell and SubDomain got rebranded as AppArmor and the
cleanup and rewriting took place to prepare AppArmor for upstream Linux kernel inclusion.
The development and maintenance of AppArmor is now done by Canonical, which acquired
AppArmor in 2009 [22].
AppArmor is currently used in Ubuntu, Debian 10 and SUSE-affiliated Linux systems. It is
available to all systems that use the Linux kernel with LSM support.
AppArmor is another LSM that uses MAC to isolate and control permissions. To enforce the
MAC, AppArmor uses profiles to define the policy of access control. The profiles are simple
text files and are created on an application basis. This means that if a new application is
added, a profile with the access control policy has to be loaded into the kernel before it can
perform actions to deny access. The profiles policy is defined through file system paths,
where permissions for the application are defined to identify what the application should
be able to access and what should be restricted from, e.g., read/write access to files or the
ability to access a directory. AppArmor gives the ability to customize access control for files
and directories not existing on the system yet and will apply the access control for it if they
ever were to be created. As it relies on system paths, this also means that if a file or directory
changes file system paths, it will no longer be under the control of AppArmor’s access control.
15
==PAGE:22==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
3.5
Firejail
AppArmor can run in two modes. The first is complain, which does not restrict access but
logs the attempts in system logs. It should be noted that deny rules stated in the profiles,
even in complain mode, will be enforced and therefore prevents access to those resources.
Running applications in complain mode can be useful for creating new profiles for the appli-
cation since all access attempts are logged and can be individually reviewed to select what
is allowed. The second mode is enforce, which enforces the access control and denies access
attempts not allowed by that process or object [23]. AppArmor uses Domain Type Enforce-
ment, which is a variant of TE. The difference between the two is the addition of domains.
Domains are defined by their specified rights that each domain has to objects of a specific
type. This means that all processes running under the same domain are given the same set
of access rights [24]. As AppArmor utilizes the LSM framework to provide hooking functions
for the kernel system calls, it is able to control the usage of networking sockets as well.
The customization and usability of AppArmor offer effective controls for managing permis-
sions for applications and their processes, while still providing user-friendly tools for manag-
ing permissions, such as aa-genprof, aa-easyprof, and aa-logprof, to create and edit profiles
without being too complex and still providing effective isolation. It is however missing the
ability to create an MLS or MCS model, so it is not useable in systems where these models
are required. As AppArmor uses system paths it does not require the filesystem to support
file labeling, as some of the other security approaches do.
3.5
Firejail
Firejail is a Set User ID (SUID) sandbox used to restrict the runtime environment of un-
trusted applications. It has been created as a community project without any financial goals
and is not affiliated with any companies, thus it is being maintained and developed by a
large group of international volunteers and is released under the GPL v2 license [25].
Firejail gives the ability for processes to have their private view of the shared kernel resources
such as the network stack, process table, and mount table.
As Firejail is a lightweight sandbox, it requires very few dependencies and can run on any
Linux computer with kernel version 3.x, or newer. It has a low overhead and all the security
features are directly implemented in the kernel without using any daemons running in the
background.
The underlying separation mechanism for Firejail is relying on Linux namespacing and
seccomp-bpf [26]. This is used to create a MAC that allows an application access to the
filesystem on a file-by-file basis. Seccomp-bpf, described in section 2.3.2, is used to tie a
system call filter to a process and its child processes. For managing network access for the
sandbox, Firejail attaches a new TCP/IP networking stack, which comes with its own rout-
ing table, firewall, and interfaces, all implemented inside the kernel using Linux namespaces.
The access policies are defined by profiles that are loaded into Firejail when it starts. The
profiles can easily be configured and multiple profiles can be active at once when Firejail is
16
==PAGE:23==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
3.5
Firejail
started.
When starting it is required to run some processes as root but the application inside the
sandbox has a user namespace installed with only one user which does not have root privi-
leges. When the sandbox is running, the root directory is not visible for the process contained
inside. Instead, the root directory of the application inside the sandbox is set to /home/user.
Several tools are available for Firejail to monitor and audit. Jailcheck is a simple tool created
for auditing user sandboxes and requires to be run as root and then attaches itself to all
running sandboxes to report on flaws in the user’s configuration. Firetools is a graphical
user interface tool, which shows statistics and information from the running sandboxes but
requires a display port, which most embedded devices is lacking. Firetunnel is a tool for
connecting multiple Firejail sandboxes on a virtualized Ethernet network and encapsulates
ethernet packets in UDP packets [27]. Firejail itself also comes with a method to see the
statistics and resource requests of the sandbox. By using the firejail –top command an
overview of the CPU/memory/bandwidth usage, uptime, and processes running is given.
It does support the usage of SELinux and AppArmor, but at least for AppArmor, it is
advised not to use both Firejail and AppArmor for the same application as preconfigured
profiles can cause the security mechanism to break and cancel each other out rather than
providing additional security [28].
17
==PAGE:24==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
4
System Description
The system setup used for running and benchmarking the different sandbox solutions was a
Raspberry Pi 4 Model B [29]. As for embedded devices, the Raspberry Pi 4 is quite powerful
in terms of resources onboard with a quad core Cortex-A72 (ARM v8) 64-bit SoC running
at 1.8GHz and 8GB of LPDDR4-3200 SDRAM. Comparing these specifications to more
specialized embedded devices made for specialized tasks, it can therefore be troublesome as
some of the sandboxing techniques require a minimum set of resources. This is because the
development of the sandboxes was not targeted at the world of embedded systems. The
OS used for testing was the Raspberry Pi OS Lite which is based on a Debian 11 system
and kernel version 6.1. Due to the default kernel supplied in the Raspberry Pi Lite OS not
supporting SELinux and AppArmor, the default kernel was replaced with a kernel version
6.1.20 that has enabled support for both LSMs that were tested. The Raspberry Pi OS Lite
is a minimal image of Debian that only contains the core operating system and boots to a
command line instead of a user interface. This means that it does not support any form
of desktop display, which is necessary for some of the utility tools for the sandboxes. This,
however, does not hinder the manual configurations and setup for the sandboxes, but makes
it a little more time consuming than using the utility tools.
The Raspberry Pi OS Lite was flashed to an SD card and then loaded into the Raspberry
Pi.
To communicate with the Raspberry Pi and send commands from the desktop, the
Raspberry Pi was connected through serial pins to the desktop PC. The serial tool Minicom
was used to send commands from the desktop PC through the serial pins.
18
==PAGE:25==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
5
Benchmarking tools
As embedded devices can have a very limited amount of resources, the applications running
have to be as efficient as possible. Since the resource margin for such embedded systems is
so narrow, the sandboxing tools’ impact on performance is evaluated. This section will cover
the benchmarking tools used for testing the systems and the actual tests.
5.1
Whetstone
Whetstone is a synthetic benchmark that was first developed in 1972 written in Algol 60 and
later converted to other programming languages [30]. It is a processor benchmark consisting
of 150 statements with eight active loops. Three of which execute via procedure calls. The
benchmarks consist of doing floating point calculations, assignments, fixed point arithmetic
and branching statements [31]. The primary loop, which accounts for 30% to 50% of the
time, does floating point calculations via procedure calls.
The tests consist of a small amount of data that fits in the L1 cache of any CPU so that
the L2 cache and memory speed should not have an impact on the results. The results from
Whetstone are given as Millions Whetstone Instructions Per Second (MWIPS). This means
that the higher the output value given by the Whetstone result, the more instructions it was
able to execute, which in turn means a better performance.
5.2
Dbench
Dbench is a tool used to generate I/O workloads to benchmark the performance of the
file system or a networked CIFS or NFS server [32]. It is used to simulate the file system
load and does the same I/O operations that a Samba server would do when it is tested
with the Netbench benchmarking tool. The testing is done by stressing the file system.
The number of parallel clients and application workload is increased until the file system
becomes saturated and responsiveness is impacted. To simulate the Netbench test, dbench
reads a load description file client.txt that was derived from a network capture of a real
Netbench test. The file is 25 MB and has descriptions of roughly 500 000 operations that
a netbench client would typically do under a test [33]. The dbench test consists of a large
number of files being created with different sizes which have to be written, read, and deleted
and has a warmup period of 120 seconds and then runs for 600 seconds and outputs the
results afterward as throughput in MB/s and the max latency in ms. The interpretation of
the output is that the higher the throughput, the better the performance of the system is.
5.3
IOBench
IObench is a simple shell script used for I/O benchmarking of the storage and file system.
It uses the Linux dd utility to copy a file by writing and reading blocks of data. It measures
the time taken for the dd utility to read and write from a file and uses this to calculate the
throughput [34]. It also has the option to drop caches and force the data to be physically
written to the file before finishing [35].
19
==PAGE:26==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
5.4
Cyclictest
5.4
Cyclictest
Cyclictest is a tool used for benchmarking the difference between a thread’s intended wake-
up time and the time the thread actually wakes up.
It uses these tests to measure the
system’s latency and can measure the latency caused by hardware, firmware and the OS
[36]. To do the measurements of the latency it runs a non-real-time master thread that
starts a defined number of measuring threads with a priority for scheduling. It periodically
wakes up the measuring threads in a defined interval and measures the difference between
the programmed and the actual wake-up time. The master thread reads the measurements
via shared memory and outputs the result in minimum, average and maximum latencies
measured in µs. The latency should be as low as possible for the best performance. The
most interesting value to look at is the maximum latency as it indicates the latency for a
possible worst-case scenario.
As cyclitest is used to test real-time systems. The testing of sandboxes in a non-real-time
system can give inaccurate results due to how the kernel works in a non-real-time system
and therefore makes the benchmark less relevant. However, it indicates if the access control
mechanism used in the sandbox slows down the wake-up time of threads and increases the
latency.
20
==PAGE:27==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6
Results
The analysis and comparison of the different sandbox techniques will focus on the per-
formance of the systems as well as their security. The performance will be tested using
different benchmarks to get an overall idea of the performance impact the sandboxes have
on the system. The security will be evaluated by using the existing Common Vulnerabilities
and Exposures (CVE) reported for the different systems, while also looking at the general
attack surface of the different sandboxes.
6.1
Performance
In the analysis of the performance of the different sandbox systems, each of the sandboxing
methods first had to be configured. This was done to ensure that the access policies for each
sandbox included the benchmarks so that the operations requesting access to resources would
take place. This was to guarantee the most accurate measurements of the performance. The
access request would then go through the sandbox’s policy and make a decision on whether
or not it was allowed. All of the performance tests have been done using a Raspberry Pi 4
Model B with the Raspberry Pi OS Lite with a modified kernel as described in section 4. To
run the LSMs and to simplify the process of testing, a kernel that supports both AppArmor
and SELinux had to be built and replace the kernel that came as standard in Raspberry Pi
OS Lite. The new kernel was version 6.1.20 and allowed either AppArmor or SELinux to be
enabled. A brief explanation of how each sandboxing method has been configured will also
be given in this section.
6.1.1
Configuration of sandboxes
SELinux
To enable SELinux, command flags security=selinux and selinux=1 had to be set in
/boot/cmdline.txt. After a reboot of the system, the command sestatus was to check
if SELinux had been enabled. As SELinux is using a binary policy file, it is loaded into
the kernel. The policy files are located under \etc\selinux\policy where multiple policies
can be found and used. The targeted policy was used for benchmarking. The files and the
benchmarks themselves were given the labels in the extended attributes as
system_u:object_r:user_home_t:s0. If it were located in the /bin directory it would be
given system_u:object_r:bin_t:s0 as their label. This was done to make sure that the
access controls were applied to the benchmarks.
Testing of SELinux with permissive mode enabled was also done but was deemed to not be of
interest since a system using those sandboxes would be unlikely to switch them off. Although
the results are not shown in the figures it did have a negative impact on the performance of
5% in IObench write tests and 3% in dbench tests.
21
==PAGE:28==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
AppArmor
To enable AppArmor, command flags security=apparmor and apparmor=1 had to be set
in /boot/cmdline.txt. After the command flags were set the system was rebooted and the
command aa-status was used to check if AppArmor was correctly enabled. As AppArmor
uses profiles stored under /etc/apparmod.d the custom profiles were stored at that loca-
tion. For creating the custom policy for each benchmarking tool, firstly some utility tool
was installed, namely, apparmor-easyprof and apparmor-utils. Then a skeleton of the
policy was generated with the utility tool aa-easyprof and loaded into the kernel with the
command sudo apparmor_parser -r. After loading the profile in the kernel it is set in
complain mode using aa-complain and the benchmarking tool was executed. This is done
to first allow it to run, as the generated policy has not specified anything to access and is
therefore denied access to the resources needed for the benchmarking tool to work. Secondly,
it is used to generate log messages for what resources are being accessed doing run time. The
utility tool aa-logprof is used to refine the custom profile, as it looks through the logs that
were generated and suggests statements that can be added to the policy to allow access to
this requested resource for the benchmarking tool. The decision on whether or not the action
is allowed is up to the user configuring the profile, as the statements are not automatically
added but manually accepted to be passed to the profile during configuration [37].
As profiles can be generated and loaded into a build system such as Yocto, it is suitable for
being used in embedded systems that have the required resources needed to support the use
of AppArmor.
Firejail
As Firejail uses profiles to define access control, the profiles must be modified to enable the
execution of all the benchmarks used. The default profile was edited to include multiple state-
ments, such as noroot, nonewprivs, seccomp, and protocol unix,inet,inet6, which
were removed. After configuring the default profile, benchmarks that required root privileges
to run were successfully executed.
6.1.2
Results of benchmarks
The results from the different benchmarking tools were done by iterating the benchmark tests
multiple times. The results fluctuated, some more than others, depending on the benchmark
tool used. The dbench benchmarking tool was the one that fluctuated the most as the re-
sults from the baseline were quite unstable and would fluctuate between 30 MB/s and 40
MB/s. Both I/O benchmarks (dbench and IObench) gave varying results that did not live
up to the expectation of the predicted result. The hypothesis was that the baseline would
have the best performance under all benchmarks as the sandboxing techniques were adding
complexity and therefore would have a lower performance score. By examining benchmark
results from others done in 2019 on AppArmor [38] and 2020 on SELinux [39], a 5% impact
on performance in some of the benchmarks was demonstrated. However, a different system
was used for the benchmark, so it might not resemble the system used for testing embedded
22
==PAGE:29==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
devices in this work.
Whetstone
The whetstone benchmark ran with no parameters set, as it was just an executable file that
would produce an output.
Figure 6: Results of Whetstone benchmark
For all figures in the results section boxplots are shown. The boxes show the median and the
25% and 75% quantiles. The whiskers represent the 2nd percentile and the 98th percentile
of the data set. Outliers are displayed as filled circles. The average values are displayed as
open diamonds.
The results displayed in Figure 6 are as expected, with the anticipation that the baseline
would perform the best. The performance difference between the tested sandboxes shows
almost no difference. Therefore, the impact on the CPU performance of the different sand-
boxes is so small that it does not make a significant difference.
Dbench
For the dbench benchmark, the --clients-per-process was set to 10 which would set
10 clients to run per process. The default argument passed to dbench was num-procs and
was set to 10. This would start 10 processes with 10 clients each when combined with the
--clients-per-process argument.
23
==PAGE:30==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
Figure 7: Results of dbench benchmark
The results from dbench varied a lot from test to test. It mostly affected SELinux as the
other benchmarks, the baseline, AppArmor and Firejail experienced little to no variation
from the results. This can also be seen from Figure 7 where SELinux had a lower through-
put than the other sandbox technologies. The inconsistency in the results for the baseline
and SELinux can also be seen in the spread of the box plots.
IObench
As IObench is a shell script it was easily executed. For the testing, the arguments --megabytes 1024
were used. This tells the script to use a file size of 1GB, which would be written and read
from, both with and without the use of caches.
24
==PAGE:31==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
Figure 8: Results of IObench write benchmark without cache
Figure 9: Results of IObench write benchmark with cache
25
==PAGE:32==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
Figure 10: Results of IObench read benchmark with dropped caches
Figure 11: Results of IObench read benchmark with cache
26
==PAGE:33==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
The results from the read benchmark with dropped caches is observed in Figure 10. It shows
that Firejail as significantly faster, but this is due to an error where Firejail was restricted
from dropping the caches and therefore it looks similar to the results from Figure 11 where
the cache remained untouched. The other tests showed little to no difference as seen in
Figure 8–11.
Cyclictest
Cyclictest was installed as an executable binary using the Linux package manager. A few
arguments were given when cyclictest was used. The argument for real-time thread priority
was given the value 80. The intended wake-up period for the latency measuring threads was
set to 10000 µs. The count argument was set to 1000, which was the number of times the
latency was measured.
Figure 12: Results of minimum latency with cyclictest benchmark
27
==PAGE:34==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
Figure 13: Results of average latency with cyclictest benchmark
Figure 14: Results of maximum latency with cyclictest benchmark
28
==PAGE:35==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.1
Performance
The results from cyclictest shown in Figure 12–14 indicate that there was little difference
between the different systems tested. It did show that the added complexity from the LSMs
had some impact by looking at the minimum latency compared to the baseline. The lowest
average latency was for AppArmor. By analyzing the data from the maximum latency we
observe that SELinux has the highest impact. As mentioned in 5.4, these results can be
inaccurate as the system tested was not a real-time system. This could cause errors in the
results. This also shows from the outliers in the maximum latency test, where they resulted
in some considerably higher values.
Figure 15: Comparison of the different systems relative to the baseline
Figure 15 illustrates the relative comparison of the different systems tested compared to the
baseline. We see that SELinuxdoes have a measurable difference of 5% in the dbench bench-
mark. SELinux also had a 4% increase in latency in the cyclictest benchmark. This shows
that SELinux does have an impact on a system’s performance. AppArmor is performing
better than the baseline, with a 4% increase in performance in the dbench benchmark and
a 2% decrease of latency in the cyclictest benchmark. The same goes for Firejail where the
only benchmark test that yielded a decrease in performance was the cyclictest, while dbench
and IObench showed an increase in performance. Besides SELinux and AppArmors impact
in performance for dbench and cyclictest benchmarks, the other benchmark results showed
a marginal difference in performance.
29
==PAGE:36==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.2
Security Evaluation
6.2
Security Evaluation
For the analysis of the security of different sandbox systems, the reported CVEs and their
corresponding Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) for each sandboxing method
will be looked at to create an overview of how many and how serious the vulnerabilities
have been. The amount of CVEs does not indicate the security of a system. It acts as a
guide to show the severity of the vulnerabilities found, as large projects frequently have a
higher possibility of having an exploit reported as more people are using it and looking at it.
To understand the attack surface of the different sandboxing methods, the isolation mecha-
nisms and how they are implemented are analyzed. This is used to create an understanding
of what privileges the processes used have when running and how the access control policies
are formed.
SELinux
By looking at the general security of SELinux, it is integrated into the kernel as a kernel
module. It relies on the security features the Linux kernel provides. This means that a flaw
in the kernel security will impact the security properties that SELinux provides.
One of the biggest weaknesses of SELinux is the possibility of misconfiguring policies. Cre-
ating a least privilege system requires a very in-depth configuration of a policy. This is due
to the added complexity child processes bring, as each child process requires a specific set
of resources as well as the parent process. This requires a lot of resources and time to do
a proper least privilege configuration. By using proper configurations, SELinux can help
mitigate zero-day exploits as the processes are only allowed to access the resources needed
for it to work.
Looking at the CVEs existing for SELinux most of them are for specific applications or sys-
tems [40]. SELinux has over 50 CVEs reported with the latest being reported while writing
this thesis. The CVSS scores for the CVEs were evenly distributed between high to low
with a few cases of critical scores. The CVEs regarding SELinux were purely about default
policy files, distributed with SELinux, being misconfigured. These types of CVEs are only
regarding specific targeted systems and therefore not of relevance. This indicates that the
security mechanisms used in SELinuxs are fundamentally secure.
AppArmor
The general security of AppArmor relies on a kernel module that resides in the kernel space.
AppArmor is implemented by using pathnames to identify applications and resources. It
gives the ability to deny access to common paths such as /etc/shadow and deny access
to destinations in the system that do not even exist yet. Some problems arise when using
pathnames as multiple files sharing the same name, or if files or directories change paths
the profiles have to be updated accordingly. In the case of multiple files sharing the same
name at the same location, they are under the same access restriction. This could break
the functionalities of one of the files as the content inside the files might differ from one
another. The attack surface of AppArmor, profiles are loaded into the kernel and relies on
30
==PAGE:37==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.2
Security Evaluation
the security that the Linux kernel offers. As much of the security AppArmor provides is
relying on the profiles, the most obvious weakness relies on profile configurations. This is
due to it being manually configured by system administrators who can make errors during
the configuration. Some incorrectly configured profiles could lead to possible exploits that
could give an opportunity for an adversary to perform malicious actions. It runs a daemon
as root that could lead to possible exploitation if a vulnerability were to be found.
Examining the CVEs reported for AppArmor it was mostly for specific systems where App-
Armor access controls could be bypassed. There were 20 CVEs with the latest CVE reported
while writing this thesis. There were some CVEs regarding AppArmor profiles being miscon-
figured which could lead to an escape of AppArmor confinements using symlink attacks [41].
The CVSS scores were mostly around medium with a few high and critical ones. AppArmor
is still patching four-year-old vulnerabilities such as CVE-2016-1585 which had a CVSS score
of critical. This is a long time it has taken to patch a critical vulnerability.
Firejail
Taking a look at the attack surface of Firejail it is a more typical application sandbox in the
sense that it requires to be started and given the application to contain before it starts up.
To start with it requires running as root to initialize and set up the sandbox. It is heavily
reliant on the security of the kernel and the namespace features that come with it. So if an
exploit is found within any of these features it would impact Firejail as well.
Looking at the CVEs reported for Firejail it shows multiple almost all of the CVEs are of
high or critical severity [42]. Most of the CVEs are about privilege escalation and breaking
out of the sandbox with increased privileges. This indicates that there are some huge flaws
in the implementation of the program. Using SUID comes with a risk as it runs the sandbox
as root. With CVEs regarding command line injection the use of SUID becomes even more
severe as any arbitrary commands can be used with root privileges. When using Firejail
with default settings the files created under the sandbox are persistent. If the benchmark
process did not delete the files themselves, they would still remain on the system and were
not removed by the sandbox even after the sandbox stopped running. This is not necessarily
a bad thing as there are cases where you want the information from an application to remain
after the sandbox has terminated. But it can be a security issue if malware would be able
to save malicious code or scripts that could potentially be executed. It is however possible
to set Firejail to delete files created from within the sandbox. To explicitly state that the
sandbox should delete all files created, the --private option can be used. It mounts a
temporary tmpfs filesystem on top of the /home/user directory for the application to use.
The folder and its content are then deleted when the sandbox is terminated. During the
cyclictest benchmark, it was noticed that the thread ID was always the same. By further
analyzing the view created for the sandbox to see any other indicators that would make
someone believe they are in a sandbox and not a real system. By viewing the processes
running in the sandbox, it was observed that it only had one to three processes running
which is very unusual for a real system. This could be used by malicious applications for
sandbox evasion. It seems as if there have not been any measures taken to mitigate the use
31
==PAGE:38==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
6.2
Security Evaluation
of sandbox evasion. This does however lessens the amount of resources needed for running
the sandbox and hides the resources available for the host system, and should not be a
critical concern. But it is worth considering if one were to run untrusted applications inside
the sandbox for testing as they could be using sandbox evasion to hide any malicious in-
tent and perform malicious actions as soon as it is used outside the sandbox on a real system.
32
==PAGE:39==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
7
Discussion
Going through the performance tests and looking through the security and attack surface
of the tested sandboxes some recommendations for usage of the different sandboxes are
discussed in this section. As the performance testing for some of the benchmarks was incon-
sistent some possible faults and errors and the cause of these will also be discussed.
7.1
Recommendations
One thing is performance and security but for a company to adapt to a new technology
it also has to have ease of use and to be as easy as possible to understand and configure
the sandboxes, so that the isolation is performed as initially desired. This part will give
recommendations for different usages of the sandboxes will be given.
The label-based approach which SELinux has used is great for creating a least privilege sys-
tem and offers a lot of control over access rights for each application and their child processes
and can help mitigate zero-day exploits. From a performance perspective, it was the one
that had the largest impact, but it was not considered enough to be a concern. Even when
SELinux was the one with the highest amount of more than 50 reported CVEs it is not seen
as a failure. Rather it is an indicator of how widely it has been used and how long it has
been available. However, the difficulty of configuring policies due to the significant level of
complexity makes it harder to adopt for a company as it requires experts with knowledge
of how configurations are made. If security is a high priority and the need for a MLS or
MCS system is required it is definitely recommended to use SELinux as a tool for hardening
a system as it provides a high level of control for what can be accessed by processes and
users alike. As with most security concerns, it is still recommended to use multiple layers
of security and not only rely on a single layer so combining SELinux with another form of
isolation should give a high level of system security.
The path-based AppArmor had an easy to understand syntax for writing profiles that made
it both easy to read and understand the actions taken. The security provided is sufficient
and can easily control specific actions of applications. With the security combined with the
performance and its ease of creating profiles, AppArmor is recommended to use for harden-
ing a system by targeting specific applications. It is therefore useful in situations where the
security of the whole system is not the highest priority. It is still advisable to use multiple
layers of security and not solely rely on the access control AppaArmor provides.
The SUID-based sandbox Firejail are patching CVEs, but the CVEs found all had high
or above CVSS score. This indicates that when a vulnerability is found it most likely has
a critical impact on the security of the system. As no mitigation for sandbox evasion, it
would be hard to argue for it to be used when testing untrusted applications. Also worth
mentioning are the conflicts and security issues that come when combining Firejail with
AppArmor that could arise. This results in a few use cases where Firejail is useable in the
33
==PAGE:40==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
7.2
Faults and errors
world of embedded systems, but I would not recommend it as better alternatives exist such
as Docker, which uses containerization technology.
7.2
Faults and errors
When looking at the results from the performance, the I/O benchmarks stand out as the
baseline was performing worse than most of the other sandboxing techniques. Assuming that
the added complexity through access control checks in theory would have an impact on the
read/write operations, it was surprising that in two of the cases of the more complex systems,
they gained performance compared to the baseline. One of the reasons for this tendency
could be that the I/O benchmarks were running a lot longer than the other benchmarks,
which could lead to inaccuracy in the tests as other processes in the system running in the
background had a higher chance to impact the resources available to perform the actions
that the I/O benchmarks requested. In regards to the instability of the dbench benchmark
results, it was surprising to see that the results from the baseline and SELinux fluctuated as
much as they did. For the baseline, the results ranged from 34 MB/s to 41 MB/s and for
SELinux, throughput as low as 30 MB/s and up to 39 MB/s were found. Another reason for
the errors could be that some of the sandboxes were influenced by access rights or permission
issues and the benchmark would then calculate the result based on the time used instead
of the actual I/O operations. As not all benchmarks take into consideration if it is allowed
access and therefore would throw an error message in the case of access being denied. This
did happen with Firejail in the IObench read benchmark with dropped caches, where an
error was thrown saying that /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches was a read-only file.
34
==PAGE:41==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
8
Conclusion
Four different systems, SELinux, AppArmor, Firejail, and a baseline, have been tested in
different fields using the following benchmarks: whetstone, dbench, IObench, and cyclictest.
For all tests, a similar performance was observed. AppArmor and SELinux both have dif-
ferent advantages and disadvantages. SELinux had the highest level of customization, while
AppArmor was the easiest to use. Both impacted the performance. Where AppArmor had
a positive influence of 4% as compared to the baseline, SELinux reduced the performance
by about 5% in the dbench benchmark. SELinux in permissive mode was also tested and
showed a negative impact on performance. The highest performance impact of 5% is an
acceptable loss for most embedded systems. As SELinux and AppArmor are already widely
in use in the industry, they seem to be the obvious choice for creating an isolated sandbox
to further harden the security of a system.
Firejail did perform well in the benchmarks but with the kind of security issues reported and
the utilization of root privileges required, it creates an exposed attack surface. Therefore it
is not considered as being very useful in embedded systems. As the performance tests were
performed on a rather resource-rich embedded device, such as the Raspberry Pi 4, it is hard
to tell if it would impact the performance differently if used in a more resource-constrained
environment. Some considerations must still be made. The amount of resources available to
embedded systems can vary a lot. E.g., SELinux policy rules can take up a lot of memory
in a system, which would impact the performance or even crash the system.
8.1
Future work
For future work, it would be interesting to see how the sandbox technologies would perform
on different embedded systems with varying resources available to them. E.g., to see how
large of an impact on memory SELinux and AppArmors loaded policies and profiles would
have. As a benchmark like cyclictest was used, which tests the latency of the kernel, it could
also be interesting to explore if any of the sandbox technologies are viable to use on real-
time systems. It could be that the small performance impact would make a big difference
in a real-time system. More sandbox technologies with a wider variety of container-based
and LSMs could also be considered to be tested such as TOMOYO, Smack, and Yama for
kernel sandboxing and nspawn, bubblewrap, flatpack, LXC, RKT, and docker, which are
container-based.
35
==PAGE:42==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
References
References
[1] D. E. Bell and L. J. La Padula, “Secure computer system: Unified exposition and
Multics interpretation,” 1976.
[2] D. McCullough, “Specifications for Multi-Level Security and a Hook-Up,” Proceedings
of the Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 161–166, 1987.
[3] F. Faghihi, M. Zulkernine, and S. Ding, “CamoDroid: An Android application anal-
ysis environment resilient against sandbox evasion,” Journal of Systems Architecture,
vol. 125, 2022.
[4] “syscalls(2) — Linux manual page.” https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/
syscalls.2.html. Last Accessed: 2023-06-12.
[5] T. L. Foundation, “Overview of Linux Kernel Security Features.” https://www.linux.
com/training-tutorials/overview-linux-kernel-security-features/. Last Ac-
cessed: 2023-06-12.
[6] M. Navrátil, P. Ondrejka, E. Majoršinová, M. Prpič, R. Landmann, and D. Silas, “Re-
source Management Guide.” https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/
red_hat_enterprise_linux/6/html/resource_management_guide/index. Last Ac-
cessed: 2023-06-12.
[7] “Linux kernel version 2.6.12.” https://kernelnewbies.org/Linux_2_6_12. Last Ac-
cessed: 2023-06-12.
[8] “seccomp(2) — Linux manual page.” https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/
seccomp.2.html. Last Accessed: 2023-06-12.
[9] “Linux kernel version 2.6.24.” https://kernelnewbies.org/Linux_2_6_24#PID_and_
network_namespaces. Last Accessed: 2023-06-02.
[10] M. Kerrisk, “Namespaces in operation, part 1: namespaces overview.” https://lwn.
net/Articles/531114/#series_index, 2013. Last Accessed: 2023-06-02.
[11] M. Larabel, “Namespaces in operation, part 1: namespaces overview.” https://www.
phoronix.com/news/Linux-Time-Namespace-Coming, 2020. Last Accessed: 2023-06-
04.
[12] M. Larabel, “The Time Namespace Support Has Been Added To The Linux 5.6 Ker-
nel.” https://www.phoronix.com/news/Time-Namespace-In-Linux-5.6, 2020. Last
Accessed: 2023-06-04.
[13] “Virtualization.” https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/virtualization/.
Last Ac-
cessed: 2023-06-09.
36
==PAGE:43==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
References
[14] “What is Application Virtualization?.” https://www.vmware.com/topics/glossary/
content/application-virtualization.html. Last Accessed: 2023-06-09.
[15] “Understanding containers.” https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/containers. Last
Accessed: 2023-06-09.
[16] “About
the
Open
Container
Initiative.”
https://opencontainers.org/about/
overview/. Last Accessed: 2023-06-09.
[17] “Secure Android devices.” https://source.android.com/docs/security. Last Ac-
cessed: 2023-02-10.
[18] Red Hat, “Using SELinux.” https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/
red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/using_selinux/index. Last Accessed: 2023-02-
10.
[19] “Security-Enhanced
Linux
in
Android.”
https://source.android.com/docs/
security/features/selinux. Last Accessed: 2023-05-08.
[20] R.
Haines
and
P.
Moore,
“The
SELinux
Notebook.”
https://github.com/
SELinuxProject/selinux-notebook/releases, 2022. Last Accessed: 2023-05-08.
[21] C. Cowan, S. Beattie, G. Kroah-Hartman, C. Pu, P. Wagle, and V. Gligor, “SubDomain:
Parsimonious server security,” 2000.
[22] J. Johansen and S. Beattie, “AppArmor History.” https://gitlab.com/apparmor/
apparmor/-/wikis/AppArmor_History. Last Accessed: 2023-05-2.
[23] A. Gruenbacher and S. Arnold, “AppArmor Technical Documentation.” https://lkml.
iu.edu/hypermail/linux/kernel/0706.1/0805/techdoc.pdf, 2007. Last Accessed:
2023-05-02.
[24] “Domain Type Enforcement.” https://acv.cs.mtu.edu/dteTutorial.htm. Last Ac-
cessed: 2023-05-02.
[25] “Firejail About.” https://firejail.wordpress.com. Last Accessed: 2023-05-09.
[26] “Firejail
Security
Sandbox
Features.”
https://firejail.wordpress.com/
features-3/. Last Accessed: 2023-05-09.
[27] “Firejail project Github.” https://github.com/netblue30. Last Accessed: 2023-05-
09.
[28] “Firejail
FAQ.”
https://github.com/netblue30/firejail/wiki/
Frequently-Asked-Questions#how-does-it-compare-with-apparmor.
Last
Accessed: 2023-05-09.
[29] “Raspberry
Pi
4
Tech
Specs.”
https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/
raspberry-pi-4-model-b/specifications/. Last Accessed: 2023-05-16.
37
==PAGE:44==
Embedded Linux sandbox analysis and comparison
References
[30] R.
Longbottom,
“Whetstone
Benchmark
History
and
Results.”
http://www.
roylongbottom.org.uk/whetstone.htm. Last Accessed: 2023-05-16.
[31] H. J. Curnow and B. A. Wichmann, “A synthetic benchmark,” Annals of Mathematics,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 43–49, 1976.
[32] A. Tridgell and R. Sahlberg, “DBENCH.” https://dbench.samba.org/. Last Accessed:
2023-05-19.
[33] P. Russell, “dbench(1) - Linux man page.” https://linux.die.net/man/1/dbench.
Last Accessed: 2023-05-19.
[34] C. Blechert, “iobench.” https://github.com/perryflynn/iobench.
Last Accessed:
2023-05-24.
[35] P. Rubin, D. MacKenzie, and S. Kemp, “dd(1) - Linux man page.” https://linux.
die.net/man/1/dd. Last Accessed: 2023-05-24.
[36] “Cyclictest.”
https://wiki.linuxfoundation.org/realtime/documentation/
howto/tools/cyclictest/start. Last Accessed: 2023-05-19.
[37] J.
Strandboge,
“How
to
create
an
AppArmor
Profile.”
https://ubuntu.com/
tutorials/beginning-apparmor-profile-development#1-overview.
Last
Ac-
cessed: 2023-06-06.
[38] M. Larabel, “The AppArmor Performance Impact In 70+ Benchmarks On Linux 5.5
Git.” https://www.phoronix.com/news/AppArmor-Linux-5.5-72-Tests.
Last Ac-
cessed: 2023-06-14.
[39] M. Larabel, “The Performance Cost To SELinux On Fedora 31.” https://www.
phoronix.com/review/fedora-31-selinux/4. Last Accessed: 2023-06-14.
[40] “SELinux
CVE
search
results.”
https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/search/results?
form_type=Basic&results_type=overview&query=selinux&search_type=all&
isCpeNameSearch=false. Last Accessed: 2023-06-14.
[41] “AppArmor CVE search results.” https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/search/results?
form_type=Basic&results_type=overview&query=apparmor&search_type=all&
isCpeNameSearch=false. Last Accessed: 2023-06-14.
[42] “Firejail
CVE
search
results.”
https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/search/results?
form_type=Basic&results_type=overview&query=firejail&search_type=all&
isCpeNameSearch=false. Last Accessed: 2023-06-14.
38
