==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Excitaiton of higher order modes in optical
fibers using nanostructures
Rasmus Hvidberg
s174012
June 16, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory - Binary Phase Plates
3
2.1
LPl,m - modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Intermodal Dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Coupling and Transmission Efficiency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Gaussian Beam and Binary Phase Plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Gaussian Width and BPP Bandwidth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methods - SLM and Binary Phase Plates
17
3.1
Experimental Setups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
SLM Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
BPP Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
S2 Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results - Binary Phase Plates
23
4.1
Spatial Light Modulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
BPP Free space excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
BPP Close contact excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Discussion - Binary Phase Plates
29
5.1
Mode selection for fixed BPP pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
BPP stacking for wavelength tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Close contact BPP alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Comparison of SLM and BPPs for HOM excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Theory - Axicon and Photonic Crystal Metasurfaces
40
6.1
Huygens-Fresnel Diffraction Integral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Nelder-Mead Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Axicon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.4
Graded Index Photonic Crystals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Methods - Photonic Crystal Metasurface Simulation
51
8
Results - Photonic Crystal Metasurfaces
54
9
Discussion - Photonic Crystal Metasurfaces
57
9.1
Optimization of radial phase transfer function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
9.2
Photonic Crystal Metasurface Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9.3
Comparison of Photonic Crystal and Bulk - Axicon and BPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
10 Conclusion
62
11 Appendix
64
i
==PAGE:3==
List of Abbreviations
HOM
Higher Order Mode
MMF
Multi-Moded Fiber
NA
Numerical Aperture
FF
Filling Fraction
BPP
Binary Phase Plate
DGD
Differential Group Delay
MPI
Multi-Path Interference
SLM
Spatial Light Modulator
PC
Photonic Crystal
GRIN
Graded Index
HMA
Homogeneous Material Approximation
ii
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
With the exponential growth of technology in modern society, fast and efficient communication has become an
important contributor. Optical fibers have emerged as the backbone of modern telecommunications networks
due to their ability to provide high bandwidth with low transmission losses, while also being resistant to electro-
magnetic interference, as opposed to channels such as co-ax cables [5]. As communication systems grow, being
prepared for up-scaling of the bandwidth in fibers is becoming increasingly important.
One potential way of increasing bandwidth is the utilization of higher order modes (HOMs) in multi-moded
fibers (MMFs) [14] [20]. In traditional single-mode fiber communications, the fundamental mode, referred to as
the LP0,1 mode, is primarily used for data transmission. However, recent studies have shown that the different
spatial distributions of the HOMs allows for space-division multiplexing, meaning that each of the modes can
be used as a channel, and can co-propagate with other modes and still be distinguished at a receiver. This, in
combination with wavelength multiplexing, could enable a substantial increase in bandwidth. Therefore, efficient
excitation of the HOMs, especially methods of excitation which can be employed in the modern telecommunica-
tions infrastructure, becomes an important aspect of practical implementation.
In addition to telecommunications, fields such as fundamental research, medical diagnostics and treatment, and
defense systems - particularly relevant with the current international conflicts - are pushing the development of
high-power lasers which can utilize nonlinear optical processes [13][9]. Using HOMs in fibers holds potential for
a new paradigm in high-power fiber lasers. Multi-moded fibers exhibits a larger guiding surface area, allowing
for increased optical power before the fiber material is optically damaged. Moreover, detrimental effects such
as stimulated Brillouin scattering and nonlinear mode coupling can be mitigated in these multi-moded fibers.
The control of which modes are present also allows for utilizing the fiber lasers for applications where the spatial
distribution of light is crucial, such as laser ablation for surgery and material structuring and processing.
The combination of nonlinear optics and HOMs also opens the door for interesting opportunities. Nonlinear
processes arise when the intense electric field in the fiber interacts with a material with nonlinear properties [15].
These nonlinear phenomena include frequency conversion and supercontinuum generation. Frequency conversion
in particular could potentially allow for the construction of a tuneable wavelength laser, where the spatial inten-
sity distribution and phase matching capabilities of the HOMs are important contributing factors.
A well-established efficient way of exciting HOMs is by transmitting a Gaussian beam through an axicon [3][17].
After passing through the axicon, the beam transforms into a Bessel-like beam with a Gaussian amplitude, also
known as a Bessel-Gauss beam. Since the radial field distribution of the fiber HOMs correspond to a Bessel
function [22], the axicon generated field can efficiently couple to the target HOM, when imaged to the fiber
facet. While the power coupling from the Gaussian beam to the mode is high, the axicon has the disadvantage
of requiring a free-space optical setup for implementation, posing challenges in beam, lens and fiber alignment -
especially with respect to practical implementation in the current telecommunications infrastructure. Addition-
ally, the axicon is not particularly broadband, which can also be detrimental if the wavelength of the propagating
HOM is important, as in the case of a fiber laser.
Another efficient method of exciting HOMs is the use of a liquid crystal-based Spatial Light Modulator (SLM)
[17][1]. The SLM consists of a transparent medium comprised of birefringent liquid crystals. By applying a
voltage across the anode and cathode surrounding material, and thereby creating a potential field, the crystals
align with the electric field lines. The control of the spatial distribution of the orientation of the liquid crystals,
in combination with their birefringent nature, allows for spatial control of the phase of a polarized beam. This
spatial control allows for efficient and easy mode-selection. However, the SLM has two distinct disadvantages: the
price of the SLM is high, and the optical power tolerance is low. With the high price of the liquid crystal-based
SLM, it becomes financially inconvenient as a means of HOM excitation, especially for use in telecommunications
networks. Additionally, if the intensity of the incident field is sufficiently high, the electric field of the beam itself
will change the orientation of the liquid crystals, thereby rendering the SLM unable to spatially modulate the
field as intended. This limited power tolerance can also be a detrimental effect for telecommunication purposes,
as well as for generation of high-powered fiber laser mode conversion.
An alternative method for efficiently exciting HOMs is the use of a binary phase plate (BPP), which modi-
1
==PAGE:5==
fies the phase of the transmitting Gaussian beam, and allows for efficient coupling to the target mode [17][10].
The BPP achieves this by spatially changing the phase of the field by either 0 or π. One significant advantage of
the BPP over the axicon is the increased bandwidth, allowing for efficient conversion at a much broader interval
of wavelengths. Another distinct advantage is that the field does not have to propagate any additional distance
after the BPP, in order to couple to the fiber modes. This potentially allows for etching of BPP patterns into
the fiber facet, allowing for a in-fiber solution for HOM excitation. A propagating fundamental mode could be
modified, and become the target HOM, all within a fiber. This practical benefit could facilitate efficient implemen-
tation into the fiber-based telecommunication networks. Conversely, the BPP also likely allows for the conversion
of a particular HOM to the fundamental mode [9]. In combination with nonlinear wavelength conversion in the
HOM, this could potentially facilitate a broadband wavelength tuneable laser with a Gaussian beam output mode.
This report is intentionally split into two main parts.
Part 1 focuses on the use of BPPs to excite higher
order modes in a multi-moded fiber, and Part 2 focuses on the design and numerical simulation of a photonic
crystal (PC) metasurface axicon and BPP. Section 2 presents the theoretical background for HOM excitation us-
ing Gaussian beams transmitted through BPPs. The theory is extended with a brief analysis of factors impacting
BPP coupling efficiency, and the resulting coupling to parasitic modes, which refers to the unwanted HOMs that
are inevitably also excited when using a BPP.
Section 3 explains the different experimental components and setups used to experimentally quantify the per-
formance of the SLM and the BPPs. The modal content of the excited fiber modes is analyzed using Spatially
and Spectrally (S2) imaging, and this method of analysis is explained. Section 4 covers the experimental results,
presenting the measured performance of the SLM and the BPPs, in terms of modal content and coupling efficiency.
Section 5 provides a discussion of the obtained results, including a comparison of the different methods of HOM
excitation, with respect to measured performance, as well as a qualitative comparison of the benefits and chal-
lenges associated with each of the excitation methods. The section also gives an analysis of using multiple BPPs
in a stacked configuration, showing promise as a means of tuning the wavelength at which the BPP has optimal
performance, while also covering the challenges of using BPPs in this way.
Part 2 of the report is related to the simulation of the photonic crystal axicon and BPP. This part starts in
Section 6, which gives insight to the principles behind the generated field from using an axicon, as well as how
to compute the fields using the Huygens-Fresnel diffraction integral.
This section also covers the phase and
transmittance of a simulated unit cell of the photonic crystal, which is then spatially distributed periodically to
imitate the spatial phase transfer functions of the BPPs and the axicon. The behavior of these sub-wavelength
nanoscaled features are qualitatively explained and discussed using fiber optic theory.
Section 7 covers the principles behind the numerical simulations of the photonic crystal unit cells, by describ-
ing the setup of the computational domain and the boundary conditions used. The simulations were performed
using the Lumerical FDTD simulation tool. This section also covers how to spatially distribute the simulated
nanoscale pillars, so as to obtain performance similar to the axicon and the BPP. The relevant approximations
and assumptions for the results are also stated in this section. Section 8 covers the simulated performance of the
metasurfaces, both for the axicon and the BPPs. Section 9 introduces two ways to improve the performance of
the metasurfaces. Due to the added complexity of the metasurfaces relative to the ”simple” bulk material BPPs,
this section also discusses how to modify the performance, which can be beneficial for specific applications.
Finally, Section 10 summarizes the main experimental and simulated results, practical challenges, and possi-
ble implementations of using BPPs and meta-surfaces as in-fiber solutions for excitation of HOM’s, as well as
associated costs and benefits compared to traditional means of mode excitation, such as using an SLM.
2
==PAGE:6==
2
Theory - Binary Phase Plates
The following section aims to provide the relevant theory for understanding excitation of HOMs in a MMF.
In Section 2.1, the scalar wave equation will be derived from the Maxwell Equations, which gives the spatial
distribution of the HOMs. Section 2.2 will then describe intermodal dispersion, which is the phenomenon that
allows for determination of the modal content of the light propagating in the fiber using the S2 imaging technique.
The coupling efficiency is introduced in Section 2.3, which is used to determine the fractional amount of light
that will be guided in the fiber in a particular HOM, as a function of the transverse field distribution at the fiber
facet of the in-coupling light, and the transverse mode field distributions. Section 2.4 will introduce the Gaussian
Beam and the design and properties of the BPPs with respect to the imposed phase on the Gaussian beam in the
plane transverse to the direction of propagation.
2.1
LPl,m - modes
In order to obtain information on the spatial properties of the HOMs permissible in a MMF, the scalar wave
equation will be derived. As is typically the case, the starting point are the generalized Maxwell Equations,
describing the time-dependent electric and magnetic fields. The Maxwell Eqations are:
∇· D(r, t) = ρf
(1)
∇· B(r, t) = 0
(2)
∇× E(r, t) = −∂B(r, t)
∂t
(3)
∇× H(r, t) = jf + ∂D(r, t)
∂t
(4)
Where the electric field E and the magnetic field H are related to the auxillary fields D and B as well as
the induced macroscopic polarization of the medium P, by D = ε0ε(r)E + P and H = (µ0µ(r))−1B, where r
is the spatial coordinate vector. The vacuum permittivity and permeability are ε0 and µ0 respectively, and the
relative permittivity and permeability are ε(r) and µ(r), and ρf and jf are the free charge and current densities.
Here the permittivity and permeability is introduced with a spatial dependence, to indicate that the values will
spatially vary in accordance with the macroscopic strucutures which comprise the domain in which the light is
propagating, e.g. a MMF. When working with dielectric materials such as Silica (SiO2), the typical material for
optical fibers, there is no net charge in the material, and the material is also non-magnetic. Therefore, both ρf
and jf is equal to 0, and the relative permeability µ(r) = 1. When strong fields are present, the local relative
permittivity can be a function of time due to nonlinear phenomena like the Kerr effect [15]. These contributions
substantially increase the complexity of the analysis of waveguide modes, but can be neglected when considering
low intensity propagating fields. Therefore, the permittivity will be considered time invariant.
When the medium has a time invariant relative permittivity, the electric fields become separable with respect
to spatial coordinate and time.
For example, the time dependence of say, the E field, is given as E(r, t) =
E(r) exp(i(ωt + ϕ)), where ω is the angular frequency and ϕ is the phase of the field at t = 0 at position r. This
means that the derivatives with respect to time in Equations 3 and 4 become:
−∂B(r)
∂t
exp(i(ωt + ϕ)) = −iωµ0H(r)
(5)
∂D(r)
∂t
exp(i(ωt + ϕ)) = iωε0ε(r)E(r)
(6)
Practically the phase between the electric and the magnetic fields at some position r differ by π/2, but since
the DC phase is unimportant for the derivatives, they are expressed as equal for simplicity. Using these results,
the relevant Maxwell equations for depolarized dielectric materials then become:
∇· ε0ε(r)E(r) = 0
(7)
3
==PAGE:7==
∇· H(r) = 0
(8)
∇× E(r) = −iωµ0H(r)
(9)
∇× H(r) = iωϵ0ϵ(r)E(r)
(10)
Any electric field can be written as a sum of mono-chromatic fields, such that the total field is a linear
combination of single frequency states. This means that E = P
i aiEi, where Ei is such a single frequency state,
where the time dependence of the i’th single frequency state is given as ωit + ϕi, where ωi is the frequency of the
state. For simplicity, the Maxwell equations will be assumed to be linear, in which case the total solution is given
as the sum of solutions for each single frequency state. However, if ε(r) is time independent, then the linearity of
the equations is lost. Again, this can happen due to nonlinear light-matter interactions.
As the E and H fields are directly related to each other respectively through Equations 9 and 10, only one of the
fields have to be determined to fully determine the other. In order to achieve this, one can for example divide by
ε(r) on both sides in Equation 10, and then take the curl (∇×) on both sides to obtain:
∇×
 1
ε(r)∇× H(r)

= iωε0∇× E(r) = ω2µ0ε0H(r)
(11)
Similarly, by taking the curl on both sides of Equation 9, one obtains:
∇× ∇× E(r) = −iωµ0∇× H(r) = ω2ε0µ0ε(r)E(r)
(12)
Using the fact that ε0µ0 = 1/c2
0, where c0 is the speed of light in vacuum, and using the vector identity
∇× ∇× A = ∇(∇· A) −∇2A, as well as approximating the dielectric distribution ε to be spatially invariant,
meaning the spatial derivatives in Equation 11 can be neglected, Equations 11 and 12 can then be rewritten by
multiplying ε(r) on both sides in Equation 11. This yields:
∇2H(r) + k2
0ε(r)H(r) = 0
(13)
∇2E(r) + k2
0ε(r)E(r) = 0
(14)
Where the wave number k0 = ω/c = 2π/λ has been substituted in. Additionally, the gradient of the diver-
gence of the E and H fields are 0, as the divergence is 0, as stated by Equations 7 and 8. As is evident from this
result, the decoupled equations for the two fields are functionally exactly the same. It is however very important
to keep in mind that this derivation relies on neglecting the spatial derivatives of ε(r), which is the so-called
”weakly-guiding” regime, also known as the scalar approximation. This approximation can be justified for step
index fibers, where the fiber core and cladding respectively can be taken to have a constant ε, and the difference
between the core and cladding permittivity is sufficiently small, such that the spatial derivatives are negligible.
Since the two fields can both be represented by a scalar quantity Ψ, without changing the functional form of the
obtained equations, this is what gives rise to the so-called scalar wave equation.
In order to consider the behavior of a straight waveguide, the permittivity distribution can be taken to be
translationally invariant with respect to some coordinate axis, say z, meaning that the straight waveguide lies
parallel with the direction z. In that case, ε(r) = ε(x, y). Additionally, by assuming that the fields propagate in
the z-direction, their z-dependence can be given as a complex exponential, E(r, t) = E(x, y) exp(iωt) exp(−iβz),
where β is introduced as the propagation constant for the propagating field, and the phase ϕ has been set to 0
for simplicity. Therefore, the time and spatial dependence on the E field can then be expressed as:
E(r, t) = E(x, y) exp(i(ωt −βz))
(15)
This specific z-dependence means that the term including the Laplacian (∇2) in Equations 13 and 14 can be
rewritten as:
∇2E(r) =
 ∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2 + ∂2
∂z2

E(r) =
 ∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2

E(r) −β2E(r)
(16)
4
==PAGE:8==
Where the parenthesis with the second order derivatives on the right hand side is denoted as the transverse
Laplacian ∇2
⊥. Adding β2Ψ(r) to both sides of Equations 13 and 14, and substituting the scalar quantity Ψ for
H and E respectively, the scalar wave equation in Cartesian coordinates is obtained:
∇2
⊥Ψ(r⊥) + k2
0ε(r⊥)Ψ(r⊥) = β2Ψ(r⊥)
(17)
Which is then the particular eigenvalue problem which is solved for the dielectric structure ε(r⊥). By trans-
forming from Cartesian (x, y, z) to polar (r, θ, z) coordinates, and assuming that the permittivity distribution is
azimuthally invariant as well as z-invariant, i.e. ε(r, θ) = ε(r), the scalar wave equation becomes:
∂2Ψ(r, θ)
∂r2
+ 1
r
∂Ψ(r, θ)
∂r
+ 1
r2
∂2Ψ(r, θ)
∂θ2
+ k2
0ε(r)Ψ(r, θ) = β2Ψ(r, θ)
(18)
Since the dielectric structure being considered is a step-index fiber with a small index difference, the permit-
tivity distribution can be expressed as a step-function:
ε(r) =
(
εc
r ≤Rc
εcl
r > Rc
(19)
Where εc and εcl refers to the relative permittivity of the core and cladding material of the fiber respectively,
and Rc is the fiber core radius. Here it is assumed that the fiber cladding extends to infinity, but practically
the fiber cladding will be in contact either with air, or some absorbtive protective layer, to shield the fiber from
damage. However, for the guided modes, as will be shown, the field in the cladding has an exponential-like decay
as a function of radial distance, and so the extension of the cladding to infinity is a good approximation, as the
effects of an absorptive material will be negligible, due to the insignificant overlap of the guided mode fields with
the material. The permittivity is related to the refractive index by nc = √εc. This means that within each
domain of constant ε, a solution can be found for Ψ(r, θ). Taking the solutions to be separable in r and θ, the
solution can be written as Ψ(r, θ) = Rl(r)Θ(lθ), where Θ(lθ) has to be 2π periodic with respect to θ, meaning
Θ(θ + 2π) = Θ(θ), since a trip around integer multiples of 2π of angle in θ in the fiber gives the same spatial
position, and thus has to give the same field distribution, as otherwise field discontinuities would be present.
Using the complex exponential as to describe the azimuthal dependence on the field:
Θ(lθ) = exp (ilθ)
(20)
Then the double derivative with respect to θ yields:
∂2Rl(r)Θ(lθ)
∂θ2
= i2l2Rl(r)Θ(lθ) = −l2Rl(r)Θ(lθ)
(21)
And reinserting this result into Equation 18 then gives:
∂2Rl(r)Θ(lθ)
∂r2
+ 1
r
∂Rl(r)Θ(lθ)
∂r
−l2
r2 Rl(r)Θ(lθ) + k2
0ε(r)Rl(r)Θ(lθ) = β2Rl(r)Θ(lθ)
(22)
Since Θ(lθ) is present in each term, it can be canceled out, leaving the scalar wave equation in cylindrical
coordinates for a circularly symmetric step-index fiber:
∂2Rl(r)
∂r2
+ 1
r
∂Rl(r)
∂r
−l2
r2 Rl(r) + k2
0ε(r)Rl(r) = β2Rl(r)
(23)
It is worth mentioning that is the l, m indexes of Ψ(r, θ) which is referred to when talking about the cross-
sectional field distribution mode order in the so-called LPl,m scheme, where LP stands for Linearly Polarized,
since it is assumed in the scalar approximation that the polarization of the field is confined to lie uniformly along
one axis. There will be a slight deviation from the actual polarization state of the guided modes in the scalar
approximation, relative to the full-vectorial approach, but again, for small index difference (weakly-guiding) fibers,
the discrepancy is small, and can practically be neglected. For these LPl,m modes, as stated previously, l gives
the angular dependence of the mode field, meaning how many time l2π of phase is present when considering a
walk around the mode at a constant radius. The m mode order gives the radial dependence on the modes, as will
be shown below, and will have m −1 zero crossings, where the field goes from positive to negative, or vice versa.
6 of the lowest order LPl,m modes are shown in Figure 1.
5
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1: The field distributions of Ψ(r, θ) for the LPl,m mode scheme of guided modes in a step-index fiber.
Figure source: [22].
To further expand on the functional shape of Rl(r) in Equation 23, the quantities σ and κ for core and cladding
respectively are introduced as:
κ =
q
k2
0εc −β2
(24)
σ =
q
β2 −k2
0εcl
(25)
Where it is important that both are real quantities, i.e. k2
0εcl < β2 < k2
0εc. Introducing the effective index
neff of the waveguide mode with propagation constant β as neff = β/k0, the requirement of real quantities can
then be stated as ncl < neff < nc, meaning the effective index of a particular mode has to lie between the core and
cladding index. By multiplying the σ and κ quantities with the radial position r, one obtains the dimensionless
quantities u = κr and v = σr, and the wave equations for core and cladding respectively then become:
u2 ∂2Rl(u)
∂u2
+ u∂Rl(u)
∂u
+ (u2 −l2)Rl(u) = 0
(26)
v2 ∂2Rl(v)
∂v2
+ v ∂Rl(v)
∂v
−(v2 + l2)Rl(v) = 0
(27)
For which the quantities u < κRc to constrain this to the domain of the core, and v > σRc to constrain to the
cladding. The solutions to the two equations are respectively given by the l’th order Bessel function of the first
kind, Jl(u) for the core, and the l’th order modified Bessel function of the second kind, Kl(v) for the cladding.
The Bessel functions of the first kind are oscillating functions with respect to u, and the modified Bessel functions
of the second kind have an exponential decay-like functional shape. Since the fields have to be continuous at the
core-cladding interface, this means that:
AJl(κRc) = BKl(σRc)
(28)
d
drAκJl(κr)|r=Rc = d
drBσKl(σr)|r=Rc
(29)
Where A and B are complex-valued field amplitude coefficients. Denoting the spatial derivative of Jl(r) as
J′(r), and combining Equations 28 and 29, and solving for the amplitude coefficient B gives:
6
==PAGE:10==
B = AJl(κRc)
Kl(σRc)
(30)
Which then implies:
κJ′
l(κrc)
Jl(κrc) = σK′
l(σrc)
Kl(σrc)
(31)
Specifically for these Bessel functions, it is the case that the derivatives of the functions of order l can be related
to the l −1’th order functions by the relations xJ′
l(x) = xJl−1(x) −lJl(x) and xK′
l(x) = −xKl−1(x) −lKl(x).
Using these results on Equation 31 gives:
κJl−1(κrc)
Jl(κrc)
= −σKl−1(σrc)
Kl(σrc)
(32)
Where specifically for the l = 0 case, it is also a property of the Bessel functions that J−1 = −J1 and
K−1 = K1. As these higher order modes start to become guided, it is a requirement that the mode effective
index neff = β/k0 lies between the core and cladding index. At the wavelength for which a mode is barely
guided, neff ≈ncl, such that σ from Equation 25 is approximately 0. Since the cladding field distributions are
proportional to Kl(σr), the low value of σ means that the field will exist far out into the cladding, while greater
values of σ means the field will decay much more rapidly going into the cladding. The slow decay in the cladding is
therefore referred to as weakly guided modes. The asymptotic exponential-like decay of the cladding then imposes
the requirement that Jl−1(κRc) = 0 when new higher order modes are guided. In this case, κ = k0
p
n2c −n2
cl,
from which the requirement can be stated as:
Jl−1(V ) = 0
(33)
Where V is introduced as κRc when the new mode is just guided, meaning:
V = κRc = 2π
λ Rc
q
n2c −n2
cl
(34)
Where also the square-root of the squared index differences,
p
n2c −n2
cl is referred to as the Numerical Aperture
(NA) of the fiber. The particular value of V fulfilling this requirement then gives the maximum wavelength at
which the HOM is guided. One particular class of the higher order modes are the rotationally symmetric LP0,m
modes, for which l = 0. Here the respective field distributions in core and cladding are then given by J0(u) and
K0(v), where again u = κr and v = σr. These radial field distributions are plotted in Figure 2.
Figure 2: The functional form of the zeroth order Bessel function of the first kind, J0(u), and the zeroth order
modified Bessel function of the second kind, K0(v), corresponding to the core and cladding field distributions of
the LP0,m modes.
7
==PAGE:11==
As the wavelength is decreased, meaning k0 is increased, new higher order field distributions Ψ(r⊥) will
have corresponding effective indexes neff between the core and cladding, and the number of radially distributed
oscillations of the field inside the core is increased. These modes still have to adhere to the boundary conditions of
field continuity, as stated in Equations 28 and 29. These higher order modes of order m can then become guided
by virtue of V increasing, either by increasing the core radius Rc or by going to shorter wavelengths λ, implying a
increase in k0. Figure 3 shows the intensity distribution of two experimentally excited modes of the LP0,m type,
namely the LP0,3 and the LP0,6, where the intensity I(r) ∝|E(r)|2 is proportional to the electric field amplitude
squared. The figure also shows the numerically calculated intensity distribution of those two modes. Throughout
the report, whenever calculating theoretical values with respect to the modes, an implementation of a numerical
mode solver has been used. For example, when calculating the propagation constants (or correspondingly the
effective indexes) for the modes, or their radial field distribution, the results are obtained from the numerical
mode solver. The mode solver used in this project was handed out by the supervisor team of this particular
project.
Figure 3: Experimentally obtained images of the intensity distribution of an LP0,3 and LP0,6, and the corre-
sponding numerically simulated intensity profiles.
The radial field distributions of the LP0,m HOMs, ranging from mode order m = 2 to m = 7, is shown in
Figure 4. The report will concern itself with only these HOMs, as the geometry of the fiber and the wavelength
used to experimentally excite the modes correspond to a V -parameter which allows modes up to m = 7 to be
guided.
8
==PAGE:12==
Figure 4: The radial field distributions relative to the fiber core radius Rc of the LP0,m HOMs for mode orders
ranging from m = 2 to 7. The dashed black line indicates the fiber core-cladding interface.
2.2
Intermodal Dispersion
From the scalar wave Equation (Eq. 17), it is evident that the different HOMs with field distribution Ψ(r), will
have different propagation constants β(ω) as their respective eigenvalues, here introduced as frequency dependant.
As the field dependence on the propagation constants are exp (−iβz), it is evident that the different modes with
different propagation constants will drift in relative phase with respect to the propagated distance. The group
velocity vg of the propagating modes are given as vg = dω/dβ, and therefore the total time τ to propagate a
distance of L is then:
τ = L
vg
= L
dω
dβ
= Ldβ
dω
(35)
Thus, if a pulse is launched into a fiber at z = 0 and couple into two modes with propagation constants β1
and β2 respectively, the arrival time difference for the two modes with propagation constants after a propagation
distance of L is then:
∆τ = τ1 −τ2 = Ldβ1
dω −Ldβ2
dω
(36)
Where ∆τ is the Differential Group Delay (DGD). Letting the spatio-temporal dependence of the present fields
be given as in Equation 15, the intensity I ∝|E|2 can then be found. Assuming that the fields have identical
polarization, and defining them to be normalized, such that |E1|2 = E∗
1E1 = I1 the total intensity of the resulting
two propagating fields is then:
I(x, y, z) =
E0,1(x, y) expi(ωt−β1z) +E0,2(x, y) expi(ωt−β2z)
2
= I1(x, y)+I2(x, y)+2E0,1(x, y)E0,2(x, y) cos ((β1 −β2)z)
(37)
Where E0,i is the amplitude coefficient of the i’th mode, and it has been assumed that E∗
0,1E0,2 = E0,1E∗
0,2 =
E0,1E0,2. Defining the difference in propagation constant as ∆β(ω) = β1(ω)−β2(ω), and evaluating the intensity
at z = L, the intensity is then:
I(x, y, L) = I1(x, y) + I2(x, y) + 2E0,1(x, y)E0,2(x, y) cos (∆β(ω)L)
(38)
Where propagation losses of the modes are neglected. It is therefore the case that the intensity of the sum of
the two modes is proportional to the cosine of the difference of the propagation constants, as:
I(L) ∝cos (∆β(ω)L)
(39)
9
==PAGE:13==
A first order Taylor expansion of the argument in the cosine, ∆β(ω)L, with respect to ω, expanded around
the frequency ω0 then gives:
∆β(ω)L ≈∆β(ω0)L + d
dω ∆β(ω0)L (ω −ω0) = ∆β(ω0)L + L
dβ1
dω −dβ2
dω

(ω −ω0)
(40)
Where the differential group delay ∆τ is equal to the L(dβ1/dω −dβ2/dω) term. Therefore, the expression
simplifies to:
∆β(ω)L ≈∆β(ω0)L + ∆τ(ω −ω0)
(41)
Where taking the derivative with respect to λ, and using the chain rule implies:
dβ(ω)L
dλ
= dβ(ω)L
dω
dω
dλ
(42)
And to recast with respect to the wavelength, where ω = 2πc/λ, and considering finite changes in wavelength,
then by multiplying by ∆λ (with infinitesimal corresponding dλ), gives:
∆β(ω)L ≈∆β(ω0)L −∆τ 2πc
λ2 ∆λ
(43)
Inserting the obtained expression from Equation 43 in Equation 39, we get:
I(x, y, L) ∝cos

∆β(ω0)L −∆τ 2πc
λ2 ∆λ

(44)
Evidently, the intensity distribution at a fixed distance L will then oscillate as a function of wavelength
difference ∆λ with respect to the considered wavelength λ of the launched pulse. By setting the last term in the
cosine equal to 2π, and replacing ∆λ by the beat wavelength λB, the beating period of the intensity with respect
to wavelength can be determined:
∆τ 2πc
λ2 λB = 2π =⇒λB = λ2
c∆τ
(45)
Therefore, two propagating modes with a differential group delay ∆τ at a propagation distance of L will
oscillate with a period of λB, meaning if the two modes are interfering constructively at a wavelength of λ0, then
so too will they interfere constructively at λ0 + λB. An example of a wavelength dependent power (integrated
intensity I(x0, y0, λ) over some small local surface) at some fixed position (x0, y0) in the fiber is plotted in Figure
5A. Evidently, the total intensity at this point has a DC component from the sum of individual mode intensities,
I1(x0, y0) + I2(x0, y0), with the wavelength dependent oscillations present stemming from the interference of
the modes, as described above. A Fourier transform of the measured power is shown in Figure 5B, where the
horizontal time-axis has been normalized with respect to the fiber length, so as to give information about the
group delay per unit length of fiber, ∆τ/L. The amplitude at zero group delay, ∆τ = 0 corresponds to the signal
strength of the overall power at that specific wavelength, i.e. equal to the sum of the powers of the two modes.
The peak at approximately 0.7 ps/m of group delay difference then gives the signal strength corresponding to the
power of the interference term in Equation 38, from the interference of the two modes. By integrating the signal
amplitude for the peak corresponding to the interference term, one can get the power P12 for the interference of
the two modes E1 and E2, and integrating the signal amplitude for the zero group delay can then give the relative
power coming from the individual intensities, I1 + I2, plus the interference term. Assuming that the power in
mode E1 is much larger than E2, meaning P1 >> P2, one can then use the relative power in the peak of interest
to compute the relative power in the mode with that corresponding group delay difference. This can then be
used to compute the relative powers, and thereby the modal purity of the propagating light, by the method of
Spectral and Spatial imaging, also referred to as S2 imaging. This method of measuring modal content will be
introduced in Section 3.2.
10
==PAGE:14==
Figure 5: (A): An example of the wavelength dependent power at a fixed position of (x0, y0) at the fiber output
facet, as a function of in-coupled wavelength λ. (B): The corresponding Fourier transform for the wavelength
signal in (A), where the time axis is normalized with respect to the fiber length, showing group delay difference
per meter of fiber. The amplitude of peak of interest corresponds to the normalized group delay per meter fiber
of the two interfering modes, ∆τ/L. Figure source: [8]
The intensity at a fixed position (x0, y0), as given in Equation 38 can be generalized in the case of N total
propagating modes, and equals:
I(x0, y0) =
N
X
i=1
I(x0, y0)i +
N−1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
2E0,i(x0, y0)E0,j(x0, y0) cos (∆β(ω)z)
(46)
Meaning that peaks will occur at all possible combinations of group delays ∆τi,j coming from interference of
the Ei and Ej modes. However, assuming that there is a dominant mode present, i.e. E0,1 >> E0,j for all j ̸= 1,
the intensity can be simplified for N modes. In this case, the variations in intensity stemming from interference
of two non-dominant mode is negligible and can therefore be removed from the expression. This then yields:
I =
N
X
i=1
Ii + 2E0,1
N
X
j=2
E0,j cos (∆β(ω)1,jz)
(47)
Again, evaluated at the point (x0, y0) .The peaks in the Fourier transform will thus be a result of interference
between the assumed dominant mode E1 and the weaker mode Ej at differential group delays ∆τ1,j and propa-
gation constant difference β1,j. This spatial distribution of oscillating intensity based on the present modes and
their spatial distribution is used for the Spectral and Spatial (S2) imaging technique, explained in Section 3.2.
2.3
Coupling and Transmission Efficiency
The incoupling of light to a fiber at the fiber facet is quantified by the coupling efficiency ηif, which gives the
fractional power contained in some input field Ei(r, θ) which will couple to a specific allowed field distribution in
the fiber Ef(r, θ). The coupling efficiency is given by the overlap integral:
ηif =

R 2π
0
R ∞
0
rdrdθEi(r, θ)∗Ef(r, θ)

2
R 2π
0
R ∞
0
rdrdθ|Ei(r, θ)|2 R 2π
0
R ∞
0
rdrdθ|Ef(r, θ)|2
(48)
Where the denominator normalizes the overlap integral, such that η ∈[0, 1]. In the context of the LP0,m mode
scheme, the field distributions of the guided modes in the fiber have no θ-dependence. Assuming that the input
field Ei(r) is also azimuthally invariant (rotationally symmetric), the integral over the azimuthal θ coordinate
can then be canceled out, yielding:
ηif =
R ∞
0
rdrEi(r)∗Ef(r)
2
R ∞
0
rdrdθ|Ei(r)|2 R ∞
0
rdr|Ef(r)|2
(49)
11
==PAGE:15==
Where η ∈[0, 1]. Besides coupling to allowed field distributions in a mode, the overlap integral can also be
used to calculate the transmission efficiency. If a field distribution Ei is incident on an interface with varying
spatial transmittance T in the radial direction, T(r) = t(r)2, then the overall transmission efficiency ηT of the
field through the interface is given as the power of the transmitted field, normalized with respect to the power of
the incident field, as:
ηT =

R ∞
0
rdrEi(r)t(r)
R ∞
0
rdrEi(r)

2
=
R ∞
0
rdr|Ei(r)|2T(r)
R ∞
0
|Ei(r)|2
(50)
2.4
Gaussian Beam and Binary Phase Plates
Referring back to Equation 13, this equation in particular, known as the Helmholtz equation, is a particular type
of eigenvalue problem related to the Laplacian operator ∇2. It can be shown [6] that the Gaussian beam is a
solution to the Helmholtz Equation. The electric field of a Gaussian beam in cylindrical (r, θ, z)-coordinates is
given as:
E(r, z) = ˆxE0
W0
W(z) exp
 −r2
W 2(z)

exp

−i

kz + k
r2
2R(z) −ψ(z)

(51)
Where it has been assumed that the beam is linearly polarized in the ˆx direction. Here, E0 is the (complex)
field amplitude, W(z) is the beam Gaussian width, where W0 = W(z = 0) is the beam waist, assuming the beam
is focused at z = 0. k is the wave number, related by k = k0n where n is the refractive index of the medium.
R(z) is the radius of curvature of the wave fronts, and ψ(z) is the Gouy phase. A schematic of a Gaussian beam
is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: The z-dependent width W(z), with a focus at z = 0 of the Gaussian beam. The surfaces of constant
phase are depicted, showing a radius of curvature for the surface of constant phase R(z) →∞at z = 0, and a
minimum R(z) at the Rayleigh range, zr ≈20 mm. Figure source: [23]
The beam width cannot remain remain constant with respect to the propagation direction z, due to diffraction.
Rather, the width of the beam W(z) is related to the Rayleigh length zr by:
W(z) = W0
s
1 +
 z
zr
2
(52)
Where the Rayleigh range equals zr = πW 2
0 /λ. Likewise, the radius of curvature for the phase fronts are also
related to the Rayleigh range by:
12
==PAGE:16==
R(z) = z

1 +
zr
z
2
(53)
Which therefore has a maximum at z = 0 and a minimum at z = zr. Because the Rayleigh range is pro-
portional to beam waist W 2
0 , then a highly focused beam will have a correspondingly small Rayleigh range, and
therefore diverge rather quickly. However, a comparatively larger beam, meaning a larger W0, will therefore have
a relatively longer Rayleigh range, meaning that the beam will only vary in with and phase front curvature slowly
with z. This is referred to as a collimated beam.
Evaluating the field for the Gaussian beam (Equation 51) at the beam waist z = 0 gives:
E(r, z = 0) = E0 exp

−r2
W 2
0

(54)
Where it has been used that the radius of curvature R(z) →∞as z goes to 0, and that ψ(z = 0) = 0,
yielding a total phase of whatever phase the complex amplitude E0 has, across the entire transverse plane of
the Gaussian beam. While the transverse distribution of the Gaussian beam has a high coupling efficiency η to
the fundamental LP0,1 mode, assuming an appropriate Gaussian width W0, the Gaussian transverse field can be
modified to increase coupling to higher order modes.
Since the z-dependence on a propagating field is exp(−ikz) = exp(−ik0nz) where n is the refractive index,
a propagation of distance L through a medium of refractive index n will obtain an additional phase of k0nL,
whereas propagation in free space (n = 1) will obtain an additional phase of k0L. The refractive index can be
a complex quantity, where n = nr + ini where the imaginary part ni is typically referred to as the extinction
coefficient. A nonzero imaginary part of the refractive index will lead to exponential decay of the electric field as
a function of propagation distance, but will for the purposes used here be considered entirely real, as the material
considered is Silica glass (SiO2). The difference in phase ∆ϕ obtained from propagation in the medium, compared
to free space propagation over a distance of L is then:
∆ϕ = k0Ln −k0L = k0L(n −1) = 2π
λ L(n −1)
(55)
Referring to Figure 2, the center of the LP0,m modes have a positive real part of the field amplitude in the
center (r = 0), which then changes between positive and negative multiple times within the core, where the
number of changes depend on the mode order m. In order to modify the Gaussian beam profile to increase the
coupling η to these modes, one can spatially modify the phase ∆ϕ(r) by selecting the appropriate difference in
propagation distance L by π, which has the effect of multiplying the field amplitude by −1, as exp(−iπ) = −1.
Thus, by taking the radial LP0,m field distribution, given by J0(κr) and evaluating the intervals of r for which
J0(κr) > 0 and J0(κr) < 0, one obtains the spatial domains where the field is positive and negative. By spatially
matching the positive parts of the field to a phase difference of ∆ϕ = 0 and the negative fields to a phase difference
of ∆ϕ = π, the transverse plane of the Gaussian beam is modified to couple more efficiently to the higher order
mode. This means that one should spatially vary the phase ∆ϕ(r) as:
∆ϕ(r) =
(
0
J0(κr) > 0
π
J0(κr) < 0
(56)
To achieve this spatial distribution of the binary phase, consisting of either a phase difference of 0 or π, a
slab of material with refractive index n is then constructed such that there is a radial variation of thickness L,
corresponding to that imposed by Equation 56. A schematic of such a structure, referred to as the Binary Phase
Plate (BPP), is shown in Figure 71.
1The schematic shows an increased propagation distance in white areas between shaded red areas, corresponding to ∆ϕ = π from
the analysis, as opposed to the presented theory of imposing the relative π phase shift at the red areas - However, as it is a relative
spatial phase difference which impacts the coupling efficiency, both configurations results in the same value for η.
13
==PAGE:17==
Figure 7: Left: A schematic of a BPP used to modify a Gaussian to couple with an LP0,5 mode. The outlined
red areas indicate where a phase shift of π is imposed. Right: A 3D model of the same structure, with the
propagation distance difference L depicted.
The radial field distribution of a Gaussian beam, modified using the BPP structure shown in Figure 7, is
plotted with the field distribution of an LP0,5 mode in Figure 8A, and the phase imposed by the BPP, ∆ϕ(r) is
shown in Figure 8B. This addition of spatial phase change of the field allows for an increase in coupling efficiency
from η = 0.2% for the Gaussian beam without transverse phase modulations, to a coupling efficiency of η = 73.5%
when using a Gaussian width of W0 = 4/5Rc.
Figure 8: (A): The radial field distribution of a numerically simulated LP0,5 mode, and the radial distribution of
a Gaussian, with a spatially modified phase ∆ϕ(r) from a BPP, resulting in a coupling efficiency of η = 73.5%.
(B): The radial distribution of phase change ∆ϕ(r) of the LP0,5 BPP.
Setting the phase difference ∆ϕ = π in Equation 55, and solving for the propagation distance L as a function
of wavelength λ yields:
L(λ) =
λ
2(n(λ) −1)
(57)
Where the refractive index is introduced as wavelength dependent, to account for material dispersion. Thus,
when using the BPPs to to work at a target wavelength of λ, the difference in thickness of the BPP should radially
vary by L as given in Equation 57, where the intervals of radial variations is given in Equation 56.
14
==PAGE:18==
2.4.1
Gaussian Width and BPP Bandwidth
One important parameter which impacts how well the Gaussian beam modulated by the BPP’s couple to the
HOMs, is the Gaussian width W0. Suppose a Gaussian beam of width MW0 is propagated through a BPP
phase plate with phase structure ∆ϕ(r/M), meaning both beam and BPP is scaled up by a factor of M. After
transmission through the BPP, the resulting modulated beam is then imaged into a fiber of core radius Rc, using
a magnification setup which de-magnification the Gaussian by a factor of 1/M. This de-magnification ensures
that the phase spatially imposed to the magnified beam will spatially overlap with the mode in the fiber. Figure
9A shows the computed overlap η as a function of the Gaussian width, for the LP0,m modes from m = 2 to 7, for
a simulated mode in a fiber of NA = 0.22, with a core radius of Rc = 25µm and refractive index n = 1.45 fiber,
at a wavelength of λ = 1550 nm. Figure 9B displays the resulting optimal Gaussian width as a function of mode
order, with respect to the coupling efficiency to that specific mode. The legend gives the resulting overlap mode
specific η, at the optimal Gaussian width. As can be seen, the optimal Gaussian width for the m = 3 to m = 7
modes is approximately 0.8RcM, which gives an overlap of roughly 74%.
Figure 9: (A): The calculated overlap η of a Gaussian beam to the LP0,m mode for the m = 2 to 7 modes, as a
function of Gaussian width. (B): The optimal Gaussian width for maximizing coupling to the mode, as a function
of mode order, with the legend giving the resulting coupling efficiencies at the optimal gaussian width.
Another parameter impacting the mode coupling efficiency by using a BPP is the wavelength of the light.
As can be seen in Equation 55, for a fixed L, the phase difference is inversely proportional to the wavelength.
The material of the BPP experimentally used is Corning 7980, and the wavelength dependent refractive index is
modelled from a Sellmeier equation, where the coefficients are given in [16]. Since the spatial distribution of the
guided fiber modes is also wavelength dependent, it is numerically simulated for each wavelength for which the
overlap η is calculated. Here, the fiber is assumed to have a constant NA of 0.22 regardless of wavelength,thereby
neglecting the effects of material dispersion on the waveguide. In order to obtain a spatial phase shift of π at a
wavelength of 1.55µm, the resulting variations in the plate thickness is L = 1.746µm. The calculated overlap for
a BPP pattern constructed to excite the LP0,5, with this variation in plate thickness is shown as a function of
wavelength in Figure 10A for modes m = 2 to 7. The ”Total” indicates the sum coupling efficiency of the modes
m ̸= 5. The overlap is only calculated for wavelengths where the mode is guided, where the cut-off wavelength is
calculated from Equation 33, using l = 0, and where the m’th root of J−1(V ) gives the cut-off frequency of the
LP0,m mode.
The parasitic modes refer to all present modes which are not equal to the target mode excited with the BPP, i.e.
for a target mode of LP0,5, modes LP0,2 through to LP0,7 excluding the LP0,5 is considered the present parasitic
modes. The total parasitic mode coupling efficiency ηP for a target mode order of m = mT , where mG is the set
of guided LP0,m modes, is then computed as:
15
==PAGE:19==
ηP =
mG
X
m,m̸=mT
ηm
(58)
Where the relative parasitic mode power of the m’th parasite is ηm/η, and is calculated in dB as 10log10(ηm/η).
The parasitic power of mode order m relative to the target mode power is quantified by the Multi Path Interference
[17], or MPI, and is computed as 10log10(ηm/η), where η is the overlap to the target mode. For example, for an
MPI of -10 dB means only 1/10’th the power of the target mode is present in the parasitic mode. The resulting
relative parasitic powers of using a LP0,5 BPP is shown in Figure 10B, where the Total indicates the sum MPI
of the parasites, calculated as 10log10(ηP /η), where η is the coupling efficiency to the target mode of the LP0,5.
Figure 10: (A): The overlaps calculated for m = 2 to 7 from propagation of a Gaussian beam of width W0 =
0.8RcM through a LP0,5 BPP, respective to the LP0,m modes. The Total is the sum overlap of the parasites.
(B): The relative parasitic powers, 10log10(ηm/η), of the parasites, relative to the LP0,5 mode.
As the coupling to target mode is dependent on Gaussian width, so too is the coupling to the parasites. Figure
11A shows the computed sum MPI of the parasitic modes relative to the target LP0,5 as a function of wavelength
for 5 different Gaussian widths, ranging from W0 = 0.5RcM to 2RcM. The MPI as a function of Gaussian width,
at a fixed wavelength of 1550 nm, is shown in Figure 11B. The best modal purity is obtained at a Gaussian width
of approximately W0 = 1RcM. In comparison, from Figure 9A, the optimal coupling efficiency is obtained at a
width of 0.8RcM, meaning a trade-off exists between overall coupling efficiency and modal purity, and that the
Gaussian width used should be chosen in the range, depending on the particular application.
16
==PAGE:20==
Figure 11: (A): The sum MPI of the parasites for a LP0,5 BPP, as a function of wavelength, at 5 different
normalized Gaussian widths W0/RcM. (B): The sum MPI of the parasites at a fixed wavelength of 1550 nm, as
a function of normalized Gaussian width, with a minimum at approximately W0 = 1RcM.
3
Methods - SLM and Binary Phase Plates
The following section covers the experimental setups and method used to characterize the performance of the
SLM and the BPPs in both a free space and close contact configuration. The characterization of the modal
content in the fiber is obtained using S2-imaging. The principles behind this imaging technique is also covered
in this section.
3.1
Experimental Setups
In order to characterize the performance of the BPPs relative to the well-established method of HOM excitation
using a SLM, three distinct experimental setups were used.
3.1.1
SLM Setup
The setup used to excite HOMs in the fiber is schematically illustrated in Figure 12.
A laser diode with a
collimated beam output emits a Gaussian beam of λ ≈1550 nm light. The laser diode (LD) used was the Agilent
HP81689A wavelength tuneable laser, allowing tuning of the wavelength from 1525 to 1575 nm. The emitted
collimated beam is incident on a linear polarizer (P1) used to control the polarization state of the beam, and
steered by a mirror (M1). Since the SLM is based on birefringent liquid crystals, the spatial variation in phase
delay obtained by the SLM is sensitive to input polarization, thus the need for control of the input polarization.
A telescopic beam expander consisting of lenses (L1) and (L2) increased the size of the Gaussian, allowing for
an effective increased resolution of the SLM with respect to the beam size. Due to the resolution of the SLM,
the effective resolution in pixels/beam width is increased for bigger beams. The Gaussian beam is then incident
on the SLM surface, where a binary phase pattern is produced, similar to that described in Section 2. The SLM
was positioned with a slight tilt relative to normal of the incident beam, and the reflected beam with imposed
spatial phase flips was then steered using a set of mirrors (M2) and (M4) allowing for control of both the height
and the angle of the beam. The beam was then focused into the fiber, using the focusing lens (L3). The fiber
used in all 3 experimental setups was a 2 meter section of a 0.22 NA Thorlabs FG050LGA fiber, with technical
specifications that can be found in [25]. At the fiber output facet, the beam was collimated using a lens (L4),
and the collimated beam was then incident on a CCD, consisting of a Xenics Bobcat 640 series camera. The
modal content of the fiber was characterized by the S2 software, by doing a wavelength sweep, controlling the
wavelength of the LD, and acquiring images of the spatial intensity distribution at the fiber output facet. These
images were then analyzed to obtain the modal content in the fiber, as explained in Section 3.2. The obtained
modal purity of the excited mode is then used as a reference for comparison with the modes excited by using the
BPPs.
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 12: A schematic diagram of the setup used to excite HOMs in the Thorlabs fiber, and to measure the
resulting modal content by S2 imaging using the wavelength tuneable LD and the IR-sensitive CCD camera.
3.1.2
BPP Setup
For HOM excitation using the BPPs, the different BPP patterns corresponding to target mode orders LP0,m for
m = 2 to 7 were etched by the process photo-lithographic etching on a glass wafer of material Corning 7980, with
material properties found in [16]. The wafers were 6x2 cm in dimensions, with a total thickness (parallel to the
propagation direction of the incident beam) on the order of 1mm. The L = 1.746µm deep circular rings were
then etched in the glass, so as to provide the spatial phase difference of π at a wavelength of 1550 nm. Two sets
of BPP structures were made, namely one for close-contact excitation, and one for free space excitation. For the
close-contact excitation, where the BPP patterns were positioned in contact with the fiber in-coupling facet, the
BPP patterns were etched with a spatial size matching exactly the fiber guided modes, meaning a magnification
of M = 1 such that the in-coupling Gaussian beam obtained the radial phase transfer function described from
Equation 56. This corresponds to the actual BPP pattern having an approximate radius of Rc = 25µm. For the
free-space setup, the patterns were designed to be a factor of M = 40 times bigger, in order to allow a collimated
beam to propagate through the BPPs. At this increased scale, the patterns had a outer radius of ≈40Rc = 1 mm.
The spatial distribution of the large M = 40 BPP patterns on the glass wafer is shown in Figure 13, where the
columns, left to right, were designed to excite LP0,2 up to LP0,7 respectively. The 3 different rows were identical
designs so as to provide redundancy, should something in the etching process have gone wrong for some of the
patterns. It is worth noting that all the even ordered modes, m = 2, 4, 6, had the center part of the pattern etched
as opposed to the odd ordered modes, m = 3, 5, 7. This was done to make sure the correct phase was obtained
in the cladding, with respect to the phase in the center of the mode. For example, in Figure 4, the odd ordered
modes are seen to have field distribution with the same ”sign” of the mode field in the center at r = 0 as in the
cladding, where r > Rc. The sign of the phase in the center and cladding of the modes are identical for the odd
ordered modes, and opposite for even ordered modes. As can be seen from the overlap integral in Equation 49, it
is not the absolute phase that is important for the coupling efficiency, but rather the relative phase distribution,
as the sign of the overall field overlap is unimportant due to taking the norm squared value, |x|2, where x is the
mode field overlap to the fiber mode.
18
==PAGE:22==
Figure 13: The distribution of BPP patterns on the large M = 40 glass wafers used for the free-space setup,
scaled by a factor of M = 40 with respect to the fiber mode field distribution. The columns, left to right, shows
patterns for mode excitation ranging from LP0,2 to LP0,7.
The setup used to characterize the magnified M = 40 BPPs in a free-space setup, is shown schematically
in Figure 14A. The Agilent tuneable wavelength laser also used in the SLM setup is used as a source. Two
mirrors (M1) and (M2) steer the emitted collimated Gaussian beam into a telescope consisting of lenses (L1)
and (L2). Both the lenses had the same focal length (f = 100 mm), and was used to tune the beam phase
curvature, so as to allow control of the phase at the plane of the BPP. The mirrors (M3) and (M4) were then
used for additional beam steering, in order to have normal incidence on the BPP. The wafer with the etched
BPPs was mounted on a (x, y)-stage, allowing for precise control of the position of the phase plate relative to
the beam. The (x, y)-stage was controlled digitally by a python script, which allowed control of the location of
the BPP to spatial step sizes within 0.1µm. After transmission through the BPP, a telescope consisting of lenses
(L3) and (L4) with focal lengths of fL3 = 250mm and fL4 = 6.24 mm giving a magnification of approximately
M = 1/40 de-magnified and imaged the beam to the fiber facet, with the theoretically optimal size for coupling
into the fiber. Between the lenses, two mirrors (M5) and (M6) were positioned, with (M6) being as close to the in-
coupling lens (L4) as possible, in order to better control the position of the beam spot on the fiber facet, resulting
in only small changes to incidence angle of the beam, when aligning by moving mirror (M6). After propagation
in the 2 meter section of the fiber, the output beam was collimated using (L5) and incident onto the CCD camera.
For the close-contact setup, where the BPPs were aligned to- and in contact with the input fiber facet, the
free-space setup was modified, resulting in the setup shown schematically in Figure 14B. The BPP used were
those designed to fit spatially with the mode field distribution in the fiber with no magnification, meaning M = 1.
The in-couling lens (L4) and the fiber was mounted on a (x, y, z) translational stage. When alignment of the BPP
to the fiber was obtained in the transverse (x, y) plane, the fiber was ”pushed” against the BPP until there was
physical contact between the fiber and the BPP, by moving the fiber stage holder in the z-direction towards the
BPP. An explanation of how alignment was practically achieved is given in the Appendix, Section 11, including
additions to the setup which were only used for alignment of the BPPs in the setup, and not for characterization
of the BPPs.
19
==PAGE:23==
Figure 14: (A): Schematic diagram of the setup used for HOM excitation using the BPPs in a free-space config-
uration. (B): The setup used for HOM excitation using the BPPs in a close-contact configuration.
3.2
S2 Imaging
The Spectral and Spatial (S2) imaging technique allows for determination of modal content in light propagating
in the fiber [8] [21], based on the fact that the different modes have corresponding different propagation constants
β, which consequently means that the intensity will oscillate as a function of wavelength of the in-coupled light,
as outlined in Section 2.2. If assuming that only two modes are co-propagating in the fiber, and the two mode
intensity distribution is dominated by the intensity in mode i = 1, then an approximation can be made to the
intensity, now also introduced as a function of wavelength:
I(x, y, λ) = I1(x, y, λ) + 2Re
hp
I1(x, y, λ)E2(x, y, λ)
i
(59)
Where the real part of the field of the parasitic mode, E2, then equals:
Re [E2(x, y, λ)] = I(x, y, λ) −I1(x, y, λ)
2Re
hp
I1(x, y, λ)
i
= J(x, y, λ)
(60)
Where I1(x, y, λ) is the slowly varying intensity of the dominant mode with respect to wavelength, and
J(x, y, λ) is the fast oscillations due to the interference stemming from the difference in propagation constants of
the present two modes. The approximately DC peak signal (at a DGD of 0) is then the power in the dominant
mode, and the intensity at position (x0, y0) can be approximated as:
I1(x0, y0) ≈
1
λe −λs
Z λe
λs
I1(x0, y0, λ)dλ
(61)
Where λs and λe is the start and end wavelength respectively, for the filtering to obtain the dominant mode
intensity. Likewise, the parasitic mode intensity at that position can be obtained as:
I2(x0, y0) ≈
2
λe −λs
Z λe
λs
J2(x0, y0, λ)dλ
(62)
20
==PAGE:24==
The total power in the mode is then obtained by integrating the spatial intensity distribution of the mode, as
obtained by the above expression, over the entire cross-sectional area of the fiber. Using Equations 61 and 62 and
evaluating the intensity in all points across the fiber cross section, the total power in the i’th mode then becomes:
Pi =
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
Ii(x, y)dxdy
(63)
From which, the relative power Prel in the parasitic mode relative to the dominant is then obtained as:
Prel = P2
P1
=
R R
I2(x, y)dxdy
R R
I1(x, y)dxdy
(64)
Practically the measurement of modal power in the lab is achieved by combination of the wavelength tune-
ability of the Agilent laser, with the CCD camera. A start and end wavelength λs and λe is chosen, with a
wavelength step size of δλ, meaning a total number of (λe −λs)/δλ discrete wavelengths were used. At each
wavelength, the spatial intensity distribution of the output facet was measured by image acquisition using the
camera. Thereby, the intensity in each pixel was obtained as a function of wavelength, which can be Fourier
transformed to give a amplitude spectrum with respect to absolute differential group delay. Such a spectrum
obtained from a measurement in the lab is shown in Figure 15. As the span of wavelengths λe −λs is increased,
the temporal resolution of the Fourier transform δt is increased, and as the wavelength step-size δλ is decreased,
meaning a better frequency resolution, the span of measured differential group delays is increased.
Figure 15: An example of the Fourier transform of the wavelength dependent intensity in a particular pixel of
the images acquired by the camera, showing a peak caused by a parasitic mode at a differential group delay of
approximately ∆τ = 8.5 ps.
In order to determine the required parameters for the S2 imaging, the expected differential group delays were
calculated by numerically computing the group velocity dω/dβ, based on the propagation constant β obtained
from the numerical mode solver. The expected group delays were then calculated from Equation 36. Figure 16A
shows the calculated differential group delay per meter of fiber length for the 0.22 NA Thorlabs fiber. The m’th
mode order indicates the mode order of the parasite, and the DGD given is computed relative to the dominant
mode order, as given by the label. The DGD is always calculated as positive, even though the arrival time of
the parasite might come before that of the dominant mode. Due to the fourier transform carried out to get the
amplitude as a function of DGD, the resulting spectrum is one sided, and posive and negative DGDs cannot be
distinguished. Within the guided mode orders going up to m = 7, the maximum differential group delay per meter
of fiber is approximately 35 ps. One thing to consider is the relative difference in group delay of the m −1’th and
m+1th mode of the dominant m’th mode. Consider for example the DGD of the LP0,5 and LP0,7 parasites, when
considering the dominant mode of LP0,6. The DGD of those two parasites are very similar. Figure 16B therefore
shows the minimum difference in DGD for the guided modes, as a function of dominant mode order m, with the
legend giving the corresponding values. For the dominant mode of LP0,6, the minimum differential group delay
21
==PAGE:25==
per meter fiber length is only 0.4 ps, corresponding to difference between the m = 5 and 7 parasites. Values for
the fiber length and the swept wavelength interval used for S2 should therefore be chosen to sufficiently resolve
peaks with such a separation.
Practically, a total fiber length of 2 meters were used, giving a maximum possible DGD of around 70 ps, with
a minimum difference in DGD of 0.8 ps. A wavelength range of λs = 1535 nm and λe = 1565 nm was chosen,
giving a temporal resolution δt of the time traces of 0.25 ps. The wavelength resolution of δλ = 0.05 nm was
chosen, resulting in a maximum possible DGD of 80 ps. This combination of parameters therefore allowed the
measurement of modal purity, even at maximum possible DGD of a 2 meter fiber (stemming from the difference
between the LP0,2 and the LP0,7), and to possibly distinguish the peaks of the two nearest parasites relative to
the LP0,6. Figure 17A shows an obtained time trace plotted from 0 to 40 ps, for a dominant mode of LP0,5 in 2
meters of fiber. The dashed lines indicate the expected differential group delays of the parasitic modes, and the
shaded area indicates the integrated part of the spectrum used to calculate the relative power to the power in the
dominant LP0,5. Figure 17B shows the expected parasitic powers in the solid bars, based on calculation of the
overlap integrals, and the crosses indicates the measured relative power, as given in Equation 64, with the Total
indicating the sum of parasitic powers (LP0,2 to LP0,7 excluding the dominant) relative to the dominant mode.
For all results presented, the dominant mode power is obtained by integration from a DGD of 0 to 1 ps, and the
relative parasitic powers were integrated over the interval determined visually to cover the entire corresponding
peak in the time trace. Additionally, the practical measurement of the ”Total” parasitic power was obtained by
integration from DGD = 1 to 80 ps (meaning the entire time trace besides the DC), rather than from summing
the powers in the peaks. This is done to also include the powers in the l ̸= 0 modes, which will also be excited
when the Gaussian beam doesn’t have perfect normal incidence on the fiber facet. As is evident from the Figure,
the modes LP0,2 and LP0,7 has a similar expected group delay, relative to the dominant LP0,5. In cases where the
peaks corresponding to multiple modes were indistinguishable, the obtained parasitic power has been assumed to
be evenly distributed between the corresponding modes, as is the case for the LP0,2 and LP0,7 parasites in Figure
17B.
Figure 16: (A): The calculated DGD per meter of fiber as a function of parasitic mode order m, relative to the
dominant modes shown in the legend. (B): The minimum difference in DGD for the m’th order dominant mode,
with the legend giving the DGD in ps/m.
22
==PAGE:26==
Figure 17: Left: The Fourier transform of the wavelength dependent intensity distributions. The dashed lines
indicate the calculated DGD for 2 meters of fiber relative to the dominant LP0,5, and the shaded area under the
graphs indicate the interval of integration used to obtain the relative modal power of the parasite. Right: The
calculated parasitic mode powers in dB shown by the bars, relative to the dominant LP0,5 mode. The crosses
indicates the relative parasitic mode power as measured by relative power in the corresponding peaks shown on
the left. The total indicates total calculated parasitic power relative to the dominant ηP /η.
4
Results - Binary Phase Plates
The following Sections shows the obtained modal puritities and coupling efficiencies measured with the S2 imaging
method, using the 3 different setups (SLM, Free-space and Close-contact BPP) described in Section 3. As the fiber
used supports HOMs up to a maximum m = 7 for the LP0,m modes at a wavelength of 1550 nm, the modal purity
for target modes ranging from m = 2 to m = 7 has been measured in each setup, except the m = 2 mode using
the SLM setup. The results of the SLM excitation method is shown in Section 4.1, which gives the modal purity
for modes LP0,3 to LP0,7. Here the LP0,2 is neglected, as the excitation of this mode was unsuccessful, due to the
imaged fiber mode at the output facet having a flat intensity profile when using a broadband SLED for alignment,
indicating excitation of many higher order modes, and the resulting intensity profile being a superposition of the
excited HOMs. Since there wasn’t a dominant mode present, the S2 imaging method could not be used to reliably
obtain information about the modal content for this mode order. Section 4.2 shows the obtained modal puritities
and coupling efficiencies of the HOMs in the Free-space setup, and compares them with the theoretically best
possible , based on the overlap calculation for BPPs presented in Section 2.3 and 2.4. The experimental coupling
efficiencies are obtained from measuring the beam power before and after the fiber in-coupling and collimating
lenses, respectively just before the in-coupling lens to the fiber, and just after the collimating lens at the fiber
output facet. This means there is an important distinction between the values of mode specific η presented in
the Theory section, and the values for the overall η measured experimentally, as the experimentally measured
coupling efficiency is the sum coupling to all the excited modes. Section 4.3 shows the observed performance of
the close-contact BPP configuration.
4.1
Spatial Light Modulator
For the excitation of the LP0,m HOMs using the SLM setup shown in Figure 12, the resulting modal content
and purity is shown in Figure 18A, with the measured total parasitic power for the modes tabulated in Table 1.
The reconstructed dominant mode intensity profile from the DC peak in the DGD time trace is shown in Figure
18B. In Figure 18A, the different m’th mode orders are distributed on the x-axis, with a dashed line separating
the measured modal content for each target mode order. For each mode order, the bars indicate the expected
parasitic power for that specific parasite based on the overlap calculations of a Gaussian beam with optimal
Gaussian width (W0 = 0.8RcM) for maximum coupling efficiency. This was achieved, by changing the size of the
BPP pattern on the SLM, so it was correspondingly the correct size to the incident Gaussian. The theoretical
23
==PAGE:27==
Total is calculated as the sum of the parasites coupling efficiency relative to the dominant, and is measured as
the relative power in the spectrum integrated from DGD = 1 ps to 80 ps, where the dominant is found as from
integration of the DC peak from DGD = 0 ps to 1 ps. Therefore the measured total purity takes into account
all other HOMs, including the l ̸= 0 modes. The obtained values of modal purity for the different target mode
orders are tabulated in Table 1.
Figure 18: (A): The expected modal content of using an SLM to produce BPP patterns, with a relative Gaussian
size of W0 = 0.8RcM, for main mode orders of LP0,m modes ranging from m = 3 to 7. The theoretically expected
values are shown in the bars, and the measured values are shown by the markers. (B): The reconstructed dominant
mode images from the S2 software, based on the spatial intensity distribution from the DC component in the
time trace, integrated from DGD = 0 ps to 1 ps.
Table 1: Measured modal purities of the m’th order LP0,m as excited by the SLM.
Mode order LP0,m
m = 3
m = 4
m = 5
m = 6
m = 7
Total parasitic power [dB]
-11.4
-12.3
-11.1
-12.5
-10.4
Evidently, the SLM method of excitation results in modes of purity similar to those expected from calculating
the overlap integrals with an ideal Gaussian width. Unfortunately the coupling efficiency was not experimentally
measured, but values around 80% for overall coupling efficiency are reported possible2. One distinct advantage
of the SLM setup is the easy mode selection. Once the setup is built and fixed, mode selection is obtained by
digitally updating the phase pattern produced on the SLM. This has the result of mode selection being fast and
flexible, and there is no need for physically altering the setup between different modes.
2Here with an important distinction between coupling efficiency to the specific modes, as Figures 10 and 42 show, and overall
coupling efficiency, being the sum of all HOM coupling efficiencies, including the target mode.
24
==PAGE:28==
4.2
BPP Free space excitation
For the excitation of the LP0,m HOMs for m = 2 to 7 using the BPP in a Free-space configuration, as shown in
Figure 14A, the expected and measured modal content for the different target mode BPP patterns are shown in
Figure 19A, with the reconstructed dominant modes shown in Figure 19B. The obtained total modal puritities
and total coupling efficiencies are given in Table 2. For the theoretically expected values, a Gaussian width of
W0 = 0.831MRc was measured at the plane of the BPP, and this value is used in the calculation of the overlap
integrals to determine the expected values. The width of the Gaussian was obtained directly from the beam
collimating lens, indicated schematically on Figure 14A as the collimated beam coming from the laser diode, with
a slight modification to the collimation of the beam stemming from the telescope comprised of lenses (L1) and
(L2). The intensity distribution obtained using the BPPs were also imaged at the fiber output facet using the
camera, when using a broadband SLED source. The resulting imaged intensity distributions are shown in Figure
20.
Figure 19: (A): The expected modal content of the BPP patterns, with a relative Gaussian size of W0 = 0.831MRc,
for main mode orders of the LP0,m modes, from m = 2 to 7. (B): The reconstructed dominant mode images from
the S2 software corresponding to the measured modal content in (A).
Table 2: Measured total parasitic power and total coupling efficiency for the different m’th mode order BPP
patterns.
Mode order LP0,m
m = 2
m = 3
m = 4
m = 5
m = 6
m = 7
Total parasitic power [dB]
-9.1
-9.1
-7.3
-8.2
-7.9
-8.0
Coupling efficiency η [%]
35.0
32.6
32.7
33.3
30.7
21.4
25
==PAGE:29==
Figure 20: The imaged fiber output facet intensity distribution, for BPP patterns used in the Free-space setup
configuration, with the pattern target modes ranging from LP0,2 to LP0,7. The light source used was a broadband
SLED.
Evidently, the obtained total modal purity is inferior to SLM excitation, as the generated modes are roughly
8 dB pure. Additionally, the measured overall coupling efficiency ranges from 30 to 35%, which is less than half
of that theoretically possible for the BPPs. The in-coupling lens (L3) was later measured to have a transmittance
of 74.2%, which is not accounted for in the listed coupling efficiencies in Table 2. One possible explanation for
the lower than expected coupling efficiency is a non-ideal setup, with respect to the lens positioning of lenses
(L3) and (L4), as shown in Figure 14A. As the free-space patterns were a factor of M = 40 than the fiber mode
spatial distribution, a 4f system with magnification 1/40 is expected to be ideal for this setup. Unfortunately,
the best matching pair of focal lengths for the lenses used were 300mm and 8mm, resulting in a magnification
of 1/37.5, resulting in a spatial distribution of phase flips in the beam different from those in the fiber.
To
compoensate for this, the lenses (L3) and (L4) were positioned in many different combinations, and for each
combination of positions, the coupling efficiency and modal purity was measured. The results shown above is
from the combination of lens positions resulting in the best coupling efficiency obtained from using those two
specific lenses. This possible cause of deviation from expected performance with respect to modal purity and
coupling efficiency is further explained in Section 4.3 and Section 5.
Additionally, from visual inspection of
the reconstructed dominant signal from for example the LP0,2, the dominant mode does not appear to be a
particularly ”clean” mode, as the center spot and the ring are not clearly separated by a dark fringe. Therefore,
it is reasonable to expect that the obtained purity of the LP0,2 isn’t actually the 9.1 dB measured. For a similar
reason, excitation of the m = 2 mode was excluded from the results using the SLM setup, as the generated field
did not appear as a mode. Since the S2 method assumes a dominant mode present in order to compute the
relative parasitic powers, and seeing as the dominant mode doesn’t look like a pure LP0,2, it is therefore believed
that the measured performance is not the actual performance. The coupling efficiency for the LP0,6 and LP0,7
are also observed to be lower than the other modes, and is suspected to be caused by mode-dependent bend
losses, as the higher order modes are more weakly guided, and therefore more sensitive to bend losses. This will
be elaborated on in Section 5.
4.3
BPP Close contact excitation
For the last experimental characterization of the BPPs, the BPP patterns with spatial size corresponding to the
fiber (meaning a BPP scaling of M = 1) were positioned in contact with the fiber input facet, as schematically
shown in Figure 14B. Since the two used lenses in this setup (L3) and (L4) had focal lengths of 250 mm and 6.24
mm respectively, the resulting magnification of the beam is M ≈1/40. Therefore, for the theoretically expected
values, a Gaussian width of W0 = 0.831Rc was used, as this should be the Gaussian width when imaged to the
fiber facet using the 4f system. The measured parasitic powers are shown in Figure 21A, with the reconstructed
dominant mode reconstructed from the DC peaks in the time traces shown in Figure 21B. The values for the
26
==PAGE:30==
total parasitic power and the overall coupling efficiency are given in Table 3, and the imaged fiber output for the
excited LP0,3 and LP0,5 modes are shown in Figure 22. The modes shown are representative performance for all
modes, but images of the other modes were not obtained due to forgetfulness.
Figure 21: (A): The expected and measured modal content for HOM excitation using the BPPs in the close
contact configuration. (B): The dominant signal, reconstructed from the DC peak in the time traces.
Table 3: Measured total parasitic power and overall coupling efficiency for the BPPs in the close-contact config-
uration, for the different mode orders.
Mode order LP0,m
m = 2
m = 3
m = 4
m = 5
m = 6
m = 7
Total parasitic power [dB]
-7.4
-8.6
-8.9
-8.9
-8.3
-8.2
Coupling efficiency η [%]
3.8
8.3
8.8
12.3
11.3
5.7
Figure 22: The imaged fiber output intensity distribution, for BPP patterns in the close contact configuration,
with target modes LP0,3 and LP0,5. The source used was a broadband SLED.
While the obtained modal purities are comparable to those from the free-space setup, the coupling efficiency
obtained with this setup was substantially lower, with values in the 5 −10% range. While trying to optimize
27
==PAGE:31==
modal purity in the setup for the different target mode order BPPs in the close contact configuration, a strong
dependence on the position of the in-coupling lens (L4) with respect to both modal purity and overall coupling
efficiency was observed. For the obtained data, the position of lens (L3) was fixed to give an approximate distance
between the lenses (L3) and (L4) of the sum focal lengths, fL3 + fL4 ≈25.6 cm, and during the alignment, the
position of lens (L4) was moved along the z-direction, parallel to the beam path. While moving (L4) away from
the fiber, the coupling efficient was reduced, but the corresponding modal purity was increased. This tendency is
shown in Figure 23A for the LP0,5 target mode BPP pattern, where the coupling efficiency η is varying directly
as a result of the z-position of lens (L4), ranging from the highest possible obtained coupling efficiency at that
specific position of lens (L3) (completely neglecting the resulting modal purity), to the best possible modal
purity, neglecting coupling efficiency. Figure 23B shows the corresponding reconstructed dominant mode from
the S2 imaging from the measured points in 23A, which visually shows a degradation of dominant mode purity,
as the coupling efficiency is increased. It is evident that a 10 dB pure mode is obtainable in the close contact
configuration, while a coupling efficiency comparable to the free-space BPP setup is also possible, although neither
were obtainable simultaneously, using the setup with a distance between the lenses equal to their sum focal length.
Consequently, the measured values in Figure 21A and Table 3 are obtained at some arbitrary position between
optimal coupling efficiency and optimal modal purity. The discrepancy between positions of (L4) resulting in
optimal coupling and optimal modal purity is due to a non-optimal combination of lens (L3) and (L4) positions
relative to the BPP.
Figure 23: (A): The measured modal purity of the dominant mode, as a function of coupling efficiency, for the
LP0,5 target mode BPP pattern. The coupling efficiency is changed by moving the in-coupling lens (L4). (B):
The reconstructed dominant mode from the S2 imaging, corresponding to the points shown in (A).
In order to examine the impact of the relative distance between lenses (L3) and (L4), the distance between
them was changed, and the modal purity and coupling efficiency was then measured using S2 imaging again at
different positions of lens (L4). The distance d between the lenses (L3) and (L4) with focal lengths fL3 and fL4
is here given as:
d = fL3 + fL4 + ∆zL3
(65)
Where ∆zL3 is then the additional displacement of lens (L3) away from lens (L4). The resulting measured
modal purities as a function of coupling efficiency, is shown in Figure 24, where again the coupling efficiency
is to be considered an expression for the distance from lens (L4) relative to the BPP in close contact with the
fiber. The coupling efficiency is also modified to compensate for the losses in lens (L4), which had a B-band anti-
28
==PAGE:32==
reflective coating applied. This particular anti-reflective coating resulting in the transmittance of the 1550 nm
wavelengths being reduced, and the transmission efficiency ηT of the lens was measured to be equal to ηT = 74.2%
by comparing the beam power before and after the lens.
Figure 24: The measured total relative parasitic powers as a function of coupling efficiency, for 6 different relative
positions of lens (L3) relative to lens (L4). The coupling efficiency is changed by increasing the distance separating
the lens (L4) and the BPP.
As can be seen from Figure 24, the modal purity was increased to an overall purity of > 10 dB at even higher
coupling efficiencies of η > 50%. Specifically, a modal purity of 10.6 dB was obtained with a coupling efficiency of
51.7% for the ∆zL3 = 12 cm displacement of lens (L3). For each of the curves, the data was acquired starting at
the maximum obtainable coupling efficiency, and the lens (L4) was only ever moved away from the BPP, resulting
in lowering of the coupling efficiency, and a reduction of the modal purity, as illustrated for the curves of ∆zL3
equal to 9 and 12 centimeters. It is possible that intermediate positions between those tested could allow for an
even better combination of coupling efficiency and modal purity, and would be a natural next step to characterize
the best possible performance of the BPPs, as well as measuring obtained modal purity for all mode orders at
that configuration. This was unfortunately not possible due to time restrictions related to the project deadline.
However, the measured coupling efficiency and corresponding total parasitic power was measured for the LP0,2 to
LP0,6 modes with the ∆zL3 = 12 cm configuration of the setup, and the results are shown in Figure 34 in Section
5.4, with resulting modal purities across the different modes of roughly 10 dB, with a maximum obtained modal
purity of 11.8 dB for the LP0,5 at a coupling efficiency of roughly 50%.
5
Discussion - Binary Phase Plates
The following section will discuss the possible applications and limitations of using binary phase plates for ex-
citation of LP0,m HOMs, as well as practical things that could have been implemented in the experimental
characterization of the BPPs to improve the measured performance. Section 5.4 gives a comparison of using the
SLM and the BPPs for HOM excitation, in relation to ease of use, price difference and achievable performance.
5.1
Mode selection for fixed BPP pattern
In the presented theory and results, the mode selectivity using BPP was always implemented by changing the
used BPP pattern, where the pattern was specifically designed to give a spatial phase variation to optimize
coupling to the target modes. One disadvantage then is the need to physically move components to achieve the
mode selectivity, for example by translating the glass wafer on which the BPPs were etched. Another possible
approach to changing the target mode, is to have a BPP with a high number of radial phase flips, and change the
29
==PAGE:33==
effective amount of induced spatial phase flips in the beam, by changing the beam width at the plane of the BPP.
Such a BPP with a high number of radial phase flips is shown in Figure 25. The design showed is obtained by
simulating the radial field distribution of an LP0,30 using the numerical mode solver. To achieve this, the effective
V-parameter of the fiber has to be increased such that these high order modes are guided. Therefore, a NA of
0.35 was used, with a core radius of 50µm, and a propagating wavelength of λ = 1030 nm. The resulting mode
field distribution was used to design the BPP, where the spatial variation of imposed phase was implemented as
stated in Equation 56.
Figure 25: The BPP design for a target mode of LP0,30.
When fabricating such high order BPP patterns, one should account for the maximum spatial resolution pos-
sible by the photo lithographic etching method used to produce the BPPs. As the higher order modes have a
higher spatial frequency, meaning smaller pattern features for a fixed size of the pattern, there’s a practical limit
to the producible size of such high order target mode patterns. However, as beam alignment is also crucial for
the performance of the BPPs, it is practical to produce the patterns with a relatively big size. This has the added
bonus of making beam collimation and alignment easier. To achieve mode selection by changing the Gaussian
width in the plane of the BPP, one has to use a free-space type setup, as the beam will have to be magnified to
spatially overlap with the fiber modes in the fiber smaller than the beam size. Therefore, this method cannot be
used in a close-contact type setup.
Figure 26A shows the maximum possible coupling efficiency as a function of normalized gaussian width W0
relative to the pattern radius Rp, where the pattern radius is given by MRc, and Rc then is the core radius of the
fiber simulated to generate the pattern. The overlap integral is then calculated based on the mode distributions
of the Rc = 25µm, 0.22 NA fiber used in the report. For each Gaussian width, the plotted coupling efficiency is
calculated at the optimal magnification from the BPP to the fiber facet. Evidently, by changing the Gaussian
beam width, it is possible to efficiently couple to all the HOMs, when using the appropriate beam magnification
for coupling. Figure 26B shows the Gaussian width giving optimal coupling efficiency for all the m’th mode orders
of the guided HOMs in the fiber, with the legend indicating the maximal possible coupling efficiency to the target
mode. Figures 26 C and D shows the the resulting radial field distributions for the LP0,3 and LP0,7, both for the
Gaussian beam transmitted through the high-order BPP pattern at the optimal magnification, as well as the field
mode distribution from the mode solver, indicated by the dashed line. As the target mode orders increase in m,
the maximum possible overlap decreases. This is due to the fact that the Gaussian beam has to be wide enough
to get enough spatial phase flips imposed, which consequently gives a bigger mismatch in radial field magnitude
distribution between the fiber mode and the Gaussian transmitted through the BPPs.
30
==PAGE:34==
If the mode selectivity was implemented this way, then one practical disadvantage is the control of the Gaussian
width in the BPP plane. For example, with respect to the Free-space setup shown in Section 3, the control of
beam width would come from changing the telescopic configuration of lenses (L1) and (L2), both by changing
the focal lengths and the distance between them. Therefore, it was deemed easier to obtain mode selectivity
by spatially translating the wafer with multiple BPP patterns, and this possible method of mode selectivity by
changing of the gaussian width using a high order BPP pattern was not pursued.
Figure 26: (A): The maximum possible coupling efficiency for the m = 2 to m = 7 modes, as a function of
Gaussian width W0 normalized with respect to pattern radius Rp for a BPP pattern of fixed target mode order
m = 30. The maximum coupling efficiency is that obtained at the optimal magnification of the transmitted
Gaussian beam. (B): The Gaussian width resulting in maximum coupling efficiency η, as a function of target
mode order m. The corresponding maximum coupling efficiencies are indicated by the legend. (C): The spatial
distribution of the Gaussian transmitted through the BPP at the optimal Gaussian width, evaluated at the ideal
magnification, for the target mode of LP0,3. (D): Same as in C, but for a target mode of LP0,7.
31
==PAGE:35==
5.2
BPP stacking for wavelength tuning
One disadvantage of using the BPPs compared to the SLM, is that the structured etch depth of the BPPs is
fixed, which reduces the effectiveness of the BPPs at wavelengths away from the optimal wavelength. As stated
in Section 2, the phase difference ∆ϕ as a function of etch depth L is related by ∆ϕ = k0L(n −1) (Equation
55). As the obtained phase difference is changed from π, the coupling efficiency to the target mode is reduced,
resulting in both a lowering of coupling efficiency, and a reduction in modal purity. This dependence on total etch
depth L is shown in Figure 27 for BPPs ranging in target mode from LP0,2 to LP0,7, at the design wavelength
of λ = 1550 nm and corresponding optimal plate thickness Lo ≈1746 nm. The results for the plate thickness
in Figure 27 are periodic with a periodicity of 2Lo, as a thickness of 3Lo gives a phase shift of ∆ϕ = 3π, giving
exactly the same overlap to the HOM’s as a phase shift of π.
Figure 27: (A): The target mode overlap η and the obtained target mode purity, as a function of total BPP plate
thickness L, for a design wavelength of 1550 nm and a Gaussian width of W0 = 0.8RcM. (B): The corresponding
relative parasitic mode power.
Around the peaks of optimal performance, the BPPs works quite well in a large range of etch depths. This
is also in accordance with the good wavelength bandwidth of the BPP, as the wavelength, imposed phase and
etch depth are directly related. It is therefore potentially possible to make a set of identical BPP patterns with
varying etch depths, and aligning these patterns in the plane normal to the propagation direction of the beam.
By changing the number of BPPs used, one can select an effective total etch depth, and thereby the spatial
phase imposed at some fixed wavelength. Due to a calculation mistake in the initial design of the BPP structures
intended to work at 1550 nm, BPPs were also fabricated at an etch depth of roughly 556 nm, giving only a 1
radian phase shift at a wavelength of 1550 nm, as opposed to the ideal π radian phase shift. Therefore, stacking
and alignment of 3 identical plates would then give a phase shift of 3 radians. As seen from Figure 27, the
resulting total thickness of 3 · 556 nm = 1667 nm should still give good performance of the stacked BPPs. To test
this, the stacked configuration of 3 and 4 BPP patterns were used in the free space excitation setup. An image
of the best obtained alignment of the plates are shown in Figure 28 for two different target mode patterns. The
images are skewed (i.e. the patterns are not perfectly circular) due to stretching of the images in plotting, and
therefore not due to production errors.
32
==PAGE:36==
Figure 28: Left: The obtained alignment of 3 BPP patterns with a target mode of the LP0,3, with one pattern
in focus, and the 2 others located up and to the left of the pattern in focus. Right: The obtained alignment of 4
BPP patterns with a target mode order of LP0,7.
There are three factors that should be considered when using BPPs in such a stacked configuration. Firstly,
the Fresnel reflections from the multiple interfaces between the BPPs and air will increase the total reflectance
of the stacked wafers, thereby lowering the total efficiency of the setup. If the plates are stacked in contact with
each other, one can possibly reduce the total amount of reflections by layering the BPPs with sides containing
the etched pattern facing each other, thereby reducing the maximum glass-air interfaces by a factor of 2 in the
limit of using many plates. Secondly, the more phase plates are used, the more difficult the alignment becomes,
as there are simply more plates that have to be perfectly aligned to exactly impose the spatial phase required
for exciting the target mode. This obstacle can be circumvented by producing phase plates with varying etch
depths, such that any target total etch depth can be achieved by combinations of a few BPPs. The third factor
that should be considered is the different spatial frequency of the HOMs, and therefore the BPP patterns. For
example, the absolute deviation in alignment of the patterns in Figure 28 are comparable for both the LP0,3 and
the LP0,7 BPP. However, much more dramatic is the effect of the same absolute misalignment for the higher
ordered mode, as the spacing between the rings are decreased. The absolute misalignment of the stacked BPPs
is thus much more detrimental as the target mode order m increases. One possible solution to this problem is by
using the BPPs in a free-space configuration, with an even wider gaussian beam and even larger BPP patterns.
The M = 40 BPPs used in the free space setup could for example have been manufactured even larger, and
a telescopic beam expander could have increased the Gaussian width of the beam accordingly. Thereby, the
absolute misalignment error for the bigger patterns results in a smaller relative alignment error, thus having less
of a detrimental impact on the higher order modes. The practical difficulty in alignment consequently means
that using a stacked configuration for a setup with the BPPs in close contact with the fiber increases in difficulty,
and was therefore not attempted. It is also worth considering the effect of the finite thickness of the glass wafer
on which the BPPs are located. In the case of the close-contact setup, the beam is ideally focused at the fiber
input facet.
Therefore, the beam varies in radius quite significantly with respect to propagation distance z,
corresponding to a much shorter Rayleigh range of the Gaussian beam, and the positions of the imposed phase
flips relative to the beam width will therefore change, as the beam changes width over the distance in which the
phase flips are imposed. It is therefore suspected that a free-space setup configuration is superior when using
multiple BPPs, as the approximately collimated beam has a negligible change in Gaussian width over the finite
propagation distance of the stacked glass wafers. The measured total parasitic power using 3 and 4 stacked phase
plates, resulting in a phase shift of ∆ϕ = 3 and 4 radians, are shown in Figures 29 and 30 respectively. Here, the
non-optimal phase shifts are taken into account for the bars indicating the theoretically expected modal content.
The total parasitic power and total coupling efficiency, corrected for the in-coupling lens transmission losses, are
tabulated in Tables 4 and 5 respectively, but with the coupling efficiencies for the 4 stacked BPPs missing, due
to forgetting to measure the power before and after the fiber in the lab.
33
==PAGE:37==
Figure 29: The theoretically expected and experimentally measured modal content of 3 stacked BPPs giving a
phase shift of 3 radians, for the different HOM target modes.
Table 4: Measured total parasitic power and overall coupling efficiency for the 3 stacked BPPs of etch depth L =
556 nm.
Mode order LP0,m
m = 2
m = 3
m = 4
m = 5
m = 6
m = 7
Total parasitic power [dB]
-8.0
-8.8
-8.5
-8.1
-7.7
-6.9
Coupling efficiency η [%]
54.7
54.3
53.6
53.5
44.5
34.8
Figure 30: The theoretically expected and experimentally measured modal content of 4 stacked BPPs giving a
phase shift of 4 radians, for the different HOM target modes.
Table 5: Measured total parasitic power for 4 stacked BPPs of etch depth L = 556 nm.
Mode order LP0,m
m = 2
m = 3
m = 4
m = 5
m = 6
m = 7
Total parasitic power [dB]
-6.6
-6.0
-5.9
-6.2
-5.7
-6.8
34
==PAGE:38==
In order to compare the obtained modal purities for the single plate with ideal phase shift of π, and the two
stacked configurations, the measured total parasitic powers for all 3 configurations are plotted together in Figure
31. While the single plate has the advantage of imposing the optimal phase shift, the variation in performance
between the 3 experiments is rather explained by the alignment of the patterns, as the BPPs high bandwidth
and therefore good performance with the corresponding obtained total etch depths, do not explain the decrease
in performance of the 4 stacked wafers. The 4 stacked BPPs have a significantly lower modal purity for all target
mode orders, and at the levels obtained, the accuracy of the S2 imaging technique should also be considered, as
the assumption that a dominant mode is present likely isn’t satisfied. The misalignment of the patterns could
have been improved by building a custom mount for the wafers, as the wafers were diced such that the different
BPP patterns were distributed similarly for all the wafers. This was not attempted due to the time it would
take to produce such a mount, compared to the potential benefit, as the single plates already showed promising
performance. However, the performance of the 3 stacked BPPs are comparable to the single plate, and therefore
stacking of BPPs to change the imposed phase can practically be used in order to tune the optimal wavelength
at which a phase shift of π is obtained.
Figure 31: Comparison of measured relative parasitic mode power for the different HOMs, for the free-space BPP
configuration. The blue is using a single BPP imposing the ideal phase shift of π, while the red is 3 stacked BPPs
imposing a phase shift of 3 radians, and green is 4 stacked BPPs with a resulting phase shift of 4 radians.
5.3
Close contact BPP alignment
As shown in Figure 24, in order to achieve high coupling efficiencies while also obtaining good modal purity, the
positioning of the two lenses (L3) and (L4) was critical. As the figure shows, coupling efficiencies over 50% were
possible, with the corresponding modal purity strongly dependent on the separation of the lenses. For this rea-
son, it is suspected that the modal purity of the free space setup could also have been improved to obtain modal
purities of > 10 dB, by systematically trying to improve the lens positions in that setup in a similar fashion. The
process is however tedious and time consuming, as for each position of the lens (L3), the beam steering mirrors
would have to be aligned to adjust the coupling in a un-optimized setup. The need for realignment of the mirrors
also suggests that the beam incident on (L3) were angled slightly with respect to normal incidence on the lens.
After each alignment, using a broadband SLED as the source for easier visual inspection of the obtained modal
content, an S2 measurement would have to be made, using the Agilent wavelength tuneable laser. The mirrors
would then be moved again to try and optimize the modal purity of the obtained mode. Unfortunately, once
the mirrors had been realigned, and the resulting modal purity was for example decreased, there was no way to
reposition the mirrors to give the best obtained modal coupling. Therefore, the process was similar to a iterative
random walk, and stopped arbitrarily when a value better than the typical obtained value for measured modal
purity was reached. Implementing a way to accurately align the mirrors exactly as intended would make this
process easier, as a systematical approach to optimizing the alignment of the setup could be implemented. For
35
==PAGE:39==
example, by using a computer controlled mirror stage, similar to the one used to accurately control the position
of the BPPs. Unfortunately, mirror drift occurs slowly over time, and therefore, each day measurements were
attempted in the lab, a significant amount of time was spent on realigning the setup, which had misaligned over
night. While the multiple pairs of steering mirrors and lenses allowed precise control of the beam, the increased
number of mirrors and lenses also increased the time required to re-align.
In the process of obtaining pure modes using the close-contact setup, it was observed that the modal purity
and coupling efficiency was sensitive to alignment of the pattern to the fiber. By back coupling light through the
fiber, and imaging the fiber input facet on which the BPPs were positioned, the alignment of the BPP patterns
could be visually inspected. An example of the fiber facet with the BPP aligned as good as possible is shown in
Figure 32. In this case a ”clean” pattern is shown, but for many of the small scale BPP patterns, dust and other
foreign particles would accumulate in the etched part of the glass. Figure 33 shows the patterns for m = 2 to 7,
showing some of the patterns to be dirty. While the dirt might block a fraction of the light, lowering the overall
coupling efficiency, it is suspected that the scattering of light from the dirt wouldn’t change the relative power in
the dominant and parasitic modes excited.
Figure 32: The alignment of the BPP pattern with target mode LP0,5 aligned to the fiber core. The image was
acquired by back coupling light into the fiber, and imaging the BPP plane onto a CCD camera.
Figure 33: Examples of the BPP structures used for the close-contact setup, as seen through a microscope, with
visible dirt present. The image blur is due to vibrations in the microscope.
36
==PAGE:40==
One potential way to remove the problems associated with alignment of the fiber to the BPP structures
roughly the size of the fiber core, is to etch the BPP patterns directly onto the fiber facet. This would mean
that a incident Gaussian should be optimized for coupling efficiency by having the beam waist located in the
plane of the fiber facet. This would allow for a high overall efficiency of the setup while offering modal puri-
ties possible from the BPPs (> 10 dB). One would practically have to find ways to mount a fiber facet in the
photo-lithographic etching machines used, and also find a reliable way to accurately apply the photo resist used
to achieve the intended patterning. Due to lack of knowledge of modern nanoscale etching techniques and their
limitations, no conclusions on the actual feasibility of this will be attempted.
When etching the fiber with the BPP patterns, mode selectivity is consequently made impossible for that fiber,
meaning that the fiber is destined to only ever excite the HOM corresponding to the target mode of the etched
BPP pattern. While excitation of the HOMs using the BPPs is possible, another interesting aspect is potentially
beam reconversion, where the propagating field in the fiber at the output facet will reconvert to a Gaussian beam,
using a BPP. This could be particularly useful when for example doing nonlinear dispersive wave generation,
where the properties of the HOMs are useful, especially seeing as the BPPs are able to excite the target mode
over a wide range of wavelengths, and thus consequently also reconvert the HOM into a Gaussian-like beam for
a wide range of wavelengths [19][9]. If this approach works for beam reconversion into a Gaussian, this will allow
for a continuous-wavelength tuneable fiber laser with a gaussian beam output mode, where the output wavelength
is determined by the wavelength of the generated dispersive wave. One factor to consider is the bandwidth of
the BPPs with respect to the generated wavelength of the dispersive wave. Because the BPPs are broadband,
meaning effective mode excitation over a large band of wavelengths, it is suspected that the BPPs would also
allow for efficient beam reconversion over a broad range of wavelengths. The beam quality of Gaussian beams
are typically measured by the M 2 beam parameter [2], and therefore, a natural starting point for determining if
the BPPs would work for Gaussian beam reconversion would be to measure the M 2 value for a reconverted beam
using the BPPs in the close-contact setup.
When the pattern and fiber was seen on the camera to align, the fiber would be pushed against the BPP.
Unfortunately, due to the BPP not being fixed in place, but held loosely by clamps on the top and bottom of the
wafer, the physical push from the fiber would on occasion move the wafer, thereby moving the pattern relative
to the fiber. This small movement of the pattern relative to the fiber would in some cases reduce the coupling
efficiency from the measured 50% to values in the range of 10 to 25%, while also ruining the mode purity. This
could be improved by fixing the binary phase plates to the stage much more firmly, or again, by etching of the
BPP patterns directly on the fiber facet.
5.4
Comparison of SLM and BPPs for HOM excitation
When it comes to exciting pure LP0,m HOMs, the obtained modal purities from the SLM were better (> 11 dB
across all modes) compared to the obtained modal purities for the different configurations of using the BPPs.
The obtained purity of the SLM was almost equal to that predicted by the calculation of overlap to the parasitic
modes ranging from m = 2 to m = 7, where the discrepancy from the theoretically possible modal purity is likely
due to misalignment of the in-coupling mirrors and lenses, which could for example result in excitation of LP1,m
modes, or other modes with angular dependence. Figure 34A shows the best obtained modal purities for the
the different mode orders, both for excitation using the SLM and the BPPs. The presented results for the ∆zL3
configuration were obtained shortly before the project deadline, and the Result section has therefore not been
updated to feature the results in this configuration instead. Figure 34B shows the measured coupling efficiencies
of the obtained best modes, where the losses due to the anti-reflective B-band coating on the in-coupling lens
has been has been compensated for. Unfortunately the coupling efficiency for the SLM was not measured, but
typical values of total coupling efficiencies of roughly 80% are possible. A modal purity of 11.8 dB was obtained
for the LP0,5 mode using the BPP in the close contact setup, where the relative separation of the two lenses was
changed from the sum focal lengths, and still with no guarantee that the optimal combination of lens positions was
used when this was obtained. Due to the discrepancy between the Gaussian width resulting in optimal coupling
(W0 ≈0.8MRc) and best modal purity (W0 ≈1MRc), it is likely that the specific distance between the lenses
resulting in the 11.8 dB pure mode had a Gaussian width somewhere between these values. The gaussian width
could have been determined by removing the fiber and imaging the fiber input facet plane for that particular
setup. It is reasonable to expect that similar modal purities to the obtained 11.8 dB is achievable for the other
m’th order HOMs by use of the BPPs at similar coupling efficiencies. The values shown in Figure 34 for the
37
==PAGE:41==
∆zL3 = 12 cm setup was acquired the day before the deadline of the project, and due to a sudden problem with
the setup when trying to excite the LP0,7, this mode was neglected due to lack of time. The results from the
free-space setup could likely be improved to give similar modal purities as for the close-contact configuration
by optimizing the lens positions of the in-coupling telescope in a similar way as to the systematic approach to
optimizing lens positions shown in Figure 24.
Figure 34: (A): The measured relative parasitic power of the m’th order dominant LP0,m HOM, for the SLM and
BPP configurations. (B): The corresponding measured overall coupling efficiencies, compensated for the reduced
transmittance of the in-coupling lens.
As is evident from Figure 34, the coupling efficiency to the LP0,6 and LP0,7 drops relative to the other modes.
Since the coupling efficiencies were obtained by measuring beam power directly in front of the in-coupling lens,
and directly after the out-coupling lens, the losses are suspected to be because of bending of the 2 meter fiber. As
the higher order modes are less confined to the core, the change in index profile caused by bending and stresses
in the fiber causes the losses to be disproportionately higher for the modes closest to cutoff, i.e. the least well
guided modes. This also explains why the LP0,7 had even greater losses than the LP0,6. In the experimental
setups, the fiber was laid on the table between the in-coupling stage and the out-coupling stage, with minimum
bending radii on the order of 10 cm. To determine if it is indeed the bend losses which reduce the total coupling
efficiency, the fiber could be straightened, and the experiments repeated. If the target mode order was the LP0,7,
then the bend losses would mean a greater fraction of power was lost in the dominant relative to the parasitic
modes, and the modal purity is therefore expected to decrease (i.e. increasing values of the MPI). This might
explain the relatively worse performance of the LP0,7 for the SLM, and the LP0,6 for the close-contact ∆zL3 = 12
cm results.
Another possible explanation for the higher ordered reduced coupling efficiency is the low NA of the fiber, unable
to collect the light at larger incidence angles. Due to the unfortunate calculation mistake resulting in BPPs being
produced with the wrong etch depth, which turned out to impose close to a π phase shift for the typical laser
pointer wavelength of 532 nm, one of these BPP’s were aligned with the output of a green laser pointer. The
resulting field intensity distribution obtained by pointing the BPP-laser pointer at a wall is shown in Figure 35.
As there is evidently power in the outer diffraction rings, one possible explanation was also the fraction of power
in the outer diffraction rings, as a function of target mode order BPP pattern. Additionally, the higher order
BPP patterns have more discontinuities, and therefore the potential fraction of scattered light is increased for
these pattern, also leading to suspecting a higher loss for the higher order mode patterns. Therefore, the power
of the beam roughly 30cm before and 30cm after the BPP in the free-space configuration was measured. The
resulting fractional powers (transmission efficiencies) are shown in Figure 36, as a function of pattern mode order,
where ”Glass” refers to incidence on the wafer without a pattern present in the beam.
38
==PAGE:42==
Figure 35: The far field intensity distribution of using a BPP for a visible green laser pointer, obtained by pointing
the laser pointer at a wall.
Figure 36: The transmission efficiency of the BPP wafer versus BPP target mode pattern positioned in the
transmitted Gaussian beam. ”Glass” is measured as transmittance of the beam without a pattern, as a reference.
The fractional reflectance of the plate is calculated from the Fresnel reflection coefficient as:
R = r2 =

n −1
n + 1

2
(66)
Where using the refractive index of the silica wafer of n = 1.45 would give an expected reflectance of R = 3.3%,
and therefore a transmission of T = 1 −R = 96.7%. The discrepancy between the expected transmission and
the observed is therefore speculated to be due to scattering caused by a dirty/greasy BPP. Evidently, there is a
slight reduction in transmission efficiency at the higher order mode patterns, suspected to be scattering losses.
The power in the outer diffraction rings were potentially not coupled into the HOMs in the fiber due to the low NA.
Despite the poorer performance (although similar for the close-contact LP0,5), there is still some merit to HOM
excitation using the BPPs. Firstly, a SLM is rather expensive, whereas glass wafers with small patterns etched
39
==PAGE:43==
onto them is comparatively cheap, with material costs being negligible, and with most of the expenses related
to fabrication. Therefore, using BPPs in a stacked configuration could, or indeed spatially aligning the BPPs in
close contact with the fiber input facet, will allow for HOM excitation at a fraction of the cost.
For applications of HOMs using nonlinear phenomena, the optical power propagating in the modes is crucial,
as a higher intensity results in more efficient nonlinear processes. As the SLM relies on controlling the imposed
phase by birefringent liquid-crystals aligning themselves to the electric field lines in the display, the SLM will not
work at high optical intensities, as the electric field contribution from the beam itself will make the liquid crystals
realign with the sum electric field. This is not a problem for the silica BPP wafers, as they are produced of the
same material as the fiber core, thereby giving them the same dielectric strength. Therefore, the power threshold
of HOM excitation using the BPPs is expected to be similar to the power threshold of the fiber, which is typically
limited by dielectric breakdown in the center of the fiber core, where the intensity is the highest for the LP0,m
modes. This would then also mean that the BPPs would be ideal for beam reconversion, for example for a high
power Gaussian beam wavelength-tuneable laser based on dispersive wave generation. This could possibly be
implemented by etching of the BPPs directly on the fiber facet, as discussed above.
In the case of either the close-contact setup of using BPPs, or when the BPP patterns are etched directly on the
fiber facet, the mode selectivity is lost, whereas the SLM offers superior selectivity, with almost instantaneous
response times. The BPPs would therefore be ideal for purposes where the mode order for the application is
fixed.
6
Theory - Axicon and Photonic Crystal Metasurfaces
While Sections 2 through 5 considered the use of BPPs for HOM excitation, the following Sections (6 through
to 9) will consider the analysis and results of a simulated photonic crystal metasurface axicon and BPP for
HOM excitation, as a possible broadband alternative to the BPPs. As will be shown, the conventional axicon
offers greater coupling efficiency, but at a reduced bandwidth, with respect to the wavelength span of efficient
excitation. This section will briefly introduce the concept and principles behind the axicon, as well as covering
the properties and behavior of the silicon nanoscaled pillars simulated. The phase difference and transmission
efficiency from propagation through the simulated unit cells with said pillars is then implemented to work with the
Huygens-Fresnel diffraction integral presented in Equation 75, in order to calculate the overlap to the guided fiber
modes. Section 7 will introduce the FDTD simulation used to obtain the phase and transmission of the pillars,
and describes how these pillars are spatially distributed in order to form a metasurface axicon and metasurface
BPP. Section 8 shows the resulting simulated performance of the metasurfaces, and Section 9 discusses ways to
increase and/or tailor the performance of the metasurfaces, such as increasing bandwidth, or tailoring specific
stop-bands, within which the efficiency of excitation of the HOM (and conversely also the beam reconversion) is
reduced.
6.1
Huygens-Fresnel Diffraction Integral
Previously, the excitation of HOMs using the BPP relied on spatially imposing a phaseshift on a gaussian beam
and imaging the resulting beam to the fiber, meaning no additional propagation distance for the field distribution
coupling well to the mode after the BPP. The method of mode excitation such as using an axicon relies on coupling
of the resulting field obtained after propagation of a Gaussian through the axicon. This section shows how the
propagated field distribution is obtained based on the Huygens-Fresnel diffraction principle [4], and Section 6.3
applies this to an axicon.
With respect to the geometry shown schematically in Figure 37, consider a transparent surface imposing a spatial
phase ∆ϕ(ξ, γ) in the source plane, (ξ, γ), located at z = 0. An input field propagating in the positive z-direction,
with distribution Ui(ξ, γ), will then immediately after the phase imposing transparency have a transverse field
distribution U0(ξ, γ) equal to:
U0(ξ, γ) = Ui(ξ, γ) exp (i∆ϕ(ξ, γ))
(67)
The observation plane, (x, y), located at a distance of z = Z from the source plane, will then have a spatial
field distribution U1(x, y), given as the sum of all possible spherical wavelets originating in the source plane. This
40
==PAGE:44==
comes from the Huygens principle stating that the phase front of a wave can be considered to consist of infinitely
many distributed point source spherical wavelets. Consider for example the point P1(x1, y1, Z) in the observation
plane. The source spherical wavelet located at point P0(ξ0, γ0, 0) will then have a resulting field contribution
U1(P1) at P1, proportional to the source wavelet as:
U1(P1) ∝U0(P0) 1
r01
exp (ikr01)
(68)
Where k = 2π/λ, and r01 is the Cartesian distance of the vector r01 connecting points P0 and P1:
r01 =
p
Z2 + (x1 −ξ0)2 + (y1 −γ0)2
(69)
Where it is assumed that the common z unit direction crosses both coordinate systems in (0, 0), and that the
coordinate systems are oriented similarly, such that ξ and x are parallel. In order to take the whole source plane
into account, the integral over all points in the source plane is used, and the total expression for the field U1 at
point (x1, y1) from the Huygens-Fresnel principle is then:
U1(x1, y1) = 1
jλ
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
U0(ξ0, γ0)exp (jkr01)
r01
cos θ0dξ0dγ0
(70)
Where cos θ0 is the angle between the vector r01 connecting points P0 and P1, and the ˆz unit-vector in the
z-direction, and by definition, cos θ0 = Z/r01. Substituting this in the above, yields:
U1(x1, y1) = Z
jλ
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
U0(ξ0, γ0)exp (jkr01)
r2
01
dξ0dγ0
(71)
Figure 37: The geometry for determining the field distribution in the observation plane, (x, y), from a input
diffracting source plane, (ξ, γ), where the two planes are separated by a distance of Z.
The source and observation points in cylindrical coordinates are given as P0 = (rs, θs, 0) and P1 = (r1, θ1, Z),
where the source plane is defined from the radial and azimuth components (ρ, ν), and the observation plane by
(r, θ). Assuming that the field distribution in the source plane is circularly symmetric around the z-axis, the field
distribution in the observation plane will consequently also be circularly symmetric. Therefore, any value of θ1 can
be chosen, and will exactly represent the field amplitude at any other point in the observation plane of identical
radial distance r1. By using the coordinate transformations ξ0 = rs cos θs, γ0 = rs sin θs and x1 = r1 cos θ1,
y1 = r1 sin θ1, and letting the point P1 lie exactly on the x-axis (meaning y1 = 0 and θ1 = 0), Equation 69 can
then be expressed as:
r01 =
q
Z2 + (r1 −rs cos θs)2 + (0 −rs sin θs)2 =
q
Z2 + r2
1 + r2s −2r1rs cos θs
(72)
Equation 71 can then be restated in polar coordinates to obtain the radial field distribution U1(r1) as:
41
==PAGE:45==
U1(r1) = Z
jλ
Z 2π
0
Z ∞
0
U0(rs, θs)exp (jkr01)
r2
01
ρdρdν
(73)
Considering again the geometry in Figure 37, it is apparent that the sum contributions from the source plane
for which points have γ > 0 and γ < 0 will have equal contributions to the field amplitude at the observation point
P1, chosen to have y = 0. Therefore, the limit of integration for the angular dependence can be rewritten, since
the integral from 0 to 2π has a contribution equal to twice the integral from 0 to π. Therefore, the expression for
the radial field amplitude distribution in the observation plane is:
U1(r1) = 2Z
jλ
Z π
0
Z ∞
0
U0(rs, θs)exp (jkr01)
r2
01
ρdρdν
(74)
And substituting in the RHS of Equation 67, the final expression as a function of incident field Ui and radial
phase transfer function ∆ϕ(r) (assumed to also be circularly symmetric) becomes:
And assuming the incident field is rotationally symmetric (i.e. a Gaussian beam), meaning U0(ρ, ν) = U0(ρ),
as well as a rotationally symmetric phase transfer function ∆ϕ(ρ), the final expression for the resulting field
distribution becomes:
U1(r1) = 2Z
jλ
Z π
0
Z ∞
0
Ui(ρ) exp (i∆ϕ(ρ)) exp (jkr01)
r2
01
ρdρdν
(75)
Which is then the resulting radial field distribution after a propagation distance of Z used to calculate overlap
to the LP0,m modes. This integral is numerically implemented to calculate the radial amplitude distribution as
a function of the incident field Ui (taken to be a Gaussian) and the phase transfer function ∆ϕ. In the limits of
long propagation distances, one can simplify the expression using Bessel functions, and thereby loose the need to
integrate over azimuthal dependence found in r01, but this approximation is not valid at the distance in which
the generated field of an axicon couples well to the fiber modes.
6.2
Nelder-Mead Gradient Descent
As shown in Section 6.1, the generated field after the diffracting surface depends on propagation distance z
(previously symbolized as Z), meaning the coupling efficiency η from Equation 49 for the generated field with
respect to the fiber mode consequently also depends on z. As will be shown in Section 6.3, the coupling efficiency
also depends on the Gaussian Width W0 and the so-called tilt angle α of the axicon used. Assuming those are
the parameters that influence the coupling efficiency, then the expression for the coupling efficiency can then be
expressed as:
η(z, W0, α)
(76)
Which is then calculated based off of the overlap of the spatial distribution obtained from the numerical
mode solver, and the generated far field, calculated from Expression 75. The function for the coupling efficiency
therefore becomes hard to analyze. As the number of dimensions of the input space increases, meaning that η is
a function of more and more parameters, the problem of finding the point which maximizes the function grows in
complexity. Practically, the algorithm implemented to achieve this maximization was the Nelder-Mead algorithm
[11]. An exact description of the algorithm will not be attempted, but the basic principles are the following: Start
with a point xi given as:
xi = ˆzzi + ˆ
W0W0i + ˆααi
(77)
For which the value η(xi) is calculated. Then, calculate the gradient ∇η(z, W0, α) giving the ”direction” of
increasing η, and multiply the gradient by some step-size δ. A new point xi+1 will then be obtained as the initial
point, plus a step of size δ in the direction of the gradient of η, meaning:
xi+1 = xi + δ∇η(xi)
(78)
Where the gradient is defined as:
∇η(z, W0, α) = ˆz ∂
∂z η(z, W0, α) + ˆ
W0
∂
∂W0
η(z, W0, α) + ˆα ∂
∂αη(z, W0, α)
(79)
42
==PAGE:46==
Where, if the step-size δ is sufficiently small, the resulting point xi+1 will then be closer to, or at the local
maximum lying in the direction of the gradient, meaning that:
η(xi+1) ≥η(xi)
(80)
And this process can then be repeated iteratively until some sort of convergence limit C is reached, where the
difference between the n’ and n + 1 iteration step is lower than C, meaning:
|η(xi+1) −η(xi)| ≤C
(81)
Alternatively, the iterative process can be stopped after some specified number of iterations. Unfortunately,
there is no guarantee that the initial guess of xi will converge to the global maximum of η. Even so, the obtained
numbers in the following sections, which are based on the results of the implementation of the Nelder-Mead
algorithm, are similar to those found in [17] when for example comparing the obtained optimal propagation
distance for an axicon with the reported distance.
This implementation was therefore used to also find the
optimal parameter combination for the axicon tilt angle and propagation distance and gaussian width, for modes
other than the LP0,5, although the report only focuses and presents the results obtained for this mode, with
respect to the axicon simulations.
6.3
Axicon
For the investigation of the axicon, Equation 73 was implemented numerically, as a function of Gaussian width
W0, the radial phase transfer function ∆ϕ and propagation distance z. The axicon is a lens constructed of a
conical section of glass, which is shown schematically in Figure 38. The tilt angle α is the angle between the
normal incidence on the plane glass, and the angle of the conical tilted part of the glass surface. As the axicon is
rotationally symmetric and decreasing linearly in thickness as a function of radial position r, the phase transfer
function of the axicon equals:
∆ϕ(r)Axi = −k0r tan

sin−1 (n sin(α)) −α

(82)
Where n is the refractive index of the axicon.
The interference of the rotationally symmetric input field
propagated through the axicon results in a Bessel-Gauss beam in the near-field, meaning a Bessel like radial
profile of the beam with a Gaussian envelope. Using the Nelder-Mead algorithm to maximize η for the silica
axicon3 as a function of tilt angle α (and thereby the phase transfer function ∆ϕAxi), input Gaussian width W0
and propagation distance, yields an optimal tilt angle of α = 0.987◦, a gaussian width of W0 = 2.24RcM and a
propagation distance of z = 0.62zr for the LP0,5 mode. The generated radial intensity distribution I(r) ∝|E(r)|2
for that particular axicon has been plotted as a function of propagation distance z, normalized with respect to
the beam Rayleigh range zr = W0/((n −1)α) in Figure 39.
Figure 38: The schematic of an axicon, with plane waves incident from the left, and the resulting diffracted wave
fronts on the right.
3Technically, minimizing the expression 1 - η.
43
==PAGE:47==
Figure 39: The intensity distribution I(r) as a function of propagation distance z, for a silica axicon of tilt angle
α = 0.987◦with an incident gaussian beam of width W0. The optimal coupling to the LP0,5 is obtained at a
propagation distance of 0.62zr, indicated by the black dashed line, giving a coupling efficiency of η = 83.4%.
With respect to Figure 39, as the propagation distance is increased relative to z = 0.62zr, additional ”rings”
start to occur in the intensity profile of the propagated field. This consequently allows for mode selection using
the axicon, where one can instead optimally couple to the LP0,6 for example, by imaging the plane for some
propagation distance 0.62zr + ∆z. Whereas mode selectivity from the BPP comes from replacing one specific
BPP structure with another in the same location, the mode selectivity from the axicon comes from changing the
distance between the axicon and the plane in which the field distribution coupling to the fiber is obtained.
The z-dependent overlap for the axicon generated field to the LP0,5 mode is plotted in Figure 40A, Assuming
optimized magnification to the fiber mode of the resulting field distribution. The maximum overlap is obtained at
a propagation distance of z = 0.62zr. Figure 40B shows the relative power coupled into the other guided modes
of the fiber at the optimal propagation distance of z = 0.62zr. The ”Total” is similarly defined as previously,
with a sum coupling efficiency of all the parasites equal to ηP .
44
==PAGE:48==
Figure 40: (A): The numerically simulated overlap integral value η for a target mode of LP0,5, using a gaussian
beam of width W0 = 2.24RcM as incidence, and an axicon phase transfer function with tilt angle α = 0.987◦and
a refractive index of n = 1.45. (B): The resulting relative parasitic modal powers, with a sum total of −14.6 dB.
With respect to the impact of the Gaussian width, it was shown for the BPP that there is a slight discrepancy
between optimal coupling efficiency and modal purity.
This discrepancy is more pronounced for the axicon.
Figure 41 shows the axicon coupling efficiency to the LP0,5 mode as a function of the normalized Gaussian width,
and the obtained relative parasitic power. Indeed, the total parasitic power asymptotically converges for larger
and larger gaussian widths - however, the coupling efficiency will correspondingly fall. For this report, the phase
profile (from the corresponding ratio between tilt angle and Gaussian width) used for the results in this report
corresponds to the maximization of the coupling efficiency η, with disregard for minimizing modal purity. It is
however worth keeping in mind that if a higher modal purity is wanted, then one can increase the relative width
of the Gaussian.
Figure 41: (A): The axicon maximum coupling efficiency to the LP0,5 as a function of Gaussian width W0. (B):
The resulting sum parasitic power for the corresponding Gaussian widths.
The wavelength dependent mode coupling η for LP0,m modes from m = 2 to 7 of the α = 0.987◦axicon,
evaluated at a propagation distance of z = 0.62zr is plotted in Figure 42A. The maximum coupling efficiency of
η = 83.4% to the LP0,5 obtainable from the axicon is, compared to the results for the BPP in Figure 10A, higher,
but the bandwidth, meaning the effective span of wavelengths at which a high coupling efficiency is obtained,
is substantially reduced. There is also a decrease in bandwidth with respect to obtained modal purity of the
45
==PAGE:49==
LP0,5, as illustrated in Figure 42B. This is because the ”neighboring” modes are instead strongly coupled to
when changing the wavelength. This can be considered as a mode selective behavior as a function of wavelength,
and corresponds also to the mode selectivity of the axicon by changing the distance between the axicon and the
plane of the coupling field distribution, as the spatial distance at which different wavelength interfere to give the
Bessel-Gauss beam is wavelength dependant.
Figure 42: (A): The wavelength dependent coupling efficiency η(λ), for an axicon of tilt angle α = 0.987◦, at a
propagation distance of z = 0.62zr. The total indicates the sum overlap of the parasites ηP , for all the modes
m ̸= 5. (B): The relative power in the parasitic modes, corresponding to the values in (A).
6.4
Graded Index Photonic Crystals
As was covered in Section 6.3, the conical glass of the axicon gives a linear phase transfer function ∆ϕ(r) as
a function of radial distance r to the beam center. This imposed phase allows for excitation of LP0,m HOMs
at higher coupling efficiency than the BPPs, or better modal purities, depending on the used Gaussian width.
Rather than using bulk glass for the axicon, or spatially varying glass thicknesses for the BPPs, it is also possible
to achieve the required radial phase profiles by use of a 2D Photonic Crystal (PC) with a spatially graded index
(GRIN) [7]. These PCs are structured combinations of materials with structure sizes typically smaller than the
wavelength, which due to their geometry and combination of material properties, allows for engineering of the
optical properties for the photonic crystal. Specifically, the following section will regard a realization of such a PC
by use of nanoscale cylindrical pillars of silicon structured on a silica wafer. It is therefore recommended to read
Section 7 to understand the spatial layout of the structure and the Lumerical FDTD domain used to simulate
the results shown in the following paragraphs.
As also stated in Section 2.1, the z-dependence of the field E propagating in the z direction is given by:
E(r, θ, z) = E(r, θ) exp (−ik0neffz + ϕ0)
(83)
Where the use of scalar quantities implies that the propagation direction z and k are parallel. The phase of
the field after a propagation distance of L is therefore changed by k0neffL. Whereas the radial phase distribution
of the axicon decreased linearly with radius r by linearly decreasing L(r) from the flat slope of the lens, another
way to obtain the phase profile is to radially increase the effective index of the material, neff(r), while keeping
the propagation length L constant. One approach is to introduce high-index features in the bulk material, such as
silicon (nSi ≈3.48 at λ = 1550nm), and distribute them across the PC. If the length scales of the structures are
much smaller than the wavelength, then the material can be considered homogeneous from the perspective of the
propagating fields, and the effective relative dielectric can be considered to stemming from a single bulk material
46
==PAGE:50==
[12]. This is referred to as the Homogeneous Material Approximation. However, this approximation breaks down
at shorter wavelengths, where the pillars start to behave as waveguides themselves, which effectively changes the
overlap of the propagating assumed plane waves and the PC, as a bigger fraction of the field starts to be confined
to the high index material. The phase shift from a propagation distance of 2000 nm for a constant refractive
index of neff = 1 is shown in Figure 51, along with the phase obtained from the Lumerical FDTD simulation of
a silicon pillar of height H = 2000 nm, with a radius of Rp = 64.3 nm, in a square unit cell of width and length
of 200 nm, with periodic boundary conditions in both directions normal to the direction along the length of the
pillar, and perfectly matched layers at both top and bottom of the simulation domain.
Figure 43: (A): The phase change of the field for both a constant effective index of 1 and for a simulated pillar of
silicon of height H = 2000nm, radius Rp = 64.3 nm in a unit cell of width and length of Luc = 200 nm, plotted
against wavelength of the transmitted field. (B): The same phase, but plotted as a function of frequency rather
than wavelength.
As evident from the constant effective index, the phase shift increases linearly with frequency, or correspond-
ingly proportional to λ−1 with respect to wavelength. However, for the silicon pillar simulation, the behavior
isn’t linear with respect to frequency of the field. This is due to the variation of neff(λ). While one contributing
factor is the material dispersion of the silicon itself, the majority of the nonlinear behavior can be explained by
the breakdown of the HMA. One possibility is to explain this qualitatively with results from fiber optics theory.
Consider for example the pillar of silicon as a step index fiber, where the cladding domain is the surrounding
air. This results in a very high NA of the waveguide, with a corresponding core radius much smaller than typical
single moded step-index fibers. The wavelength dependent V-parameter for the silicon pillar with radius Rp and
index nSi is:
V (λ) = 2π
λ Rp
q
n(λ)2
Si −1
(84)
For which the single mode cut-off at V ≈2.4 is still valid. As the pillar can be considered a step-index
waveguide, the field confinement to the structure can be quantified by the effective area, Aeff, given by:
Aeff =
R 2π
0
R ∞
0
rdrdθ|E(r, θ)|22
R 2π
0
R ∞
0
rdrdθ|E(r, θ)|4
(85)
Which has the interpretation of being the cross sectional area corresponding over which the field is completely
evenly distributed (i.e. a flat intensity profile over an area of Aeff). Consequently, for a fixed size of the waveguide,
a greater effective area means the field is less confined to the core. For the fundamental mode of a step-index fiber,
the relation between effective area, normalized to the surface area of the fiber with core radius a as a function of
V is shown in Figure 44.
47
==PAGE:51==
Figure 44: The effective area Aeff normalized to the cross-sectional area of the waveguide with core radius a, as
a function of V -parameter, for the fundamental mode. Figure credit: [22].
As the mode therefore gets more confined at lower wavelengths (larger V ), the homogeneous material approx-
imation is lost, and the effective index will have to be modified by weighing the spatial distribution of the field
with the dielectric distribution. Therefore, as the field gets more and more confined, the effective index for the
simulated unit cell is increased, and will converge asymptotically to the pillar index nSi in the short wavelength
limit. Another important aspect of using high index inclusions is the effect of Fresnel reflections at the silicon-air
interfaces normal to the propagation direction. The incident waves will undergo multiple reflections at the end
faces of the silicon pillar, and the pillar itself therefore functions as a Fabry-Perot resonator. Consider a single
reflection with reflectance R from the light propagating in the silicon reaching the interface. The reflected light
will then undergo a roundtrip of length 2L, where L is the length of the resonator, which in the cases being
considered is always the pillar height H = 2000nm. The obtained phase difference from this 2H propagation is
δϕ = k0neff2H, again with neff being the effective index of propagation4. Due to the low Fresnel reflection coef-
ficient of the silicon-air interface, the total emitted field can to a good approximation be considered as the single
pass and single reflection superposition. Therefore, if the obtained phase shift δϕ is a multiple of 2π(N + 1/2) for
integer values of N, then the fields will interfere destructively at the top surface of the pillar, and a decrease in
total transmittance will occur. This is shown in Figure 45A, which shows the wavelength dependent transmittance
of the same simulated unit cell size, for 4 different pillar radii. Firstly, the wavelengths at which this destructive
interference requirement is met changes with wavelength due to the effective index being itself a function of pillar
radius Rp. Secondly, it is evident that the Filling Fractions (FF) of the pillars, indicating the fractional area of
the unit cell which is covered by the silicon pillar, calculated as FF = πR2
p/L2
uc where Luc is the length and
width of the simulated unit cell, impacts the overall transmission loss for the unit cell. As the FF is increased, a
bigger fraction of the incident plane wave field will be guided in the silicon pillar, and therefore a bigger fraction
of the single reflection field will interfere destructively with the single pass transmitted field.
Figure 45B shows the relative phase difference of the n’th pillar Pn, relative to the phase transmitted by the
pillar P1 with FF = 4.9% and corresponding radius of 50nm. Defining the obtained phase of transmission of the
structure as ϕn for the n’th pillar, then the relative phase difference is given as ∆ϕn = ϕn −ϕ1. Consider the
relative phase differences ∆ϕn at for example a wavelength of λ = 1550nm. It is evident that the phase difference
to the pillar P1 is dependent on pillar radius. Therefore, one can spatially distribute the pillars of different radii,
to produce a 2D material with the desired spatially varying effective index, at that particular wavelength. One
thing to consider with respect to the numerical results shown, is the chaotic behavior at shorter wavelengths, seen
4Here with the notation of δϕ to make a distinction between phase from reflections in the pillar, and obtained phase shift ∆ϕ of
the whole unit cell structure, comparing incident and emitted fields.
48
==PAGE:52==
at around λ = 1000 nm. It is suspected that the behavior here is caused by the field confinement to the pillar be-
ing considerable, and the calculated transmittance and phase being calculated from a sum of many approximated
plane waves in the plane after propagation in the pillar. However, effects such as scattering and absorption also
plays a role in the short wavelength limit, where Silicon absorption becomes considerable. The validity of the
results are therefore dubious for wavelengths shorter than the shortest wavelength at which discontinuities in the
transmittance and obtained phase occur. However, the opposite is therefore also the case: When the phase and
transmittance behavior is smooth and continuous and can be explained by Fabry-Perot resonance frequencies and
effective indexes of the unit cells, the results are assumed reliable5.
Figure 45: (A): The transmittance of the field for 4 different pillars simulated in a unit cell of length and width
of 400 nm. The filling fraction (FF) indicates the fraction of the cell cross-sectional area covered by the pillar.
The values of the radii are listed in the legend in (B). (B): The relative phase difference ∆ϕn of the n’th pillar
Pn, relative to the phase of pillar P1.
Figure 46 shows the Transmission and obtained phase ϕ for 3 pillars of varying unit cell sizes Luc, but with
roughly similar Filling Fraction. In the long wavelength limit where field confinement is negligible, the amplitude
of oscillations in the transmittance is similar. For the unit cell of Luc = 600 nm, the pillar is larger, thereby
having a larger V -value for a fixed wavelength. Therefore, the field is more confined to the pillar, which explains
why the amplitude of oscillations in the transmittance increases more rapidly at shorter wavelengths compared to
the other pillars. The same argument of field confinement to the high index pillar at longer wavelengths explain
why the obtained phase is increased at longer wavelengths for the largest pillar.
5Assuming a sufficient resolution of the Lumerical FDTD is used.
49
==PAGE:53==
Figure 46: (A): Transmission of 3 silicon pillars with approximately similar filling fractions, at different unit cell
sizes. (B): The phase ϕ of the field after transmission through the corresponding structures.
The increased field confinement as a function of V is also evident from the Transmission shown in Figure
47A, depicting the transmission for 5 different pillars simulated with a unit cell size of Luc = 400 nm. The
corresponding pillar radii are listed in Table 7, for series S3.
Evidently, the amplitude of oscillations in the
transmission increase as a function of V , also indicating the increased field confinement to the pillar. Lastly,
it is well known that Silicon has strong absorption in the visible spectrum. The absorption is described by the
complex part of the refractive index. For a generalized complex refractive6 index n = nr + ini, the z-dependence
of the field then becomes:
E(r, θ, z) = E(r, θ) exp (ik0(nr + ini)z) = E(r, θ) exp (ik0nrz) exp (−k0niz)
(86)
Where the imaginary part of the refractive index therefore leads to a exponential decrease in field amplitude,
caused by absorption in the material. Figures 47B and 47C shows the resulting transmission and phase for the
pillar P4 with Luc = 400nm, with the solid line using the complex valued refractive index, and the dashed lines
showing the corresponding results when simulating the silicon with only the real part of the refractive index.
Evidently, the results are similar, and therefore the effects of absorption on the performance of the silicon pillars
are negligible above a wavelength of 1000nm.
6Typically expressed as ˜n = n + iκ
50
==PAGE:54==
Figure 47: (A): The transmission of 5 selected pillars with unit cell size Luc = 400 nm, as a function of pillar
V -parameter, modeling the pillar as a step-index fiber. (B): Transmission for pillar P4 with simulated complex
and purely real refractive index. (C): Phase for pillar P4 with simulated complex and real refractive index.
7
Methods - Photonic Crystal Metasurface Simulation
With respect to HOM excitation, Section 2 shows that the BPP has a superior bandwidth for pure (>10 dB)
HOM excitation, while the axicon offer a higher maximum coupling efficiency, or better modal purity, depending
on the used Gaussian width. One possibility is to combine the bandwidth with the high coupling efficiency, by
exploiting nanoscale structured photonic crystal metasurfaces. To achieve this, a Lumerical FDTD simulation
was used to obtain the optical properties of a unit cell of the PC, with respect to the transmittance and the
phase of the transmitted beam. The geometry of the unit cell, including the dielectric structure simulated, is
shown in Figure 48. The figure shows the boundary of the unit cell, as well as the top and bottom surface used
to compute the S-parameters for the simulation, from which the transmittance and phase is extracted. Towards
the bottom of the unit cell, a broadband plane wave source is positioned, generating plane waves propagating in
the positive z-direction (up). The plane waves are then incident on a 100 nm thin slab of silica, on top of which
a silicon pillar of height H = 2000 nm is placed. The unit cell boundaries parallel to the z-direction were set
up to have periodic boundary conditions, so as to simulate identical pillars being placed on a square grid, with
infinite extend in both x and y. At both ends of the domain, normal to z, a Perfectly Matched Layer boundary
condition was used, which effectively absorbs the propagating field, thereby avoiding reflected fields from the
numerical simulation when characterizing the obtained field after propagating the length of the pillar structure
[18]. For simulating the performance of the meta-axicon, two parameters were extracted from the simulation.
The first being the overall wavelength dependent Transmission T(λ), given as Pout(λ)/Pin(λ), where the power
P is surface integral of the field intensity, across the surfaces normal to the z-direction, at the top and bottom
of the S-parameter domain. The second extracted parameter is the wavelength dependent phase difference ϕ(λ)
51
==PAGE:55==
of the propagated plane waves, equal to the accumulated phase of the field from propagating the length of the
S-parameter calculation domain, and is also extracted from the S-parameters [24].
Figure 48: A schematic of the Lumerical FDTD unit cell, including the simulated silicon pillar structure.
In order to simulate the meta-axicon, 10 different pillars were simulated for the same unit cell size, and the
relative phase with respect to the phase of the smallest pillar was then obtained. Denoting the phase change
of the first (and smallest) pillar as ϕ1, then the relative phase of the n’th pillar Pn to the first pillar P1 equals
∆ϕn = ϕn −ϕ1. The pillar radii were chosen such that the 10 different pillars would approximately linearly span a
total phase-shift of 2π at a wavelength of 1550. By definition, the relative phase of pillar P1 is of course ∆ϕ1 = 0,
and the radii of the n’th pillar is then chosen to give a relative phase shift of ∆ϕn = (n −1)/10 · 2π. This allows
the spatial distribution of the pillars to approximate the phase profile of the Axicon, as given in Equation 82. For
example, for a unit cell of length and width Luc = 400 nm, and a pillar height of H = 2000 nm, the used pillar
radii can be seen in Table 6, and the obtained relative phase and transmission is shown in Figure 49 for 3 distinct
wavelengths of the incident plane wave. These parameters were obtained at 1000 different wavelengths, spanning
from λ = 550 nm to 2550 nm. As is evident from Figure 49, as the n’th pillar radius is increased, so too is the
relative phase shift ∆ϕn. As the filling fraction of the pillar increases, the effective index neff of propagation is
increased, and as the fields have a z-dependence of exp(−ik0neffz) dependence, a greater phase shift is obtained
at a larger effective index. As is also evident from 49B, the transmission efficiency of the pillars are high, except
at the short wavelengths. This is caused by confinement of the field in the pillars.
Table 6: Silicon pillar Pn radii for the n’th pillar in [nm], with a unit cell size of Luc = 400 nm.
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
Luc
50.06
66.59
79.76
91.06
101.09
110.22
118.65
126.51
133.92
140.93
400
52
==PAGE:56==
Figure 49: (A): The phase shift ∆ϕ relative to the phase obtained by pillar P1, for the 10 different pillars listed
in Table 6, at 3 different wavelengths. (B): The corresponding transmission for the pillars at the 3 wavelengths.
The spatial distribution of the different pillars were then made so as to minimize the difference between the
relative phase of the n’th pillar, and the target spatial phase profile, for either the axicon or the BPP. The whole
(x, y) will then be covered with these different radii silicon pillars, for which the unit cells are separated on a
square grid in the plane. Consider for example, for the unit cell size of Luc nm, the i’th unit cell, going radially
outwards in either the x or y direction, parallel to the boundaries of the unit cell. The center position ri of said
unit cell will be located at ri = Luc(i −1/2), when evaluating the radial position along one of the axis parallel
to the unit cell. At this point, the n’th pillar is selected, so as to minimize the difference in phase between the
target phase profile ∆ϕT (r) (corresponding either to the axicon phase transfer function or the BPP) and the
relative phase difference of the n’th pillar relative to pillar P1. Therefore, the n’th pillar should be selected so as
to minimize:

|∆ϕT (ri)|
2π

−∆ϕn

(87)
Where ⌊·⌋denotes the floor function.
Since the impact of the spatial phase profile is 2π periodic as the
transmitted field is modified by exp(i∆ϕ), only the relative value of the target phase profile from 0 to 2π has to
be considered. Due to the distribution of the pillars on a square grid, there will of course be variations in the
obtained phase profile as a function of angle θ in the PC surface. To investigate the impact of this, the expression
for the axicon radial phase profile (Equation 82) can be set equal to −1/10 · 2π, and solved for r to give the
distance over which the same pillar will be distributed, giving a phase shift of 1/10 · 2π. This results in:
r =
λ
10 tan

sin−1 (n sin(α)) −α

(88)
Which, when using the axicon tilt angle of 0.987◦gives r ≈20µm. Therefore, if using for example a unit cell
size of Luc = 400 nm, one would radially distribute approximately 50 unit cells of the same pillars. Therefore, the
azimuthal dependence on the spatial phase profile following the recipe for distribution of the pillars from Equation
87 is assumed to be a minor one, and the resulting performance is then simulated assuming that the spatial phase
profile of the metasurface is invariant with respect to azimuthal angle in the plane of the metasurface. For all
results shown in Section 8, the target phase profile used to spatially distribute the pillars is always that at a
wavelength of λ = 1550 nm. For a unit cell size of Luc, and a spatial resolution of the source plane of ∆r in
the numerical implementation of the Huygens-Fresnel diffraction integral (Equation 75) an amount of Luc/∆r
subsequent points will be set to have the same properties, i.e. same phase and transmission, as these simulated
source points fall within the same unit cell. For example, for Luc = 400 nm, and a spatial resolution in the source
plane of ∆r = 100 nm, 4 subsequent spatial points will always be set equal in phase and transmission. Using for
example the axicon of tilt angle α = 0.987◦, and obtaining the target phase transfer function ∆ϕ(r) from Equation
53
==PAGE:57==
82, the target phase of the Axicon and the obtained spatial phase, based on distribution of the different sized
pillars, is shown in Figure 50A. The spatial distribution of the transmission from the specific pillar distribution is
shown in Figure 50B, and the relative intensity distribution of the input Gaussian beam is shown in 50C, along
with the beam profile after being changed by the spatial variations of transmittance in the metasurface. The
then modified transmission and discretized spatial phase of the transmitted gaussian is then used to calculate the
overlap and parasitic mode powers relative to the fiber HOMs, bu calculating the resulting field distribution as a
function of z using the Huygens-Fresnel diffraction integral, as presented in Equation 75. The spatial resolutions
for the integrals were dρ = 100 nm, and dν = π/250, which was tested to be enough resolution for the results
to converge, i.e. at smaller simulation resolutions, the calculated wavelength dependent coupling efficiency and
modal purity would change.
Figure 50: (A): The phase transfer function of a α = 0.987◦tilt angle axicon, at a wavelength of λ = 1550, and
the obtained spatial phase profile of the metasurface (MS). (B): The spatial distribution of the transmittance
T of the metasurface, based on the distribution of the pillars with varying transmittance. (C): The incident
Gaussian beam intensity distribution, and the Gaussian distribution immediately after transmission through the
metasurface.
8
Results - Photonic Crystal Metasurfaces
The following section will show the simulated performance of the 2D PCs simulated, both for a metasurface
axicon and metasurface binary phase plate.
As outlined in Section 7, 10 pillars of varying radii were selected to cover a relative phase shift of 2π at the
target wavelength of 1550 nm. Since the pillar radii changes the effective index due to field confinement in the
pillars, 4 different sets of 10 pillars were created, with varying unit cell sizes. The pillar radii for the 4 different
series (labeled S1 to S4) of pillars are given in Table 7, with the unit cell size given in the last column. The
current limit of producible aspect ratios of the pillars, meaning the ratio between the pillar height H and pillar
diameter 2Rp is 20:1. Therefore it is only series S3 and S4 that consists of pillars that are practically possible to
fabricate, due to their larger radii. It is however still interesting to consider the possible performance achievable
if these limitations are someday removed due to new fabrication methods. All simulated pillars had a height of
H = 2000 nm.
Table 7: Silicon pillar radii in [nm] for the 4 series of pillars.
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
Luc
S1
12.51
18.87
23.57
27.47
30.89
33.97
36.78
39.40
41.86
44.17
100
S2
25.23
36.54
45.10
52.28
58.58
64.27
69.50
74.36
78.91
83.23
200
S3
50.06
66.59
79.76
91.06
101.09
110.22
118.65
126.51
133.92
140.93
400
S4
102.60
111.98
120.58
128.60
136.15
143.30
150.00
156.60
162.89
168.92
600
54
==PAGE:58==
The resulting phase difference of the pillar Pn relative to pillar P1 for the 4 different series are shown in
Figure 51, at 3 different wavelengths. The wavelengths are chosen to illustrate the performance at both ends
of the simulated wavelength range, i.e. at 550 and 2550 nm, and at the target design wavelength of 1550 nm.
The relative phase difference of the 4 series at 1550 nm are roughly linearly distributed between 0 and 2π phase
shift, whereas the relative phase shifts are seen to diverge at the longer wavelength simulated. This difference is
explained by the effects of field confinement to large S4 silicon pillars, even at this wavelength. The approximately
linear distribution of relative phase as a function of pillar number n loses its linearity at the shorter wavelength of
550 nm, due to the strong dependence of the pillar radii on the field confinement at this wavelength. Figure 51B
shows the corresponding transmittance of the same 4 series at the same wavelengths. The transmittance is seen
to be high for all 10 pillars at the target wavelength of 1550 nm. The combined effect of pillar confinement and
strong absorption explains the reduced transmission at 550 nm. Particularly for S1 at 550 nm (blue rectangles),
the transmittance reduces as a function of pillar radii, again due to the strong dependence on V -parameter at
this wavelength, and therefore field confinement to the highly absorptive silicon.
Figure 51: (A): The phase of the n’th pillar relative to P1 for the 4 series, evaluated at wavelengths of 550, 1550
and 2550 nm. (B): The resulting unit cell transmission of the field for the corresponding pillars in (A).
Using the phase and transmittance of these pillars, and spatially distributing them according to the formulation
in Equation 87, with the target phase profile of the axicon with tilt angle of α = 0.987◦, the resulting performance
of the designed photonic crystal metasurface axicons is shown in Figure 52. Figure 52A shows the computed
coupling efficiency η to the LP0,5 mode, as well as the sum parasitic coupling efficiency ηP for the m = 2
to m = 7 modes.
The maximum overlap at the design wavelength of 1550 nm is given in the legend.
The
corresponding relative parasitic mode power is shown in Figure 52B, with the inset showing the resulting purity
close to 1550 nm. While all 4 metasurfaces have roughly the same total parasitic power at the design wavelength,
the wavelengths at which good modal purity is obtained is extended to the shorter wavelengths for the metasurfaces
with smaller pillars. This increased bandwidth, both with respect to coupling efficiency and modal purity is due
to the nonlinearity of the effective index with respect to wavelength. While the target radial phase profile changes
proportionally with λ−1, according to Equation 82, the metasurface phase gradient varies nonlinearly, but still
with the same spatial distance between pillars of equal phase (due to the fixed positions of identical pillars),
which results in the spatial interference in the observation plane being less sensitive to wavelength variations
of the interfering light in the source plane. However, the otherwise continuous phase profile of the axicon will
instead be replaced with a phase profile with discontinuities at wavelengths away from the design wavelength. This
is because the phase difference between pillar P10 and P1 is approximately 2π/10 at the target wavelength, but
changes at wavelengths away from the target 1550 nm. Figure 52C shows the calculated transmission efficiency ηT
for the 4 surfaces as calculated by Equation 50, and the resulting overall coupling efficiency, equal to the product
of the transmission efficiency and calculated overlap, is shown in Figure 52D. Due to the combined effects of the
sub-unity transmittance of the metasurfaces, and the slightly reduced coupling efficiency, the resulting coupling
efficiencies are lower than the 83.4% achieved by the glass axicon. However, the bandwidth of high coupling
55
==PAGE:59==
efficiency can be controlled by changing the sizes of the pillars used in the photonic crystal, which allows for
engineering of the bandwidth. Methods of improving and engineering the performance of these PC metasurface
axicons are proposed in Section 9.
Figure 52: The wavelength dependence performance of the PC metasurface axicons. (A): The coupling efficiency
η to the target LP0,5 mode, indicated by solid lines, and the sum parasitic coupling efficiency ηP indicated by
dashed lines. The maximum coupling efficiency at 1550 nm is given in the legend. (B): The corresponding relative
parasitic mode powers from the results in (A). (C): The transmission efficiency ηT for the 4 surfaces. (D): The
overall coupling efficiency to the target LP0,5 mode, calculated as the product of η and ηT .
Another possibility is to use the same 4 series of pillars to produce metasurface BPPs. Here, only 2 different
pillars are required for each surface, as opposed to the 10 simulated above.
Figure 53 shows the resulting
simulated performance of the PC BPPs simulated. For each simulation, the pillars used were P1 and P6, giving
an approximate relative phase difference of π at a wavelength of 1550 nm. Again due to the nonlinearity in
effective index, the shortest wavelength at which the BPP efficiently couples to the target LP0,5 mode is strongly
dependent on the pillar sizes used. The resulting coupling efficiency at wavelengths shorter than the dips seen
in 53A should de disregarded, due to the limited accuracy of the Lumerical FDTD simulations, as explained in
Section 6.4. The dips corresponding to a near-zero coupling efficiency, which occurs at different wavelengths for
the 4 different surfaces, is due to the relative phase difference of the two types of used pillars going to 0, thus
not coupling the field to the HOMs. The resulting parasitic mode powers are comparable for the 3 series S1, S2
and S3, but increased for S4. Therefore, to obtain pure modes using PC BPPs one should make the pillar radii
as small as possible, while still getting a π phase shift between the two used pillars. As was also the case for the
MS axicon, the overall coupling efficiency, shown in Figure 53D is increased for smaller pillars, converging at the
bandwidth expected by the simple glass BPP proposed in Sections 2. The MS and glass axicons and BPPs will
further be compared in Section 9.
56
==PAGE:60==
Figure 53: The wavelength dependence performance of the PC BPPs. (A): The coupling efficiency η to the target
LP0,5 mode. The maximum coupling efficiency at 1550 nm is given in the legend. (B): The sum parasitic mode
powers relative to the LP0,5. (C): The transmission efficiency ηT for the 4 surfaces. (D): The overall coupling
efficiency to the target LP0,5 mode, calculated as the product of η and ηT .
9
Discussion - Photonic Crystal Metasurfaces
The following section will consider methods of improving and tuning the performance of the photonic crystal
metasurfaces, both with respect to transmission efficiency, and with respect to obtained modal purity - in both
cases, the improvements come from selecting the specific silicon pillars used for the surface, which therefore allows
for more degrees of freedom for designing the surfaces to be application specific. However, the section will briefly
start with an analysis of possible optimization of the bulk glass axicon, before considering the photonic crystal
performance.
9.1
Optimization of radial phase transfer function
One thing that was attempted early on, was to use the implementation of the Nelder-Mead algorithm outlined
in Section 6.2 to improve the coupling efficiency η. The classical axicon has a linear phase transfer function
∆ϕ(r)Axi, with slope proportional to the tilt angle α of the axicon. Rather than considering it as a linear phase
profile, a modeling of the phase profile as a polynomial with N terms was also attempted. The radial phase
transfer function was in this case defined by:
∆ϕ(r) =
N
X
i=1
ai
 r
R
bi
(89)
57
==PAGE:61==
Where R is used to normalize the radial coordinate, such that r ∈[0, R]. Specifically this was introduced with
N = 3 terms for describing the phase transfer function, where the coefficients of a1 and b1 was selected to give
the linear phase profile of the classical axicon (i.e. b1 = 1). The wavelength dependent phase profile ∆ϕ2(r) at
some wavelength λ2 is then equal to:
∆ϕ2(r) = ∆ϕ1(r)λ1
λ2
n(λ2) −1
n(λ1) −1
(90)
Assuming the axicon being made of bulk glass, and where λ1 is the 1550 nm, with corresponding phase
profile ∆ϕ1. The Nelder-Mead algorithm was then implemented where η then was a function of the phase profile
coefficients and exponents aswell, meaning:
η(W0, z, a1, a2, a3, b1, b2, b3)
(91)
And the algorithm was then run with an initial conditions corresponding to a axicon of tilt angle 0.787◦,
with a Gaussian width of W0 = 1.8RcM. The resulting bandwidth of the linear phase profile axicon is shown in
Figure 54A, indicated by the blue curves. The corresponding optimal coupling efficiency at 1550 nm was 85.2%,
with a resulting relative parasitic mode power of approximately −11 dB, as indicated by the legend in Figure
54B. The Nelder-Mead algorithm was then run for many combinations of combinations of initial guesses for the
values of ai and bi for i = 3, to possibly overcome the problem of the results converging to a local maximum
value of η. The resulting phase profile, shown as ”Optimized η” in Figure 54, increased the maximum coupling
efficiency to 88.7% while reducing the parasites to −12 dB. The resulting values for the coefficients and exponents
of the phase profile are tabulated in Table 8. It was also attempted to modify the algorithm to minimize total
modal purity as a function of the phase profile, where the algorithm was permitted to change the width of the
Gaussian. The resulting performance is plotted as ”Parasites”, and the phase profile parameters are listed in the
table for ”Optimized parasites”. However, the reduced coupling efficiency and increased modal purity is much
more a result of the algorithm increasing the Gaussian width, which as shown in Section 6.3 decreases coupling
efficiency but increases modal purity. Based on the insignificant increases in modal purity by allowing more
complex expressions for the phase profile, this approach to finding the best possible phase profile was abandoned,
and the method explained in Section 6.2 was used, modeling η only as a function of W0, z and α.
Figure 54: (A): The wavelength dependent η for the simple axicon with tilt angle α = 0.787◦, designated
”Axicon”, as well as the axicons with optimized coupling and minimized parasites based on the Nelder-Mead
algorithm results. The phase profile coefficients and exponents are tabulated in Table 8. (B): The resulting
wavelength dependent modal purity of the 3 axicons.
9.2
Photonic Crystal Metasurface Improvements
For the simulations of the metasurface axicon, only 10 discrete pillar sizes were used for a the different unit cell
sizes. Consequently, the phase profile is discretized to impose the transmitted beam with spatially varying phase
58
==PAGE:62==
Table 8: Phase transfer function coefficients and exponents for optimized η and optimized parasites.
Type
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
Optimized η
-100.1
79.74
-76.16
1.3134
2.439
5.0386
Optimized parasites
-112.3
70.55
-69.96
1.27
2.425
5.097
relative to the smallest pillar of approximately (n −1)/10 · 2π for the n’th pillar, at the target wavelength. This
discretization therefore impacts where the transmitted field will interfere constructively in the far field, as there is is
a discrepancy between the metasurface axicon, where the continuous radial distribution has discretized phase, and
the bulk glass axicon where the imposed phase is continuously distributed radially. To address this, more than the
simulated 10 discrete pillar sizes can be used. Figure 55A shows the resulting total coupling efficiency to the LP0,5
of the metasurface axicon performance, using the pillars from S3 with unit cell Luc = 400 nm, where the effect of
sub-unity transmission is taken into account. The legend indicates the numbers of pillars used, and specifically,
for n = 3 the pillars used were P1, P6 and P10. For n = 5 it was P1, P4, P6, P8 and P9, and all 10 pillars simulated
in the n = 10 case. These combinations of pillars were selected from the simulated pillars, as they most evenly
distributed the imposed phase between 0 and 2π in 3 and 5 steps. From the figure, it is evident that increasing
the number of pillars increases the coupling efficiency to the target mode, which asymptotically converges to that
of the axicon, if neglecting transmission losses due to the pillars. Figure 55B shows the computed parasitic mode
power, where the bandwidth of pure mode excitation isn’t particularly sensitive to number of pillars used. While
the fewer number of pillars used reduces the field overlap to the target mode, it consequently also reduces the
field overlap to the parasites, thereby resulting in a relatively similar performance with respect to obtained modal
purity. As the radial distribution of the pillars is generated by applying Equation 87, it is therefore possible to
use more pillars with equally distributed phase between 0 and 2π at the target wavelength, in order to increase
the performance of the metasurface axicon. Assuming the photoresistive mask used in the photo-lithographic
etching process isn’t more complicated to make with more different pillar radii, there is no reason not to use more
pillars to have smaller steps in obtainable phase difference for the pillars.
Figure 55: (A): The coupling efficiency to the LP0,5 mode of the metasurface axicon, for respectively n = 3,
n = 5 and n = 10, where n is the number of discrete pillars used to distribute a phase shift of 2π at the target
operational wavelength of 1550 nm. (B): The corresponding relative parasitic powers.
Another possible way to address the performance of the photonic crystals is to selectively also choose pillars
with sizes such that the drop in transmission due to the Fabry-Perot type reflections are minimized at the target
wavelength. However, the problem therefore also grows in complexity with the number of pillars used for the
design. It is perhaps therefore a more viable way to increase the PC BPP performance, as only 2 different pillars
are used. Consider again the unit cell performance of the S3 series of silicon pillars. Different pairs of pillars can
have a relative phase difference ∆ϕ ≈π at 1550 nm, while their transmittance also varies at this wavelength.
Figure 56 shows the simulated transmission efficiency for 3 different combinations of pillar pairs of the simulated
pillars in S3. The pillar number combinations and resulting phase difference at 1550nm are given in the legend,
59
==PAGE:63==
and the inset shows the transmission efficiency close to 1550 nm. Notice that the combination used for the results
shown in Figure 53 of S3 actually uses the pillar combination which gives a high transmission at the target
wavelength. However, should one choose to use such BPP at other wavelengths, the combination of pillars used
can be chosen such that transmission losses are negligible at that particular wavelength.
Figure 56: Transmission efficiency for the PC BPP, using different pillar combinations of the pillars simulated in
S3. The combination of used pillars allows for optimizing the transmission efficiency at the target wavelength,
while maintaining a π phase shift.
Another possible way to engineer the performance of the structures, is to use a different material for the
pillars. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has a lower refractive index of ≈2.4 within the wavelength range simulated, and
negligible absorption across the whole simulated range. This would allow for bigger structures, while keeping the
field confinement to the pillars low, as the reduced refractive index strongly impacts the V -parameter. These lower
index pillars therefore consequently means that the homogeneous media approximation extends further into the
shorter wavelengths, for similar pillar sizes. Likewise, if the pillars can be increased in radius without negatively
confining the fields, then the total pillar height H can also be increased, which allows more freedom to select for
which wavelengths the Fabry-Perot type resonator induced transmission losses occur. Choosing materials with
high absorption and high refractive index also allows for producing a stopband wavelength, for which shorter
wavelengths will have a significant decrease in transmission efficiency. This can allow for more engineering of the
performance for the PC BPP compared to BPP patterns etched in bulk materials.
9.3
Comparison of Photonic Crystal and Bulk - Axicon and BPP
While the practical performance of the BPPs were only measured at a wavelength of 1550nm, and with the
axicons not measured at all, a comparison can only be made based on calculated and simulated performance of
the BPPs and axicons for the bulk material and the photonic crystal versions. A natural next step in the project
would have been to have the designed PC BPPs and Axicon produced, and measure the performance. This was
unfortunately not possible due to the time constraints of the project deadline.
With respect to the performance of the bulk glass axicon and the PC axicon, the obtained coupling efficiency
and total parasitic power is shown in Figure 57, showing the performance of the unrealizable axicon from S1
(being unrealizable because the pillars simulated have an aspect ratio too high to be fabricated), as well as the
two realizable metasurfaces, S3 and S4 and the simple bulk glass ”Axicon”. For all three metasurfaces, the effect
of reduced transmission efficiency has been accounted for in the calculation of the coupling efficiency. Likewise,
the Fresnel reflection stemming from incidence onto the bottom silica layer is also accounted for in the transmis-
sion of the metasurfaces, but are neglected in the plotted performance of the bulk glass axicon. Evidently, the
glass axicon has a higher maximum coupling efficiency at the target wavelength of 1550 nm. The bandwidth for
coupling to the LP0,5 HOM is however increased slightly for the realizable surface S3, and even further increased
for the theoretical surface S1. Therefore, producing the metasurface axicons using the simple spatial distribution
of cylindrical silicon pillars, in order to obtain a graded index corresponding to the glass axicon, allows for an
60
==PAGE:64==
increase in bandwidth, also with respect to total modal purity. The simple axicon does show better total parasitic
mode suppression at the design wavelength, but as discussed previously, this is possible to improve by using more
than 10 discrete phases from only 10 different pillar radii in the design, or by increasing the incident Gaussian
width. The simple bulk glass axicon still reigns supreme with respect to efficient and pure mode excitation at a
single wavelength, also compared to using BPP’s. The mode selectivity however comes from changing the physical
excitation process, for example by changing the distance between the axicon and the in-coupling lenses to the
fiber. This gives an additional degree of complexity of using the axicon, if mode selectivity is important for the
application.
Figure 57: (A): The coupling efficiency to the LP0,5 of the simple ”Axicon” and for 3 of the realized metasurface
axicons, S1, S3 and S4 with transmission losses accounted at a fixed propagation distance after the axicon. (B):
The corresponding wavelength dependent relative sum parasitic mode powers.
The corresponding results for the simple bulk silica BPP and 3 of the simulated PC BPPs is shown in Figure
58. The simple BPP offers significantly better bandwidth with respect to excitation of the target LP0,5, while also
having the best modal purity, compared to the metasurfaces. However, the sudden drop in coupling efficiency for
the PC BPPs allows for selection of a stopband for conversion, which can be useful for certain applications. The
sudden drop is again due to the nonlinear response of the pillars, which means that the relative phase difference
between the two pillars go to 0.
The wavelength for which this happens can be engineered by selecting the
dimensions of the pillars used, while making sure the phase difference is still π at the target design wavelength.
Therefore, while the bandwidth of the metasurface BPPs are reduced compared to the simple BPP, the increased
degrees of freedom allow possibly using PC BPPs for applications where the broad bandwidth of the simple BPP
is a hindrance to performance. One could for example use this property of tuning the wavelength at which HOM
excitation isnt possible, by not exciting a HOM, or not reconverting the pump signal at a wavelength of the stop
band in a fiber laser. However, the price and relative ease of manufacture for the simple BPPs and axicons are
also a factor to consider, with efficient and broadband LP0,m excitation possible for the simple BPP, relative to
the SLM and the PC BPP’s.
61
==PAGE:65==
Figure 58: (A): The coupling efficiency to the LP0,5 of the simple ”BPP” and for 3 of the realized PC BPPs,
S1, S3 and S4, with transmission losses accounted. (B): The corresponding wavelength dependent sum parasitic
mode powers.
10
Conclusion
With the increasing use and potential of higher order modes in optical fibers, efficient mode excitation is crucial
for implementation into modern applications. Specifically, this report has considered the use of binary phase
plates and axicons for excitation of LP0,m modes in a multi-moded fiber, with experimental characterization of
the performance of the BPPs. Additionally, numerical simulations of graded index photonic crystal metasurfaces
variations of the BPP and axicon show potential to tune the performance of the excitation process, both with re-
spect to overall coupling efficiency and the obtained modal purity of the mode, by changing the design parameters.
This report demonstrates excitation of the LP0,5 mode using a BPP in close contact with the fiber input facet,
with corresponding coupling efficiency of 50 percent, and with a resulting modal purity 11.8 dB, as well as modal
purities of ≈10 dB for modes LP0,2 to LP0,6. Additionally, the numerical simulations of the metasurface axicons
and BPPs show that the comparatively smaller bandwidth of HOM excitation for the metasurface axicon relative
to the BPPs, can be increased by changing the properties of the metasurface design, such as the size of the
nanoscaled pillars simulated. The simulated metasurface BPPs shows both lower coupling efficiency and modal
purity compared to the bulk material BPP which was experimentally tested, but is also shown to asymptotically
converge to the performance of the BPP as the dimensions of the inclusions in the metasurface are reduced.
Additionally, the effects of field confinement into the nanostrucutred pillars simulated gives a nonlinear variation
in effective index of the material, thereby allowing for tailoring of the phase difference between the binary phase
flips of the PC BPP. This introduces the ability to produce coupling stop-bands, in which bands wavelengths will
not couple to the HOMs.
Unfortunately, the process of fabricating the BPPs for experimental characterization, as well as the construc-
tion of a working experimental setup took longer than proposed in the initial project plan, leaving less time
for characterization of the produced BPPs. This results in the limited experimental results of the BPPs. The
close-contact performance of the BPPs was tested towards the end of the project, and the results indicate that
optimization of the experimental setup is possible, in order to achieve both higher coupling efficiencies, and better
modal purity. This also indicates that the setup used for acquisition of data in the free-space BPP setup was
also likely not optimized, and therefore the modal purities of ≈8 dB obtained are likely possible to improve.
While the demonstrated performance of using BPPs in a free-space configuration is worse than the close-contact
configuration, the possible speed and ease of mode selectivity was drastically improved in the free-space setup.
Additionally, the free-space setup allows mode selection by varying the Gaussian width, for a fixed BPP pattern
with many radial phase flips. The time consuming process of experimental BPP characterization also left too
62
==PAGE:66==
little time for fabrication and experimental characterization of the simulated photonic crystal axicon and BPP.
A natural next step would be to fabricate and characterize the PCs at multiple wavelengths, in order to quantify
their performance.
One interesting potential application of the BPPs is the etching of the BPP pattern directly on the fiber facet.
This is expected to give performance comparable to or better than the demonstrated 11.8 dB modal purity at 50%
coupling efficiency. The direct etching of the BPP patterns on the fiber facet would allow for an in-fiber solution
to HOM excitation. It is also suspected that the bandwidth of the BPP will facilitate beam reconversion from the
propagating higher order modes to a free-space Gaussian beam. This could facilitate a wavelength tuneable fiber
laser with a Gaussian output profile, which is indeed an interesting prospect. The ability to choose a stopband
using a PC BPP can allow for spatial filtering of the pump signal in the fiber.
Compared to the well-established HOM excitation method of using a Spatial Light Modulator, the BPPs are
experimentally shown to have similar resulting modal purity for the LP0,5. Additionally, two distinct advantages
of using BPPs are identified. Firstly, the price of the manufacture of BPPs will be significantly lower, allowing for
a cheaper solution of LP0,m HOM excitation, compared to using a SLM. However, the thin glass wafers on which
the BPPs are etched are of course susceptible to damage, and should be handled with care. Additionally, a way
to accurately control the position of the BPPs is required, so as to align the BPP pattern to the Gaussian beam,
or to the fiber facet. The limited overlap to the target mode of ≈75% is likely too detrimental to be viable for
space-division multiplexing to increase telecommunication fiber bandwidth, as the inherent 25% loss is a lot of
wasted energy. Secondly and lastly, since the BPPs are etched in silica glass, the optical power threshold exceeds
that of the SLM. This means that the use of BPPs will be particularly suited to HOM excitation in high-power
applications.
63
==PAGE:67==
11
Appendix
This section aims to provide an explanation of how alignment of the BPPs were obtained, and the different
additions made to the schematic setups shown in Figure 14 to facilitate this. Figure 59A shows the setup for
the free-space BPP configuration, and Figure 59B shows the close-contact. Firstly, the addition of an SLED
in the setup improves the visual cues and modal image acquired, as the SLED has a broad emission spectrum.
This results in the imaged mode being the sum of all single-frequency modes all squared, whereas with a narrow
linewidth laser, like the tunable Agilent laser used, interference of the light at the single frequency will be evi-
dent in the observed intensity image. Therefore, it is easier to ”find” the mode when aligning for example the
incoupling mirrors (M5) and (M6). The SLED and Agilent (LD) have their output propagating in a single mode
fiber, going into the 2-way 3dB splitter (2WS). It is set up such that the output of the Agilent, shown with red
lines, only passes one way through the setup, eventually hitting the camera, as shown in the Methods section.
However, the SLED output, shown schematically with both blue and green lines, will both go into the green beam,
similar to the Agilent laser, and the blue beam used to back couple the light through the fiber. Starting with the
forward coupling, green beam, a flip mirror (FM2) was positioned after the BPP in the free-space configuration,
diverting the beam. The lens (L8) then imaged the plane of the BPP onto the CCD of the camera (CAM3). This
camera image was used to see the alignment of the BPP patterns to the gaussian beam, as well as comparing the
gaussian beam width incident on the planes. A script was written to fit a Gaussian onto the obtained image of
the beam, and the approximate value of the Gaussian width was obtained this way. With the flip mirror (FM2)
down, the SLED beam was free to propagate to the CCD camera, to align for better mode purity. In order also
to check for alignment of mirrors (M5) and (M6), the back coupled blue beam was used. A single mode fiber
with output collimated using lens (L6) would then be incident on mirrors (M7) and flip mirror (FM3). These
two mirrors in combination allows for steering the beam, such that coupling into the fiber from the output facet
was possible. The back coupled beam would then propagate, hit the BPP pattern, before another flip mirror
(FM1) would divert the beam, and lens (L7) would image the BPP plane onto the CCD camera (CAM2). An
iterative approach was then used, where the beam was coupled into the fiber in the forward direction, aligning
the beam to the fiber using (M5). Then, switching to the back coupled beam, the beam would be steered onto
the BPP, checking alignment using CAM2, by moving lens (L6). This was iteratively repeated until the beam
would overlap the pattern in both directions, finally resulting in alignment of the setup.
For the close-contact configuration, shown schematically in Figure 59B, the setup was quite similar, However,
alignment of the fiber and BPP was then only possible by back coupling of the beam. Once a pattern was found
and partly overlapping the fiber output facet, (CAM3) would be used to visually inspect the alignment, and the
computer controlled stages with which the BPP was held, would then be moved very finely, in order to get the
precise alignment. However, the initial alignment of a pattern to the fiber facet is similar to looking for a needle
in a haystack. Therefore, a microscope was used to first roughly align the patterns to the fiber. The setup for
this is shown in Figure 60, showing the microscope looking at the BPP wafer and the fiber behind it. In order to
fit the microscope, mirror (M6) and the in-coupling lens (L4) was removed. The microscope had a bright lamp
build in, and the discontinuities of the small BPP patterns would scatter the incident light, thereby making it
possible to see the positions of the small BPP patterns on the wafer, relative to the fiber facet location. The
computer controlled stages would then be used to align a pattern as well as possible to the fiber facet. After the
alignment, the microscope would be moved to look at the fiber and glass wafer from a side view, to inspect the
approximate separation distance between the wafer and the fiber. A figure showing the contact of the fiber to
the glass wafer, including the in-coupling lens (L4) is shown in Figure 61.
64
==PAGE:68==
Figure 59: (A): The setup used for excitation and alignment of HOMs, showing the additions to the setup allowing
for alignment of the BPPs. (B): The setup for the BPPs in close-contact, showing also the additions made to
align the BPP patterns to the fiber facet.
65
==PAGE:69==
Figure 60: The microscope (center left) positioned to look at the BPP (center right) and fiber facet, in order to
get an approximate alignment of the patterns to the fiber facet.
Figure 61: The configuration of the BPP wafer being held between the in-coupling lens (left) and the fiber (right).
Even after using the microscope for alignment, the BPP would not be perfectly aligned to the fiber. Figure
62 shows the view of the back coupled beam on the left, as obtained by (CAM3), and the side view of the fiber
in close contact with the BPP wafer. The fiber would then be moved slightly away from the fiber, and the wafer
would be moved slightly in the transverse plane to the fiber, after which the fiber would be moved back to see if
the BPP pattern would be aligned to the fiber facet. After trying this multiple times, eventually the BPP pattern
would appear on the camera, as shown in Figure 63. From there, it was simply the case of iteratively moving the
pattern very finely until the alignment was obtained, as shown for example in Figure 32.
66
==PAGE:70==
Figure 62: The view of the back propagated beam, as shown by (CAM3) on the left, and the microscope view of
the fiber touching the BPP wafer seen from the side, shown on the right.
67
==PAGE:71==
Figure 63: The view of (CAM3) with partial alignment of the BPP to the fiber facet.
68
==PAGE:72==
References
[1]
D. Casasent. “Spatial light modulators”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 65.1 (1977), pp. 143–157. doi: 10.
1109/PROC.1977.10439.
[2]
Anthony E. Siegman. “Defining, measuring, and optimizing laser beam quality”. In: Laser Resonators and
Coherent Optics: Modeling, Technology, and Applications. Ed. by Anup Bhowmik. Vol. 1868. International
Society for Optics and Photonics. SPIE, 1993, pp. 2–12. doi: 10.1117/12.150601. url: https://doi.
org/10.1117/12.150601.
[3]
J. Arlt and K. Dholakia. “Generation of high-order Bessel beams by use of an axicon”. In: Optics Commu-
nications 177.1 (2000), pp. 297–301. issn: 0030-4018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0030-4018(00)
00572-1. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0030401800005721.
[4]
Joseph W Goodman. “Introduction to Fourier optics”. In: Introduction to Fourier optics, 3rd ed., by JW
Goodman. Englewood, CO: Roberts & Co. Publishers, 2005 1 (2005).
[5]
Emmanuel B. Desurvire. “Capacity Demand and Technology Challenges for Lightwave Systems in the Next
Two Decades”. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology 24.12 (2006), pp. 4697–4710. doi: 10.1109/JLT.2006.
885772.
[6]
MIT.edu. Paraxial Wave Equation and Gaussian Beams. 2006. url: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/6-
974-fundamentals-of-photonics-quantum-electronics-spring-2006/871c32e6e4a44cbb1546741ef06f0f2f_
parax_wav_eq_gau.pdf (visited on 05/27/2023).
[7]
Hamza Kurt and David S. Citrin. “Graded index photonic crystals”. In: Opt. Express 15.3 (Feb. 2007),
pp. 1240–1253. doi: 10.1364/OE.15.001240. url: https://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-
15-3-1240.
[8]
J. W. Nicholson et al. “Spatially and spectrally resolved imaging of modal content in large-mode-area
fibers”. In: Opt. Express 16.10 (May 2008), pp. 7233–7243. doi: 10.1364/OE.16.007233. url: https:
//opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-16-10-7233.
[9]
S. Ramachandran et al. “Ultra-large effective-area, higher-order mode fibers: a new strategy for high-power
lasers”. In: Laser & Photonics Reviews 2.6 (2008), pp. 429–448. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.
200810016. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/lpor.200810016. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/lpor.200810016.
[10]
Grzegorz Stepniak, Lukasz Maksymiuk, and Jerzy Siuzdak. “Binary-Phase Spatial Light Filters for Mode-
Selective Excitation of Multimode Fibers”. In: J. Lightwave Technol. 29.13 (July 2011), pp. 1980–1987. url:
https://opg.optica.org/jlt/abstract.cfm?URI=jlt-29-13-1980.
[11]
Fuchang Gao and Lixing Han. “Implementing the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm with adaptive parame-
ters”. In: Computational Optimization and Applications 51 (May 2012), pp. 259–277. doi: 10.1007/s10589-
010-9329-3.
[12]
Josef Humlicek. “Data Analysis for Nanomaterials: Effective Medium Approximation, Its Limits and Imple-
mentations”. In: Mar. 2013, pp. 145–178. isbn: 978-3-642-33955-4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33956-1_3.
[13]
Cesar Jauregui, Jens Limpert, and Andreas T¨unnermann. “High-power fibre lasers”. In: Nature Photonics
7.11 (Nov. 2013), pp. 861–867. doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2013.273.
[14]
David J Richardson, John M Fini, and Lynn E Nelson. “Space-division multiplexing in optical fibres”. In:
Nature photonics 7.5 (2013), pp. 354–362.
[15]
Karsten Rottwitt and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg. Nonlinear Optics: Principles and Applications. English.
CRC Press, 2014. isbn: 978-1-4665-6582-1.
[16]
Corning.com. Corning HPFS 7979, 7980, 8655 Fused Silica Optical Materials Product Information. 2015.
url: https://www.corning.com/media/worldwide/csm/documents/HPFS_Product_Brochure_All_
Grades_2015_07_21.pdf (visited on 05/29/2023).
[17]
Jeff Demas, Lars Rishøj, and Siddharth Ramachandran. “Free-space beam shaping for precise control and
conversion of modes in optical fiber”. In: Opt. Express 23.22 (Nov. 2015), pp. 28531–28545. doi: 10.1364/
OE.23.028531. url: https://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-23-22-28531.
[18]
Andrei V. Lavrinenko et al. Numerical Methods in Photonics. 1st Edition. CRC Press, 2015. isbn: 9781315216119.
69
==PAGE:73==
[19]
Xiaomin Liu et al. “Nonlinearity-tailored fiber laser technology for low-noise, ultra-wideband tunable fem-
tosecond light generation”. In: Photon. Res. 5.6 (Dec. 2017), pp. 750–761. doi: 10.1364/PRJ.5.000750.
url: https://opg.optica.org/prj/abstract.cfm?URI=prj-5-6-750.
[20]
Georg Rademacher et al. “Long-Haul Transmission Over Few-Mode Fibers With Space-Division Multiplex-
ing”. In: J. Lightwave Technol. 36.6 (Mar. 2018), pp. 1382–1388. url: https://opg.optica.org/jlt/
abstract.cfm?URI=jlt-36-6-1382.
[21]
Lars Gr¨uner-Nielsen, Neethu Mariam Mathew, and Karsten Rottwitt. “Invited paper: Characterization of
few mode fibers and devices”. English. In: Optical Fiber Technology 52 (Nov. 2019). issn: 1068-5200. doi:
10.1016/j.yofte.2019.101972.
[22]
Jesper Lægsgaard. Introduction to dielectric waveguides. Lecture notes for course 34041.
[23]
Ansys Optics. Metamaterial S parameter extraction. url: https://www.rp-photonics.com/gaussian_
beams.html (visited on 06/10/2023).
[24]
Ansys Optics. Metamaterial S parameter extraction. url: https://optics.ansys.com/hc/en- us/
articles/360042095873-Metamaterial-S-parameter-extraction (visited on 06/01/2023).
[25]
Thorlabs. Corning HPFS 7979, 7980, 8655 Fused Silica Optical Materials Product Information. url: https:
//www.thorlabs.com/thorproduct.cfm?partnumber=FG050LGA (visited on 05/29/2023).
70
