==PAGE:1==
Discovering E­GSM process models from
sensor data logs
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Christopher Jung
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathemat­
ics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulfilment for the
Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering
Christopher Jung ­ s205574
Signature
21st July 2023
Date
ii
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
E­GSM provides artifact­centric process monitoring, the declarative nature and extended
components of the process modelling language allows for greater conformity checking and
deviation detection than traditional imperative style process modelling languages such as
BPMN, and Petri Nets. However, the declarative nature of the language can be harder
to business process owners to understand when designing an artifact­centric process
model. This thesis introduces methods for producing E­GSM models directly from raw
event logs. By utilising process mining techniques, and incorporating different interme­
diary modelling languages that can be converted into E­GSM currently in literature such
as Business Process Modelling Notation [1], and Directly­Follow graphs [2]. On top of
this, we introduce a conversion method for another popular process modelling language:
Petri Nets and Petri Net modelling language. This thesis provides a formal specification
with pseudo code on how this is achieved, and also offers a codebase implementation of
this. Provided on top of this is also a tool for the process of mining raw data, automatically
handling the intermediary process and formalising as an E­GSM model. Finally through
comparing and contrasting of the different intermediaries, we see that the provided Petri
Net conversion provides a well conforming E­GSM process model.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank both of my supervisors. Andrea Burattin, whose course’s sparked
a deep interest in me for the field of Process Mining, Business Processes, and Business
Intelligence. Giovanni Meroni, whose continued guidance and feedback has been invalu­
able and instrumental throughout this entire thesis.
I would also like to thank Charlie Van Dyke Junior, and all those working at Novasun who
offered the collaboration and assisted me during my time there, and allowed myself and
this thesis the opportunity of obtaining real world event logs.
iv
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Modelling Languages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Problem Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Related Works
7
3.1
SMARTifact: BPMN to E­GSM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Viola: Directly­Follow Graph to E­GSM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Problem Analysis and Proposal
9
4.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Data Collection
11
6
Converting Petri Nets to E­GSM
13
6.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
6.2
Enhancement with Workflow Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
6.3
Translation Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
7
Solution
21
7.1
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
7.2
Business Process Modelling Notation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7.3
Directly Follow Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7.4
Petri Nets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7.5
Transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
8
Comparison and Evaluation
27
8.1
Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8.2
Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
9
Conclusion
29
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Bibliography
31
A Appendix
33
A.1 Gantt Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
v
==PAGE:8==
A.2 BPI Challenge 2013 E­GSM models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
vi
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Business process modelling is a steady yet growing field with a great many corporations
taking a keen interest. With the possibility of automating what used to be manual human
led and worked processes into streamlined information­centric applications, pipelines, and
workflows. Which are capable of great cost and time savings, on top of being less error
prone and more accurate. It is no wonder that the research sphere surrounding business
process modelling, development, monitoring, and mining have an active and popular com­
munity.
Traditionally, process monitoring, a tool which businesses can use in order to automati­
cally keep track of complex business processes, are modeled using process­centric ap­
proaches. Usually the processes contain, human­assisted tasks, fully automated tasks, or
a healthy mixture of both, with priorities for the latter, as is where process modelling really
shows its benefits. Such modelling can be carried out using formal specifications such as
BPMN, or Petri­Nets which allow for greater ease­of­use to specialists who design, test,
and implement process models manually. However, these approaches separate their
data management and manipulation from the model’s specification. On top of this, typical
imperative models such as these, struggle or even do not allow deviations outside the
fixed original flow. The lack of support for monitoring deviations can lead to erroneous
results being missed and processes silently failing and subsequently stalling, all whilst
failing to communicate to relevant stakeholders who preside over the process model of
any and all deviant information.
Such complications in imperative models only amplify once businesses decide to extend
their process models to incorporate the actions of 3rd party actors and stakeholders, form­
ing multi­party business processes. However, with Artifact­Driven monitoring [1], a link
is created between process and data, usually in the form of an information model and a
life­cycle model. One modelling language representing this train of thought is E­GSM [3]
proposed by Meroni. This declarative style of monitoring allows for greater flexibility, and
signalling of deviations during expected flow than typical imperative models. On top of
this, alerted deviations do not interrupt the proposed processes flow, only communicating
the deviations occurrence or lack thereof, and other attached data that is now embedded
within the process itself, to appropriate stakeholders.
Process mining [4] is the act of automatically discovering business process models from
a given log of event data. Typically the algorithm will traverse through the event log iden­
tifying processes that are often seen following one another and attempt to justify one
processes succession to another using such data. Finally when the algorithm finishes,
it will have constructed, in the chosen process modelling language, what it believes to
be the flow of processes given the event log. Whilst the output is usually difficult for a
human to interpret due to how usual business processes adhere to block­structured logic,
and manually created models are often far denser, the created model is still very useful,
especially when trying to grasp larger, and more complex processes with large event logs.
It is quite often seen that when discovering models, especially for models with greater
complexity such as BPMN, an intermediary process model is used between the act of
mining, to the point where the final BPMN model is realised. There exists various inter­
mediaries for such process, and where they have been compared and contrasted against
one another to show strengths and weaknesses. However, as E­GSM is a relatively new
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
1
==PAGE:10==
process modelling language, there does not exist many intermediaries nor their compar­
isons. As such, this thesis, we look at current methods for the process mining into E­GSM
specification, introduce a new intermediary, and compare and contrast all the methods
thereby presented.
1.1
Scope
The scope of this project is to have an investigation into current methods for discovering
E­GSM process models from raw log data. Specifically, an offline training data­set that
has been labelled, and then will the resultant E­GSM model be able to conform accurately
to a given test data­set. On top of the current methods for discovering E­GSM in literature,
this project will propose a intermediary for which E­GSM models can be constructed using
the Petri Net Modelling Notation.
1.2
Outline
: In this thesis, there are 9 chapters. They are as follows:
Chapter 2 ­ Background: Here we introduce the important fields that compliment the
theory that is worked on in this thesis. Then we talk about the problem domain.
Chapter 3 ­ Related Works: Here the thesis introduces works closely related to what is
being worked on in this project, as they will also be used throughout
Chapter 4 ­ Problem Analysis and Proposal: Here we define our research questions
that we aim to answer in the latter half of this thesis. Also we discuss the methodology in
which the work for this thesis was carried out with.
Chapter 5 ­ Data Collection: Here we discuss how we collected the real world dataset
that is used later on in this thesis
Chapter 6 ­ Converting Petri Nets to E­GSM: In this chapter we introduce our approach
for turning a Petri Net into an E­GSM model, laying down the foundations of any definitions
that are required along the way.
Chapter 7 ­ Solution: We introduce our proposed full solution to some of the research
questions.
Chapter 8 ­ Comparison and Evaluation: In this chapter we evaluate our solution and
answer the remaining research questions.
Chapter 9 ­ Conclusion and Future Work: We conclude the thesis in this chapter, and
then discuss what we would have like to have added if we were to work on this project in
the future.
2
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Process Mining
With an abundance of event logs accruing due to the readily available and ease­of­use
of various information, and resource planning systems. Process mining, a young area of
research, allows businesses and academics innovate in a vastly growing data­driven en­
vironment. Stemming from computational intelligence and data mining, to process mod­
elling and analysis, process mining enables the extraction, and enhancement of informa­
tion from event logs provided by commonly used information systems [5]. Process mining
can be broken down into various sub­topics; Process discovery, conformance checking,
process monitoring, organizational mining, simulated model construction, model repair
and extension, and recommendation systems based on history.
Process discovery, is the corner­stone and the first segment of process mining. Only
requiring a given event log, a sequential record indicating that a process has taken place
at some given time, and a complimentary algorithm. Process discovery is able to produce
a model without any further information. There are various such algorithms such as α­
algorithm, heuristic, and inductive mining, all employing a variety of techniques in order
come to the conclusion that is the process model. Such algorithms are also able to output
to various modelling language formats, but such is dependent on the algorithm choice.
Although it is noted that the algorithm is only as complete, and correct as its input event log,
an insufficiently satisfactory event log will produce a sub­standard model as the algorithm
is unable to compute the full process.
Conformance checking, another large part of process mining, is the second segment.
Using a given event log, and an already formed process model, either manually created
by a specialist, or by process of discovery, conformance checking provides stakeholders
the ability to verify the measure of their model’s ability to cope with reality. By running a
process model against an event log, hopefully not one used to discover the model, one
can catch deviations from the expected flow, and also understand how significant these
deviations could or could not be.
Process mining, itself is also not limited to offline analysis using already collected logs for
either discovery or conformance checking. Techniques can also be applied to streaming
live data to either ensure correctness or catch deviations.
2.2
Modelling Languages
A Modelling language is a formal specification and rules for which process models adhere
to in order to be considered a valid model. A process model, boiled down, is simply a file,
usually XML based, that is checked against their respective specification. These files
are then loaded into a process model engine or workflow engine. The specifications are
published and are publicly available, most often held by the Object Management Group
(OMG). There a great variety of specification such as BPMN, EPC, Petri­Nets, or UML
activity diagrams.
2.2.1
E­GSM
E­GSM or Extended Guard Stage Milestone, is a declarative artifact­centric modelling
language. Built upon the Guard Stage Milestone (GSM) language, which incorporates
an artifact­centric nature of modelling a process in terms of artifacts and characteristics,
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
3
==PAGE:12==
which allows for detecting deviations during runtime. GSM, as appropriately named is
built using Stages, Guards, and Milestones, and on top of this is the information model.
Stages represent activities within the process flow. They can also be nested within each
other to represent a larger complex flow. Guards hold a condition that allows a stage to be
activated. Milestones, like guards also hold a condition, but instead will close the stage,
indicating the end of the activity. The information model holds the state of the artifact,
comprising of data and status attributes. The former, that define the characteristic of the
artifact, and the latter that tracks the activation, and closing of stages and milestones.
E­GSM takes this further, whilst stages, milestones, and the information model are the
identical to GSM. E­GSM introduces data flow guards, process flow guards, and fault
loggers. First he data flow guard of DFG replaces the GSM guard and represents an
event expression that enables the opening of a stage. The process flow guard or PFG is
a logical expression representing the expected flow for the stage that it is attached to. It’s
evaluation is carried out when any of the DFG’s also attached to the stage are triggered.
If the logical expression evaluates to true, the stage has carried out as expected, however
if the expression evaluates to false, then the stage is still opened, yet it is considered ’out
of order’, because it has not followed the expected process flow. The fault logger is an
event expression that when triggered indicates that the associated stage is now ’faulty’,
however does not close or terminate the stage as that is still achieved by the milestone.
[3]
E­GSM’s declarative and artifact­centric nature allow for a great degree of flexibility when
it comes to process monitoring, it’s fault loggers, and PFGs enable timely, appropriate,
and important information regarding deviations to be effectively communicated to share­
holders. However, it’s declarative nature makes the language harder for less specialised
individuals to construct effective, correct, and sound process models than they would with
imperative models.
2.2.2
Business Process Modelling Notation
Business Process Modelling Notation, or BPMN, is an imperative modelling language,
focused on its easily understandable manner, and industry standardisation. Developed
by the Object Management Group (OMG), it’s primary focus is enabling and easing the
collaboration between business analysts, developers, and other stakeholders in order to
communicate and design business processes effectively. One important aspect of BPMN
is its graphical elements. Using a standardised set of graphical symbols to represent dif­
ferent components of a business process, as such it is easier and more intuitive for an
individual with no experience to understand the general flow of a BPMN diagram. BPMN
is composed of various components such as tasks, gateways, events, and flows between
these components. Decision points can be made at gateways allowing for process flows
to allow exclusive decision making, or allowing parallel activities within the model. Var­
ious events such as a timer, rest api, or various signals can invoke the event triggers.
Entire BPMN process flows can be nested into a single sub­processes allowing for the
simplification of higher level process models. Tasks can hold boundary events in order to
capture timeouts, errors, or any other supported event type. [6]
Due to how BPMN’s use of gateways, it naturally follows block­like structure. This of­
ten mimics business decisions in real life as often the criteria and information about the
process leads decisions down any number of paths ultimately collecting into a final com­
pletion of the entire business process.
4
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: The core­set of BPMN elements [7]
2.2.3
Petri­Net Modelling Language
Petri Nets or Place/Transition Nets, are a type of graph used to describe and analyze
concurrent systems. They comprise of place, transitions, and arcs. First, the place repre­
sents a state of the system, and are depicted as circles. Transitions, represent changes
in state, or actions, and are depicted as bars. Finally, arcs connect places and transitions
indicating the flow for the model. Tokens represent pieces of information, resources, or
control at a particular place. When a transition fires, the tokens from all connected input
places are consumed, and all output places produce one token. [8] Petri Nets have been
used in a multitude of areas such as biological systems modelling, manufacturing sys­
tems, and software modelling, on top of the fact that it is also widely used for workflow
process modelling.
Figure 2.2: The core­set of Petri­Net Elements [9]
2.2.4
Directly­Follow Graphs
A directly­follow graph or DFG, is the simplest form of modelling language used by process
modelling, mining, and monitoring engines. A DFG consists of nodes, or activities, and
directed edges indicating relationships between nodes in the form of a direct follow. On
top of this a DFG has indications of a start and end event which occur in their respective
places.
Since DFGs are very simple to follow they are often used as the base for a wide variety of
mining engines. To mine for a DFG they collect activities from logs, form them into traces,
a sequence of activities, and count the number of activities, traces, and sub traces. The
most common traces, determined minimum number of traces threshold, are then used to
construct the final graph.
However, it is considered that DFGs, when used to process mine, can be misleading and
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
5
==PAGE:14==
be generated in various ways leading to misinterpreted process models. [10]
2.3
Problem Domain
With the rise of information centric system, and businesses incorporating online tools,
cloud providers, and smart workflows such as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) sys­
tems into the core of their business processes. So has risen the desire to provide intelli­
gence to every business decision. Process monitoring, mining, business intelligence, and
workflow engines allow businesses to cut costs, ensure quality, eliminate deviations, and
automate what were traditional human­led processes.
Whilst businesses who have incorporated and invested such tools to be at the center of
their work often see great returns across the board, either due to automation of manual
labour or analyses, or from increased awareness and allowed greater control over their
business processes. There still exists tasks that still must be carried out manually or
situations where reliability is not guaranteed.
With workflow engines, and traditional imperative driven process modelling languages
struggling to maintain coherency with regards to these situations. Businesses often find
these aspects to be challenging or frustrating to deal with. Artifact­centric process mod­
elling is the incorporation of traditional process modelling languages except for the inclu­
sion of an attached information model, allowing such languages far greater flexibility, and
able to make greater, well informed decisions. E­GSM, a declarative process modelling
language, offers solutions for problems pertaining to cross domain and organisational
monitoring and deviant detection.
However, often the adoption of newer technologies are held back due to their complexity.
E­GSM whilst very flexible and able to provide monitoring solution that traditional process
modelling languages are not able to. The declarative modelling approach comes with a
steeper learning curve than the more intuitive imperative style.
If the problem of having to construct these models were taken out of the hands of dis­
couraged learners and instead a simple yet effective approach for generating E­GSM
models, from already understood imperative style models was available, the usage of
E­GSM would be less discouraging. Further more, since algorithms already exist for gen­
erating traditional process models such as BPMN models, DFGs, and Petri Nets, a whole
workflow tool for starting with raw event logs and ending up with a fully formalised E­GSM
model could be achieved.
6
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:15==
3
Related Works
3.1
SMARTifact: BPMN to E­GSM
[1] proposes a method of generating E­GSM models by enriching BPMN models with arti­
facts. The proposed solution uses The ATL (ATL Transformation Language) Language as
the tool for deconstructing, transforming, and reconstructing BPMN into E­GSM notation,
through the use of a command­line tool provided as supplement to SMARTifact, one can
create E­GSM models in xml format and the corresponding information models that are
compatible with the platform. This is great as SMARTifact is the first and primary engine
that utilises and runs E­GSM models, and as such a tool that’s conversion process is
tailored to this project can act as a valuable reference.
ATL, is a hybrid language counting both declarative and imperative syntax. Based in the
realm of Java, it compiles and runs with its own custom ATL compiler and virtual machine.
ATL’s approach to transformation uses a read only input to a write only output, both input
and output must conform to a meta­model, a specification and rule­set describing the
syntax for the modelling language, as ATL uses grammar from these meta­models in order
to compute it’s transformation from one to the other. ATL’s main source of transformation
logic is formed by a set of ’rules’. Following a source and a pattern and optionally a guard,
a rule will match the incoming pattern and transform them and any specified attributes into
the output target pattern only if the corresponding evaluates to true. ATL’s declarative
side is composed of various kinds of these rules; standard, lazy, and unique. Lazy rules
are only triggered by other rules, and unique rules are the same as lazy except are only
called once. For ATL’s imperative side, it allows for action blocks in which a sequence of
statements can be triggered alongside rules.[11]
Figure 3.1: The ATL source and target conforming to Metamodels [12]
The proposed solution works well for the conversion of BPMN into E­GSM, especially for
running on the SMARTifact platform. However, there only exists the single BPMN2EGSM
tool and no other process model language converters are supplied limiting usage to only
BPMN. On top of this, ATL due to its declarative nature and use of Metamodels, are
unforgiving in terms of development. ATL, and the Eclipse Modelling Framework (EMF),
which ATL is built on top of serve in a tight eclipse ecosystem forming a rigid development
experience. As such, extending the tool for various other process modelling languages
becomes a rough endeavour.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
7
==PAGE:16==
3.2
Viola: Directly­Follow Graph to E­GSM
Viola, proposed by Di Federico, et al [2], is a conformance checking tool with applications
centering around streaming information from IoT based devices. The tool collects event
logs from these devices, forming them into a Directly­Follow graph, and enhancing this
with a rule­set generated by a decision tree classifier. The conversion approach taken is
pythonic, centering around the use and creation of XML trees and elements whilst iterating
through the generated DFGs list of activities.
Viola’s use is as a behavioral violations detector. Building up an E­GSM model from
labelled sensor data, Viola is able to verify an online streaming source’s conformity based
upon the generated behavioural model. Essentially translating sensor information into
activity representations.
8
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:17==
4
Problem Analysis and Proposal
In Chapters 1, 2, and 3, we see that declarative based modelling languages provide solu­
tions that current imperative languages such as BPMN, Petri­Nets, and DFGs are unable
to handle. Further, as businesses generate more and more data, there becomes an in­
creased demand for data­centric monitoring. Process Mining provides a solution where
businesses are able to break into artifact­centric monitoring without inital specalist knowl­
edge into the E­GSM domain. However, with limited conversion tools, the barrier for
entry becomes higher. As such, in this chapter we provide a set of research questions
with these problems in mind. Following that, we outline the methodology taken to carry
out this project.
4.1
Research Questions
RQ1: Can E­GSM process models be accurately discovered by using process mining
techniques from log data.
RQ1.1: Starting from a labelled offline training dataset, will the approach be able to con­
struct an E­GSM model.
RQ1.2: Is the resulting E­GSM model able to identify activities from an unlabelled stream­
ing source.
RQ2: To what extent can process models represented in Business Process Modelling No­
tation (BPMN), Petri­net notation, and direct­follower graphs serve as an effective medium
from the conversion of raw data to E­GSM models.
4.2
Methodology
The overall timeline of this project was defined at the beginning of this project in the form of
gantt chart A.1. This outlined when sections of the project were expected to be completed
by, the first half would be dominated by the literature review, problem analysis and solution,
whilst the second half would be occupied by development, and evaluation of upon the
problem solution. On top of this, for a month in the second half would be spent at Novasun
in South Africa, for the purpose of data gathering so that evaluation could occur on real
world data.
4.2.1
Research
The approach for research in this project was primarily conducted using key­word based
searches upon DTU’s own academic search engine. Whilst other search engines were
used, DTU’s was the first point of entry for most. On top of this we were able to snowball by
looking through the citations of relevant academic papers that otherwise could have been
missed. Whilst not all paper researched during the first half of the projects period proved
useful, they were evaluated not just upon their title, upon inspection of their abstract and
conclusive results. A comprehensive list of sources was kept, and a note attached on why
the paper was useful, and what could and could not be achieved using it as a source.
4.2.2
Evaluation
For the evaluation, we used a quantitative research method in order to evaluate the imple­
mentation of the proposed algorithm, and other solutions found in literature. The training
and testing data sets would be the same for all solutions, and multiple data­sets, including
a real world collected one, would be used to evaluate these solutions.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
9
==PAGE:18==
4.2.3
Collaboration
Regular meetings were held between the Thesis student and a supervisor, initially being
fortnightly, and then moving to becoming weekly as the project progressed. Meetings were
still held whilst the student was abroad at the collaborative company and there the Student
would have multiple meetings a week with numerous staff members to discuss various
aspects of the data collection process. Meetings were structured as a Q&A dialogue, with
the thesis student presenting work completed between meetings.
10
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:19==
5
Data Collection
For the creation of a real­life data­set there were a few functional requirements in order
to be able to ensure data consistency between solutions and to adhere best practices, as
well as accommodating for how data needed to be collected at Novasun. The eXtensible
Event Stream (XES) format, is a tag­based language under the XES specification that is
used for the defining and capture of event logs. It’s extensible methodology and unification
of event logs means that it is a popular choice for process designers, and data scientists
of storing offline event logs. As such there are many connectors for various languages all
held to the standard to ensure data consistency. Since the time spent collecting the data
also had to be accompanied with project work, acquiring a data­set as soon as possible
was most preferable. Since time was also spent understanding the information system at
the associate company, rapid development of a tool was required here. Finally, as Nova­
sun lacked a centralised information or enterprise resource planning system, and instead
relied on a well structured internet accessible storage through Microsoft Sharepoint. For
keeping track of every single documented process, a custom connector would need to be
created in order to gather the data. As such, the tool proposed, was a small python web­
server running Flask [13], collecting data from a web­hook and appending into a CSV,
was finally converted into a compressed XES file. On top of this another Python script
was created to cast back to a point in time, and collect file updates on the share point up
until the program has been run.
A webhook was chosen primarily to receive live event data throughout the work day as
individuals created and uploaded reports to the shared drive. The creation of the webhook
as seen in 5.1, initates a subscription with Microsoft Graph until a specified time as stated
in ’expiratedDateTime’. On top of this it requires what kind of change is happening, such
as ’updated’ for when a file is updated or uploaded, and most importantly, the url in which
Microsoft Graph will send notifications towards for the event data stream. With this request
sent, the server only needs to reply back to the url with a ’200’ request ’ok’ in order to finish
the subscription creation handshake.
1
post https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/subscriptions
2
content -type: application/json
3
4
{
5
"changetype": "updated",
6
"notificationurl": "https://webhook.localhostingclient.net",
7
"resource": "/site/SITEID/drive/root",
8
"expirationdatetime":"2023-07-01t12:00:00.0000000z",
9
"clientstate": "secretclientvalue",
10
"latestsupportedtlsversion": "v1_2"
11
}
Listing 5.1: example webhook request
The event data received back as seen in 5.2, does not include any revealing information
about the drive item that the event is about other than its id. After receiving this notification,
the server notes down the time received, and in another thread sends out a driveItem delta
request as to understand what update has happened to the driveItem. Only the creation
of documents are noted down as this generally signifies the ending of a process within the
business. Since the Sharepoint shared drive is well structured into a large set of folders
named after their appropriate process, then further segmented by month, and finally the
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
11
==PAGE:20==
uploaded documents name corresponds to the day of upload. As such to correspond
the drive item to the given process, grabbing the process folder name was all that was
necessary.
1
{
2
"value": [
3
{
4
"id": "lsgTZMr9KwAAA",
5
"subscriptionId":"{subscription_guid}",
6
"subscriptionExpirationDateTime":"2016-03-19T22:11:09.952Z",
7
"clientState":"secretClientValue",
8
"changeType":"updated",
9
"resource":"/site/SITEID/drive/root/",
10
"tenantId": "84bd8158 -6d4d-4958-8b9f-9d6445542f95",
11
"resourceData":
12
{
13
"@odata.type":"#Microsoft.Graph.DataItem",
14
"@odata.id":"RANDOMID",
15
}
16
}
17
]
18
}
Listing 5.2: example webhook request
Finally, the dataset as a CSV was given one last run through before transformation into
XES, where process names were replaced with anonymized names in order to obfuscate
the full business process as requested by Novasun.
12
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:21==
6
Converting Petri Nets to E­GSM
In the following chapter, we will be covering the process of converting Petri Nets into E­
GSM. First we will discuss what limitations were placed in order to ensure consistent and
correct results. In the second section, we discuss the use of a derived tree from the Petri
Net that will ease the conversion process. Next in the third section, we cover the rules
and pseudo­code for the conversion process. In the final section, we go over the function
implementation of the conversion.
6.1
Limitations
Since there are no real limitations to how Petri Nets are formed, the formulation of expres­
sions that are dependent on the succession and predecessors of event activities would
prove to be an overwhelming initial task. As such, by limiting the source Petri Net by
certain factors, we are able to gradually lift limitations after having formulated rules and
solutions to the limited Petri Net. Continuing with this, our first limitation upon our source
Petri Net, is that it must conform with that of a Workflow Net.
A Workflow Net, is a Petri Net, that has a singular start place that has no previous transi­
tions, and a singular end place with no succeeding transitions [14]. We have limited our
input into Workflow Nets because of their nature of having a start and end place closely
matches that with how business processes are often discovered or modelled. Whilst this
is a limitation, this occurred naturally as discovered and modelled processes with regards
to business requirements and event log data almost always had a singular start, and end
place.
On top of this, we limit the Petri Nets to be block structured. This is defined as every
exclusive or parallel split within the net, is matched by a corresponding exclusive or parallel
merge. This limitation links back to the Workflow Net, especially regarding of whether or
not it is sound. A Workflow Net is considered sound if for every token placed in the start
place i, eventually after any number of transitions or activities, there will exist a token in the
end place o, and there exists no other token in any other place [14]. The block structure
aspect of the source Petri Net, will in turn allows us to compute expression evaluations
with greater ease later on.
Finally, the last limitation for the source Petri Nets, is that there should not exist any loop
with a length greater than size one. This means that transitions which point to themselves
through a τ­transition are allowed, but any other loops are not.
6.2
Enhancement with Workflow Trees
Whilst the limitations above do prevent the conversion of any Petri Net, they do in fact
allow for the generation of a process tree, the Workflow Tree (WF­Tree), which gives
structural information about the source Petri Net. This information enhancing can then be
used during the conversion process, and for conformity checking [15]. Since the WF­Tree
is an already enhanced version of the refined process structure tree (RPST), we will look
at that next.
6.2.1
Refined Process Structure Tree
The refined process structure tree (RPST), is a method for enhancing the information of a
Petri Net into an annotated workflow graph. First lets explore the definition of a workflow
graph
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 6.1: A petri net coloured to match its corresponding RPST
14
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:23==
Figure 6.2: A RPST colored to match its corresponding petri net
Definition 1 Workflow Graph. Given a Petri Net PN = (P, T, A) where they respectively
represent it’s places, transitions, and arcs. Then we can define the workflow graph as
a directed graph DG = (V, E), where places, and transitions have become vertices, i.e.
V = P ∪T, and E = A.
Next lets assume that: G is a WF­net, and GS = (VS, S) is a connected sub­graph of G
formed by a set of edges S and the vertices VS induced by S.
Definition 2 Subnet Nodes. Given a set of edges S ⊆E, is a Single­Exit­Single­Entry
(SESE) of a graph G = (V, E) if and only if, GS has exactly two boundary nodes: an entry
and an exit. A set of edges SESE is considered trivial if it is only composed of a single
edge, and a given SESE S of G is cacnonical only if it does not overlap with any other
SESE of G. Either the SESE S is nested i.e. S′ ⊆S or S ⊆S′, or they are entire disjointed
i.e. S ∩S′ = ∅. A SESE is considered a polygon if it contains other SESEs such that the
exit of Si is the entry to Si+1. Finally, a SESE is considered a bond if it contains a subset
of SESE’s such that they share a split pair.
Finally, the definition of the RPST:
Definition 3 RPST. Given G is the workflow graph of an input WF­net. The RPST of G
is a tree consisting of all canonical SESEs belonging to G, that the parent of SESE S, S′,
is the smallest SESE that contains S. Given this, the root of the RPST is a fragment that
contains the entire graph.
Summing this up, the RPST introduces Single­Entry­Single­Exit branches into a tree struc­
ture. Using this information it becomes trivial to ascertain information about an entire
branch e.g. The other transitions within that branch, within the knowledge space of a
single transition without having to traverse preceding or succeeding arcs, places, and
transitions.
6.2.2
Workflow Tree
Now that we have the RPST defined, we can look at defining the workflow tree (WF­Tree).
The WF­Tree takes the RPST and elevates it further by annotating fragments with refined
behavioural information. Since bonds and polygons closely relate to routing concepts, we
are able to annotate these fragments or branches with said behaviour characteristics [15].
Definitions 4 WF­Tree. Let (N, Mi) be a sound free­choice WF­Net. It’s corresponding
RPST is as follows: TN = (Ω, χ, t, b)
• Ωis a set of all fragments of N.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
15
==PAGE:24==
• χ : ω →P(Ω) is a function that assigns to a fragment its child fragments.
• t : Ω→{T, P, B, R} is a function that assigns a type to a fragment
• b : ΩB →{B◦, B⋄, L}, ΩB = {ω ∈Ω| t(ω) = B} is a function associates a bond
fragment a behaviour characteristic or refined type. B◦, B⋄, L refer to the different
characteristics: place bordered, transition bordered, and loop boarded.
Now we have a refined type attached to fragments that gives us more information about it
given that it is already of type bond. The types are: place bordered, transition bordered,
and loop bordered. The first, is as is described, indicates a split from a given place into two
or more sub­fragments. This can and later will be considered as an exclusive branch as an
activation of any one of the transitions will remove the token from the branch head before
any other transitions can use it. Next, transition bordered, also as described indicates that
a transition has multiple arcs leading to two or more places. We consider this a parallel
branch, as activation of the transition will leave tokens in all outgoing places, leading to
multiple active sub­branches. Lastly, is the loop boarded fragment, this indicates that
whilst there inherently exists a path from the entry to the exit of the fragment, there also
exists a path from the exit back to the entry.
The produced WF­Tree compliments the source Petri Net in the aspect that it allows ac­
cess to structural information that would otherwise would have to have been computed
regardless, possibly multiple times due to how the translation rules could resulted. In­
stead, the WF­Tree cuts back on unnecessary computation and helps further simplify
algorithm design by providing a low access cost structural information model.
6.3
Translation Rules
– One atomic stage. S_run is used to record the atomic run of transition T.
– One parent stage. The parent stage S, which contains the sub stage S_run, is
used to check T’s conformity in regards to the desired order of execution
– One DFG (data flow guard). Is attached to S. On event e′, S.DFG is evaluated
against the expected transition T. For example, Stage A, which expects event ea,
will open once event ea has occurred.
– One DFG (data flow guard). Is attached to S_run. The S_run.DFG, is a duplica­
tion of S.DFG.
– One milestone. Is attached to S_run. Since S_run is used to identify that a process
has occurred (Transition T has happened). It’s milestone, S_run.M, is also the
occurrence of the expected event e.
– One milestone. Is attached to S. The pseudo­code for determining the milestone
expression is expressed below.
– One PFG (process flow guard). Is attached to S. The pseudo­code for determining
the process flow guard expression is expressed below.
– One Event added to the event model. The event corresponds to the occurrence of
transition T.
– One Event added to the information model. The event corresponds to the occur­
rence of transition T, and for the information model specifies any extra artifact data
that is attached to the event.
16
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:25==
S
(a) A single Transition labelled S
S
S_run
D
P
D
DFG
PFG
M
M
(b) A Stage labelled S, with a sub stage labelled
S_run
Determining the expression for a milestone as seen in algorithm 1 is as follows: Given the
current transition being inspected, the next non τ­transitions are collected. If there is only
one transition next, the expression is simple: The stage S, milestones on the activity of
Stage Ssucc. Otherwise if there exists no following transitions; the Stage S then milestones
on when it’s atomic sub stage Srun has milestoned, as this stage is the last stage before
the end place. Otherwise, if there exists more than one next transition, and the current
transition’s highest WF­Tree fragment has a refined type of ’Transition Bordered’, we know
that this is a parallel branch. For this we will add the pair, higher branch first, and then the
current branch into a list for dealing with later as these pairs will need to inherit from the
branch below. Otherwise, we can expect an exclusive branching next. First we check if the
current transition loops back to itself and other transitions and deal with that expression.
Then we generate an exclusive branch expression for all the remaining transitions, as is
exclusive is delimited by an ’or’ expression.
Next, we are dealing with those unresolved transitions that are the entry point to a parallel
branch as shown in algorithm 2. First we join up all pairs into longer chains from the
list of pairs if they are able to be joined. Then iterating through the different chains we
maintain a dictionary of used transitions and their expression outcome. Starting from the
last chain, or the furthest transition bordered branch down the WF­Tree, we collect the
transitions for each child branch of that branch, removing it’s entry and exit transitions from
the list, if there exists any overlap between the used dictionary and the list of transitions,
we remove them and add their pre­generated expression to our expression extension.
With the remaining transitions, they are collected into a milestone achieved expression
separated by ’or’s and the extended expression is then also added and separated by an
’or’. This expression is then added to a list for the transitioned bordered branch, where
all child branch outputs are collected and joined with an ’and’.
Finally all the unique transitions that were used for the transitioned bordered branch are
collected, alongside the final expression and added to the used dictionary. As the algo­
rithm reaches higher into the WF­Tree, each bordered­transition branch, will rather than
act upon transitions that are subsetted by a child transition bordered branch, will just in­
herit the saved expression instead, which allows for maintaining lower branch parallel
expression logic, that otherwise would be lost if the transition acted without regard to it’s
below and above transition bordered branches.
For processing flow guards, as seen in algorithm 3, first the previous transitions from the
current transition is gathered. If there only exists one transition in this list, we first check
if that transition is itself, because it might be a length one loop. If this is the case, we
remove the transition from the list, and search branches that the transition is part of all the
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
17
==PAGE:26==
Algorithm 1 Pseudo­code for determining milestone
Require: n ←next_transitions
▷Is a list of the next transitions
Require: c is current_transition
Ensure: d ←empty list
N ←n
if len(N) = 1 then
milestone is next transitions activity
else if length(N) = 0 then
milestone is t_run has milestoned
else
h ←highest_branch(c)
if b(h) is Transition Bordered then
▷Check h’s branch type
if Parallel branch exists above h then
add ( parent branch, branch ) to d ▷Adds to chained list of parallel branches
else
▷Exclusive Branch
e ←empty list
if current transition in N, remove and add milestone achieved expression to
e
generate stage active expression based on N with ’or’ between and add to e
join all in e with ’or’ into an expression
generate PFG using expression and add to stage
end if
end if
end if
way to the root branch in the WF­Tree. If there exists a fragment that is an entry to any of
these branches and is not a τ­transition, we can grab the lowest level branch with a valid
transition and designate that as the active stage expression for the PFG. Otherwise, we
can expect that since there is no previous transition, this transition has a path directly to
the start place. For this we apply the initial placement PFG rule that no other transition
should be active before this transition opens. This rule is added, and if transition also
self looped, that rule is appended to the initial placement rule and a PFG is created and
attached to the stage. If the exists no previous transition, we simply apply the initial PFG
expression rule to the PFG, and add the PFG to the stage.
If there is more than one previous transition, we then determine how many previous places
precede the current transition. If it is more than 1, we know that this is a parallel synchro­
nization. For this we collect all groups of transitions that are previous to those places.
Create an active stage expression between all of them joined by ’or’s. Then for all the
groups of transitions for those places, we join those expressions together with ’and’s.
The ’or’s between transitions for places covers for the fact that those places might have
exclusive merges. Whilst, the ’and’s between groups of transitions belonging to the pre­
vious place’s is the actual parallel synchronization. Otherwise, if there only exists one
place proceeding the current transition, we check if the current transition loops into itself,
and remove from that previous transition list if so, whilst storing the appropriate self loop
expression for later joining. Then based on all the previous transitions, an stage active
expression is created for each one, and joined by ’or’s. Finally, if there is an expres­
sion stored, join that with the previous expression via an ’or’ and create a PFG with the
resultant expression, and add that to the transition’s stage.
18
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:27==
Algorithm 2 Pseudo­code for resolving parallel nested milestones
Require: d ←list of branch pairs
chains ←unpack list into chains
▷e.g. (A,B),(B,C),(D,E) →(A,B,C),(D,E)
for all list ∈chains do
used ←empty dictionary
for all frag ∈reversed(list) do
expressions ←empty list
for all subbranch ∈frag.children do
t ←gather transitions from subbranch
remove subbranch.entry, subbranch.exit from t
if t ∩used ̸= ∅then
remove visited transitions from used from t
get visited transitions stored expression from used
end if
generate expression based on t using ’or’
if stored expression exists then
join generated expression and stored expression using ’or’
end if
append expression to expressions
end for
final ←Join all expressions in expressions using ’and’
add transitions into used with final
grab milestone using frag
create milestone condition using final
add condition to milestone
end for
end for
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
19
==PAGE:28==
Algorithm 3 Pseudo­code for process flow guards
Require: current ←current transitions
prev_t ←list of previous transitions
if length(prev_t) = 1 then
e ←empty list
if current ∈prev_t then
add milestone achieved expression to e for own sub­stage
remove current from prev
end if
if length(prev_t) = 0 then
check if belonging to any fragments whose entry is a non τ­transition
if entry does not exist then
▷There exists a τ path back to start
generate stage active expression for initial activities and add to e
join all expressions in e with ’or’
generate PFG with expression and add to stage
else
grab entry from lowest level branch with a transition and generate stage active
expression from that transition
generate PFG with expression and add to stage
end if
else
generate stage active expression PFG based upon only transition in prev_t
generate PFG with expression and add to stage
end if
else if length(prev_t) = 0 then
generation stage active expression based for initial activity
generate PFG with expression and add to stage
else
prev_p ←previous places
if length(prev_p) > 1 then
▷Parallel synchronization
t ←empty list
for all place ∈prev_p do
add previous transitions of place to t as a list
end for
e ←empty list
for all group ∈t do
generate active stage expression for all in group separated by ’or’s
add whole expression to e
end for
join all expressions in e with ’and’s
generate pfg with expression and add to stage
else
▷Exclusive merge
e ←empty list
if current ∈prev_t then
add milestone achieved expression to e for own sub­stage
remove current from prev_t
end if
generate stage active expression based on prev_t separated by ’or’
join the expression with any expression in e by an ’or’
generate PFG using expression and add to stage
end if
end if
20
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:29==
7
Solution
To answer RQ1 and its sub­question: RQ1.1 and RQ1.2, we must first construct a system
that is able to, given a, specifically, offline training dataset, produce an E­GSM model, and
the resultant model is able to identify activities given an unlabelled steaming source.
As previously mentioned in section 3, there currently exists two tools with the capabilities
of producing an E­GSM model from different preexisting process models. One which uses
BPMN models [6], and one which uses DFG models [10].
In this section we will discuss how utilised these tools, and the algorithm discussed in the
previous section. Then connected them to process mining utilities in order to provide a
full, from raw logs to E­GSM model.
7.1
Process Mining
First and foremost, there are a large variety of process mining tools available for use,
all with similar and different algorithms producing a variety of types of process models
with varying levels of accuracy. Whilst this project does not focus on the effectiveness
of different process mining tools and algorithms and the extent those influence the end
result, we will briefly justify our choice of tool and algorithm. For our process mining tool,
we chose Process Mining 4 Python (PM4PY) [16] over other freely available tools such as
ProM [17] and RapidMiner Studio [18]. This is because of it’s ease­of­use and codebase
being entirely based upon Python. This allowed for rapid development and testing. On
top of this, PM4PY fit the functional requirements of the project: It was able to digest XES
format, able to produce BPMN, DFG, and Petri Net models from given event logs, and
load them from file. In turn also able to write and visualise them as well. Further, the
project is also already in use by one of the available tools: Viola, whose codebase was
also entirely based in Python. Finally, the tools also came as a recommendation from a
project supervisor.
In terms of algorithm choice, we went with inductive mining for BPMN and Petri Net mod­
els, in order to keep consistency between them, and frequency information mining for
DFG models. This was also a limitation from PM4PY, whereas Petri Nets are able to be
discovered using a variety of algorithms, as of implementation, BPMN models are only
able to be discovered through the induction algorithm. However, it will be noted that the
inductive algorithm favours creating invisible transitions, or larger number of gateways, in
for it to achieve what it believes is the correct process model.
From here, using PM4PY, the dataset that was described in section 5, that has been prop­
erly anonymised and cleaned of any identifiable data, is read into a pandas [19] dataframe
as an event stream. This is the standard python data type used with the process mining
algorithms. First however, since a requirement of the project is to use both a training set
and testing set, we used Scikit­learn [20], to split the dataset into an 80% training and
20% testing split. The training set is then used with the chosen algorithms to generate the
respective intermediary models. Both datasets are saved to drive for repeated testing,
and later the testing set can be streamed to check the conformance of the final E­GSM
models.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
21
==PAGE:30==
7.2
Business Process Modelling Notation
Alongside SMARTifact, the E­GSM based monitoring platform [1], Meroni introduces ’BPMN2EGSM’,
a plugin for converting BPMN models into E­GSM models. The project is java based and is
heavily incorporated into the eclipse ecosystem. For use alongside the proposed solution,
the java files can be compiled into a ’.jar’ file. From here, as long as the correct version of
Java is installed, plugin can be used in various environments, and even be called invoked
by other programming languages mimicking command­line such as Python’s subprocess
module. From here, it is easily accessible to simple supply the provided ’.jar’ with an input,
and to capture the output folder, the resultant E­GSM , and information model.
Let it be of note that, the ’.jar’ tool also requires the various ’ecore’ files. These files are
metamodels, that EMF, and ATL, two frameworks used by the plugin. To verify, decom­
pose, and reassemble the given input into a valid output. Further, the since due to the
provided ecores, the tool outputs the E­GSM model first as an ’XMI’, an interchangeable
format. From here, using another provided schema: an ’XSD’, which is ’XML’s schema
definition for use on ’XML’ based files, the output ’XMI’ is finally transformed into an ’XML’
file, for use with SMARTifact.
7.3
Directly Follow Graphs
Viola [2], provides a range of tools for process discovery, conformance checking, and
even process mining. However since this has been already covered it wont be used
here, although it is largely the same. The main aspect that Viola provides is tooling for
generating an E­GSM model from a DFG model.
Conveniently provided as a single Python script, the algorithm for the conversion can be
easily run via command line, or adapter into a Python workflow for further automation. The
algorithm, rather than export into an interchangeable ’XMI’ format, directly manipulates an
XML tree whilst recursively applying rules, as it iterates through all activities defined within
the graph.
7.4
Petri Nets
For the Petri Net tooling, Python was chosen as it’s rapid development style, debugging
capabilities, and wide range of connectors, modules, and libraries available by and for the
Python community resulted it in it being the favourable choice. Due to this, Python was
chosen over ATL, and other languages such as Java. ATL was initially the intended lan­
guage that would be used for the conversion process. However, during development this
had changed due to the shortcomings of the language. Due to its incorporated ecosys­
tem with EMF, and Eclipse­like offerings, setting up the development environment be­
came problematic, where minor version changes in any number of dependencies such as
ECORE versions, Eclipse Editor Versions, and Java versions could affect the outcome.
Whilst ATL’s declarative style of creating rules, and the entire language’s purpose of model
conversion makes it the ideal candidate for this tool, it proved to be far too cumbersome.
The Petri Net tooling, titled ’PNML2EGSM’, can be broken down into various modules.
First before the conversion process itself. PNML2EGSM incorporates The E­GSM model
into an object orientated manner. With the module ’EGSM’, heavily based upon the E­
GSM ECORE file used by BPMN2EGSM as seen in figure 7.1, allows complete control
over every aspect of the full E­GSM model. On top of this, the model can recursively
generate it’s own ’XMI’ tree due to the parent and child relationships between objects.
Specifying the DocumentRoot to parse to XMI, given the model has been filled out with
22
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:31==
the desired components, will render a correctly attributed, formatted, and E­GSM ’XMI’
model.
Figure 7.1: The ECORE metamodel for E­GSM visualised in Eclipse
The conversion module itself is a function that takes as input: The Petri Net, and its start
and end places, and the WF­Tree. From here the conversion iterates over the transi­
tions of the Petri Net, and following the algorithms described in section 6, results in a
well connected E­GSM object. Further modification of individual components can still be
made even after the process if need be, such as the nested parallel branching algorithm.
Alongside the E­GSM, the information model is also generated and populated with the
appropriate event information. Once the conversion is finished, both the E­GSM Docu­
mentRoot and the external information model are passed back to the main program. From
here, using the same ’XSD’ file in BPMN2EGSM, the DocumentRoot is rendered out into
XMI, and then converted into XML appropriate for SMARTifact.
7.4.1
WF­Trees
For WF­Trees, the JBPT library [21] has been used as it has the fully implemented object
structure, necessary algorithms, and is supported by the author of WF­Trees. However,
since this tooling is only available as a Java library, a short Java program needed to be
created in order to process the Petri Net into a WF­Tree and pass back the information.
The library allowed for this easily, and the resulting program, just like the BPMN2EGSM
plugin, can be turned into a ’.jar’ file and incorporated into the Python workflow. Since
the creation of a sound, and correct library for WF­Trees in python is outside the scope
of this project, the Java program ends up passing derived data from the WF­Tree directly
into Python through the form of a CSV output, allowing the program to make use of the
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
23
==PAGE:32==
derived information rather than having to reconstruct the WF­Tree itself.
7.5
Transformations
Given that the tooling is now in place, we can derive some E­GSM models from event
data. Starting off with an initally smaller dataset. Such as the one from the BPI challenge
2013, focusing on Volvo IT incident and problem management [22]. We can mine the
event logs into a BPMN model, as seen in figure 7.2, a DFG, as seen in figure 7.3, and
finally into a Petri­Net, as seen in 7.4. Here, as noted earlier, the inductive algorithm has
created a large number of τ­transitions for the Petri Net, and Gateways for the BPMN
Model.
Figure 7.2: The result of inductive mining to BPMN model
Figure 7.3: The result of frequency mining to a DFG
From here, each respective graph is transformed into an E­GSM model, and the visual
representation as shown in SMARTifact is as follows for BPMN, in figure 7.5, DFG in figure
7.6, and the Petri Net, in figure 7.7.
Looking at these diagrams, it is insurmountably obvious that the BPMN conversion chooses
not to ignore or skip past gateways when no activities can be found in them, and as such
24
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:33==
Figure 7.4: The result of inductive mining into a Petri Net
Figure 7.5: The E­GSM model derived from the BPMN diagram
every gateway is then converted into a Stage. Unlike the Petri Net conversion which
by design is ignoring τ­transitions and correlates the normal transitions instead. Another
point of interest is how similar the DFG and Petri Net conversions are. The only difference
being a singular stage contains the other 4 stages and their DFGs, as sub stages and its
own DFGs. Regardless from here we can see that process conversion for BPMN, DFG,
and Petri Nets into E­GSM is successful. Thereby satisfying our research questions RQ1
and RQ1.1.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 7.6: The E­GSM model derived from the DFG
Figure 7.7: The E­GSM model derived from the Petri Net
26
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:35==
8
Comparison and Evaluation
Prior to this chapter, we have explored the theory behind the process conversion of Petri
Nets, the current available tools for process conversion methods using different interme­
diaries, how all of these solutions have been implemented, and seen that they provide
us an E­GSM model in which we are able to operate. In this chapter, we will evaluate
the terms in which we will evaluate our models, and how these models inevitably match
against each other. This comparison and evaluation will be used to answer research
questions RQ1.2 and RQ2
For this evaluation, we will be using the real­world dataset that was gathered in collabora­
tion with Novasun. The event log is large and represents a realistic event input. However,
as no process aware information system existed at the company, and no manually defined
process model, the entire event log is unlabelled and it is not possible to know if events
are deviant or not. As such, all events are treated as positive occurrences. On top of this,
we will use a publicly available dataset that is smaller in size [22], the generated models
for this we’re used for explorative purposes in chapter 7.
Since testing the E­GSM process models on a dataset which is also used to generated
them, could lead to inflated conformance results, therefore the dataset is split between
an 80% training set, and a 20% testing set. The testing set is randomly pulled from the
dataset in an attempt to conserve the overall process flow. The testing set will be the
provided streaming data, sent to check model conformance. However, it is taken into
consideration that due to the unlabelled nature of these logs, it is unknown if the testing
set’s workflow will adhere to the workflow given by it’s accompanying training set.
8.1
Criteria
For assessing the models, we will observe when activities occur ’onTime’ or ’outOfOrder’.
Given the onTime, and outOfOrder activity counts, we will be able to calculate the confor­
mance rating of the model. Taking into consideration the datasets used here, their unique
activity count related to the total number of events in the logs mean that the observation
of their True Positive and False Positive score would be meaningless as all models would
recognise all positive activities.
8.2
Considerations
When generating BPMN into an E­GSM model using the BPMN2EGSM plugin, and with
the DFG2EGSM tool, they automatically create both a start and end event for given tasks.
This doubles the number of total activities that the model would expect. In order to keep
the resulting values more in like with the actual event count given by the dataset, the start
and end events supplied to the BPMN derived model, will only count towards one total
event, since the tool used for verification sends one right after the other.
8.3
Results
8.3.1
Synthetic results
The results of the conformance checking are available in table 8.1. As noticed within the
table, the models derived from a DFG, and Petri Net provide a full conformancy. However,
it is seen that the model dervied from BPMN, achieves only a conformance score of 0.137.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
27
==PAGE:36==
BPMN
DFG
Petri Net
OnTime
116
845
845
outOfOrder
729
0
0
Total
845
845
845
Conformance
0.137
1
1
Table 8.1: The conformance score of the generated models using synthetic data
BPMN
DFG
Petri Net
OnTime
12882
80530
80530
outOfOrder
67648
0
0
Total
80530
80530
80530
Conformance
0.160
1
1
Table 8.2: The conformance score of the generated models using real world data
8.3.2
Real World results
Looking at the table 8.2, shows very similar results to the synthetic event log. Again the
models derived from a DFG, and a Petri Net, have a conformance score of 1, whereas the
model generated from a BPMN model provides a score on the other end of the spectrum
at 0.160.
8.4
Discussion
Both sets of results showed almost identical returns. Whilst it is promising that both mod­
els generated from DFGs and Petri Nets show perfect conformity. It must be taken into
account that both Event logs had a low number of unique activities compared to the logs
total length, allowing for a greater certainty upon these activities. Another thing taken
into account, is when looking at the generated intermediary models, as seen in chapter
7, is that all events can be observed as occurring only by themselves without any con­
nection to the remainder activites. This is done through the possible paths through the
gateways on the BPMN model, the τ­transitions on the Petri Net, and how every activity
in the DFG connects to both the start and end positions. Looking at these it now seems
obvious as to why these models are able to achieve a perfect conformity rating. Although
bearing in mind that for the E­GSM model generated from the BPMN model is incredibly
complex for what the other two generated models have in turn generated. Seemingly a
reason that could be attributed to the BPMN model intermediary is in fact a poor match
up made between the process mining algorithm: inductive mining. Known for favouring
these gateways and invisible transitions, unnecessarily complicating the BPMN2EGSM
algorithm.
Regardless, looking back to our research questions. It can be positively replied to RQ1.2,
that all models tested have been able to identify activities from an unlabelled streaming
source. With respect to RQ2, with more regards leaning towards using DFGs and Petri
Nets as intermediaries, that indeed they can serve as an effective medium, providing
uncomplicated and clear E­GSM models allowing for the ingestion of raw data. Whilst
BPMN, through our results was quite an ineffective model, it should be taken into consid­
eration that this is impart due to the process mining method for getting the BPMN model,
as it is shown in [1] that the conversion of well structured and designed BPMN models
lead to clear and effective E­GSM models.
28
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:37==
9
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to generate E­GSM process models from raw event logs using
various intermediary formats such as a BPMN model, a DFG, and also introduced in this
thesis, a Petri Net. Then we introduced formal logic for converting from Petri Net Modelling
Language into an E­GSM model. From there we discussed the implementation and the
process of achieving full flowing offline event logs into E­GSM through the aforementioned
tools. On top of this a real world event log was collected from a collaborating company,
and using that and a synthetic event log obtained during the research part of this project.
For the empirical evaluation of this project, taking the synthetic and real world data sets,
we streamed testing events against the E­GSM engine for each model generated, and
collected results in order to quantify how effective the model was at conformance check­
ing. This showed that whilst the intermediaries: DFGs, and Petri Nets, are effective for
use when they are process mined, the limitations of the data sets prevented further anal­
ysis into analysing if the well conforming models are not too allowing. Also that the other
intermediary: BPMN, does not conform well and produce an effective E­GSM model when
process mined from event logs.
With regards to our research questions proposed in chapter 4. For RQ1: we constructed
a method that generates a given intermediary model, and transforms that model into the
final E­GSM process model. For RQ1.1: Just like how we approached RQ1, our event
log was an activity labelled offline training dataset. With regards to RQ1.2: we used a
verification tool to provide a streaming source to SMARTifact where our generated E­
GSM models were able to accurately identify the incoming activities. Finally, for RQ2,
we tested all the generated E­GSM models against two datasets: A syntheticly created
one, and one dervied from a real world source. Analysing the results here showed to us
that, for some instances, there are where intermediary models can effectively serve as a
medium, allowing for high conforming E­GSM model.
The GitHub repository containing all the implementation used in this thesis can be ob­
tained at https://github.com/XrayNerd/PNML2EGSM.
9.1
Future work
For further work on this, it would be a great opportunity to explore the various different
available process mining algorithms available when converting from raw sensor logs into
BPMN, Petri Nets, and DFGs. As was clearly seen, the inductive miner, provided a mixed
level of results. Further to this would be conversion from well defined and human made
intermediary models. Allowing for a range of these approaches could allow for a better
level of understanding for when to use which approach when wanting to convert to E­GSM.
Even further work, we would like to improve the quality of the datasets chosen. Ideally, a
labelled dataset would allow us to identify the precision and recall of the various models
against varying level of incorrect datasets, moving for more well defined form of confor­
mity. Rather than us only having conformity as a value to determine the effectiveness of
the models.
Further, the formalisation of the translation rules from Petri Net to E­GSM, having a better
defined proof that allows us to prove it’s correctness.
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Meroni, C. Di Ciccio, and J. Mendling. “Artifact­driven process monitoring: Dy­
namically binding real­world objects to running processes”. English. In: vol. 1848.
ISSN: 1613­0073. 2017, pp. 105–112.
[2]
G. Di Federico, G. Meroni, and A. Burattin. “Viola: Detecting Violations of Behaviours
from Streams of Sensor Data”. Has been submitted but is currently unpublished.
[3]
Giovanni Meroni. “E­GSM: An Artifact­Centric Language for Process Monitoring”.
In: Artifact­Driven Business Process Monitoring: A Novel Approach to Transpar­
ently Monitor Business Processes, Supported by Methods, Tools, and Real­World
Applications. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 45–60. ISBN: 978­
3­030­32412­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-32412-4_4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-32412-4_4.
[4]
W.M.P. Van Der Aalst. “Process mining: spreadsheet­like technology for processes”.
English. In: Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik, MKWI 2016, 9­11 Marz 2016, Il­
menau, Germany. Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik, MKWI 2016 ­ Multi­Conference
on Information Systems, MKWI 2016 ; Conference date: 09­03­2016 Through 11­
03­2016. Universitatsverlag Ilmenau, 2016, pp. 23–26.
[5]
Wil Van Der Aalst. Process Mining. en. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2016. ISBN:
978­3­662­49850­7 978­3­662­49851­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4 (visited on 04/04/2023).
[6]
About the Business Process Model And Notation Specification Version 2.0. URL:
https://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/ (visited on 04/16/2023).
[7]
What is the BPMN 2.0 Standard? en­US. URL: https://www.processmaker.com/
blog/what-is-the-bpmn-2-0-standard/ (visited on 04/20/2023).
[8]
L. M. Hillah et al. “A primer on the Petri Net Markup Language and ISO/IEC 15909­
2”. English. In: Petri Net Newsletter 76 (2009). This article was also published at the
Tenth Workshop and Tutorial on Practical Use of Coloured Petri Nets and CPN Tools
(CPN ’09), Århus, Denmark, Oct. 2009, pp. 101­120, pp. 9–28. ISSN: 0391­1804.
[9]
Gustavo Callou et al. “A Petri Net­Based Approach to the Quantification of Data
Center Dependability”. In: Aug. 2012, pp. 313–336. ISBN: 978­953­51­0700­2. DOI:
10.5772/47829.
[10]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “A practitioner’s guide to process mining: Limitations of
the directly­follows graph”. en. In: Procedia Computer Science. CENTERIS 2019
­ International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN 2019 ­
International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist 2019 ­ International Con­
ference on Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies, CEN­
TERIS/ProjMAN/HCist 2019 164 (Jan. 2019), pp. 321–328. ISSN: 1877­0509. DOI:
10.1016/j.procs.2019.12.189. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1877050919322367 (visited on 07/20/2023).
[11]
Frédéric Jouault and Ivan Kurtev. “Transforming Models with ATL”. In: Satellite
Events at the MoDELS 2005 Conference. Ed. by Jean­Michel Bruel. Berlin, Heidel­
berg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 128–138. ISBN: 978­3­540­31781­4.
[12]
ATL/Concepts ­ Eclipsepedia. URL: https://wiki.eclipse.org/ATL/Concepts (visited
on 04/24/2023).
[13]
pallets/flask: The Python micro framework for building web applications. URL: https:
//github.com/pallets/flask (visited on 06/07/2023).
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
31
==PAGE:40==
[14]
Wil Aalst. “Verification of Workflow nets”. In: Jan. 1997, pp. 407–426. ISBN: 3­540­
63139­9.
[15]
Matthias Weidlich et al. “Causal Behavioural Profiles – Efficient Computation, Ap­
plications, and Evaluation”. In: Fundam. Inform. 113 (Jan. 2011), pp. 399–435. DOI:
10.3233/FI-2011-614.
[16]
Alessandro Berti, Sebastiaan J. van Zelst, and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Process
Mining for Python (PM4Py): Bridging the Gap Between Process­ and Data Science”.
In: CoRR abs/1905.06169 (2019). arXiv: 1905.06169. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1905.06169.
[17]
A.J.M.M. Weijters et al. “Process mining with ProM”. English. In: Proceedings of the
19th Belgium­Netherlands Conference on Artificial Intelligence (BNAIC 2007), 5­6
November 2007, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Ed. by M. Dastani and E. Jong, de. 19th
Belgian­Dutch Conference on Artificial Intelligence (BNAIC 2007), BNAIC 2007 ;
Conference date: 05­11­2007 Through 06­11­2007. Netherlands: Utrecht University,
2007.
[18]
RapidMiner | Amplify the Impact of Your People, Expertise & Data. en­US. URL:
https://rapidminer.com/ (visited on 05/15/2023).
[19]
The pandas development team. pandas­dev/pandas: Pandas. Version latest. Feb.
2020. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[20]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit­learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Ma­
chine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[21]
Artem Polyvyanyy and Matthias Weidlich. “Towards a compendium of process tech­
nologies: The jBPT library for process model analysis”. In: Proceedings of the CAiSE’13
Forum at the 25th International Conference on Advanced Information Systems En­
gineering (CAiSE): CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Volume 998. Ed. by H. A. Proper
and R. Deneckere. http://www.ceur­ws.org/: Sun SITE Central Europe, 2013, pp. 106–
113. URL: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/59637/.
[22]
Ward Steeman. BPI Challenge 2013. en. 2014. DOI: 10.4121/UUID:A7CE5C55-
03A7-4583-B855-98B86E1A2B07. URL: https://data.4tu.nl/collections/_/5065448/1.
32
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:41==
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
33
==PAGE:42==
A
Appendix
A.1
Gantt Chart
Figure A.1: Project’s Gantt Chart
34
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:43==
A.2
BPI Challenge 2013 E­GSM models
A.2.1
BPMN
This file is too lenghty and can be requested from the author.
A.2.2
DFG
1
<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
2
<ca:CompositeApplicationType xmlns:ca="http://siena.ibm.com/model/
CompositeApplication" version="2.0" name="Definitions_1_application"><
ca:EventModel id="Definitions_1_eventModel" name="Definitions_1_eventModel
"><ca:Event id="Accepted_s" name="Accepted_s" /><ca:Event id="Accepted_e"
name="Accepted_e" /><ca:Event id="Completed_s" name="Completed_s" /><
ca:Event id="Completed_e" name="Completed_e" /><ca:Event id="Queued_s"
name="Queued_s" /><ca:Event id="Queued_e" name="Queued_e" /><ca:Event id="
Unmatched_s" name="Unmatched_s" /><ca:Event id="Unmatched_e" name="
Unmatched_e" /></ca:EventModel><ca:Component id="Definitions_1"><
ca:InformationModel id="infoModel" rootDataItemId="infoModel"><ca:DataItem
id="infoModel" rootElement="infoModel" schemaUri="data/infoModel.xsd" /><
/ca:InformationModel><ca:GuardedStageModel id="test_GSM" name="Default
Process"><ca:Stage id="process" name="Default Process"><ca:DataFlowGuard
eventIds="Accepted_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Accepted_s)" id="
process_Accepted_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Process Accepted data flow
guard" /><ca:SubStage id="Accepted" name="Accepted"><ca:DataFlowGuard
eventIds="Accepted_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Accepted_s)" id="
Accepted_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Accepted data flow guard" /><
ca:Milestone eventIds="" id="Accepted_m" name="Accepted milestone"><
ca:Condition expression="GSM.isStageActive(Completed) or GSM.isStageActive
(Queued) or GSM.isStageActive(Unmatched)" id="Accepted_m_c" language="JEXL
" name="Accepted milestone condition" /></ca:Milestone><
ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Accepted_pfg" name="Accepted process flow guard"
expression="(not (GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.isStageActive(
Completed) or GSM.isStageActive(Queued) or GSM.isStageActive(Unmatched)))
or (GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.isStageActive(Completed) or GSM.
isStageActive(Queued) or GSM.isStageActive(Unmatched))" /><ca:SubStage id=
"Accepted_run" name="Accepted running"><ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="
Accepted_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Accepted_s)" id="
Accepted_run_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Accepted running data flow guard"
/><ca:Milestone eventIds="Accepted_e" id="Accepted_run_m" name="Accepted
running milestone"><ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Accepted_e)" id="Accepted_run_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Accepted running
milestone condition" /></ca:Milestone></ca:SubStage></ca:SubStage><
ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Completed_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Completed_s)" id="process_Completed_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Process
Completed data flow guard" /><ca:SubStage id="Completed" name="Completed">
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Completed_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Completed_s)" id="Completed_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Completed data flow
guard" /><ca:Milestone eventIds="" id="Completed_m" name="Completed
milestone"><ca:Condition expression="GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.
isStageActive(Queued)" id="Completed_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Completed
milestone condition" /></ca:Milestone><ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="
Completed_pfg" name="Completed process flow guard" expression="(not (GSM.
isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.isStageActive(Completed) or GSM.
isStageActive(Queued) or GSM.isStageActive(Unmatched))) or (GSM.
isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.isStageActive(Completed) or GSM.
isStageActive(Queued) or GSM.isStageActive(Unmatched))" /><ca:SubStage id=
"Completed_run" name="Completed running"><ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="
Completed_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Completed_s)" id="
Completed_run_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Completed running data flow guard
" /><ca:Milestone eventIds="Completed_e" id="Completed_run_m" name="
Completed running milestone"><ca:Condition expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Completed_e)" id="Completed_run_m_c" language="JEXL" name
="Completed running milestone condition" /></ca:Milestone></ca:SubStage></
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
35
==PAGE:44==
ca:SubStage><ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Queued_s" expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Queued_s)" id="process_Queued_dfg" language="JEXL" name="
Process Queued data flow guard" /><ca:SubStage id="Queued" name="Queued"><
ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Queued_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Queued_s)" id="Queued_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Queued data flow guard" /
><ca:Milestone eventIds="" id="Queued_m" name="Queued milestone"><
ca:Condition expression="GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.isStageActive(
Completed) or " id="Queued_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Queued milestone
condition" /></ca:Milestone><ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Queued_pfg" name="
Queued process flow guard" expression="(not (GSM.isStageActive(Accepted)
or GSM.isStageActive(Completed) or GSM.isStageActive(Queued) or GSM.
isStageActive(Unmatched))) or (GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.
isStageActive(Completed) or GSM.isStageActive(Queued) or GSM.isStageActive
(Unmatched))" /><ca:SubStage id="Queued_run" name="Queued running"><
ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Queued_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Queued_s)" id="Queued_run_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Queued running data
flow guard" /><ca:Milestone eventIds="Queued_e" id="Queued_run_m" name="
Queued running milestone"><ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Queued_e)" id="Queued_run_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Queued running
milestone condition" /></ca:Milestone></ca:SubStage></ca:SubStage><
ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Unmatched_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Unmatched_s)" id="process_Unmatched_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Process
Unmatched data flow guard" /><ca:SubStage id="Unmatched" name="Unmatched">
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Unmatched_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Unmatched_s)" id="Unmatched_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Unmatched data flow
guard" /><ca:Milestone eventIds="" id="Unmatched_m" name="Unmatched
milestone"><ca:Condition expression="GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) or GSM.
isStageActive(Completed) or GSM.isStageActive(Queued)" id="Unmatched_m_c"
language="JEXL" name="Unmatched milestone condition" /></ca:Milestone><
ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Unmatched_pfg" name="Unmatched process flow guard"
expression="(GSM.isStageActive(Accepted))" /><ca:SubStage id="
Unmatched_run" name="Unmatched running"><ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="
Unmatched_s" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Unmatched_s)" id="
Unmatched_run_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Unmatched running data flow guard
" /><ca:Milestone eventIds="Unmatched_e" id="Unmatched_run_m" name="
Unmatched running milestone"><ca:Condition expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Unmatched_e)" id="Unmatched_run_m_c" language="JEXL" name
="Unmatched running milestone condition" /></ca:Milestone><
ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Unmatched_run_pfg" name="Unmatched running process
flow guard" expression="not GSM.isMilestoneAchieved(Unmatched_run_m)" /><
/ca:SubStage></ca:SubStage></ca:Stage></ca:GuardedStageModel></
ca:Component></ca:CompositeApplicationType>
E_GSM/bpi2013_dfg_dervied_egsm.xml
A.2.3
Petri Net
1
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
2
<ca:CompositeApplicationType xmlns:ca="http://siena.ibm.com/model/
CompositeApplication" name="Definitions_1_application" version="2.0">
3
<ca:EventModel id="Definitions_1_eventModel" name="Definitions_1_eventModel"
>
4
<ca:Event id="Unmatched" name="Unmatched"/>
5
<ca:Event id="Accepted" name="Accepted"/>
6
<ca:Event id="Completed" name="Completed"/>
7
<ca:Event id="Queued" name="Queued"/>
8
</ca:EventModel>
9
<ca:Component id="Definitions_1">
10
<ca:InformationModel id="infoModel" rootDataItemId="infoModel">
11
<ca:DataItem id="infoModel" rootElement="infoModel" schemaUri="data/
infoModel.xsd"/>
12
</ca:InformationModel>
13
<ca:GuardedStageModel id="Definitions_1">
36
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:45==
14
<ca:Stage id="Unmatched" name="Unmatched">
15
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Unmatched" expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Unmatched)" id="Unmatched_dfg" language="JEXL"
name="Unmatched Data Flow Guard"/>
16
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Completed" id="Unmatched_m">
17
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Completed)" id="
Unmatched_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Unmatched Milestone
Condition"/>
18
</ca:Milestone>
19
<ca:SubStage id="Unmatched_run" name="Unmatched_run">
20
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Unmatched" expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Unmatched)" id="Unmatched_run_dfg" language="
JEXL" name="Unmatched_run Data Flow Guard"/>
21
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Unmatched" id="Unmatched_run_m">
22
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Unmatched)" id="
Unmatched_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Unmatched Milestone
Condition"/>
23
</ca:Milestone>
24
</ca:SubStage>
25
<ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Unmatched_pfg" name="Unmatched Process Flow
Guard" expression="not (GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) and GSM.
isStageActive(Completed) and GSM.isStageActive(Queued))"/>
26
</ca:Stage>
27
<ca:Stage id="Accepted" name="Accepted">
28
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Accepted" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring
(Accepted)" id="Accepted_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Accepted Data
Flow Guard"/>
29
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Accepted" id="Accepted_m">
30
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Accepted)" id="
Accepted_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Accepted Milestone Condition
"/>
31
</ca:Milestone>
32
<ca:SubStage id="Accepted_run" name="Accepted_run">
33
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Accepted" expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Accepted)" id="Accepted_run_dfg" language="JEXL
" name="Accepted_run Data Flow Guard"/>
34
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Accepted" id="Accepted_run_m">
35
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Accepted)" id="
Accepted_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Accepted Milestone
Condition"/>
36
</ca:Milestone>
37
</ca:SubStage>
38
<ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Accepted_pfg" name="Accepted Process Flow
Guard" expression="GSM.isMilestoneAchieved(Accepted_run) or (not (
GSM.isStageActive(Unmatched) and GSM.isStageActive(Completed) and
GSM.isStageActive(Queued)))"/>
39
</ca:Stage>
40
<ca:Stage id="Completed" name="Completed">
41
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Completed" expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Completed)" id="Completed_dfg" language="JEXL"
name="Completed Data Flow Guard"/>
42
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Completed" id="Completed_m">
43
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Completed)" id="
Completed_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Completed Milestone
Condition"/>
44
</ca:Milestone>
45
<ca:SubStage id="Completed_run" name="Completed_run">
46
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Completed" expression="GSM.
isEventOccurring(Completed)" id="Completed_run_dfg" language="
JEXL" name="Completed_run Data Flow Guard"/>
47
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Completed" id="Completed_run_m">
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
37
==PAGE:46==
48
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Completed)" id="
Completed_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Completed Milestone
Condition"/>
49
</ca:Milestone>
50
</ca:SubStage>
51
<ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Completed_pfg" name="Completed Process Flow
Guard" expression="GSM.isMilestoneAchieved(Completed_run) or GSM.
isStageActive(Unmatched) or (not (GSM.isStageActive(Unmatched) and
GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) and GSM.isStageActive(Queued)))"/>
52
</ca:Stage>
53
<ca:Stage id="Queued" name="Queued">
54
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Queued" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(
Queued)" id="Queued_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Queued Data Flow
Guard"/>
55
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Queued" id="Queued_m">
56
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Queued)" id="
Queued_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Queued Milestone Condition"/>
57
</ca:Milestone>
58
<ca:SubStage id="Queued_run" name="Queued_run">
59
<ca:DataFlowGuard eventIds="Queued" expression="GSM.isEventOccurring
(Queued)" id="Queued_run_dfg" language="JEXL" name="Queued_run
Data Flow Guard"/>
60
<ca:Milestone eventIds="Queued" id="Queued_run_m">
61
<ca:Condition expression="GSM.isEventOccurring(Queued)" id="
Queued_m_c" language="JEXL" name="Queued Milestone Condition"/
>
62
</ca:Milestone>
63
</ca:SubStage>
64
<ca:ProcessFlowGuard id="Queued_pfg" name="Queued Process Flow Guard"
expression="GSM.isMilestoneAchieved(Queued_run) or (not (GSM.
isStageActive(Unmatched) and GSM.isStageActive(Accepted) and GSM.
isStageActive(Completed)))"/>
65
</ca:Stage>
66
</ca:GuardedStageModel>
67
</ca:Component>
68
</ca:CompositeApplicationType>
E_GSM/bpi2013_petri_net_dervied_egsm.xml
38
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
==PAGE:47==
Discovering E­GSM process models from sensor data logs
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
