==PAGE:1==
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and
Optimization of Controls
Digital Tvilling til Styringsanalyse og ­optimering af et Ventilationsanlæg
på en Folkeskole
Master Thesis
DTU Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Section for Energy and Services
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of
Controls
Digital Tvilling til Styringsanalyse og ­optimering af et Ventilationsanlæg på en Folkeskole
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Aikaterini Deli
MSc student in Architectural Engineering
Supervision
Kevin Michael Smith
Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Energy and Services,
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/kevin-michael-smith
Christian Anker Hviid
Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Energy and Services,
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/christian-anker-hviid
Esben Visby Fjerbæk
Industrial PhD Student, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Energy and Ser­
vices, https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/esben-visby-fjerb
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom­
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
RUM Architects, 2017
Published by:
DTU, Section for Energy and Services, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Energy and Services,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Architectural Engineering, Study
Line in Energy and Indoor.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Aikaterini Deli ­ s212459
Signature
07.07.2023
Date
ii
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Malfunctions occurring in the Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems of
buildings lead to substantial energy inefficiencies during building operation.
Specifically,
faults within the Air Handling Units (AHUs) significantly impact both the energy efficiency
and indoor environmental quality of the building.
Integration of Fault Detection and Diagnosis (FDD) techniques into AHUs can contribute to
ensuring their adherence to the intended design and sustaining their operational efficiency
throughout the entire lifecycle of the building. By employing FDD methods, AHUs can be
continuously monitored, enabling prompt detection and diagnosis of faults, thereby mitigating
potential energy waste.
Digital Twins (DTs) are designed to facilitate real­time monitoring, optimization, and proac­
tive anticipation of the future status of the physical twin, with the primary goal of preventing
downtime and operational issues in manufacturing processes. By leveraging the capabilities
of DTs, HVAC systems can be equipped with real­time monitoring and diagnostic features,
enabling more efficient maintenance and performance optimization. The integration of FDD
methods and DT technology in AHUs holds promise for enhancing the overall efficiency and
reliability of HVAC systems, addressing energy waste concerns, and improving indoor envi­
ronmental quality in buildings.
This research endeavors to investigate the application of an FDD methodology by develop­
ing a DT for the supply ventilation system in a specific area of a public school located in
Denmark. A comparative analysis is conducted between the DT­generated data and the in­
formation obtained from the Building Management System (BMS) installed within the school.
The comparison focuses on key parameters such as the pressure levels of the AHU, fan
speed, and room airflows, with the objective of assessing the building’s performance valida­
tion. The HVAC equipment, its network, and the control sequences are represented using
the Modelica language as part of the modeling process. Additionally, the study explores the
energy efficiency of the system and explores alternative strategies for achieving improved
performance.
Keywords
Digital Twin, HVAC, ventilation system, Fault Diagnosis, FDD, white­box model, Modelica,
Dymola, energy performance, validation of the performance, BMS, AHU
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis represents the conclusion of six months’ worth of personal work and its com­
pletion would not have been feasible without the invaluable assistance and contributions of
numerous individuals, all of whom deserve recognition for their support.
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor, Kevin Michael Smith, and my co­supervisor,
Christian Anker Hviid, for giving me the opportunity to work with them and also for being
there during both the challenging and uplifting moments. I extend a heartfelt appreciation to
Kevin who spurred me to push myself further in pursuit of my goals. Additionally, I extend
a special acknowledgment to Christian for his amiable demeanor and considerate approach
throughout this transformative experience.
A huge thank you goes out to Esben, as without him, I would have been lost inside this new
for me world of Modelica. He was there, supporting me, explaining everything to me in detail
with patience and politeness, providing me with all the necessary material and feedback, and
making this effort easier for me. I am really grateful for this collaboration.
This 2­year period of study at DTU has been an emotionally challenging journey for me, as
it frequently required me to step outside of my comfort zone. In this regard, I owe the utmost
recognition to my family, my friends, my significant other, and anyone, wherever they find
themselves, who has been involved in this growth, for being there with me, accepting me at
my worst, supporting me unconditionally, and still loving me.
iv
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Aim and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Research Questions
3
2.1
Question I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Question II
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Question III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theory
5
3.1
Building Energy Performance Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Ventilation Systems & Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Simulation and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Literature Review ­ State of the art
9
4.1
HVAC operation faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Digital Twin as an expedient of Fault Detection & Diagnosis processes for
building HVAC systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
Modeling Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Case Presentation
13
5.1
Section division . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.2
Ventilation System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.3
Operating conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4
Building Management System (BMS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.5
North Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.6
AHU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Methodology
19
6.1
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.2
Simulation Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7
Results
35
7.1
Validation of Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Optimization of Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8
Discussion
45
8.1
Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
9
Conclusion & Future work
49
Bibliography
50
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In today’s architecture and construction, low­energy buildings have taken center stage when
a structure is being designed. But what happens if the structure that is actually built doesn’t
adhere to the energy simulations that were run during the designing stage? The so­called
energy performance gap is partly a result of subpar building system performance. Designing
and construction errors can be identified through comparison between energy simulations
and real­time data/measurements from installed devices within the building.
The digital twin methodology has emerged as a promising approach for conducting energy
simulations. The concept of the ”Digital Twin” was first introduced by Michael Grieves and
John Vickers of NASA, and has gained significant attention in recent years. Grieves pro­
posed that the digital twin consists of three key components: a physical product, a virtual
representation of that product, and the bi­directional data connections that enable the trans­
fer of information and processes between the virtual and physical representations. This
approach offers the potential to create highly accurate and detailed models of real­world
systems, which can be used to identify opportunities for optimization and improvement [1].
Fundamentally, the process of equipping a building with sensors and utilizing the Internet
or other communication networks to share real­time data with other systems and devices
can enable the creation of a digital twin for architectural and engineering projects. The pri­
mary aim of this practice is to establish a mechanism for monitoring, comprehending, and
optimizing the functions of all physical entities, both living and non­living, by enabling the
uninterrupted transmission of data between the physical and virtual realms. This approach
can facilitate the development of highly detailed and accurate models of real­world systems,
which can be employed to identify areas for enhancement and improvement [2].
1.2
Problem description
For this project, Frederiksberg Skole, a primary school in Sorø is chosen to implement the
idea of how a digital twin can be helpful for detecting operational faults in the ventilation
supply system. The model will be built in Dymola software [3], with a focus on some specific
monitoring points of the HVAC building system, such as they are fans, tees, dampers, and
air terminals, which will be used as the main implement for the detection and diagnosis of
any energy performance gaps. The school is controlled by a Building Management System
(BMS). A comparison of relevant data points in the BMS will be carried out to validate the
built model.
1.3
Aim and scope
The aim of this master thesis is to create a digital twin that links data of the Heating, Ven­
tilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) system of a public school and simulations in Dymola
focusing on specific components of the system in order to investigate their operation and
optimize their control. This leads to the following list of project objectives which this study
aims to address:
• Build a digital twin of a building’s complex HVAC system after its construction in order
to generate information, support optimization, analysis, and understanding.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
1
==PAGE:10==
• Detect any problems or inefficiencies of the installed HVAC system, by comparing the
simulation results with the measurements which are originated from the BMS of the
school.
• Improve the performance of the system to achieve a better result, in terms of the energy
footprint by optimizing control sequences.
1.4
Report structure
The current thesis is organized as follows:
Chapters 1, 2, and 3 primarily aim to present introductory information to equip the reader
with a comprehensive background regarding ventilation systems, performance simulations,
and the research questions being investigated in this project. These chapters lay the foun­
dation for understanding the core concepts and analytical frameworks that will be employed
to examine and analyze the aforementioned hypotheses, enabling a thorough exploration
and subsequent resolution of the research questions at hand.
Chapter 4 serves as a comprehensive literature review, organized into sections that present
various relevant research studies pertaining to the subject matter of the present study. Each
section within this chapter delves into distinct scholarly works, which are closely intercon­
nected with and bear significance to the ongoing research. By synthesizing and presenting
this array of existing literature, Chapter 4 offers a valuable compilation of prior research that
informs and contextualizes the current study.
Chapter 5 provides a detailed representation of the case study undertaken in this research,
offering an in­depth examination of the specific context under investigation. On the other
hand, Chapter 6 focuses on presenting the methodology employed in this project, encom­
passing the logic, choices, and assumptions made during the modeling process and an
overview of the final models.
Chapter 7 is dedicated to presenting the outcomes derived from the simulations carried out
as part of the research. The results section showcases the empirical findings, numerical
data, and other pertinent information that emerged from the simulation procedures. Τhe
outcomes of this study are summarized in Chapter 8 while Chapter 9 concludes the report.
This project’s appendix is an additional document.
2
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:11==
2
Research Questions
2.1
Question I
In the field of building engineering, creating a digital replica of a ventilation system, known as
a digital twin, has been found to be a reliable method of forecasting the energy consumption
and overall performance of the physical system. This technique has proven to be effective
in identifying potential opportunities for energy conservation and optimizing the ventilation
system’s operation both before and after the construction of a building. Considering this,
• Is the digital twin method accurate in the absence of installation data?
• Is the digital twin method accurate when the study is focused on a single part of the
building?
In the context of an already­constructed building, improving the accuracy and credibility of
the digital twin model of the ventilation system can be achieved by incorporating precise and
trustworthy as­built drawings that depict the ventilation system’s geometry and layout. Addi­
tionally, factoring in the dimensions of the individual components such as air handling units,
ducts, tees, dampers, and diffusers, and the settings for operating conditions like tempera­
ture, pressure, and airflows, along with sensor data acquired from sensors installed in the
building, can significantly enhance the precision of the digital twin model.
Developing a comprehensive and precise digital twin model of a ventilation system enables
the identification of areas for optimization and enhancement. Satisfying the prerequisites
discussed above ensures that the digital twin approach can effectively reduce the potential
risks and expenses associated with modifying the physical ventilation system while ensuring
that any modifications made are grounded on dependable and trustworthy data. With a
detailed and comprehensive digital twin of the complete structure, the energy consumption
and overall performance of the real­world ventilation system can be predicted with accuracy,
and opportunities for energy conservation and optimization can be identified.
2.2
Question II
A ventilation system consists of two subsystems: the supply subsystem and the exhaust
subsystem. For a digital twin model to effectively replicate and accurately model a building’s
ventilation system, both subsystems should be included. The supply subsystem is respon­
sible for the introduction of fresh air, while the exhaust subsystem is responsible for the
removal of stale air and airborne pollutants from the building. Considering this,
• Is it possible to provide a comprehensive representation of the ventilation system’s
operation, which can be useful for identifying opportunities for optimization and im­
provement, by modeling only one of the subsystems?
Building operators and energy managers can report a greater outcome of the study by iden­
tifying areas where optimization can be implemented to reduce energy consumption and
ensure the general health and safety of building occupants by including both the supply and
exhaust systems in the digital twin model of the ventilation system.
The energy consumption of the supply system can be high because it requires conditioning
the air to the desired temperature and humidity, which can require significant energy use.
However, the energy consumption of the exhaust system can also be high due to the need
to overcome the resistance of the system components and the need to move large volumes of
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
3
==PAGE:12==
air. Nevertheless, a supply fan and no return fan might be used to simulate the HVAC system.
It can be considered that there is no need to model the return fan due to its simplicity and
the fact that the low associated energy use is not anticipated to have a significant impact on
the outcome. [4]
2.3
Question III
The building of this study is controlled by a BMS system, which means that includes sensors,
actuators, controllers, communication devices, management, and control software, as well
as the user interface for monitoring and controlling the building systems. Considering this,
• Is it possible to use the model in order to replace the need for installing additional
physical sensors which monitor the behavior of the supply system?
A well­developed digital twin model can precisely simulate the behavior of the ventilation
system, based on the information available from the building management system (BMS)
and other data sources. This is because there are numerous types of physical sensors that
can be used to monitor the behavior of the supply system in a building, such as airflow
sensors, temperature sensors, humidity sensors, and pressure sensors. Without the need
for extra physical sensors, opportunities for energy savings and improvement can be found
by properly simulating the supply system’s behavior in the digital twin. To guarantee the
correctness of the simulation findings, it is crucial to make sure the digital twin model is
founded on accurate and trustworthy data inputs.
4
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:13==
3
Theory
3.1
Building Energy Performance Simulation
As stated by Borgstein et al. [5] a third of the world’s total final energy consumption and
CO2 emissions are attributable to buildings. As a result, the energy efficiency of buildings is
a topic that has gained prominence globally. The escalating energy consumption in HVAC
systems has emerged as a significant concern, owing to the increasing demand for thermal
comfort, which was previously regarded as a luxury. Presently, HVAC systems constitute
the foremost energy­consuming sector in both residential and non­residential domains. The
amplification in energy consumption within HVAC systems can be attributed to the growing
reliance on these systems to meet the expectations of thermal comfort.[6]
Factors that are related to the energy consumption in buildings are the climate, the building
envelope but also the operation and maintenance of the systems, the occupant behavior, and
the indoor conditions. These factors are considered for the simulations in order to enable ac­
curate predictions of the building’s energy consumption, thermal comfort, and environmental
impact. By simulating various design alternatives, system configurations, and energy con­
servation measures, building energy performance simulations provide valuable insights into
the effectiveness of different strategies and help identify opportunities for energy savings.
The results of these simulations can lead to optimization of the energy performance, and
decrease of the operational costs while enhancing occupant comfort and sustainability.
The evaluation of building performance through simulation generally involves the following
steps:
• Model development that encompasses the geometric aspects, material properties, build­
ing specifications, and external environmental factors,
• Incorporation of relevant data pertaining to the building systems and their performance,
• Integration of proposed or estimated patterns of usage, schedules, and operational
parameters,
• Conducting dynamic performance simulations over extended periods, often up to a
year,
• Evaluation of the simulation results and estimation of energy performance,
• Comparison of the obtained results with measured data or predetermined performance
criteria, such as benchmarks or regulatory requirements.
3.2
Ventilation Systems & Components
In essence, the primary objective of a ventilation system is to uphold a satisfactory indoor
air quality standard, fostering the well­being and comfort of occupants, while also regulat­
ing temperature and humidity levels, eliminating unpleasant odors and pollutants, mitigating
moisture­related concerns, ensuring safety in combustion processes, and enhancing energy
efficiency within buildings. A ventilation system that is carefully designed and effectively op­
erational assumes a critical role in establishing an indoor environment that is conducive to
health, comfort, and safety. [7]
Mechanical ventilation
If appropriately designed, installed, and maintained, mechanical ventilation systems offer
various advantages:
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
5
==PAGE:14==
• Ability to deliver the intended airflow rate, regardless of variable external factors such
as ambient temperature, contributing to occupant comfort.
• Incorporation of filtration mechanisms and control of the airflow for improving indoor air
quality by reducing pollutants and potential health risks.
• Flexibility in utilization in different types of buildings and environments.
However, it is important to acknowledge that mechanical ventilation systems also face chal­
lenges:
• Performance Issues
Mechanical ventilation systems may encounter operational difficulties and fail to per­
form as expected. Factors contributing to such issues include equipment failure, utility
service interruptions, poor system design, or improper management [8]. These prob­
lems can lead to sub­optimal ventilation performance and potential negative impacts
on indoor air quality.
• Continuous Operation Requirements
In critical facilities where continuous operation is crucial, ensuring the uninterrupted
functioning of the mechanical ventilation system becomes essential. This often ne­
cessitates the need for backup systems for all components, which can be costly and
environmentally unsustainable in terms of energy consumption and maintenance.
The ventilation system comprises several key components that contribute to its overall func­
tionality and performance. These components include:
• Filters are integral to the ventilation system as they help remove airborne particles,
contaminants, and allergens from the incoming air. They play a crucial role in improving
indoor air quality by capturing dust, pollen, bacteria, and other pollutants.
• Fans are responsible for generating the necessary airflow within the ventilation system.
They facilitate the movement of air through the ducts, promoting proper air circulation
and distribution throughout the building.
• Heat exchangers enable heat transfer between the incoming fresh air and the outgoing
exhaust air. They help to recover and utilize the energy present in the exhaust air,
thereby enhancing energy efficiency and reducing heating or cooling demands.
• Humidifiers/Dehumidifiers regulate the moisture content in the air. Humidifiers add
moisture to dry air, ensuring appropriate humidity levels, while dehumidifiers remove
excess moisture to maintain optimal indoor humidity conditions.
• Dampers are adjustable openings or devices within the ventilation system that control
or regulate the airflow. They can be used to modulate the airflow rate, redirect airflows,
or isolate specific areas as needed for efficient ventilation management.
• Ducts serve as conduits for transporting the conditioned air throughout the building.
They provide a pathway for the airflow from the ventilation system to reach different
spaces, ensuring effective distribution and ventilation in various areas.
• Transducers, controllers, and energy management systems (EMS) are essential
components for monitoring and controlling the ventilation system. Transducers convert
physical quantities such as temperature, pressure, or humidity into electrical signals
for measurement. Controllers interpret the input signals and adjust the operation of
various components to maintain desired conditions. EMS integrates and manages
6
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:15==
the overall energy consumption and efficiency of the ventilation system, optimizing its
performance.
These components collectively contribute to the efficient and effective operation of ventilation
systems, ensuring the delivery of clean, comfortable, and properly conditioned air to indoor
environments.
3.3
Simulation and Analysis
Simulations in Dymola for ventilation systems involve the following steps:
Model Development
The initial phase involves the development of mathematical models that accurately represent
the different components comprising the ventilation system. These components encompass
fans, ducts, dampers, filters, heat exchangers, and other elements. To accomplish this,
Dymola facilitates the creation of component models utilizing a combination of equations,
physical properties, and empirical data. The objective is to ensure that these models ef­
fectively capture the behavior and interdependencies of the various components within the
ventilation system.
System Integration
After the development of individual component models, the next step involves their inte­
gration to form a comprehensive representation of the ventilation system. This integration
process entails connecting the component models together, creating a network that simu­
lates the airflow, pressure differentials, and heat transfer occurring within the system. The
connections between the components are established by defining suitable interfaces that
enable the exchange of relevant information.
These interfaces include airflow connections, which enable the transfer of air between dif­
ferent components, pressure differentials that account for variations in pressure throughout
the system, and heat transfer interfaces that facilitate the exchange of thermal energy.
Boundary Conditions
By defining the boundary conditions, the simulation model receives the necessary inputs to
replicate real­world operating conditions. External factors, such as outdoor weather condi­
tions, contribute to the system’s behavior and performance. Internal conditions, such as heat
generation from occupants or equipment, occupancy patterns, and desired indoor tempera­
tures, further influence the dynamics of the ventilation system.
Control Strategies
Control strategies are vital for the effective operation of ventilation systems, by utilizing inputs
from various sensors, including temperature sensors, CO2 sensors, and occupancy sensors,
in order to gather relevant data about the system’s conditions. Based on this information,
control signals are generated and transmitted to actuators, such as dampers, fans, or heat
exchangers, to adjust the system’s parameters.
Simulation Execution
Dymola employs numerical techniques to solve the system equations and capture the dy­
namic behavior of the ventilation system over a defined time interval. The simulation process
yields a range of outputs, including airflow rates, temperatures, pressure differentials, and
energy consumption.
The results facilitate the evaluation of design decisions, ensuring that the system meets
desired specifications and regulatory requirements. Additionally, the simulation outcomes
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
7
==PAGE:16==
can inform the optimization of control strategies, enhancing the system’s efficiency, energy
consumption, and overall performance.
3.4
Model Validation
Model validation in Dymola encompasses a rigorous and structured procedure that entails
the comparison of simulation results with measured data or benchmark simulations. The
aim is to evaluate the accuracy and reliability of the model under investigation. The following
steps outline the process involved in achieving model validation in Dymola:
• Define Validation Metrics
Metrics such as airflow rates, temperatures, pressure differentials, and energy con­
sumption will be used to assess the model’s accuracy.
• Gather Experimental Data or Benchmark Simulations
Obtain measured data that represent the real­world behavior of the ventilation system.
• Implement Measured Data in the Model
Setting the model with the corresponding values from the experimental data, matching
the specific conditions under which the measured data was obtained.
• Run Validation Simulations
Execute the simulation in Dymola using the modified model, including factors such as
simulation time, solver settings, and any relevant control strategies.
• Compare Simulation Results with Measured Data
Analyze and compare the simulation results with the measured data. Statistical analy­
sis, such as calculating mean absolute error or root mean square error, can provide a
quantitative assessment of the model’s accuracy.
• Iterative Refinement
If discrepancies are observed between the simulation results and measured data, it­
eratively refine the model to improve its accuracy, by adjusting model parameters or
incorporating additional complexities based on the insights gained from the compari­
son.
8
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:17==
4
Literature Review ­ State of the art
4.1
HVAC operation faults
In Chen et al. [9] is stated that the Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) system
is one of the most crucial building mechanical systems, and it accounts for more than 40%
of a structure’s energy usage [10]. As a consequence, HVAC system malfunctions can lead
to interior environmental problems such poor thermal comfort and poor indoor air quality,
which have an impact on occupant health and productivity. [11]. In addition, inefficient HVAC
systems waste a lot of energy, which affects how energy­efficient a building is [9].
According to Andriamamonjy et al. [12], the Air Handling Unit (AHU) holds significant im­
portance as a pivotal element within the HVAC system. Its primary function is to regulate
and condition the airflow, ensuring optimal comfort by accommodating the specific cooling
or heating requirements. Moreover, the AHU stands out as one of the most energy­intensive
components within the building system [13]. Consequently, any malfunction or fault in this
equipment can lead to a substantial escalation in the overall energy consumption of the
building.
Wang and Chen mention that the supply air temperature control system, the supply air pres­
sure control system and the outdoor air flow rate control system are the most important con­
trol sequences which result a normal operation and the energy efficiency of the AHU. Since
this project will focus more on the air pressure control, they also underline that a steady
pressure level can be achieved by adapting the fan’s speed each time. Subsequently, the
air pressure control system consists of the supply air fan, a PID controller, and a supply air
pressure sensor. [14].
Wang and Chen categorize the typical faults coming from the AHU in inadequate design,
defective equipment, actuator (damper and valve) failure, controller and sensor failure, [14]
while as was discussed by Andriamamonjy et al. [12], typical faults in an AHU can be clas­
sified into three categories, static faults, abrupt faults and degradation faults. As a static
fault could be considered a sensor with a constant offset, which could lead to inaccuracies.
As abrupt faults imply sudden mechanical failures (e.g. mechanical failures: damper stuck).
Degradation faults involve a gradual decline in performance over time [8].
Table 4.1 summarizes the major AHU faults as they are represented by Chen et al. [9].
Table 4.1: Major Faults in an AHU
AHU Component
Name
Potential Faults
Fan
supply air fan failure
Sensor
pressure, temperature
Actuator
outside air, mixed air and return air damper stuck
Ducts
duct leakage
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
9
==PAGE:18==
4.2
Digital Twin as an expedient of Fault Detection & Diagnosis
processes for building HVAC systems
By the definition given by Karanjkar et al. [15], ”A digital twin refers to a virtual representation
of the real physical system that mirrors its state and behavior”. And, according to Bohlin
et al. [16], ”The concept of using a digital copy of the physical system to perform real­time
optimization is often referred to as a Digital Twin. The vision of the Digital Twin itself refers to a
comprehensive physical and functional description of a component, product or system, which
includes more or less all information which could be useful in the current and subsequent life­
cycle phases”.
Table 4.2: The characteristics of the Digital Twin and their descriptions
Characteristic
Description
Physical Entity
The physical component/product/system
Virtual Twin
The representation of that product
Physical Environment
The environment of the physical entity
Virtual Environment
The environment of the virtual twin
State
The measured values of the physical entity
that represent its conditions
Metrology
The process of measuring the values
of the state of the physical entity
Realisation
The process of decrease the values’ distances
between physical entity and virtual twin
Twinning
The act of synchronising the states
of the physical and virtual entity/twin
Twinning Rate
The rate at which twinning occurs
Physical­to­Virtual Connection
The process of determining the physical entity’s status
and reflecting it in its virtual duplicate
Virtual­to­Physical Connection
The process of measuring the virtual twin’s status
and reflecting that condition in the physical entity
Physical Processes
The processes within which the physical entity is engaged
Virtual Processes
The processes within which the virtual twin is engaged
Jones et al. [1] summarized the 13 characteristics of a Digital Twin as these are represented
in Table 4.2.
In light of the existing literature, the identification of a digital twin (DT) necessitates adherence
to the 13 characteristics previously mentioned, wherein the model aims to replicate and mon­
itor the conduct, effectiveness, and attributes of a system. In this project, the representation
of the physical entity will be simplified as the purpose is to examine if creating a very specific
and close to the scope of the project model, can detect any faults or any optimizations in the
ventilation supply system of the school.
Consequently, the DT employed will be a simplified rendition of the actual installed system,
aimed at deepening comprehension of its operational dynamics. This entails modeling only
the pertinent components in a simplified form, namely the Air Handling Unit (AHU), ducts,
junctions, dampers, and air terminals. Any components pertaining to thermal performance
10
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:19==
will be omitted, as they do not pertain to the current objectives of this study. Despite this
tailored and simplified approach, the essential characteristics of a DT remain intact, albeit
presented through a more specific and streamlined lens.
The validation of the DT will be contingent upon the alignment of simulated results with em­
pirical data. A successful congruence between the two signifies the presence of a genuine
DT. Alternatively, if inconsistencies arise, the focus will shift towards Fault Detection and
Diagnosis (FDD) methodologies as the primary analytical avenue.
On the other hand, Guarino et al. [17] outline that FDD methods are gaining ground lately
as their strong point is their ability to keep track of the operation of various systems and pro­
cesses but also to foresee the presence of any faults that could lead to an improper operation.
They are able to identify the location of the problems and to resolve them. Andriamamonjy
et al. [12] mention that apart from detecting any faults, their purpose is also to limit impacts
of them in terms of comfort and energy efficiency [18]. 42% of current FDD investigations,
as noted by Kim and Katipamula [19], are centered on AHU, highlighting the significance of
this equipment [12].
As stated in Kim and Katipamula [19], there are four types of FDD methods, where one
of them is the Quantitative or Model­Based approach. This method is basically based on
the idea of analytically reconstructing the AHU system, where any different values from the
thresholds are signifying faults. It is also underlined that the model­based approach conse­
quently is more efficient in detecting unknown divergences [12].
For this reason, and as Xie et al. [20] point out, the model should be as accurate as possible.
It is clear that any uncertainties and modifications pf the systems, could lead to inaccurate
outcomes and compromised performances of the model­based approach. As Chen et al. [9]
mention, the FDD is challenging considering the problem complexity of identifying and diag­
nosing faults because of the complexity of the buildings (residential/commercial buildings,
different functions, physical characteristics of the buildings, occupancy), the complexity of
the HVAC systems (types and capacities) but also the complexity of the faults (interactions
among subsystems and between individual subsystem components). Considering all these
complexities, Xie et al. [20] point out that it is challenging and expensive to approximate the
system’s characteristics by using grey box model.
4.3
Modeling Methods
According to Serale et al. [21], and as Xie et al. [20] mentioned in their study, an accurate
and appropriate dynamic model is demanding, challenging, time­consuming and expensive.
For this reason, the modeling methods are categorized by ASHRAE [22] into two main cat­
egories, the physical models and the data­driven models.
• The white­box models are physical models based on mathematical approaches where
the processes and systems are transparent and understandable. These models have
the capacity to produce simulations of data under usual operation, which are then com­
pared with measured data to identify deviations [23]. One key benefit of this approach
is that it eliminates the need for physical construction of the system in order to assess
its performance.
• The data­driven models are grouped into three categories.
– Calibrated simulation models: Similar background to that of white­box models,
but in this case the models are calibrated using actual field data.
– Black­box models (empirical models): The approach is based on previous be­
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
11
==PAGE:20==
haviors and statistical techniques that employ measured data.
These models
don’t necessitate thorough system or process understanding.
– Grey­box models: Like white­box models, these are physics­based, but instead
of simulating variables’ outputs based on inputs, they employ measurements of
both input and output variables to identify unknown physical parameters that pro­
vide the greatest fit [23]. They combine building physics and statistics. [5]
12
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:21==
5
Case Presentation
The present case study focuses on the selection of Frederiksberg Skole, a primary school
located in Sorø, situated on the island of Zealand in eastern Denmark. This site was chosen
due to its suitability for examining the subject under investigation. Built in 2017, the school
comprises three floors, namely a basement, a ground level, and a first floor, covering a total
gross floor area of 7000 m2. [24]. According to technical reports, the architectural design of
the new building was a collaborative effort involving RUM ­ Architectural Studio in conjunction
with Balslev, Oluf Jørgensen A/S, Rune Fjord, and Dines Jørgensen & Co A/S.
This thesis specifically concentrates on the examination of the ventilation supply system
within the selected building. The building encompasses two distinct systems, denoted as
”VE01” and ”VE02,” which are of particular interest for this study. Consequently, the school
itself is divided into two separate entities, namely the North Building and the Middle & South
Building. The rationale behind selecting this particular school stems from the availability
of comprehensive information regarding the accessibility of the installed and constructed
components, facilitating a thorough investigation.
Figure 5.1: Floor Plans according to F. Seebergs’ & J. Tangeraas’ MSc thesis [24]
5.1
Section division
The project’s organizational structure incorporates a division of functions into distinct sec­
tions, with each section being assigned an ”Area number”. These Area numbers serve a
dual purpose, indicating both the location of the specific function within the building and its
corresponding intended purpose. This systematic approach ensures clarity and efficiency
in delineating and managing different functions within the project. The building is divided
into 9 sections which are briefly described in Table 5.1, while Figure 5.2 illustrates the space
distribution.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 5.1: Sections & Functions
Section
Floor
Function
North
South
P
0
Staff Section (Personale)
x
I
0
Enrollment and leisure facilities, Ground floor (Indskoling)
x
I
1
Enrollment and leisure facilities, 1st floor (Indskoling)
x
M
1
Intermediate level (Mellemtrin)
x
U
1
Training (Udskoling)
x
L
0
Learning Center (Læringscenter)
x
x
L
1
Learning Center (Læringscenter)
x
V
0
Workshops and specialist rooms
x
x
K
­1
Basement
x
x
Figure 5.2: Overall disposition
5.2
Ventilation System
As previously mentioned, the building incorporates two ventilation systems, namely VE01
and VE02, with their respective units situated in the basement of the structure. Vertical
ducts within shafts facilitate the movement and distribution of air to all floors, while horizontal
ducts, positioned above suspended ceilings, are responsible for distributing air within differ­
ent rooms.
Both Constant Air Volume (CAV) and Variable Air Volume (VAV) systems have been im­
plemented throughout the building. VAV systems are generally favored for classrooms and
offices, while CAV systems have been selected for spaces such as toilets. Within rooms
equipped with the VAV system, CO2 concentration and temperature sensors are strategi­
cally placed to monitor and regulate the air volume accordingly. Additionally, technical re­
ports indicate that the ventilation process is initiated through a Passive Infrared (PIR) sensor
in conjunction with the lighting system.
14
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:23==
5.3
Operating conditions
Frederiksberg Skole serves not only as an educational institution but also as a local cultural
center and leisure facility. This multi­purpose functionality significantly impacts the operating
conditions of the ventilation system, as it must cater to varying air volume requirements based
on specific use cases.
To address these circumstances, the building has been divided into sections, taking into
consideration the different load demands throughout the day. These sections are organized
based on room usage and incorporate fire­related measures to mitigate potential extensive
damages. Specifically, the basement (approximately 600 m2), the administration section on
the ground floor (approximately 483 m2), the teaching section on the 1st floor above the
administration (approximately 509 m2), and the multi­hall/music room (approximately 345
m2) are established as smaller, independent fire sections.
The remainder of the building is divided into four sections, each spanning both the ground
floor and the 1st floor, interconnected by an open sitting staircase. The areas of these sec­
tions are approximately 604 m2, 1,074 m2, 1,199 m2, and 1,232 m2, respectively.
The expected period of regular use is typically assumed to be from Monday to Friday, be­
tween 8:00 and 16:00. However, there will be occasional utilization in the evening hours for
meetings and special events. The central subject areas, workshops, and the learning center
are anticipated to be in operation from Monday to Friday, between 8:00 and 22:00, as well
as on Saturdays and Sundays, between 10:00 and 16:00.
5.4
Building Management System (BMS)
In order to achieve enhanced sustainability and energy efficiency, the design of the Fred­
eriksberg Skole necessitated the installation of a BMS. The BMS is a computer­based con­
trol system that monitors and regulates various building services, including electrical and
mechanical equipment such as power systems, lighting, and ventilation, to promote sustain­
able outcomes [25].
For the Frederiksberg Skole, a BMS has been implemented to ensure efficient control and
monitoring of the building’s performance. This system is of the same type as the municipal­
ity’s existing BMS to achieve full integration. Technical reports from the installation process
indicate that the BMS system comprises autonomous intelligent sub­centrals communicat­
ing through a standard open communication platform, accessible to municipality operators
via an internet connection using a Virtual Private Network (VPN). This enables operators to
have remote control and monitoring capabilities. Moreover, high­priority alarms are sent to
the call center and/or operators’ mobile phones.
Within the scope of this project thesis, the BMS system plays a crucial role in optimizing en­
ergy consumption and comfort by controlling all ventilation systems. Consumption meters,
installed on mixing loops and heating surfaces, enable energy consumption control. These
meters are read through a standard serial interface, such as M­Bus, which is an industrial
network system for real­time distributed control. The meters connect instruments in a build­
ing, typically used for measuring tasks, such as heat meters, water meters, electricity meters,
and heating cost distributors.
Data collected from the consumption meters are uploaded and stored in an energy regis­
tration program at the municipality’s central office, enabling energy data to be presented in
various formats. Motion sensors (PIR) located inside the rooms provide load information,
allowing for the adjustment of proper air volumes. Air quality sensors (CO2 sensors) are
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
15
==PAGE:24==
also integrated into the system. Furthermore, programs are scheduled to control the start
and stop of equipment, ensuring energy­efficient operation and a consistent level of comfort.
An additional feature of the BMS system is the measurement of outside temperature, humid­
ity, wind speed, and direction through an installed weather station. These measurements
are utilized to optimize the correction of heat flow within the ventilation system. Finally, it is
noteworthy to mention that the BMS work adheres to Bip’s standard, indicating compliance
with the relevant industry guidelines and regulations.
5.5
North Building
The current study focuses on the North building of the Frederiksberg Skole and specifically
examines the ventilation system ”VE01.” Several challenges, including project completion
time constraints, the building’s size, and inconsistencies between the as­built drawings and
models, necessitated this narrowed scope of investigation.
According to the technical reports, the North building serves as both the administrative head­
quarters for teaching staff and as a school for students in grades one through six [24]. The
building comprises a total of 84 zones, encompassing various spaces such as 16 classrooms,
6 group rooms, 10 teacher offices and preparation rooms, 23 restrooms, 2 larger common
areas, and 9 smaller rooms for technical equipment, storage, stairs, and entrances.
For the purpose of this study, the ground floor of the North building has been selected due
to the availability of a diverse range of rooms in terms of their functions and sizes. Table 5.2
provides an overview of these rooms, their respective functions, and the corresponding air
volume requirements for each space.
5.5.1
Period of use
The duration of utilization is determined by a pre­established time program specific to the
facility, encompassing weekdays, weekends, and holidays, spanning from 07:00 to 18:00.
This configuration yields a total operational period of 77 hours per week.
It is also mentioned that a year clock is connected, which can be used to calculate operations
on a yearly basis and insert separate operating hours for weekends, holidays, and public
holidays.
5.5.2
Start/stop sequence
Start sequence is selected depending on the outside temperature:
• At outside temperature ≤6°C
When starting the system,
– the heating valve is opened 100%,
– the heating surface pump starts,
– the speed of the rotary exchanger is set to 100%.
Upon reaching a return temperature of 20°C for the heating surface, the dampers are
triggered to open. Subsequently, 60 seconds after the signal to open the dampers,
the fans gradually initiate their operation through a ramp mechanism, which can be
adjusted from the control screen. Concurrently, the system is authorized for normal
regulation, allowing for regular functioning and control of the ventilation process.
• At outside temperature > 6°C
At the start of the plant, the dampers are opened. After 60 seconds, the fans start up
slowly via a ramp, and at the same time, the system is released for normal regulation.
16
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:25==
When the system stops, the fans stop and the dampers close. When the fan guard
indicates that the supply fan has stopped, the heating surface valve closes and the
pump stops. At the same time, the rotary exchanger is stopped.
Table 5.2: North building & Ground floor rooms
Rooms
Function
Size [m2]
Persons
Air volume max [m3/h]
System
V.0.17
Maskinrum
28
4
210
CAV
V.0.18
Handvaerk
91
29
950
VAV
V.0.19
Traedepot
12
­
90
CAV
I.0.02
SFO Vaerksted
72
29
613
VAV
P.0.01
Reception
20
2
61
VAV
P.0.02
Kontor
20
2
61
VAV
P.0.03 ­ 07
Kontor
12
2
51
VAV
P.0.08
Personalerum
113
29
664
VAV
P.0.09 ­ 011
Pers. forberedelse
29
6
145
VAV
P.0.13 ­ 014
Mode
12
6
123
VAV
P.0.15 ­ 019
Toilet
3­5
­
36
CAV
P.0.20
Kopi
4
­
36
CAV
P.0.22
Garderobe
14
­
21
CAV
P.0.23
Mode
23
16
317
VAV
5.5.3
Pressure regulation
To control the pressure outside the extraction duct and maintain it at a defined set point,
a Proportional­Integral (PI) regulator is employed. This regulator governs the speed of the
extraction fan by utilizing a frequency converter. By adjusting the speed of the fan, the PI
regulator ensures that the pressure outside the extraction duct remains within the desired
range.
The control screen allows operators to define set points for the required pressure in both
the supply and exhaust ducts. These set points can be adjusted as needed to achieve the
desired pressure levels and ensure proper functioning of the ventilation system.
5.6
AHU
The ventilation systems are carried out as comfort ventilation for teaching rooms, offices,
toilets/bathrooms and other living areas. Ventilation units are made with heat recovery. In
addition, both units are equipped with a by­pass around the heat recovery, so that during
periods of high outdoor temperatures, unnecessarily heated air is not blown in.
The air handling unit is from SystemAir the product Danvent DV100. Characteristics of the
selected fan are represented in Table 5.3.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
17
==PAGE:26==
Table 5.3: AHU characteristics
Fan data
Supply Air
Extract Air
Unit
Air volume (1,205 kg/m³)
20000
20000
m3/h
Air velocity in unit
1.87
1.87
m/s
External pressure drop
290
290
Pa
RPM
1028
1004
o/min
Pressure loss
35
35
Pa
Static pressure
674
620
Pa
Total pressure
733
679
Pa
Efficiency at static pressure
73.2%
72.5%
­
Efficiency at total pressure
79.7%
79.4%
­
K­factor (p=1.2 kg/m³)
620
­
Fan type
M­RH80C
Engine
7.50
5.50
kW
Voltage
3x400
3x400
V
Power
15.4
13.7
A
Figure 5.3: AHU ­ SystemAir Danvent DV100
18
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:27==
6
Methodology
This chapter provides an explanation of the chosen simulation­based study and the para­
metric setup process based on the provided background. The descriptions are thorough
enough to enable reproduction for subsequent research. Additionally, a number of choices
and presumptions were made throughout the project in order to get the correct data and do
further research to support the thesis.
As previously mentioned, the objective of the project is to create a tool that utilizes the digital
twin principle to analyze the various operations of the ventilation system’s components and
their impact on the energy efficiency of the school. As stated in 1.2, Dymola software and
Modelica language, both described in section 6.1, have been chosen to be used for this case
study. To gain knowledge of the Modelica language, the modeling process, and the required
information to model ventilation systems, a prototype Modelica model of the case study was
created. The model is based on the Buildings library and the Modelica Standard Library
(MSL), all described in section 6.2.
The following points are parts of the main strategy concept of the creation process.
1. Build a model of the supply system (fan, tees, dampers, air terminals) in Modelica
2. Setup control systems
3. Compare the fan speed, the pressure levels, and the airflows to validate the model.
6.1
Software
6.1.1
Dymola
Dymola is a software tool that has gained widespread usage across various engineering dis­
ciplines, including mechanical, electrical, and chemical engineering, for multi­domain mod­
eling and simulation purposes. The software, developed by Dassault Systemes, boasts a
user­friendly interface that facilitates the creation of complex system models that combine
multiple physical domains. Dymola offers a rich library of pre­built model components, which
encompass various mechanical systems, hydraulic and thermal systems, and electric power
systems.
6.1.2
Modelica
Modelica is a modeling language [26] that has gained significant usage in various engineer­
ing fields, particularly in the modeling and simulation of complex physical systems. It was
developed by an international consortium comprising companies, universities, and research
organizations, with the aim of providing a standardized way of representing systems that
span multiple domains, including mechanical, electrical, and chemical systems. Modelica
models are represented using a combination of equations and graphical representations,
enabling engineers to create comprehensive models of intricate systems. The language of­
fers a library of pre­built model components that can be utilized to build models rapidly and
efficiently.
Modelica’s ability to model dynamic systems makes it a valuable tool for engineers designing
and optimizing system performance. The language’s openness and interoperability enable
the exchange of models between different software tools, fostering collaboration and inte­
gration of designs across various engineering disciplines.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
19
==PAGE:28==
6.2
Simulation Design
The following provides a sequential account of the preliminary actions carried out to acquire
proficiency with the designated software. Thus, the project commences by instructing the
student to perform some minor assignments that aim to construct basic and uncomplicated
models pertaining to the primary objective of the ultimate undertaking.
6.2.1
Libraries and Models
The Modelica Standard Library (MSL) and the Buildings Library serve as the model’s foun­
dation, as was previously mentioned. The most crucial and essential details about libraries
and how they are used to finish this case study are represented in the ensuing sections.
The following table introduces the models from both libraries that are used for the case study
of the present thesis, and, consequently, a brief description of each model is provided.
Table 6.1: Used packages & models of Buildings and Modelica library
Library
Package
Description
Model
Buildings
Controls
with models for
controls
P/PI/PID Controllers
Sines
Buildings
Fluid
with models for
air­based & water­based
HVAC systems
Dampers
FixedResistances
Junctions
Sensors
Fans
Boundaries
Modelica
Blocks
basic input/output
control blocks
Constant
Max
BooleanPulse
Switch
Modelica
Fluid
with models of thermo­fluid flow
Ports
Buildings Library
The Buildings Library at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) and is an open­
source, free library with component and system models for building energy and control sys­
tems. The library is accompanied by Python modules that can be used to automate simula­
tions and post­processing results, and by a user guide. It consists of dynamic and steady­
state models for building energy and control systems and contains models for air­based
HVAC systems, water­based heating systems, controls, heat transfer among rooms and the
outside, and multi­zone airflow, including natural ventilation and contaminant transport. The
models are organized in the 16 main packages where the most relevant to this project are
presented in Table 6.1.
Modelica Standard Library
The Modelica Standard Library is a free library that is developed together with the Model­
ica language from the Modelica Association. It provides model components and standard
component interfaces from many engineering domains. [27]
As the most important components are decided to be the fan, ducts, tees, dampers, and air
terminals, in this section, their representation on Dymola will be described.
20
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:29==
Components & Models
Fans are modelled by selecting the Buildings.Fluid.Movers.SpeedControlled_y model. Here,
the fan receives as an input signal y the value for its normalized speed which a PI­Controller
prescribes (normalized rotational speed between 0 and 1). The goal in this case is to control
the pressure of the system after the air has passed through the ducts.
For this reason, a pressure sensor, the Buildings.Fluid.Sensors.RelativePressure model, is
used. The signal of this component is directed to the PI­Controller which is connected with a
constant pressure input signal at 100 Pa. The pressure curve of the fan is defined through the
setup of the component’s parameters. A representation of the system is depicted in Figure
6.1.
Figure 6.1: Fan’s representation
Ducts are modelled with the Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.HydraulicDiameter model,
where the hydraulic diameter of the duct, the length, and the nominal mass flow rate act
as the main parameters. As the supply system of the VE01 consists of a variety of diameters
and types (square, circular, and rectangular) of ducts, for the simplicity of the model, the
hydraulic diameters are calculated by taking the average of the different diameters between
each junction. The component is depicted clearly in Figure 6.5.
Duct tees are T­shaped fittings used to connect duct­work at given junctions. For this case
study, they are modelled with the Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction model, with
fixed resistances at each port. As entries, there are the parameters of nominal pressure
loss and nominal mass flow rate at the three ports respectively.
Dampers are illustrated by the Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Dampers.Exponential model, an air
damper with exponential opening characteristics. The parameters that are necessary for this
component are the nominal mass flow rate and the pressure drop of a fully open damper at
these specific flow rates. For this case study, the damper is in connection with the CO2 and
Temperature Sensors which operate with the purpose to control the damper’s opening, as
detailed below.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
21
==PAGE:30==
CO2 and Temperature Sensors As previously mentioned in reference to 5.4, the volume of
air within a given space is determined by sensors that measure the levels of CO2 and tem­
perature within that room. This process is facilitated by a tool that utilizes data received from
the BMS, which incorporates the aforementioned sensors within each individual room. The
CO2 and temperature sensors are connected to P­Controllers that incorporate constant val­
ues. The resulting output signal is then transmitted to a maximum (max) block, which selects
and transmits the largest signal. Simultaneously, a Boolean pulse is generated to indicate
room occupancy, as detected by a PIR sensor. This output signal becomes the input for a
switch that, when activated by a true input signal, sets the damper’s opening according to
the P­Controllers. Conversely, when there is no occupancy detected, the damper’s opening
is set to 20%. The tool’s functionality is represented in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: CO2 and Temperature Sensors
22
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:31==
6.2.2
Modelica ­ Prototype model
A prototype is built, tested, and then reworked as necessary until an acceptable outcome is
achieved, from which the actual system can be developed.
• AHU’s prototype sub­model
In the beginning, efforts were concentrated primarily on developing models of the pres­
sure balance based on the functioning of a fan. PID controllers were included in the
model as the primary objective was to understand how to maintain the system’s pres­
sure stability. Since the ducts are the crucial location where pressure loss occurs, a
relative pressure sensor was added. As the model’s structure was straightforward, as
already mentioned, there was no need to include variables like the ducts’ length in this
case. Certain parameters, such as the fan’s pressure curve, the nominal mass flow
rate, and the ducts’ pressure drop at this nominal mass flow rate, were to be entered.
• Room’s prototype sub­model
Here, the primary role was to regulate the damper’s operation. Once more, technical
specifications were added to the damper in order to make it more accurate and com­
patible with the installed system. The system represented by the model, which also
includes a fan, duct, pressure sensor, and damper, is still a straightforward one.
• VAV Room’s prototype sub­model
In this instance, a model was created to show how the CO2 levels in the room can affect
how wide the damper opens. Later, a new sensor was able to detect the presence of
individuals within the room, and based on that, the damper’s opening would change
from 20% to 100% depending on whether or not there were people present in the
under­study room. A PIR sensor, which in the current model was represented by a sine
graphic, was used to identify the occupancy. Because it gives the damper a smoother
motion, a PI controller is chosen for this application to control the damper’s opening.
Additionally, a switch was added to the model to regulate whether the damper should
open to 20% or 100%. The development of these models took a long time because
there was much uncertainty about the best components to use in order to accurately
describe the system and show its function.
• Section’s prototype sub­model
The following models were made in order to find a way to represent multiple rooms,
and a bigger building section. The environment of the main model becomes more
straightforward and easy to interpret when sub­models are developed.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
23
==PAGE:32==
6.2.3
Modelica ­ Case study models
The subsequent step involved the execution of the actual project, which entailed the creation
of a model for the school system and its corresponding conditions. This phase involved utiliz­
ing the final as­built drawings, REVIT [28] models, and technical documents to gather infor­
mation for designing the system, its distribution across each floor and room, and determining
appropriate dimensions. An impediment encountered during this phase was the requirement
to work with documentation that was entirely written in the Danish language, which posed
a significant challenge. After meticulous scrutiny of the available documentation, it became
evident that there was a notable discrepancy between the REVIT models and the as­built
PDF drawings. Despite encountering several difficulties in comprehending the situation, the
only feasible solution was to utilize a combination of the PDF drawings and REVIT models
to complete the project.
Figure 6.3: Ventilation Plan ­ as built drawing
Figure 6.4: Ventilation Plan ­ REVIT
24
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:33==
As mentioned in Section 5.5, the focus of the project pertains to the northern section of the
building, specifically the ground floor and the administration area. This particular segment
encompasses a total of 20 rooms, and a comprehensive description of these rooms can be
found in table 5.5.
Once the rooms to be investigated have been identified, the subsequent step involves con­
structing the model. The newly developed model primarily comprises the primary pathway
of the supply system, encompassing the ducts and junctions that are interconnected with
various spaces. Each individual space has been designed as a distinct sub­model, which
can be easily incorporated into the main model through a drag­and­drop mechanism. Fur­
thermore, a separate model has been developed for the AHU, which serves as the starting
point for the supply pathway.
The sub­models represent the installed systems within each room. In the case of Constant
Air Volume (CAV) systems, only hydraulic diameters for ducts and dampers are utilized. The
technical specifications for these components have been sourced from the as­built drawings,
while the lengths and diameters of the ducts are obtained from the REVIT models. However,
due to discrepancies in the data, approximations were made for instances where the precise
length of the ducts could not be directly derived from the REVIT model. Moreover, to maintain
model simplicity, the ducts were consolidated into smaller numbers wherever feasible. For
Variable Air Volume (VAV) scenarios, the supply system primarily comprises dampers, CO2
sensors, and temperature sensors, as previously described and depicted in Figure 6.2.
Function
Rooms
Letters in the sub­model
Maskinrum
V.0.17
A
Handvaerk
V.0.18
B
Traedepot
V.0.19
C
Reception­Kontor
P.0.01 ­ P.0.07
F
Personalerum
P.0.08
G
Pers. Forberedelse
P.0.09
H9
Pers. Forberedelse
P.0.10
H10
Pers. Forberedelse
P.0.11
H11
Mode
P.0.13
I13
Mode
P.0.14
I14
Mode
P.0.23
I23
Garderobe
P.0.22
L
SFO Vaerksted
I.0.02
N
Table 6.2: Linked rooms to the letters of the sub­models
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.5: Main Supply Path
26
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.6: Representation of the office’s section
Figure 6.7: Representation of a single office
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.8: Representation of a VAV Room
Figure 6.9: Representation of a CAV Room
28
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:37==
AHU Model
The section of the AHU responsible for supplying air to the supply system comprises several
components, including a damper, a filter, an inspection part, a rotary heat exchanger, a fan,
and a heating battery. However, for the purpose of this study, which focuses specifically on
the ventilation system, the AHU model will be simplified to exclude heat and temperature
transmission analysis. Consequently, the model will only include the damper and the fan.
In the simplified AHU model, the characteristics of the fan are specified in terms of the pres­
sure curve and power computation. These properties can be found in the fan model’s spec­
ifications, as shown in Figure 6.10. The specific details regarding the pressure curve and
power characteristics/computation are provided in Table 6.3. The necessary supply air vol­
ume and the cumulative pressure drop across the AHU components are considered in the
damper’s properties, which define the damper characteristics within the model.
Volume Flow Rates
[m3/h]
Total Pressure
at these Flow Rates
[Pa]
Electrical Power
at these Flow Rates
[kW]
10573.77
2292.68
13
21311.47
2063.41
17
33770.49
1424.39
18.5
39262.29
868.29
16
Table 6.3: Selected values for Fan’s Pressure Curve & Power Computation
Figure 6.10: Fan’s Performance
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.11: Representation of the AHU submodel ­ BMS Data as input signal for the fan’s
controlled normalized speed
Figure 6.12: Representation of the AHU submodel ­ Pressure setpoint as input signal for the
fan’s controlled normalized speed
Figures 6.11 and 6.12 provide visual representations of the AHU. These figures offer an
illustration and depiction of the AHU’s structure, components, and relevant data, aiding in
understanding its configuration and functioning within the overall system.
30
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:39==
Pressure Losses
The pressure losses in the ducts are determined based on the data provided by the manufac­
turer. For each duct with a hydraulic diameter, the average diameter is calculated. Utilizing
this dimension, in conjunction with the diagram depicted in Figure 6.13, the corresponding
pressure loss is obtained. In the case of circular ducts, the hydraulic diameter is equal to
the actual diameter. However, for rectangular ducts, Equation 6.1 is employed to calculate
the hydraulic diameter. The hydraulic diameter serves as the characteristic dimension for
pipes and ducts with non­circular cross­sections. It is important to note that the definition of
hydraulic diameter implies that the actual and hydraulic diameters are identical for circular
pipes and ducts.
D h = 2 ∗(a + b)/a + b
(6.1)
Additionally, another significant parameter to be determined is the critical Reynolds number.
In practice, the transition from laminar to turbulent flow in straight pipes and ducts transpires
at a critical Reynolds number equal to 2300 [29].
Furthermore, in the current model, the pressure losses occurring at junctions have been
disregarded. However, to consider the impact of bends and other fittings, the model in­
corporates a flow coefficient multiplication factor, which has been set to 2, allowing for an
estimation of the additional pressure losses associated with these components.
Figure 6.13: Pressure Losses in the circular duct SR of Lindab [30]
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
31
==PAGE:40==
Data Processing
Data processing techniques were employed to extract relevant information from the data
collected by the BMS. Due to the limited storage capacity of the BMS for CO2 data, a de­
cision was made to utilize the data from the most recent 12­day period for this case study.
Since the Dymola modeling software recognizes time in seconds, the time stamps had to be
converted into seconds, which is translated to a maximum value of 981,000 seconds for the
12­day period. In order to ensure consistency and facilitate subsequent analyses, the data
were filtered to include measurements taken at 30­minute intervals. This decision was made
to address the varying time intervals between time data, as converting time into seconds
required a consistent pattern to be established. By retaining measurements at 30­minute
intervals, a regular pattern was created, making it easier to process and manipulate the data
in later stages. Similarly, temperature measurements were converted into Kelvin degrees,
the CO2 measurements were adjusted by adding the background concentration (400 ppm),
and the fan’s speed was converted to scale 0­1.
In accordance with the BMS system and as illustrated in Figure 6.15, each room has a spe­
cific temperature set­point, determined based on the desired comfort standards for the re­
spective spaces. The temperature set­point is set at 21°C for offices, while for all other
investigated rooms, it is set at 19°C, assuming occupancy within those spaces. For the
rooms equipped with a Variable Air Volume (VAV) system, which account for 16 out of the
total 20 rooms, the occupancy is simulated using a Passive Infrared (PIR) sensor, where,
it is assumed that the 80% of the time representing occupied conditions and the remaining
20% representing unoccupied conditions.
The data is incorporated into the model using the Modelica.Blocks.Sources.CombiTimeTable
component. The data set used corresponds to the time period between 15/05/2023 and
26/05/2023.
Figure 6.14 depicts the representation of the AHU as it appears in the BMS. The visualization
reveals that the damper SMI01 is fully open, indicating unrestricted airflow. The fan VI01 is
operating at its maximum capacity, indicated by a 100% speed setting. However, there is a
red alarm displayed for the pressure sensor PTI01. The set point for PTI01 is configured at
90 Pa, yet the current pressure reading indicates a significantly lower value of 12 Pa.
Simulations and Baseline models
A comparison will be conducted between simulations based on the data from the BMS and
the designed set points. The focus of the comparison will primarily be on the validation of
the performance and also on the energy consumption of the fan. Based on the outcomes of
the comparison, suggestions will be provided to reduce energy usage. These suggestions
may include adjustments to the pressure set point, modifications to the operation schedule
time frame, and the optimization of damper openings when rooms are unoccupied.
Regarding the validation of the expected performance, the following comparisons could lead
to some results.
1. The actual and designed maximum airflow in the rooms.
2. The actual and the received fan’s speed from the BMS.
To validate the expected performance, two baseline models will be executed, primarily dif­
fering in the AHU submodel. A brief description of these models is provided below.
32
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.14: Representation of the AHU in BMS
Figure 6.15: Representation of the rooms in BMS
Baseline model I ­ BMSData
In the first model, named ”BMSData”, the input for the fan speed is obtained from the BMS
data collected from the school. The data has been filtered to align with the same time intervals
as the filtered CO2 and temperature data. As previously mentioned, there is a predetermined
operating schedule for the ventilation system, specifying its operation from 07:00 to 18:00
each day. This schedule is represented using the Modelica.Blocks.Sources.BooleanTable,
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
33
==PAGE:42==
which generates a true/false signal. The time intervals during which the ventilation system
is active or inactive are specified in seconds within this table. When the current time falls
within or before a designated interval, the output of the Boolean Table corresponds to the
system’s operating status. If the output is true, the fan speed is determined by the BMS data;
otherwise, the fan speed is set to zero. The values within the Boolean Table are provided in
Figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16: Operation Schedule
Baseline model II ­ AHU90
In the second model, named ”AHU90”, the fan speed is regulated based on the designated
set­point for the pressure within the supply system, which has been established as 90 Pa.
Accordingly, the fan operates in a manner that maintains the pressure at this specified value.
This control scheme is illustrated in Figure 6.12, outlining the components and interactions
involved in the pressure control system of the AHU.
34
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:43==
7
Results
7.1
Validation of Performance
This section presents the findings obtained from the execution of the two baseline models. As
illustrated in Figure 6.14, the AHU is configured to operate at a specific supply pressure set­
point of 90 Pa, based on the provided speeds from the ΒMS. Figure 6.14 reveals a red alarm
originating from the pressure sensor of the supply system. Even when the fan operates at
maximum capacity, the pressure fails to reach the intended level, indicating four potential fault
scenarios. These include incorrect BMS operation, insufficient airflow, incorrect configuration
of pressure losses in the system components, or inadequate sizing of the fan in relation to
the system requirements.
The results indicate the presence of a fault in the system, as evidenced by the disparities in
pressure levels within the AHU. When the model with the specified pressure set­point runs,
it produces different fan speed values than those provided by the BMS, and concurrently,
when the model with the specified fan speeds operates, the pressure in the supply system
deviates significantly from the set­point, exceeding the desired level.
Figure 7.1 graphically represents the substantial increase in pressure levels observed when
the ”BMSData” model is executed, in comparison to the ”AHU90” model. The pressure levels
encompassing the entirety of the system fluctuate within the range of 150 to 1850 Pascal
(Pa). It is noteworthy that these magnitudes are approximately twenty times greater than the
originally intended set­point. Furthermore, it is observed that the pressure values exhibit an
inherent lack of stability during the operational lifespan of the AHU.
Figure 7.1: Pressure Levels in AHU
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
35
==PAGE:44==
Elevated pressure levels indicate significant pressure losses within the supply system, with
the primary contributors to these losses including the ducts themselves, duct curves, termi­
nals, and dampers. Consequently, an investigation into the ducts along the main supply path
is conducted, as depicted in Figure 6.5, as well as an examination of all dampers within the
analyzed section.
Figures 7.2 and 7.3 display the locations where the highest pressure losses occur. The
diagrams provide insight into the comparative pressure losses between dampers and ducts.
Overall, the dampers demonstrate higher pressure losses in contrast to the ducts. While
there are instances where certain ducts exhibit relatively higher pressure drops, it is important
to note that the observed pressure levels remain within acceptable ranges. Furthermore,
it appears that the AHU90 model results in lower pressure losses when compared to the
BMSData model. It can be inferred that the discrepancy in pressure is not attributable to
misconfigured pressure drops in the model.
The maximum average and maximum values of the losses from the dampers are presented
in Table 7.1. Notably, the BMSData model supplies the system with pressures that are twenty
times higher than the intended value.
Table 7.1: Pressure Losses from the Dampers in both models
Model
Maximum Pressure Loss
Maximum Average Pressure Loss
AHU ­ 90 Pa
92 Pa
56 Pa
BMS Data
1859 Pa
252 Pa
Figure 7.2: Pressure Drop in all Dampers
36
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:45==
Table 7.2: Pressure Losses in the Ducts in both models
Model
Maximum Pressure Loss
Maximum Average Pressure Loss
AHU ­ 90 Pa
3 Pa
1.5 Pa
BMS Data
33 Pa
14 Pa
Figure 7.3: Pressure Drop in the Ducts of the main supply path
The data presented in Table 7.2 reveals that the pressure losses occurring in the ducts,
particularly in the case of the AHU90 baseline model, are of negligible magnitude. However,
for the BMSData model, the observed losses are comparatively higher but remain within an
acceptable range. Once again, it can be concluded that the AHU90 model exhibits superior
operational performance.
An elevated pressure level in the AHU corresponds to an increase in airflows but the high
pressure losses through the components of the system, subsequently lead to a decrease
in the airflow rate. Figure 7.4, presents the airflow measurements for all the rooms under
investigation. The results clearly demonstrate that the system delivers a significantly greater
volume of air than the designed maximum airflows, when operating the BMSData model. In
both scenarios, the observed airflow exceeds the maximum design specification. Despite the
fact that the pressure losses induced by the dampers in the BMSData model are twenty times
greater than the intended values, one might expect a corresponding decrease in supplied
airflow. However, contrary to this expectation, the system continues to provide sufficiently
high airflow levels to adequately serve the rooms.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 7.4: Actual & Designed Airflows
Elevated pressure drops in the system are indicative of correspondingly high airflow rates,
as corroborated by previous evidence. Increased airflow rates, in turn, are associated with
higher fan speeds. In light of this relationship, Figure 7.5 depicts the speed levels of each
respective baseline model. The AHU90 model reveals fan speeds ranging between 20%
and 65%, whereas the alternative model demonstrates fluctuating speed levels ranging ap­
38
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:47==
proximately from 70% to 100%.
Ultimately, the primary distinction between the models lies in their response to varying fan
speeds. It is observed that a higher fan speed engenders a greater airflow, consequently
resulting in elevated pressure drops within the system. This occurrence can be attributed
to heightened levels of frictional resistance and turbulent flow effects induced by the larger
volume of air traversing the system.
Figure 7.5: Fan Speed ­ AHU90 vs BMSData
Based on the findings of the investigation, which align with the scenarios formulated in this
chapter concerning performance validation, it can be argued that the BMS appears to be
functioning incorrectly. This conclusion is supported by the observation that the pressure
sensor downstream of the fan registers a pressure level of 12 Pa despite the fan operating
at its maximum capacity. Notably, the airflow rates appear to be adequately high, and the
pressure drop across the system components appears to be appropriately configured. A
misconfiguration of the pressure drops would likely have resulted in elevated values in both
systems and improper dimensioning of the fan would not have led to high airflows. Insufficient
dimensioning or improper selection of a fan for a particular ventilation system can impede
its ability to generate the necessary airflow to fulfill the system’s operational requirements.
Consequently, these results suggest the possibility of a fault in the operation of the BMS.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
39
==PAGE:48==
7.2
Optimization of Controls
The second purpose of this project is to optimize the controls of the system in order to achieve
better energy performance. For the optimization of controls, two extra models are created
in order to test cases where the system can deliver the maximum designed airflow for each
room, keeping a stable pressure level in the AHU while at the same time, consuming less
energy. This relies more on the AHU90 baseline model as the BMSData model did not
succeed to keep a stable pressure level, and even if the preceding section likely indicated a
fault in the BMS, the subsequent objective is to develop a model derived from the baseline
BMSData model. This model will be employed to explore potential alternatives that could
enhance the overall performance of the system. This subsection is representing the result
of this investigation.
Typically, a reduction in the overall pressure drop correlates with a more economically ef­
ficient ventilation system. In accordance with this rationale, the optimization of the AHU
baseline model is associated with the examined set­point, which is proposed to be estab­
lished at 80 Pa. The disparity in fan speed resulting from the set­point variation between 90
and 80 Pa is illustrated in Figure 7.6. As can be observed, the disparities are not substan­
tial, with the average fan speed being identical to that of the AHU90 baseline model. The
maximum fan speed exhibits a modest decrease of approximately 5% when compared to the
aforementioned model.
Figure 7.6: Fan Speed ­ AHU90 vs AHU80
The optimization of the BMSData model revolves around the scheduling aspect, which gov­
erns the system’s operational cycles. Figure 7.7 visually illustrates the temporal periods
when the system is active or inactive. The primary objective entails reducing the operational
schedule by 30 minutes in the morning and 1 hour in the afternoon, thereby adjusting it from
07:30 to 17:00 instead of the previous time­frame of 07:00 to 18:00.
Figure 7.8 depicts the difference in the fan’s speed between the two operation schedules.
40
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:49==
The pattern of the speed remains the same but as it can be seen the average speed of the
system is decreased by 5%.
Figure 7.7: Operation Schedule BMSDataNew
Figure 7.8: Fan Speed ­ BMSData vs BMSDataNew
The airflow analysis, as detailed in Table 7.3, reveals a comprehensive comparative assess­
ment. Significantly, no noticeable distinctions are apparent between the BMSData models.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
41
==PAGE:50==
Conversely, a reduction of approximately 6% in airflow is observed within the AHU mod­
els. However, it is important to note that the actual airflow rates consistently exceed the
designated specifications. Given the superior performance of the AHU80 model, the final
column of the table highlights the percentage deviation between the maximum actual airflow
of AHU80 and the maximum designed airflow. Notably, the differences remain substantial,
with a majority of the rooms experiencing airflow rates exceeding the designed values by at
least 50% or more.
Figure 7.9: Airflows ­ Comparison between AHU90, AHU80, BMSData, BMSDataNew
42
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:51==
Table 7.3: Airflows in the different systems
Room
AHU90
[m3/h]
AHU80
[m3/h]
Difference
[%]
BMSData
[m3/h]
BMSDataII
[m3/h]
Difference
[%]
Designed Max
[m3/h]
Designed Min
[m3/h]
Difference
[%]
A
194
183
6
870
870
0
105
32
75
B
2811
2655
6
4055
4055
0
950
285
179
C
155
145
6
778
778
0
90
27
61
F
491
463
6
706
706
0
385
82
20
G
282
266
6
406
406
0
220
66
21
Gang
208
196
6
2780
2780
0
216
0
­9
H9
277
262
6
399
399
0
145
43
80
H10
277
262
6
399
399
0
145
43
80
H11
280
264
6
402
402
0
145
43
82
I13
270
255
6
388
388
0
124
37
106
I14
270
255
6
388
388
0
124
37
106
I23
609
575
6
877
877
0
317
95
82
L
44
41
6
197
197
0
21
21
98
N
282
266
6
407
407
0
205
61
30
Regarding the energy performance of the ventilation system, Figure 7.10 represents the
total consumed power for the operation of the fan, during the under­study period. As can be
observed, the models with the specified speed from the BMS are consuming more energy in
comparison with the AHU models where the pressure is the parameter. The speed is lower
for these models which contributes to a lower total power consumption.
Figure 7.10: Fan Speed vs Fan Total Consumption ­ Comparison between AHU90, AHU80,
BMSData, BMSDataNew
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:53==
8
Discussion
The primary findings of the project indicate notable distinctions in the performance validation
of the two baseline models concerning the overall pressure equilibration of the system. In­
vestigation into the specific locations of pressure losses within the system revealed that, in
general, the BMSData baseline model which utilizes speeds derived from the Building Man­
agement System (BMS), exhibited higher pressure losses compared to the AHU90 baseline
model, where the pressure set­point adhered to the intended design specifications. The
analysis further revealed that the primary source of these elevated pressure drops was the
dampers as system components. In contrast, the AHU90 baseline model showcased lower
pressure drop levels in the same dampers, implying that the adjustments and settings applied
to the HVAC system aligned with the intended design specifications.
As the pressure drop levels are high enough, one could expect that the airflows are low, too.
Instead, subsequent examination unveiled that the airflow rates in the rooms consistently
exceeded the maximum design values, presenting both favorable and unfavorable aspects.
From a positive standpoint, the heightened airflow facilitates augmented ventilation rates,
which results in improved indoor air quality. On the other hand, this circumstance may also
entail negative consequences, like discomfort to occupants due to drafts and uneven temper­
ature distribution within the room. This condition necessitates increased energy consumption
and operational costs as the HVAC system exerts greater effort to supply and condition the
air. These elevated airflow rates were related and corresponded to elevated fan speeds in
the BMSData model. Specifically, the AHU90 model demonstrated fan speeds ranging from
20% to 65%, while the alternative model exhibited fluctuating speeds ranging approximately
from 70% to 100%.
The analysis of the data obtained from the BMS revealed that the pressure sensor alarm trig­
gered an indication that, despite operating at its maximum capacity, the fan failed to maintain
an adequate overall pressure level. A low­pressure level suggests potential issues such as
reduced airflow, erroneous functioning of the BMS, or improper dimensioning of the fan. The
subsequent investigation, as described earlier, revealed multiple potential factors contribut­
ing to the system’s malfunction or incorrect operation.
In the context of energy performance optimization, it was initially anticipated that the BMS­
Data and BMSDataNew models would exhibit higher energy consumption, predominantly at­
tributed to the corresponding fan speeds. Conversely, scenarios in which the pressure was
pre­determined displayed superior energy performance, with power consumption reduced
by approximately 75% when compared to the BMSData models. Consequently, the findings
suggest that maintaining a consistent pressure level, as exemplified by the AHU models, can
result in lower overall pressure within the ventilation system, thereby positively influencing the
building’s energy efficiency without significantly compromising the airflow rates in the rooms.
Notably, the AHU80 model further exemplifies these benefits, manifesting a 20% additional
reduction in power consumption while effectively delivering the desired airflow levels.
Turning to the primary research questions of this project, it is evident that the employment
of the DT methodology can yield accurate results, particularly when focusing on a specific
section of the building. By doing so, potential faults in the operation of the BMS can be
detected, allowing for the identification of problems and inefficiencies, without having a chal­
lenging, time­consuming, and expensive process.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
45
==PAGE:54==
Furthermore, the second research question, pertaining to energy optimization within the sys­
tem’s operation is validated. It is possible to achieve the building’s requirements and reduce
energy consumption by modeling only a portion of the system, thereby adjusting parameters
from the designed values. This can give an idea of how a better implementation could lead
to better results and more sustainable energy performance.
Regarding the third research question concerning the necessity of additional sensor instal­
lations to monitor system behavior, the answer is affirmative, albeit with certain exceptions.
While it appears that an airflow sensor may be dispensable, a pressure sensor is deemed
more essential. This conclusion is supported by the presence of a red alarm triggered by the
pressure sensor in the current project, and overall, the AHU90 baseline model exhibits more
favorable outcomes based on this sensor’s readings.
8.1
Uncertainties
In order to optimize the precision of the results, bolster the quality of the discussion, and
fortify the conclusions drawn in this thesis, it is of paramount importance to conscientiously
recognize and explicitly acknowledge the assumptions that were made during the course
of this study. It is worth noting that these assumptions could have potentially impeded the
establishment of a robust and accurately calibrated model.
8.1.1
Data Selection
With respect to data selection, a comprehensive assessment of whether the specific section
of the building chosen would yield accurate results and estimations remains insufficiently
conducted. Although the selection was motivated by the diversity in geometric features of
the rooms, area, and functional aspects of the rooms, no examination was undertaken to
ascertain whether the data obtained from this section accurately represents a typical case.
With regards to the data obtained from the BMS, it is important to note that selecting timesteps
at intervals of 30 minutes has the potential to introduce inaccuracies in the results. However,
it is worth mentioning that a substantial volume of data was available, necessitating a sys­
tematic filtering process to ensure the data’s quality and relevance.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that the data obtained from the BMS encompass the entire
section serviced by the ventilation system. Conversely, in the current model, the same data
are utilized solely for a specific section of the school. This discrepancy should be taken into
consideration when interpreting and comparing the results.
8.1.2
Control Sequences
The method employed for modeling control signals can significantly influence the outcomes
of the simulations. For instance, certain assumptions were made regarding the occupancy
patterns within the rooms, such as the percentage of time occupants spend inside each room.
However, since the duration of occupancy is unknown, these assumptions may introduce
uncertainties in the results.
Another example pertains to the filtration procedure and its impact on the ventilation system’s
operation schedule. In this regard, minor inaccuracies may arise, particularly when the fil­
tration process occurs at regular intervals, potentially causing changes in the on/off signal
between time steps.
Additionally, the dynamic behavior of damper openings in the rooms was not consistently
defined, leading to uncertainties regarding their operational rhythm. Furthermore, the ab­
sence of pressure level data in the AHU, despite indications of their inclusion in the BMS,
represents an additional limitation.
46
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:55==
8.1.3
Model Design
To expedite the simulation process, a simplified model was developed, leading to oversimpli­
fications in the AHU, the hydraulic diameter, and the pressure drop of the ducts. The selection
of this specific building was motivated by the convenience of accessing its materials. How­
ever, this approach proved to be unproductive due to inconsistencies identified between the
drawings and the installed systems in the building. As a result, various assumptions were
made regarding the lengths of the ducts and the pressure losses of the components, as spe­
cific specifications were unavailable. Consequently, there is a lack of evidence supporting
the alignment of the parameters set for these assumptions with those calculated during the
design phase.
8.1.4
Dymola Simulations
Subsequent to the inclusion of the Modelica.Blocks.Sources.CombiTimeTable component
within the models, the simulation process exhibited lower speed. After some research, it
was recommended a transition from the default choice of the DASSL algorithm to the Radau
algorithm. The choice of simulation algorithm can employ distinct numerical integration tech­
niques, step sizes, and error control mechanisms. It is important to note that the selection
of a simulation algorithm significantly influences the accuracy, speed, and stability of the
simulation outcomes.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:57==
9
Conclusion & Future work
This study employs the ”Digital Twin” (DT) approach to facilitate Fault Detection and Diagno­
sis (FDD) procedures within the context of Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC)
systems in buildings. A white­box model is constructed to assess the performance of the
Frederiksberg Skole over a 12­day period between 15/05/2023 and 26/05/2023. Data from
the Building Management System (BMS) installed in the school, regarding the CO2 levels
and the temperatures inside the VAV rooms, are used as boundary conditions in the model.
Two baseline models are created relying on different control sequences of the AHU.
The findings indicate the possibility of a faulty operation within the BMS, particularly con­
cerning the fan’s operating speed. If this observation is accurate, it suggests that the DT
method can effectively identify issues even when analyzing a specific section of the building.
Given that this project primarily focuses on the ventilation supply system, the model suc­
cessfully identifies a fault in the BMS operation by exclusively modeling one of the installed
subsystems, which is the supply one.
If this method were to be applied in future research, the following suggestions may prove
useful.
• Initially, it is imperative to note that in order to obtain a more accurate and reliable out­
come from this study, it would be advantageous to consider modeling the entirety of
the building rather than focusing solely on a specific section. This recommendation is
particularly relevant when assessing the energy performance of the building. To ensure
the validity of the performance evaluation, it is essential to incorporate all relevant com­
ponents of the building into the model, including those that are directly influenced by
the corresponding ventilation system. By adopting a comprehensive approach that en­
compasses all aspects of the building’s functioning, the study would yield more precise
results.
• With respect to the collection of information and data, certain challenges arise that
necessitate careful attention. In order to construct a precise digital twin of the system, it
is advisable to meticulously verify the paths, lengths, and diameters of the components
comprising the system. By addressing these factors, the accuracy and reliability of the
digital twin can be enhanced, ensuring that it faithfully represents the physical system
being modeled.
• Despite potential access to the BMS, an obstacle encountered during the study pro­
cess was the unavailability of pressure measurements within the AHU. This limitation
posed a hindrance to the smooth progression of the study, impeding the comprehen­
sive analysis of the AHU’s performance.
• To enhance the data analysis process, it is recommended to adopt a structured method­
ology that encompasses the utilization of all the provided data, rather than filtering it
at 30­minute intervals. This approach aims to achieve a more precise and representa­
tive result by avoiding the potential loss of valuable information inherent in the filtering
process. By incorporating the complete dataset into the analysis, a comprehensive
understanding of the phenomenon under investigation can be obtained.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
49
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
D. Jones et al. Characterising the Digital Twin: A systematic literature review. 2020.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2020.02.002.
[2]
A. Fuller et al. Digital Twin: Enabling Technologies, Challenges and Open Research.
2020. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2998358.
[3]
Dymola – Dynamic Modeling Laboratory, Version 2021x (64­bit), 2020­10­0. 2023.
[4]
K. Zhang et al. Estimating ASHRAE Guideline 36 energy savings for multizone variable
air volume systems using Spawn of EnergyPlus. 2022. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
19401493.2021.2021286.
[5]
E.H. Borgstein, R. Lamberts, and J.L.M. Hensen. Evaluating energy performance in
non­domestic buildings: A review. 2016. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.
2016.07.018.
[6]
L. Pérez­Lombard, J. Ortiz, and C. Pout. A review on buildings energy consumption
information. 2008. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2007.03.007.
[7]
J. Atkinson et al. Concepts and types of ventilation. 2009. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK143277/.
[8]
T. Hong R. Zhang. Modeling of HVAC operational faults in building performance simu­
lation. 2017. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.15.
[9]
J. Chen et al. A review of computing­based automated fault detection and diagnosis of
heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems. 2022. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rser.2022.112395.
[10]
U.S. Department of Energy. 2011 Buildings Energy Data Book. 2012. URL: http://
web.archive.org/web/20130214212606/http://buildingsdatabook.eren.doe.gov/docs/
DataBooks/2011_BEDB.pdf.
[11]
P. Wargocki et al. The role of ventilation and HVAC systems for human health in non­
industrial indoor environments. A supplementary review by EUROVEN group. 2002.
URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/the-role-of-ventilation-and-hvac-systems-for-
human-health-in-noni.
[12]
A. Andriamamonjy et al. An auto­deployed model­based fault detection and diagnosis
approach for AHU using BIM and Modelica. 2018. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
autcon.2018.09.016.
[13]
K. Bruton et al. Review of automated fault detection and diagnostic tools in airhandling
units. 2014. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-013-9238-2.
[14]
Y. Chen H. Wang. A robust fault detection and diagnosis strategy for multiple faults of
VAV air handling units. 2016. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.06.013.
[15]
N. Karanjkar et al. Digital Twin for Energy Optimization in an SMT­PCB Assembly Line.
2018. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/IOTAIS.2018.8600830.
[16]
R. Bohlin et al. Data Flow and Communication Framework Supporting Digital Twin for
Geometry Assurance. 2018. URL: https://doi.org/10.1115/IMECE2017-71405.
[17]
F. Guarino et al. A Review of Fault Detection and Diagnosis Methodologies for Air
Handling Units. 2019. URL: https://doi.org/10.15377/2409-5818.2019.06.3.
[18]
Y. Yu et al. A review of fault detection and diagnosis methodologies on air­handling
units. 2014. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.06.042.
[19]
W. Kim S. Katipamula. A review of fault detection and diagnostics methods for building
systems. 2018. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/23744731.2017.1318008.
[20]
X. Xie et al. Digital twin enabled fault detection and diagnosis process for building
HVAC systems. 2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104695.
50
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:59==
[21]
G. Serale et al. Model Predictive Control (MPC) for Enhancing Building and HVAC Sys­
tem Energy Efficiency: Problem Formulation, Applications and Opportunities. 2018.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/en11030631.
[22]
Refrigerating American Society of Heating and Air­Conditioning Engineers. ASHRAE
Handbook—Fundamentals (SI Edition). 2013.
[23]
K. Grammenidis. A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems.
2022. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/62fed4b43a38d413256d453c.
[24]
F. Seeberg and J. Tangeraas. Integration of Thermal Building Simulation Tools and
Cloud­Based Building Information Models. 2022. URL: https : / / findit . dtu . dk / en /
catalog/62fed4baf2170e1325e352fb.
[25]
Md. Faruque Hossain. Chapter Seven Best Management Practices. 2019. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816722-9.00007-0.
[26]
Modelica and The Modelica Association. 2021. URL: https://modelica.org/.
[27]
Modelica User’s Guide. 2020. URL: https://doc.modelica.org/om/Modelica.Fluid.html.
[28]
Revit Software For MEP. 2023. URL: https://www.autodesk.eu/products/revit/mep.
[29]
Jørn Toftum. Duct Systems ­ Lecture Note ­ 12361 Ventilation and Climatic Systems.
2003.
[30]
Lindab. 2023. URL: https://www.lindab.com/.
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
==PAGE:61==
Digital Twin of a Public­School Ventilation System for Analysis and Optimization of Controls
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
