==PAGE:1==
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transporta­
tion
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Jaume Berta Oriol
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Google Fotos
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for six months at Department of Technology, Management
and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark ­ DTU, in fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Transport and Logistics, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge.
Jaume Berta Oriol ­ s212763
Signature
Date
ii
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Master’s thesis examines the potential for enhancing the efficiency of Novo Nordisk’s
in­site transportation system in Denmark through the utilization of mixed­integer program­
ming (MIP) and column generation. It introduces three progressive models: Model 1
and Model 2, which constitute multi­pickup and delivery problems with time windows
(MPDPTW) and capacitated MPDPTW (CMPDPTW), respectively, alongside Model 3 that
merges column generation with the CMPDPTW model for augmented efficiency. Model 3
surpasses Model 2 in performance by presenting a lower upper bound, reduced compu­
tational times, and a superior capability to locate optimal solutions for small and medium
datasets. Nonetheless, all models face challenges in managing large datasets, thereby
identifying a scope for additional exploration and enhancement. This research not only
proposes potential enhancements in operational efficiencies for Novo Nordisk but also
adds value to the extensive literature and comprehension of transportation optimization.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Jaume Berta Oriol, Transport and Logistics, DTU
Firstly, I wish to express my profound gratitude to my supervisor, Thomas Stidsen. The
past six months have been incredibly intense and full of challenges. However, they have
equally been a period of extraordinary learning and growth for me, for which I cannot thank
you enough.
My deepest appreciation goes to Novo Nordisk, particularly its Logistics and Distribution
department, for entrusting me with this project. Specific gratitude is extended to Musa
and Hadil for their help and support.
Heartfelt thanks are due to Mary, my rock. Her constant encouragement and cheerful
spirit have been a source of inspiration and resilience for me.
To my family—my father, mother, and Marta—despite the distance, your unstoppable
support and encouragement has encouraged to persevere.
Lastly, I wish to acknowledge my broskis, Dario and Raul. Watching you strive towards
and achieve your goals has been a beacon of motivation for me, illuminating my path
towards fulfilling my own. Your successes inspire me to aspire for nothing short of excel­
lence.
iv
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
7
3
Data
11
3.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Fixed routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Ad­hoc Trips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Final Dataset Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Model Formulation
21
4.1
Base Model ­ Model 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Capacitated MPDPTW ­ Model 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Column Generation ­ Model 3
33
5.1
Column generation Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Master Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.3
Initialization of the MP and SP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Subproblem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
Solving the Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Analysis and Results
41
6.1
Dataset dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Model Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.3
Analysis of the results by dataset size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.4
Summary of Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Practical Applications & Future Work
51
7.1
Practical Applications for Novo Nordisk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.2
Future Work on the CMPDPTW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Number of Cities, Number of Paths, and Time for the TSP . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Description of Location Atrributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Description of Time Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Description of Transportation Attributes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Description of Time Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Speed Limits for Heavy Goods Vehicles in Different Road Types in DK [17]
19
4.1
Description of Sets, Parameters, and Decision Variables of the MPDPTW . 22
4.2
Description of Sets, Parameters, and Decision Variables of the Model 2 . . 26
5.1
Sets, Parameters and Decision variables in the MP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Description of Sets, Parameters, and Decision Variables of the SP . . . . . 37
6.1
Dataset dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Results of the Base Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.3
Results of the Capacitated Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.4
Results of the Column Generation implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.5
Dataset classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.6
Small datasets comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.7
Medium datasets comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.8
Large datasets comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
1.1
Example of request insertion in MPDPTW [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Visual representation of Figure 1.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1
Nearest neighbour heuristic combinations for the TSP . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Locations’ geographical representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
Trips per city
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Hourly distribution of the trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.1
Column Generation Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
1
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The global healthcare industry is continuously evolving, driven by changing patient needs,
advancing technologies, and shifting regulatory landscapes. Amidst these challenges,
efficient logistics and transportation remain vital components of the industry’s success,
playing a direct role in production processes and patient outcomes.
As a key player in this industry, Novo Nordisk has been thriving, with impressive annual
growth rates that solidify its position as a global leader in diabetes care and other chronic
disease treatments. However, this success comes with its own challenges. The growing
demand for Novo Nordisk’s products has spurred the company’s expansion, leading to an
increased need for enhanced production and supply chain capabilities. In such a com­
petitive environment, meeting the demand that currently surpasses the supply becomes
a daunting task, making it imperative for Novo Nordisk to streamline its operations for effi­
ciency, cost effectiveness, and sustainability. One of the critical areas of these operations
is the in­site transportation system, responsible for the movement of raw materials and
finished products across Novo Nordisk’s plants and production sites in Denmark.
1.1
Aim of the project
The primary objective of this master’s thesis is to examine the potential for enhancing the
efficiency of Novo Nordisk’s on­site transportation system through a thorough analysis of
the intricacies inherent to the company’s internal transportation system in Denmark. The
goal involves the generation of an accurate and comprehensive representation of this
system by employing mixed­integer programming (MIP). Upon successful generation of
a foundational model, the intent is to refine it to the highest possible degree.
The aspiration is for this model to function as a catalyst for subsequent research and as a
groundwork for Novo Nordisk’s logistics optimization. Rather than promising a perfect, all­
encompassing solution, this work will provide a valuable starting point for the company’s
future research, allowing us to chip away at transportation inefficiencies progressively.
Through this research, the goal is not only to offer valuable insights and solutions to en­
hance efficiency in Novo Nordisk’s logistics operations, but also to contribute to the wider
comprehension of transportation optimization within the healthcare industry. This study
emphasizes the potential influence of such optimization on supply chain management,
production processes, and, ultimately, patient outcomes.
1.2
Problem Statement
The problem at hand emerged during my time working at Novo Nordisk. The in­site trans­
portation system employed by the company relies on fixed routes, which are executed
daily or weekly, and ad­hoc routes, which are performed upon booking. Novo Nordisk ex­
pressed an interest in determining whether certain ad­hoc routes were frequent enough
to be converted into fixed routes. Upon further investigation, it became apparent that
even the fixed routes had never been optimized, providing the impetus for this thesis
project. This issue has significant implications for Novo Nordisk, as it directly impacts
the company’s costs and revenues. Moreover, inefficient routing also has environmental
consequences, as suboptimal routes lead to increased CO2 emissions.
Many consequences from inefficient in­site transportation may arise. As the company
continues to grow at a remarkable rate, a lack of optimization could eventually lead to a
2
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:12==
tipping point where transportation inefficiencies significantly hinder operations, resulting
in delays, increased operating costs, and a negative impact on the company’s overall per­
formance. Moreover, the problem of suboptimal in­site transportation has wider relevance
beyond Novo Nordisk, as similar issues can be found in other companies and industries
that rely on efficient transportation systems. Addressing this problem can not only im­
prove Novo Nordisk’s in­site transportation but also contribute to the broader knowledge
of efficient transportation systems, potentially benefiting other organizations facing similar
challenges. Additionally, optimizing transportation systems can significantly reduce envi­
ronmental footprint, aligning with sustainability goals and contributing to global efforts to
combat climate change.
1.3
Background
In numerous scenarios, transportation systems are obligated to carry out a series of or­
dered collections of one or multiple types of items, after which all collected items must be
delivered to a predestined location. This particular problem is vividly illustrated in the con­
text of pharmaceutical distribution: a courier leaves a storage facility with a uniquely coded
passcard that exclusively grants access to the specific medicine consignments meant for
certain clinics or hospitals. The courier can choose the order of clinics to visit but must
complete all collections before delivering the medicines, and this action must precede any
new passcard issuance. This structured collection and delivery predicament also extends
to businesses that facilitate customers in placing orders from multiple grocery stores; the
enterprise is then tasked to complete all pickups from various locations before consoli­
dating and delivering the entire order to the customer. This framework mandates not only
a sequenced order of visits (all pickups prior to the final delivery), but also the constraint
that all pickups relating to a singular order must be executed by the same vehicle.
This study investigates a multiple­pickup and delivery problem with time windows (MPDPTW),
which is then transformed into a capacitated multiple­pickup and delivery problem with
time windows (CMPDPTW), in which a fleet of vehicles responds to a succession of re­
quests. Each request demands gathering items from many origins, which must then be
transported and offloaded at a single delivery point. A time window (TW) is also assigned
to each node, limiting pickups and deliveries to the specified start and finish hours. The
depot, which also serves as a transportation hub, has its own TW that indicates opera­
tional hours. The goal is to create workable vehicle itineraries that fulfill these collection
and delivery requirements while minimizing the total expenses associated with the routing
of this request set. In the MPDPTW setting, a single request must be handled by a single
vehicle, suggesting that all collects and associated deliveries must be completed within
a single route, potentially mingling with other requests. Furthermore, vehicle routes must
be designed with precedence constraints in mind, all while decreasing total routing costs.
Precedence constraints govern the order of node visits inside a single request. These do
not require direct precedence between the final pickup and delivery nodes; a vehicle allo­
cated to a given request must complete all pickup stops before arriving at the associated
delivery location.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
3
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.1: Example of request insertion in MPDPTW [1]
Figure 1.1 illustrates two distinct requests: R6 and R1. Request R6 comprises two pickup
points, labeled as p3 and p4, and a singular delivery point, denoted as d6. Conversely,
request R1 involves two pickup points, p1 and p2, and one delivery location, d1. As
stipulated previously, all pickup locations within a particular route must be serviced before
proceeding to the corresponding delivery point. In the illustrated example, one pickup
point of R1, one from R6, and one from R1 are serviced first in that order. Subsequently,
the cargo collected at both R1 pickup points is unloaded at d1. The vehicle then proceeds
to service p4 and eventually unloads the cargo obtained from p3 and p4 at d6. This
sequence clearly satisfies the precedence constraints, validating the route’s feasibility.
To enhance reader´s comprehension, a visual representation of the sequence explained
in Figure 1.1 is shown next in Figure 1.2. In the representation, pickup points are repre­
sented by circles, delivery points represented by squares and the depot is represented
by a triangle. Also, points in request R6 are painted dark blue, while points belonging to
request R1 are painted gray.
Figure 1.2: Visual representation of Figure 1.1
The MPDPTW is an intricate problem that exhibits significant parallels with earlier aca­
demic challenges, most notably, the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows
(PDPTW) and the Sequential Ordering Problem (SOP). These aforementioned problems
each encapsulate unique complexities and constraints, yet share similar core character­
istics with the MPDPTW, which renders their exploration pertinent to our understanding
4
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:14==
of MPDPTW.
In Chapter 2, a comprehensive review of these problems is presented. It reviews the ori­
gins of the Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP), and more specifically the PDPTW and SOP,
drawing out their similarities and differences with the MPDPTW. These insights conse­
quently contribute to an enhanced understanding of the MPDPTW’s characteristics and
complexity, providing a solid knowledge foundation for this Thesis.
1.4
Report Structure
This Master’s thesis is carefully organized into several distinct chapters, each with a
unique focus and purpose. In Chapter 1, the stage is set with a thorough introduction
of the research topic, providing an exposition on the background of the study and elabo­
rating on the problem under investigation.
Subsequently, Chapter 2 furnishes an extensive literature review, offering an overview
of various VRPs, along with a detailed exploration of literature pertinent to pickup and
delivery problems.
Chapter 3 is dedicated to presenting and describing the data used in this research, serving
as the foundational basis for the study. The MIP model formulation is outlined in Chapter 4.
It commences with a basic model (Model 1) and improves it by incorporating additional
constraints and variables to enhance its adherence to our problem scenario (Model 2).
In the subsequent Chapter 5, the Column Generation technique is explicated, detailing
how it has been integrated into Model 2 for optimized performance. The findings and
analyses of the three models are then presented in Chapter 6.
Wrapping up the main body, Chapter 7 presents practical applications of Model 3 and
suggests directions for future research. Finally, the conclusion in Chapter 8 synthesizes
the key findings of the study, encapsulating the essence of the research.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
5
==PAGE:15==
6
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:16==
2
Literature Review
The VRP was first introduced by Dantzig and Ramser in 1959 [2] as a combinatorial opti­
mization problem that aimed to optimize the delivery routes for a fleet of vehicles serving
multiple customers while minimizing the total distance traveled. The genesis of the VRP
marked a pivotal development in the field of operations research, transportation, and lo­
gistics due to its wide range of practical applications. Initially, the focus was on the devel­
opment of exact methods for solving the VRP, such as the branch and bound algorithm.
However, the computational intensity and scalability issues associated with these exact
methods drove the research community to explore alternatives.
The era of heuristics and metaheuristics began, spurred by the need to tackle larger in­
stances of the VRP. A critical juncture in this journey was the advent of the Clarke and
Wright Savings Algorithm in 1964 [3], a heuristic that balanced simplicity and effective­
ness. As computational capabilities expanded in the 1980s and 1990s, research in the
field surged, leading to the birth of various VRP variants and the development of innova­
tive solution methods. These include the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP),
and the Time­Window Vehicle Routing Problem (VRPTW) [4], broadening the VRP’s ap­
plicability to a wider range of transportation and logistics challenges.
Parallel to the development of VRP and its variants, the Sequential Ordering Problem
(SOP), a combinatorial optimization problem, was gaining traction. This involved deter­
mining the optimal sequence of tasks under certain constraints. The field witnessed the
pioneering work of Savelsbergh in 1985 and 1990 [5, 6], which introduced local search
algorithms to SOP problems. Subsequent research brought forth innovative models, such
as Ascheuer model in 2001 [7], Guerriero and Mancini’s parallel heuristic rollout method
in 2003 [8], and Letchford et al.’s novel multi­commodity flow formulations in 2015 [9].
The Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows (PDPTW) and its solutions have
also been explored extensively. The problem and its associated methods, such as the
adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic framework [10] and the integration of a multi­
start heuristic within an iterated local search [11], further illustrate the complexity and
diversity of routing and scheduling challenges.
A significant step forward in the complexity of these problems is represented by the
MPDPTW. This complex variant of the SOP and PDPTW addresses the simultaneous
planning of multiple pickup and delivery operations while respecting customer time win­
dows.
For the specific MPDPTW addressed in this thesis, it is important to understand that,
according to Berbeglia, Cordeau, Gribkovskaia, and Laporte’s classification (2007) [12],
it falls under the many­to­many pickup and delivery family. In this particular category,
each request is associated with a pickup and a delivery node, distinguishing it from one­
to­many configurations, where all commodities originate at the depot, and many­to­one
configurations, where all deliveries are directed at the depot. This introduces additional
complexity as multiple compulsory origins linked to a single delivery must all be visited (in
any order) before the delivery, and traditional pickup and delivery algorithms are unfit to
manage an MPDPTW instance due to this increased complexity.
The MPDPTW has gained significant attention in recent years due to its relevance to var­
ious real­world applications, such as parcel delivery, courier services, and in­site trans­
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
7
==PAGE:17==
portation management. The first work on MPDPTW was that of Naccache, Côté, and
Coelho (2018), who used a hybrid adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) with im­
provement operations to solve the problem exactly [1]. This was followed by Aziez (2020)
[13], who also used the branch­and­cut approach, employing numerous families of valid
inequalities to improve the linear programming relaxations of the suggested formulations.
More recently, Tran and Clariño (2021) proposed an Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [14]
algorithm to solve the problem, and Kohar and Jakhar (2021) [15] used a branch­and­cut
algorithm as a solution approach, combining branch­and­bound techniques with cutting
planes to effectively solve the capacitated MPDPTW .
The analysis of this body of literature, however, reveals a significant gap. The field still
lacks extensive research efforts that specifically address the MPDPTW, especially when it
comes to the use of exact methods and their efficacy in dealing with larger, more complex
problem instances. The existing methods, while providing significant advances, have
limitations in their scalability and ability to provide exact solutions for large instances of the
MPDPTW. Furthermore, the literature also lacks a thorough exploration of the MPDPTW
under more realistic scenarios, such as incorporating capacity constraints into the model.
The focus of this study is thus twofold. Firstly, the aim is to actualize the MPDPTW frame­
work as proposed by Naccache, Côté, and Coelho [1], filling a current gap in the literature.
Subsequently, the goal is to enhance this model through the inclusion of capacity con­
straints, thus increasing its verisimilitude to practical conditions and addressing another
void in the field.
To actualize the framework, various optimization methods will be explored. VRPs and their
variants, such as the MPDPTW, frequently morph into expansive problems, necessitating
distinctive optimization techniques for resolution within a feasible timeframe.
The most elementary and least efficient methodology to solve large optimization problems
are Greedy Heuristics. While this approach is intuitive and straightforward to implement,
such as the nearest neighbor heuristic where each vehicle is routed to the closest unvisited
customer, it may be constrained to discovering local optima and potentially overlooking the
global optimum. This point is illustrated through the complexity of the Traveling Salesman
Problem (TSP). This optimization problem aims to find the shortest possible route that
enables a salesman to visit each city once before returning to the starting point. Figure
2.1 and Table 2.1 depict the number of possible routes depending on the number of cities,
as well as the estimated time a computer would require to calculate all the routes if the
problem is to be solved to optimality using the Nearest Neighbour heuristic.
Figure 2.1: Nearest neighbour heuristic combinations for the TSP
8
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: Number of Cities, Number of Paths, and Time for the TSP
Number of Cities
Number of Paths
Computation Time
5
12
10 ms
10
181440
0,18 s
15
43589145600
12 hours
20
60822550204416000
1928 years
61
4,16e69
13,19e67 years
From Table 2.1, it’s apparent that even for relatively small datasets, a problem such as
the TSP, which is far simpler than the MPDPTW, rapidly becomes not possible to solve
to optimality. Therefore, it’s evident that different approach will be needed to effectively
solve the MPDPTW.
Next in the hierarchy of optimization methods are the traditional exact methods, which
balance moderate difficulty with moderate efficiency. These methods, such as integer
programming, employ mathematical models to represent the problem and seek an ex­
act solution. Although capable of identifying the optimal solution, they often struggle with
scalability, rendering them infeasible for large­scale issues. In Chapter 4, mixed­integer
programming will be applied to solve the problem. However, foreseeing potential ineffi­
ciencies for the datasets, there is an intention to explore more efficient techniques.
Lastly, decomposition approaches such as Column Generation and metaheuristic ap­
proaches are considered, representing a trade­off between heightened complexity and
improved efficiency. Metaheuristics are advanced­level procedures designed to select
a heuristic that is likely to generate a reasonably good solution to an optimization prob­
lem. This category includes techniques such as Genetic Algorithms, Simulated Anneal­
ing, Tabu Search, and Ant Colony Optimization [14]. While these methods offer promising
solutions and are applicable to larger problems, their implementation and fine­tuning de­
mand an elevated level of complexity.
In this thesis, the Column Generation method is selected as the problem­solving approach
due to its robust capabilities in handling large­scale optimization problems. The MPDPTW
problem is a complex optimization issue with a vast set of variables and constraints. Tra­
ditional metaheuristic techniques, although efficient for a range of problems, may not pos­
sess the necessary rigour to ensure optimal solutions within reasonable time frames for
such intricate problems.
Conversely, Column generation offers a notable advantage in tackling the expansive na­
ture of such problems. It selectively introduces the most pertinent decision variables,
such as routes in the context of VRPs, during the solution process [16]. This approach
enhances computational tractability and efficiency, particularly crucial for substantial and
intricate scenarios where enumeration of all potential routes is impractical or impossible.
The use of column generation facilitates the management of large problem instances and
the assurance of mathematical proof of optimality, an attribute often not guaranteed by
traditional metaheuristic techniques.
In Chapter 5, a thorough exploration of the Column Generation technique will be under­
taken from both theoretical and implementation perspectives. Overall, this research as­
pires to enrich the existing body of literature by providing a more in­depth examination
of the MPDPTW, proposing new solution methodologies, and addressing some of the
current limitations in the field.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
9
==PAGE:19==
10
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:20==
3
Data
Comprehension of the data is a critical determinant of a model’s evolution due to its sub­
stantial implications on the process, a thorough description of the data will be made in this
chapter.
3.1
Data collection
The received data set was split into two discrete Excel files, each housing unique informa­
tion related to the routes. The initial file, named ”Fixedroutes Mastertable” encapsulates
comprehensive data concerning established, fixed routes. The second file, labeled ”Inter­
site ad­hoc,” houses specific details relating to ad­hoc journeys. The inception stage of
this research venture necessitates an exhaustive dissection and evaluation of the avail­
able data, the outcome of which will aid in discerning key parameters and restrictions
indispensable for the ensuing formulation of a relevant model.
At first glance, the datasets present themselves as somewhat disordered, with conspicu­
ous gaps in information and disparate formats for column data across the two files. These
initial challenges, while complex, are not uncommon in the early stages of data­driven
research and are surmountable with rigorous attention to detail and disciplined method­
ology.
Refining and sanitizing the data will involve a systematic process of enhancing the data’s
quality by expunging anomalies, filling in missing values where feasible, and, perhaps
most importantly, standardizing the data format across both Excel files. Our intention is to
retain all data entries that could potentially feed into our evolving model while discarding
any sensitive or confidential information that is extraneous to the project’s objectives. The
overarching aim of this data purification process is to establish a streamlined, coherent,
and reliable dataset, thereby laying a solid foundation for the forthcoming development
and deployment of the models.
3.2
Fixed routes
Attention is now directed towards the cleaning and standardization of the datasets. The
”Fixedroutes Mastertable” dataset initially encompassed 429 rows and 28 columns, each
row representing a trip and each column offering distinct trip­related information. Follow­
ing an initial meticulous cleansing, a streamlined dataset comprising 21 essential columns
remains. This refined dataset forms the basis for subsequent analyses.
One remaining column in the dataset, referred to as ”Task”, necessitates a comprehensive
revision. It currently includes descriptions of various operations executed at each stop,
such as pickups and deliveries intended for disparate stops. Although designed to guide
truck drivers and location staff, its unstructured, non­standardized, text­based format is
incompatible with MIP models, which demand structured, algorithm­friendly inputs.
To remedy this, the approach entails restructuring each row to associate every pickup
with its corresponding delivery node, so that the total number of rows equals the pickup
count, acknowledging that multiple pickups can correspond to a single delivery node.
During the restructuring process, key context and details will be retained, including times
and locations of departures and arrivals, vehicle data, and route operational days. The
objective is to convert human­readable task descriptions into a format that the MIP model
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
11
==PAGE:21==
can utilize without losing the data’s essence and context, thereby enhancing the model’s
performance and utility. This restructuring and normalization of the data constituted a
meticulous and highly analytical process, performed almost entirely manually due to the
unstructured and human­oriented nature of the original data.
The post­processing dataset, while maintaining the same columnar structure, is leaner
with 273 rows, signifying successful data pruning and restructuring. This improves the
dataset’s manageability and computational efficiency, optimizing it for future research
stages without compromising its comprehensive nature.
3.3
Ad­hoc Trips
The ”Intersite ad­hoc” table, providing details of ad­hoc trips, is not designed for optimiza­
tion due to its unidirectional nature: each row includes a pickup and delivery. Instead, the
task involves determining the potential of these trips to be integrated into the ”Fixedroutes
mastertable.” The key criterion for this transition is that an ad­hoc trip must occur at least
once per week, facilitating advance planning and cost reduction.
The dataset consists of approximately 18,000 rows and 99 columns, each row represent­
ing an ad­hoc trip from 2019 to 2023. Key details include pickup and delivery locations
and times, transportation type and conditions, and the commodities transported. While
additional information exists, focus is confined to pertinent data, maintaining data integrity
and confidentiality.
Upon rigorous examination of the dataset, it was concluded that there is no compelling ba­
sis to propose any Ad­hoc trips to supplement the fixed ones. The temporal pattern of the
trips doesn’t exhibit a sufficient level of regularity to qualify them as potential candidates
for fixed routes. Consequently, this aspect streamlines the problem context, allowing for
exclusive focus on the optimization of the given fixed routes.
12
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:22==
3.4
Final Dataset Description
3.4.1
Final Dataset Attributes
Post a rigorous data processing phase, the final dataset is ready to feed into the model.
The forthcoming section provides an in­depth account of the variables encompassing task
origin and destination, pickup and delivery times, task specifics, and task operational
days. Each attribute is integral to the models in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5, offering vital
information for its successful operation.
Tables 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, provide a comprehensive display of the respective data types for
the reader.
Table 3.1: Description of Location Atrributes
Column Name
Type
Description
Trip_number
Integer
Unique ID of the pickup loca­
tion
From_City_location
String
Name of the city of the pickup
location
From_Building_location
String
Name of the building at the
pickup location
From_room
String
Room or specific area within
the building of the pickup lo­
cation
To_City_location
String
Name of the city of the deliv­
ery location
To_Building_location
String
Name of the building at the
delivery location
To_room
String
Room or specific area within
the building of the delivery lo­
cation
Table 3.1 presents the key location attributes constituting our refined dataset, each playing
a crucial role in formulating and solving the MPDPTW.
The Trip_number serves as a unique identifier for each pickup location, vital for distin­
guishing and tracking the individual tasks. From_City_location, From_Building_location,
and From_room collectively provide an intricate description of the pickup locations, con­
tributing to the accurate estimation of travel times and efficient route planning. Similarly,
To_City_location, To_Building_location, and To_room provide a detailed account of
the delivery locations, ensuring precise deliveries.
These attributes form the backbone of the models, influencing the planning of routes,
schedules, and the overall efficacy of the operations.
Table 3.2 presents the time­related attributes within our dataset.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
13
==PAGE:23==
Table 3.2: Description of Time Attributes
Column Name
Type
Description
af
Float
Earliest time of arrival at the pickup location
bf
Float
Latest time of arrival at the pickup location
sf
Float
Service time at the pickup location
at
Float
Earliest time of arrival at the delivery location
bt
Float
Latest time of arrival at the delivery location
st
Float
Service time at the delivery location
Monday
Boolean
Indicator for whether service is required on
Monday
Tuesday
Boolean
Indicator for whether service is required on
Tuesday
Wednesday
Boolean
Indicator for whether service is required on
Wednesday
Thursday
Boolean
Indicator for whether service is required on
Thursday
Friday
Boolean
Indicator for whether service is required on
Friday
Saturday
Boolean
Indicator for whether service is required on
Saturday
Sunday
Boolean
Indicator for whether service is required on
Sunday
The columns af and bf specify the earliest and latest possible times of arrival at the pickup
location, respectively. These time windows are crucial for ensuring that pickups are made
within feasible and acceptable timeframes. Similarly, at and bt represent the earliest and
latest arrival times at the delivery location, dictating when deliveries need to be made.
The parameters sf and st denote the service times at the pickup and delivery locations,
respectively, providing valuable insight into the duration of each task and helping to ac­
curately schedule the routes. The boolean indicators Monday through Sunday represent
the days of the week on which each service is required. These attributes are essential for
planning and scheduling the tasks over a weekly cycle, allowing for efficient utilization of
resources while meeting the varying demands of each day.
Finally, Table 3.3 provides an overview of the transportation­specific attributes incorpo­
rated in our dataset.
Table 3.3: Description of Transportation Attributes
Column Name
Type
Description
Car
String
Type of vehicle used for the task
Task
String
Description of the task
Comments on task
String
Additional comments on the task
Temperature
String
Temperature conditions required for the transport
Demand
Integer
Demand for the service
Commodity
String
Type of goods to be transported
The Car column denotes the type of vehicle used for each task, which can influence both
14
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:24==
the capacity and the operational costs. The Task and Comments on task columns contain
descriptions and additional comments about each task, respectively, providing contextual
details that could impact route planning and task assignment.
The Temperature column indicates the temperature conditions required for transport. This
attribute is particularly important for tasks involving temperature­sensitive goods such as
pharmaceutical ingredients, where adherence to these conditions is imperative for main­
taining the quality and integrity of the transported items.
Demand represents the service demand for each task, which is instrumental in planning
the capacity utilization of the vehicles. Lastly, the Commodity column describes the type
of goods being transported, which could potentially influence factors such as vehicle se­
lection, route planning, and regulatory compliance.
These transportation­related attributes, while not directly associated with the temporal
or spatial aspects of the problem, provide crucial contextual details that can influence
the solutions of the problem. In essence, they underline the multi­faceted nature of the
problem, reinforcing the need for comprehensive and adaptable modeling approaches.
3.4.2
Final Dataset Analysis
The subsequent part of the analysis involves a detailed examination of the values present
within our dataset. Initially, the focus is put on the spatial distribution of locations involved
in the tasks.
Figure 3.1 visually illustrates the geographical spread of all the pickup and delivery loca­
tions in our dataset, situated within the regions of Hovedstaden and Sjælland in Denmark.
The map provides an intuitive understanding of the geographical scope of our study, high­
lighting the diverse areas that our routing model needs to cover. This visualization is
particularly useful in gaining a quick understanding of the geographical constraints and
challenges inherent to the problem that is aimed to solve.
Understanding the spatial distribution of these locations is crucial for the MPDPTW prob­
lem, as it directly influences the routing decisions. Locations in close proximity are likely
to be grouped together in the same route, whereas those farther apart may necessitate
separate trips. Moreover, the geographical spread also impacts the time taken to travel
between locations, further complicating the task of creating efficient and feasible routes.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
15
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Locations’ geographical representation
Figure 3.1 reveals that our dataset comprises 17 distinct locations, most of which are
situated within the capital region. However, two locations stand apart from the rest due
to their strategic importance in Novo Nordisk’s operations. These further locations are
the Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) production plant in Kalundborg and another
crucial operational site in Lolland.
These outliers are particularly noteworthy due to their considerable distance from the clus­
ter of other locations and their vital role within the supply chain. The API production plant
in Kalundborg is a central node for Novo Nordisk, producing essential components that
are then transported to other locations for further processing or delivery. Additionally, we
identify a location in Lolland, distinct from the main cluster of locations. This site serves a
unique purpose, functioning as a waste disposal facility. Given the nature of pharmaceuti­
cal manufacturing processes, the generation of waste is inevitable, necessitating suitable
disposal methods.
The presence of these outliers introduces additional complexity into the routing problem.
They necessitate the creation of routes that can efficiently service these distant locations
while also catering to the needs of the other, more clustered locations. As such, these
outliers significantly impact the design and optimization of our routes, warranting their
specific mention and further analysis in our study.
As the analysis progresses, attention turns towards the distribution of trips across different
locations. Figure 3.2 provides a comprehensive overview of this aspect, indicating the
number of trips undertaken per location.
16
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:26==
Upon examination, it becomes evident that six nodes dominate the landscape, accounting
for nearly all the trips. These nodes, which can be considered the most critical in our
network, form the primary hubs of activity within our routing system. The sheer volume
of trips concentrated at these locations underscores their importance and implies a high
level of inter connectivity and frequent movement of goods or services.
Figure 3.2: Trips per city
Figure 3.3 presents the hourly distribution of trips, revealing a striking concentration during
typical office working hours, specifically between 7 am and 4 pm. This temporal pattern
is not incidental but rather reflective of the financial considerations tied to transportation
logistics. The predominance of trip activities during office hours can be attributed to the
cost dynamics of transportation services. Specifically, prices for transportation escalate
significantly outside of the standard office hours, making these times less economically
viable for routine pickups and deliveries.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
17
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: Hourly distribution of the trips
The final component of our dataset analysis pertains to the transportation vehicles utilized
within our network. Table 3.4 displays each vehicle’s characteristics, including type of
vehicle, transportation temperature, commodities and capacity.
The vehicle type, signified by the name, provides insight into its specific capabilities. No­
tably, the term ’TR’ within a vehicle’s name denotes its ability to transport temperature­
regulated, or refrigerated, goods. Similarly, vehicles marked with ’Double’ feature dual
compartments, allowing for the simultaneous transportation of both refrigerated and room
temperature goods. Some vehicles are also equipped to handle frozen goods. The col­
umn labeled ’Tº’ further clarifies each vehicle’s temperature regulation abilities.
Table 3.4: Description of Time Attributes
Type of truck
Tº
Commodity
Capacity
Van
Room
Boxes
4
Van with Lift
Room
Pallets
4
TR Van
2­8ºC
Pallets
4
TR Van Double
Room & 2­8ºC
Pallets
4
TR Truck 5­18
2­8ºC
Pallets
18
TR Truck 5­18 Double
Room & 2­8ºC
Pallets
18
TR Truck 5­18 Frozen
­25 to ­15ºC
Pallets
18
Truck 19­32
Room
Pallets
32
TR Truck 19­32
2­8ºC
Pallets
32
TR Truck 19­32 Double
Room & 2­8ºC
Pallets
32
TR Truck 19­32 Frozen
­25 to ­15ºC
Pallets
32
In this research, substantial computational demand is anticipated due to the complexity
of the problems under consideration. The extensive number of nodes, diversity of trucks,
and other associated factors contribute to this computational intensity. To enhance the
18
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:28==
efficiency of the models, a decision is made to partition the original dataset based on the
type of trucks, resulting in eleven distinct sub­datasets.
Each of these sub­datasets maintains the same column structure, but they differ in the
number of rows due to the varied allocation of truck types. Further detail on the formation
and characteristics of these datasets is provided in Chapter 6 of this thesis, offering deeper
insight into their composition and applicability in our modeling process.
3.4.3
Time Matrix
The final preparatory step before developing the model is to establish the time matrix.
Our primary aim is time minimization, where the time is expressed in hours. Our available
data includes the inter­site distances (in km). Consequently, it’s crucial to convert these
distances into a time unit to amalgamate both types of costs effectively.
Table 3.5: Speed Limits for Heavy Goods Vehicles in Different Road Types in DK [17]
Country
Urban Roads
Non­Urban Roads
Expressways
Motorways
Denmark
50 km/h
70 km/h
80 km/h
80 km/h
Based on the Table 3.5, an average speed of 60km/h is adopted for the transport ve­
hicles. This assumption facilitates calculations by equating 1km to 1 minute of driving
time. Moreover, the utility of the ”Ad­hoc routes” Excel file comes to light. Since each row
encompasses a pickup and delivery, this data is employed to compute the average time
expended for a delivery within the same building, and within the same site. It is crucial
to bear in mind that this calculation excludes service time, as it is already incorporated in
the ”Fixed­routes” Excel file. These average times become integral to the Python script,
aiding in the formulation of the time matrix.
Upon establishing the necessary times and distances, the creation of a Python script
ensues that generates a Time Matrix for each dataset. Given that there are 17 different
sites with their corresponding coordinates, the code executes the following steps:
Algorithm 1 Calculation of Time Matrix
Inputs: Dataset
Associate each pickup and delivery point with its respective coordinates.
Calculate pairwise distances between every pair of nodes:
for each pair of nodes (i, j) do
if nodes (i, j) are in the same site but different buildings then
Assign time = 7 minutes
else if nodes (i, j) are in the same building but different rooms then
Assign time = 2 minutes
else
Calculate distance in km based on coordinates which is equivalent to the time in
minutes
end if
Store distance in the time matrix
end for
Divide the time matrix by 60 to obtain times in hours.
Having thoroughly examined the data and successfully generated the Time Matrix for each
dataset, the design and formulation of our Base Model is now started.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
19
==PAGE:29==
20
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:30==
4
Model Formulation
Having completed the data processing and analysis tasks delineated in Chapter 3, the
subsequent step in this research involves the formulation of a MIP model to address the
identified problem. The choice to employ an MIP model is motivated by its widespread
popularity within the field of operations research and its inherent ability to effectively han­
dle complex optimization problems, particularly those characterized by both continuous
and discrete variables, as well as linear and nonlinear constraints.
The development of the MIP model for this research will be executed in three stages: the
construction of a base model (Model 1), the enhancement of the base model to create
an improved version (Model 2), and finally, the application of column generation (Model
3) to enhance computational efficiency considerations into the improved model in Chap­
ter 5. This structured approach ensures that the model adequately captures the problem’s
complexities while addressing potential limitations and maintaining equitable solutions.
MPDPTW represents a substantial challenge within the field of operational research, par­
ticularly due to its intrinsic complexity and real­world applicability. Despite the significance
of the problem, only a limited amount of research has been conducted, leaving consider­
able room for exploration and enhancement. Among the few existing works, one of the
most relevant is the paper by Naccache [1], which serves as the primary foundation for
this research. Therefore, this paper is used as the basis for the mathematical formulation
of the problem, retaining its MIP formulation and the implementation in Julia. The over­
arching objective of this research, as in most MPDPTW studies, is to establish the most
efficient routing plan for the vehicles. This plan must comply with the service time and
time window constraints of each node, while also respecting the precedence constraints
of the requests. The ultimate goal is to minimize the total cost of the routing plan, with
further insights and details provided in Section 4.1.
Building upon Model 1, Model 2 seeks to enhance its real­world resemblance and applica­
bility. To achieve this, capacity constraints for the vehicles are introduced in Section 4.2.
Recognizing these constraints allows for a more authentic representation of the vehicles’
ability to carry items, thereby ensuring the generation of feasible and practical routes. The
inclusion of capacity constraints in the MPDPTW model is crucial. It not only emulates
real­world scenarios with higher fidelity, but it also optimizes the routing plan concerning
cost, time, and distance. Consequently, it contributes towards a more robust and effective
solution.
In Chapter 5 the model will be solved using Column Generation, making it better equipped
to handle larger datasets, thereby increasing its scalability and suitability for real­world ap­
plications. The integration of these heuristics will not only expedite the problem­solving
process but also uphold the quality of the solutions obtained. As a result, Model 3 pro­
vides a more efficient approach to tackling the CMPDPTW problem, while maintaining the
practicality and efficacy of the derived routing plans.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
21
==PAGE:31==
4.1
Base Model ­ Model 1
This section provides a comprehensive overview of the Base model developed by Nac­
cache, Côté and Coelho in [1]. To begin with, all the sets, parameters, decision variables,
auxiliary variables, inescapable slack variables, and penalty parameters that are utilized
within the base model are detailed. Following this, the objectives and restrictions associ­
ated with the model are clarified.
A problem instance of the MPDPTW consists of n requests and m vehicles. Let P =
{1, . . . , p} denote the set of pickup nodes, and D = {p + 1, . . . , p + n} represent the set
of delivery nodes with |D| = n and p ≥n. The set of requests to be routed is defined
as R = {r1, . . . , rn}. Each request r ∈R is characterized by a subset of pickup nodes
Pr ⊆P and a delivery node dr ∈D. Every pickup node is uniquely associated with a
request, and each request contains at least one pickup node. The set of customer nodes
is N = P ∪D. For a node i ∈N, let r(i) denote the corresponding request.
The available vehicles are represented by the set K = {1, . . . , m}. The graph G = (V, A)
is composed of nodes V = N ∪{0, p + n + 1}, where nodes 0 and p + n + 1 serve as the
starting and ending depot, respectively. Each node i ∈V has an associated service time
si and a time window [ai, bi]. A vehicle may arrive at node i before the start of its time
window ai but must wait until ai to begin servicing. Furthermore, the vehicle must arrive
at node i prior to bi to ensure that service commences within the time window.
The set of arcs, A = I × J, omits arcs that result in infeasible solutions. Arc (i, j) is
excluded if i is a pickup node and j is its corresponding delivery node, given that bj <
ai +si +tij. Each arc (i, j) ∈A has an associated distance dij ≥0 and travel time tij ≥0.
4.1.1
Sets, parameters and variables
Table 4.1: Description of Sets, Parameters, and Decision Variables of the MPDPTW
Sets
Description
A
Set of arcs
I
Set of nodes (Including depot)
J
Set of nodes (Including depot)
P
Set of pickup locations
D
Set of delivery locations
R
Set of requests
N
Set of customer nodes
Pr
Array of sets where Pr(r) contains the pickup node for
request r
K
Set of vehicles
Parameters
Description
p
Number of pickups
n
Number of deliveries
m
Number of vehicles
R
Number of requests
ai
Earliest arrival time to node i ∈I
bi
Latest arrival time to node i ∈I
si
Associated service time for node i ∈I
drr
Array which contains the delivery node for request r
∈R
22
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:32==
Table 4.1 (continued)
Parameters
Description
cij
Cost matrix
RNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as either pickup
or delivery node
RNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as pickup node
DNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as delivery node
M
The ”Big M”
Decision Variables
Description
xk
ij
Equals 1 if arc (i, j) is traversed by vehicle k ∈K, and
0 otherwise
yrk
Equals 1 if request r ∈R is served by vehicle k ∈K,
and 0 otherwise
Si
Denotes the start of service at node i ∈V
4.1.2
Objective Function
The objective function in this model is to minimize the total transportation cost. This is
computed by summing the cost of traversing from node i to node j, across all vehicles
and nodes. The cost cij is equivalent to the travel time tij in this model.
Minimize
∑
k∈K
∑
(i,j)∈A
cijxk
ij
(4.1)
4.1.3
Constraints
In this section, the constraints embedded within the base model are detailed and analyzed,
each formulated to ensure the model accurately captures the complexity of the operational
logistics problem under study. These constraints reflect various restrictions inherent to
the problem, such as vehicle capacity limitations, service time windows, and the order of
pickup and delivery operations.
Degree Constraints
If a request r has a node i as either a pickup or delivery point, then exactly one vehicle k
must visit node i. This implies that vehicle k leaves node i for some node j and arrives
at node i from some node j.
∑
j∈J
xk
ij = ykr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : PNri = true
(4.2)
∑
j∈J
xk
ji = ykr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : PNri = true
(4.3)
Vehicle Constraints
Constraint 4.4 states that at most one vehicle can leave the start node for any other node.
This prevents more than one vehicle from starting a route at the same time.
∑
k∈1:K,j∈{2,..,|J|}
xk
1j ≤1
(4.4)
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
23
==PAGE:33==
In constraint (4.5) each request r is forced to be serviced by exactly one vehicle.
∑
r∈R
ykr = 1,
∀k ∈K
(4.5)
Time Constraints
The time Si at which service starts at node i must fall within the time window [ai, bi].
ai ≤Si ≤bi,
∀i ∈I
(4.6)
For any two nodes i and j, if any vehicle moves from i to j, the service start time at node
j must be no earlier than the time immediately after the service at node i is finished.
Sj ≥Si + si + tij −M · (1 −
∑
k∈K
xk
ij),
∀(i, j) ∈A
(4.7)
Precedence Order Constraint
For any pickup node i and delivery node j associated with the same request r, the service
start time at node j (the delivery point) must be no earlier than the time immediately after
the service at node i (a pickup point) is completed.
Sj ≥Si + si + tij,
∀r ∈R, i ∈I, j ∈J : DNrj&PNri = true
(4.8)
4.1.4
Variables
Finally, the variables, as described in Table 4.1, are the following.
xk
ij ∈{0, 1},
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(4.9)
yrk ∈{0, 1},
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(4.10)
Si ≥0,
∀i ∈I
(4.11)
24
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:34==
4.1.5
Full Base Model
Minimize
∑
k∈K
∑
(i,j)∈A
cijxk
ij
(4.1)
Subject to
∑
j∈J
xk
ij = ykr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : PNri = true
(4.2)
∑
j∈J
xk
ji = ykr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : PNri = true
(4.3)
∑
k∈K,j∈{2,..,|J|}
xk
1j ≤1,
(4.4)
∑
r∈R
ykr = 1,
∀k ∈K
(4.5)
ai ≤Si ≤bi,
∀i ∈I
(4.6)
Sj ≥Si + si + tij −M · (1 −
∑
k∈K
xk
ij),
∀(i, j) ∈A
(4.7)
Sj ≥Si + si + tij,
∀r ∈R, i ∈I, j ∈J : DNrj&PNri = true
(4.8)
xk
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(4.9)
yrk ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(4.10)
Si ≥0
∀i ∈I
(4.11)
The Base Model has now been implemented, based on the work of Naccache, Côté, and
Coelho (2018) [1]. Serving as a suitable initial point, it is recognized that to enhance
the model’s verisimilitude, the incorporation of additional constraints is essential. These
improvements will align the model more closely with real­world scenarios. In the upcoming
section 4.2, capacity constraints will be included, enhancing the model’s practicality and
fostering a stronger resemblance to real­world circumstances.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
25
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Capacitated MPDPTW ­ Model 2
In our pursuit of enhancing the base model, our next objective entails the introduction
of an additional layer of complexity and realism: the integration of vehicle capacity con­
straints. This enhancement marks an important step towards replicating real­world logis­
tics scenarios where the carrying ability of the vehicles plays a pivotal role in planning and
executing routes.
Incorporating capacity constraints invariably increases the intricacy of our model, hence
elevating its computational demands. This complexity arises from the addition of numer­
ous decision variables and constraints, each influencing the optimal routing plan and its
corresponding cost. Despite the increased computational effort, it is an essential en­
hancement to ensure the model’s practical applicability.
A notable aspect of this model is its ability to optionally forego certain pickups. While this
might seem counterintuitive, it grants the model additional flexibility, allowing it to explore
a wider range of possible solutions. To prevent the excessive skipping of pickups, this
decision is heavily penalized in the objective function.
The forthcoming discussion on the capacitated model unfolds as follows: Firstly, the sets,
parameters, and variables contributing to the formulation of the model are presented. This
is followed by elaborating on the newly integrated constraints, emphasizing each one’s
contribution to the model’s overall structure. Lastly, a comprehensive commentary on
the model is provided, delving into the intricate interplay between the added constraints,
existing parameters, variables, and the penalization term in the objective function.
In light of these additions, an attempt is made to bridge the gap between the theoretical
and practical realms of the CMPDPTW, striving for a solution that is not only optimal but
also realistic and applicable in a wide range of scenarios. The ultimate goal remains to
minimize the total cost of the routing plan while ensuring adherence to service time, time
window, and capacity constraints, even if it implies incurring penalties for skipping pickups
under certain circumstances.
4.2.1
Sets, parameters and variables
The table below outlines the sets, parameters, and variables utilized in Model 2. Elements
that are new introductions, as compared to Model 1, are highlighted in bold for ease of
identification and comparison.
Table 4.2: Description of Sets, Parameters, and Decision Variables of the Model 2
Sets
Description
A
Set of arcs
I
Set of nodes (Including depot)
J
Set of nodes (Including depot)
P
Set of pickup locations
D
Set of delivery locations
R
Set of requests
N
Set of customer nodes
Pr
Array of sets where Pr(r) contains the pickup node for
request r
K
Set of vehicles
Parameters
Description
26
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.2 (continued)
p
Number of pickups
n
Number of deliveries
m
Number of vehicles
ai
Earliest arrival time to node i ∈I
bi
Latest arrival time to node i ∈I
si
Associated service time for node i ∈I
drr
Array which contains the delivery node for request r
∈R
cij
Cost matrix
RNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as either pickup
or delivery node
RNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as pickup node
DNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as delivery node
M
The ”Big M”
Q
Vehicle capacity
qi
Demands vector. Positive for pickup, negative for
deliveries
Decision Variables
Description
xk
ij
Equals 1 if arc (i, j) is traversed by vehicle k ∈K, and
0 otherwise
yrk
Equals 1 if request r ∈R is served by vehicle k ∈K,
and 0 otherwise
Si
Denotes the start of service at node i ∈I
capkj
Denotes the load immediately after the departure
from node j ∈J, for vehicle k ∈K
pdi
Equals 1 if the pickup or delivery is made at node
i ∈I, 0 otherwise
xbk
ij
Stores the existing solution in order to later cal­
culate the Hamming Distance
4.2.2
Objective Function
The objective function (4.12) consists of two main components aimed at minimizing the
total cost of the routing plan, and heavily penalizing any skipped pickups.
The first component represents the total cost associated with the routing plan. Here, cij
stands for the cost of travel between node i and j, and xk
ij is the decision variable that
dictates if vehicle k travels directly from node i to node j.
The second component introduces a heavy penalty for any skipped pickups. The binary
parameter pdi indicates whether a pickup is made at node i or not, with M serving as a
large penalty multiplier for each skipped pickup. The large value of M ensures that the
model avoids skipping pickups unless absolutely necessary to obtain a feasible solution.
Minimize
∑
k∈K
∑
(i,j)∈A
cijxk
ij + M ·
∑
i∈I
(1 −pdi)
(4.12)
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
27
==PAGE:37==
4.2.3
Constraints
In this section, the constraints embedded within the improved model are detailed. While
maintaining the constraints from the base model such as the degree constraints, the ve­
hicle constraints, the time constraints, and the precedence order constraints; two new
dimensions of complexity are introduced: capacity constraints and a Hamming distance
constraint.
Capacity Constraints
This constraint ensures that for every vehicle k in set K of vehicles, and for every node j
from 1 to J −1, the load of the vehicle immediately after departing from node j, denoted by
cap[k, j], does not exceed the capacity of the vehicle Q[k]. This constraint is essential to
maintain the realism of the model, reflecting the physical limit each vehicle has concerning
its load capacity.
capkj ≤Qk,
∀k ∈K, j ∈{1, 2, .., |J| −1}
(4.13)
Constraint (4.14) ensures that at the end of the route (at the last node of J), every vehicle
k in set K must have an empty load. This constraint mirrors the logic that all deliveries
are completed by the end of the route, meaning there should be no remaining load in any
vehicle.
capk|J| ≤0,
∀k ∈K
(4.14)
Constraint (4.15) offers a comprehensive representation of the vehicle load dynamics
during customer service. This load update rule is triggered when a vehicle k transits
directly from node i to node j, represented by Xkij = 1. Under such circumstances,
the load of the vehicle after servicing customer i, denoted by cki, in conjunction with the
demand at customer j, denoted by qj, play a significant role in defining the updated load
of the vehicle. The utilization of a large constant, M, serves to relax the constraints
when a direct transition from node i to node j does not occur for vehicle k (Xkij = 0).
This relaxation accounts for scenarios where the vehicle may not service customers in a
sequential manner.
capkj + M · (1 −xk
ij) ≥capki + qj,
∀i ̸= j ∈A, k ∈K
(4.15)
The next two constraints handle the load dynamics when vehicle k departs from the depot
and moves directly to customer node j, and when it comes back to depot:
Constraint (4.16) stipulates the initial load condition when a vehicle departs from the depot,
considering the delivery load for the first customer node visited. By handling this initial
transition, the constraint sets the foundation for the load dynamics for the rest of the routing
plan.
capkj + M · (1 −xk
1j) ≥qj,
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(4.16)
Constraint (4.17) addresses the vehicle’s return to the depot, ensuring that it comes back
with an empty load, signifying that all deliveries have been completed. This constraint
is critical in demonstrating that all tasks have been completed within the defined routing
plan, thereby asserting the model’s completeness and practicality.
capkj + M · (1 −xk
|I|j) ≥qj,
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(4.17)
28
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:38==
Hamming Distance Constraint
The Hamming distance, originating from information theory and named after Richard
Hamming [18], is a measure of the difference between two binary vectors of equal length
[19]. It quantifies the number of bit positions where the two vectors differ, which makes it
a powerful tool when dealing with binary decision variables in operations research. Ham­
ming distance constraints are introduced in optimization models to enforce certain con­
ditions on binary decision variables. They provide an efficient way to manage specific
situations where binary variables should either coincide or diverge, thereby refining the
feasible solution space of the model.
Constraint (4.18) is a Hamming distance constraint. The binary variables xk
ij and xbk
ij
represent complementary conditions: if vehicle k moves directly from node i to node j,
xk
ij is 1, and xbk
ij is 0, and vice versa. The constraint measures the Hamming distance
between these binary decision variables, limiting this distance to be less than or equal to
the number of vehicles, K. It effectively imposes a form of balance between these decision
variables, restricting the extent of divergence between xk
ij and xbk
ij across all vehicles and
nodes. This tailored application of the Hamming distance in the model enhances its control
over the feasible solutions and adds more depth to the decision­making process.
∑
k∈K
∑
(i,j)∈A
(
xk
ij(1 −xbk
ij) + (1 −xk
ij)xbk
ij
)
≤K
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(4.18)
Incorporating this Hamming distance constraint into the model ensures that the solution
does not deviate drastically from a prior feasible solution, thus providing the model with a
form of solution stability. This is particularly crucial in an iterative optimization procedure,
where each iteration builds upon the solution found in the previous iteration. Ensuring
the solution only deviates to a certain extent from the previous one is a strategic way to
guide the search in the solution space, allowing the model to explore new solutions while
avoiding the risk of straying too far away, which could lead to non­optimal or infeasible
solutions.
Moreover, the Hamming distance constraint can also be an enabler for solution inter­
pretability. In real­world applications, solutions that involve drastic changes from one
iteration to the next can be hard to implement and justify, as they may disrupt current
operations. By controlling the Hamming distance, this constraint ensures that the model
recommends changes that are incremental, making the transition between solutions more
manageable and the solutions themselves more interpretable to decision­makers.
Finally, it’s also worth noting that the Hamming distance constraint serves as an effective
way to balance exploration and exploitation in the optimization process. The exploration
is necessary to find different regions of the solution space that may contain the optimal
solution, while exploitation is necessary to thoroughly search within a promising region
to find the best solutions. The Hamming distance constraint, by limiting the number of
changes from the previous solution, strikes a balance between these two aspects, thereby
enhancing the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the optimization procedure.
Variables
The new variables included in Model 2 are the following.
capkj ≥0,
∀k ∈K, j ∈J
(4.19)
pdi ∈{0, 1},
∀i ∈I
(4.20)
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
29
==PAGE:39==
xbk
ij ∈{0, 1},
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(4.21)
4.2.4
Full CMPDPTW Model
Model 2 is then formulated in the following way:
Minimize
∑
k∈K
∑
(i,j)∈A
cijxk
ij + M ·
∑
i∈I
(1 −pdi)
(4.12)
Subject to
∑
j∈J
xk
ij = ykr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : PNri = true
(4.2)
∑
j∈J
xk
ji = ykr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : PNri = true
(4.3)
∑
k∈K,j∈{2,..,|J|}
xk
1j ≤1,
(4.4)
∑
r∈R
ykr = 1,
∀k ∈K
(4.5)
ai ≤Si ≤bi,
∀i ∈I
(4.6)
Sj ≥Si + si + tij −M · (1 −
∑
k∈K
xk
ij),
∀(i, j) ∈A
(4.7)
Sj ≥Si + si + tij,
∀r ∈R, i ∈I, j ∈J : DNrj&PNri = true
(4.8)
capkj ≤Qk,
∀k ∈K, j ∈{1, 2, .., |J| −1}
(4.13)
capk|J| ≤0,
∀k ∈K
(4.14)
capkj + M · (1 −xk
ij) ≥capki + qj,
∀i ̸= j ∈A, k ∈K
(4.15)
capkj + M · (1 −xk
1j) ≥qj,
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(4.16)
capkj + M · (1 −xk
|I|j) ≥qj,
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(4.17)
∑
k∈K
∑
(i,j)∈A
(
xk
ij(1 −xbk
ij) + (1 −xk
ij)xbk
ij
)
≤K
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(4.18)
xk
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(4.9)
yrk ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(4.10)
Si ≥0
∀i ∈I
(4.11)
capkj ≥0
∀k ∈K, j ∈J
(4.19)
pdi ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I
(4.20)
xbk
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(4.21)
With the introduction of vehicle capacity constraints in Model 2, a significant increase
in realism is achieved, enabling a more accurate approximation of real­world scenarios.
This enhanced model can thus be used more effectively to optimize in­site transporta­
tion. However, the addition of these constraints, along with their accompanying variables,
presents a downside. It renders the model computationally heavier, and therefore, more
time­consuming to execute.
A strategy adopted to manage this computational increase involves the introduction of a
Hamming distance constraint. The role of this constraint is crucial as it provides an ef­
30
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:40==
fective method for handling situations where binary variables should either coincide or di­
verge. In other words, it imparts nuanced control over the feasible solution space, thereby
streamlining the computational process.
Despite the inclusion of the Hamming distance constraint, the model remains relatively
expensive to execute, largely due to the high running time. This issue necessitates further
enhancement and optimization of the model.
Thus, in the forthcoming chapter of this thesis, the application of the Column Generation
technique will be explored. This strategy, renowned for its efficiency in solving large­
scale linear programming problems, aims to address the model’s computational ineffi­
ciencies. By implementing a Column Generation approach, the aspiration is to render
the model more computationally tractable and significantly reduce its run time, thereby
enabling more efficient solutions to the CMPDPTW problem.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
31
==PAGE:41==
32
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:42==
5
Column Generation ­ Model 3
The concept of column generation has its roots in Dantzig­Wolfe decomposition, a tech­
nique introduced by George Dantzig and Philip Wolfe in the early 1960s [20], but was
originally invented by Ford and Fulkerson in 1962 [21]. This method aims to solve large­
scale linear programs by decomposing them into a master problem and a set of subprob­
lems, leading to the birth of column generation [21]. At its core, column generation is an
iterative method designed to tackle large­scale linear programming problems that have a
high number of variables, commonly known as columns.
One of the key benefits of column generation lies in its ability to handle complex problems
efficiently. While traditional methods of linear programming might find it challenging to
navigate problems with a large number of variables, column generation uses a ’divide­
and­conquer’ approach. This method splits the problem into a restricted master problem
(RMP) and subproblems, dealing with a fraction of variables at a time. The RMP is first
solved with a limited number of variables and an initial fake solution in the form of very ex­
pensive columns, following which the subproblems generate new variables (or columns)
to be included in the RMP. This process iteratively continues until no further improvement
in the objective function is possible. This mechanism significantly reduces the computa­
tional burden by tackling a smaller set of variables at each iteration, enhancing both the
efficiency and the scalability of problem­solving.
In the context of VRPs, column generation emerges as a particularly effective strategy.
VRPs are notoriously challenging, involving complex constraints and large­scale scenar­
ios, often with a considerable number of routes (variables). The flexibility and efficiency of
column generation make it a viable option for addressing such difficulties. By reducing the
large set of potential vehicle routes to a smaller, more manageable subset, column gener­
ation significantly improves computational tractability. As each route is represented as a
column in the matrix of constraints, the method strategically generates and incorporates
only those columns (routes) that are likely to lead to a better solution. In essence, the
method iteratively ’generates’ only the most promising ’columns’ (routes), thereby leading
to substantial gains in computational efficiency and solution quality.
5.1
Column generation Description
The fundamental principle behind Column Generation is the inclusion of a small subset of
the most promising variables for consideration while excluding the rest, thereby reducing
the overall problem size to a more manageable scale.
In the context of the Column Generation algorithm, the problem is bifurcated into two
sections: the master problem, which is the original problem with only a fraction of the
variables under scrutiny, and the subproblem, a supplementary problem formulated to
identify an ’improving variable’, which can enhance the objective function of the master
problem.
The algorithm commences with the initialization of the master problem and the subprob­
lem. The master problem is then solved, and an improving variable is searched for using
the subproblem. If an improving variable is identified, it is incorporated into the master
problem, and the process is repeated. Conversely, if no improving variable is discovered,
the solution for the master problem is classified as optimal, leading to the termination of
the algorithm.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
33
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.1: Column Generation Algorithm
In the following sections, the intricacies of the Column Generation method will be ex­
plained, using the provided diagram in Figure 5.1 as a roadmap to guide our exploration.
5.2
Master Problem
The Column Generation methodology commences with the Master Problem, which is a
simplified rendition of the original problem, contemplating only a fraction of the variables.
This simplification doesn’t represent a compromise but a strategic choice that allows con­
centration on a reduced set of variables, serving as an initial point for iterative solution
improvement.
Mirroring the original problem, the Master Problem preserves its foundational structure
and constraints. However, the problem’s complexity is diminished by constraining the
number of variables under consideration, which in turn, makes the problem more tractable.
The variables selected are not random but identified through preliminary analysis, which
suggests their likely presence in the optimal solution.
The solution derived from the Master Problem delivers a lower bound for the original prob­
lem. This lower bound provides more than a mere numerical estimate; it offers valuable
insight, revealing the structure of the optimal solution and emphasizing the variables with
a significant contribution to it.
It is noteworthy that the Master Problem isn’t a solitary entity. It shares an intricate link with
the Subproblem via an iterative process of variable addition. The Subproblem undertakes
the critical role of identifying an improving variable ­ a variable absent from the Master
Problem, which, if incorporated, could enhance the value of the objective function. This
aspect will be explored more in Section 5.4.
Once an improving variable is identified, it is added to the Master Problem, and the pro­
cess repeats. This iterative process continues until no further improving variables can be
34
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:44==
found. At this point, the solution to the Master Problem is deemed optimal.
The beauty of the Master Problem lies in its dynamic nature. It evolves with each iteration,
gradually transforming from a simplified version of the original problem to a comprehen­
sive representation that encompasses all relevant variables. This evolution is guided by
the continuous feedback loop with the Subproblem, ensuring that each addition of a vari­
able brings us closer to the optimal solution.
In Table 5.1 can be found the sets, parameters and variables of the Master Problem for
Model 3.
Table 5.1: Sets, Parameters and Decision variables in the MP
Sets
Description
MasR
Number of requests in the Dataset
Parameters
Description
RequestToHandle(RtH)
Duals of the constraints
Decision Variables
Description
ssr
Slack variable, 1 if route r is not taken
Master Problem model
Minimize
1000 ·
∑
r∈MasR
ssr
(5.1)
Subject to
ssr ≥1,
∀RtH ∈MasR
(5.2)
ssr ≥0,
∀r ∈MasR
(5.3)
(5.4)
5.3
Initialization of the MP and SP
Initiation of the Master Problem in Column Generation can be realized through two alter­
natives. The first method involves the use of a known feasible solution to the problem as
initialization values. The second method, adopted in this study, initiates the program with
an exceedingly costly solution, facilitating a gradual improvement over iterations.
The Julia implementation is thus configured such that the initial solution is intentionally
exorbitant in cost, fostering a trajectory of progressive cost reduction with each iteration.
This strategy is manifested in the objective function of the Master Problem in Section 5.2,
where the aim is to minimize the slack variable multiplied by a large constant. This large
constant in Equation (5.1) is given a value of 1000, ensuring that serving the request will
always be more cost­effective than not fulfilling it. Consequently, the initialization cost of
the master problem becomes the number of requests in the dataset multiplied by 1000.
After initialization, with each iteration of the Column Generation process, each iteration, a
new feasible and cheaper route is introduced in the master problem. The Subproblem then
takes the dual prices from the solution of the RMP as input and uses them to calculate the
reduced costs of the variables not included in the RMP. The initialization of the Subproblem
is crucial as it sets the direction for the search for improving variables. It ensures that
the search is guided by the objective of improving the solution to the Master Problem,
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
35
==PAGE:45==
keeping the process focused and efficient [16]. In Section 5.4, a thorough explanation of
the subproblem and its implementation can be found.
5.4
Subproblem
The Subproblem functions as a pricing problem, playing an integral role in the column
generation approach for three fundamental reasons.
Firstly, it acts as the navigator of our solution journey, determining the reduced costs of the
variables excluded from the Restricted Master Problem (RMP) using dual prices obtained
from the RMP solution. This variable, identified as the improving variable, is the one
with the most negative reduced cost. If such a variable exists, it is indicative of the RMP
solution’s non­optimality, suggesting that our model has room for improvement.
Secondly, the Subproblem is crafted to be efficiently solved. It is significantly smaller and
less intricate than the original problem, hence more computationally tractable. Never­
theless, it plays an instrumental role in steering the progression of the Master Problem,
as it guarantees that each iteration propels us closer to the optimum solution. The sub­
problem’s solution not only identifies an improving variable but also provides us with an
improvement vector, indicating which variable should be included in the Master Problem
and how this incorporation will influence the objective function.
Lastly, the Subproblem also serves as an effective stopping criterion for the Column Gen­
eration approach. The inability of the Subproblem to locate an improving variable signifies
that the current solution of the Master Problem is optimal, thereby halting the Column Gen­
eration process. It is through these roles that the Subproblem contributes indispensably
to the efficiency and precision of our model.
In order to be implemented using Column Generation, Model 2 needs adjustments. All of
the constraints from Model 2 (excluding the Hamming Distance constraint) will be used in
the subproblem, nevertheless, the Subproblem is formulated to explore and identify the
most optimal route that one single vehicle can cover each iteration, and Model 2 take into
account more than one vehicle. Section 5.4.1 details this small modifications.
5.4.1
CMPDPTW Modifications
The modifications for converting the Model 2 to a CMPDPTW single­vehicle model are
small, with the primary variables and constraints requiring some degree of fine­tuning.
The most notable alteration in the model pertains to the objective function, specifically the
reward mechanism for completed pickups. In the Subproblem, the reward is invoked if a
pickup associated with a specific request is completed, differing from the original model
which penalised the omission of pickups or deliveries at a given node. The modified
objective function can be seen below.
Minimize
∑
(i,j)∈A
cijxij −
∑
r∈|R|
rewardrpr
(5.5)
Further, the previous model’s Hamming distance constraint is discontinued in the single­
vehicle version. The reason for this omission is the significantly reduced size of instances
the subproblem would encounter. The Hamming distance constraint, crucial for large­
scale problems to curb computational demands, loses its necessity in the smaller, single­
vehicle context.
Additionally, in the restructured model, changes are also made to the decision variables
namely x, y, and cap. Here, x assumes the value of 1 if the truck navigates from node i to
36
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:46==
node j, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, y is assigned the value of 1 if the request r is serviced,
defaulting to 0 in its absence. Meanwhile, cap signifies the load remaining after the truck’s
departure from node j. Here are the modified decision variables.
xij ∈{0, 1}
(5.19)
yr ∈{0, 1}
(5.20)
capj ≥0
∀j ∈A
(5.22)
Additionally, a new variable pr is included in the Subproblem. This new variable equals 1
if pickup associated with request r is performed. This variable is very similar to variable
(5.20), but is more specific. While variable (5.20) focuses on whether the overall request
is serviced, variable (5.23) is more specific and considers only the pickup aspect of each
request.
pr ∈{0, 1}
∀r ∈|R|
(5.23)
In Table 5.2 can be found the sets, parameters and variables of the Subproblem.
Sets, parameters and variables of the SP
Table 5.2: Description of Sets, Parameters, and Decision Variables of the SP
Sets
Description
A
Set of arcs
P
Set of pickup locations
D
Set of delivery locations
R
Set of requests
N
Ser of customer nodes
Pr
Array of sets where Pr(r) contains the pickup node for
request r
K
Set of vehicles
Parameters
Description
p
Number of pickups
n
Number of deliveries
m
Number of vehicles
I
Number of all nodes (Including depot)
J
Number of all nodes (Including depot)
ai
Earliest arrival time to node i ∈I
bi
Latest arrival time to node i ∈I
si
Associated service time for node i ∈I
drr
Array which contains the delivery node for request r
∈R
cij
Cost matrix
RNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as either pickup
or delivery node
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
37
==PAGE:47==
Table 5.2 (continued)
Parameters
Description
RNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as pickup node
DNri
True if request r ∈R has node i ∈I as delivery node
M
The ”Big M”
Q
Vehicle capacity
qi
Demands vector. Positive for pickup, negative for de­
liveries
Decision Variables
Description
xij
Equals 1 if arc (i, j) is traversed, and 0 otherwise
yr
Equals 1 if the truck services request r ∈R is served
, and 0 otherwise
Si
Denotes the start of service at node i ∈I
capj
Denotes the load immediately after the departure from
node j ∈J
pr
Equals 1 if pickup associated with request r ∈R is
performed
In essence, the Model 3 retains Model 2’s fundamental structure, making adjustments
where necessary to accommodate the limitations and opportunities of a single­vehicle
scenario. Following these adaptations, the model is aptly primed for the implementation
of Column Generation.
Below is shown the implementation of the Subproblem.
38
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:48==
Subproblem Model
Minimize
∑
(i,j)∈A
cijxij −
∑
r∈R
rewardrpr
(5.5)
Subject to
∑
j∈J
xij = pr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : PNri = true
(5.6)
∑
j∈J
xji = pr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : DNri = true
(5.7)
∑
j∈J
xij = yr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : RNri = true
(5.8)
∑
j∈J
xji = yr,
∀i ∈I, r ∈R : RNri = true
(5.9)
∑
j∈{2,..,|J|}
x1j ≤1
(5.10)
ai ≤Si ≤bi,
∀i ∈I
(5.11)
Sj ≥Si + si + tij −M(1 −xij),
∀i ∈I, j ∈J
(5.12)
Sj ≥Si + si + tij,
∀r ∈R, i ∈I, j ∈J : DNrj&PNri = true
(5.13)
capj ≤Q,
∀j ∈{1, 2, .., |J| −1}
(5.14)
capJ ≤0
(5.15)
capj + M · (1 −xij) ≥capi + qj,
∀i ∈I, j ∈J, i ̸= j
(5.16)
capj + M · (1 −x1,j) ≥qj,
∀j ∈J
(5.17)
capj + M · (1 −xend,j) ≥qj,
∀j ∈J
(5.18)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀(i, j) ∈A, k ∈K
(5.19)
yr ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈J, k ∈K
(5.20)
Si ≥0
∀i ∈I
(5.21)
capj ≥0
∀j ∈J
(5.22)
pr ∈{0, 1}
∀r ∈R
(5.23)
(5.24)
5.5
Solving the Model
Upon resolution of the Subproblem, an improving variable may or may not be found. This
variable, if it exists, is one that is not currently included in the RMP but, if added, would
improve the objective function. The presence or absence of an improving variable plays a
crucial role in the Column Generation approach, determining the next steps in the process.
The output of the Subproblem can result in one of three scenarios:
5.5.1
Identification of an improving variable
If the Subproblem finds a variable with a negative reduced cost, it signifies that the cur­
rent solution of the RMP is not optimal and there is scope for improvement. The identified
variable is then added to the RMP. This addition introduces a new dimension to the so­
lution space, thereby expanding the scope of the Master Problem. The solution to this
expanded problem provides a new set of dual prices, which are then used as input for
the Subproblem in the next iteration. This iterative process continues, with the Master
Problem and the Subproblem working in tandem, each iteration edging us closer to the
optimal solution.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
39
==PAGE:49==
5.5.2
Absence of an improving variable
If the Subproblem does not identify an improving variable, it implies that no variable out­
side the current RMP can improve the objective function. This indicates that the current
solution of the Master Problem is optimal. The iterative process ceases at this stage.
The solution to the Master Problem, now inclusive of all relevant variables, represents the
optimal solution to the original problem. The optimal solution is expressed as a binary
decision vector, with each entry corresponding to a specific truck route or ’column’. The
value of each entry specifies whether the associated route is performed (1) or not (0).
Furthermore, as each route is linked to a particular subset of requests, which requests
are serviced on each route can be identified.
5.5.3
Time limit reached
In instances where the problem execution hits the time limit of 1800 seconds without
identifying an improving variable, the function returns the best route found within the stip­
ulated time. This route, represented as a binary vector, may not yield the optimal objective
value. However, it does provide a feasible solution given the computational constraints.
The Master Problem solution is the same as in Section 5.5.2, but in this case it won’t be
an optimal solution, just a feasible one.
In conclusion, each run of the Subproblem is pivotal in shaping the direction of our column
generation method. Whether it identifies an improving variable, concludes the optimality
of the current solution, or provides a feasible solution due to time constraints, the Sub­
problem acts as an integral component of this iterative optimization process.
In Chapter 6, discussion and analysis of the Results of the three modelscan be found.
40
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:50==
6
Analysis and Results
This chapter is devoted to the scrutiny and discussion of results originating from the trio of
models developed over the course of this research. A comparative study will be conducted
to discern the strengths and limitations inherent to each model, thereby offering a thorough
understanding of their performance when confronted with various datasets.
The models under review were implemented in Julia v1.4.2. The solver used is the Gurobi
Optimizer version 9.0.3 build v9.0.3rc0 (win64). All computational tasks were conducted
on an MSI Prestige 14Evo A11M, equipped with an 11th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i7­1185G7
processor, operating at 3.00GHz. The machine houses 4 cores and 8 logical processors,
offering reliable performance for our resource­intensive operations.
The following analysis aims to provide a detailed comparison of the three models, scruti­
nizing their computational performance alongside the quality of the solutions they gener­
ate. To fulfill this objective, all three models will be run on each of the 11 datasets. This
comparative procedure will illuminate the advancements made as the transition between
models occurred, effectively emphasizing the iterative refinement embedded within the
methodological approach.
6.1
Dataset dimensions
In Table 6.1 the dimensions of the 11 datasets described in Chapter 3 are presented.
These are the datasets that will be employed in executing the three models.
Table 6.1: Dataset dimensions
Dataset
DS Abbreviation
# of
Pickup
nodes
# of
Delivery
nodes
Total # of
nodes
TR_Truck_5_18
DS1
11
11
24
TR_Truck_5_18_Double
DS2
18
18
38
TR_Truck_19_32
DS3
29
27
69
TR_Truck_19_32_Double
DS4
9
9
20
TR_Van
DS5
12
10
24
TR_Van_Double
DS6
73
55
130
Truck_5_18_Frozen
DS7
1
1
4
Truck_19_32
DS8
26
23
51
Truck_19_32_Frozen
DS9
6
6
12
Van
DS10
76
72
150
Van_with_lift
DS11
18
18
38
Understanding the size of the datasets used in this study is of crucial importance for mul­
tiple reasons. Firstly, it provides context for the complexity of the problem being solved.
Larger datasets often mean a larger search space, resulting in more variables and con­
straints that the model must handle, which can significantly impact the computational effort
and time required. Secondly, the size of the dataset can impact the quality of the solution
obtained, with larger datasets potentially leading to less accurate solutions if the model or
method used cannot effectively manage the increased complexity. Lastly, knowledge of
dataset size is also pivotal for benchmarking and comparison purposes. It allows us to un­
derstand the scalability of the proposed model and offers a basis for comparison with other
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
41
==PAGE:51==
studies or models. By understanding how the model performs on different sized datasets,
its robustness and generalizability to real­world scenarios can be better assessed.
6.2
Model Results
In this section,the results obtained from each model are presented.
6.2.1
Results of the Base Model ­ Model 1
The evaluation of the Model 1´s performance on the 11 datasets reveals varying results
depending on the size and complexity of the datasets. The number of pickup and delivery
nodes significantly impacts the model’s performance, as seen from the contrast in the
solution quality, computational time, and the gap between the incumbent solution and the
best bound. The results can be found in the table below.
Table 6.2: Results of the Base Model
Model 1
Quality of solution
Comp.
time
Nodes
explored
Simplex
Iterations
Incumbent
Best
Bound
Gap
TR_Truck_5_18
5,9617
5,6200
5,73%
1800s
3042620
16947003
TR_Truck_5_18_Double
4,6867
1,6617
65,54%
1800s
66536
7945024
TR_Truck_19_32
8,0467
2,2200
72,41%
1800s
4342
2333362
TR_Truck_19_32_Double
3,8433
3,8433
0%
17s
54780
605342
TR_Van
4,8817
3,0550
37,42%
1800s
1567294
22444409
TR_Van_Double
Infeasible
­
­
­
Truck_5_18_Frozen
0,05
0,05
0%
1s
0
0
Truck_19_32
8,0733
2,1067
73,91%
1800s
26868
3007696
Truck_19_32_Frozen
Infeasible
­
­
­
Van
24,9950
3,8800
84,48%
1800s
1
558779
Van_with_lift
5,3733
3,3233
38,15%
1800s
20947
3679670
Model 1 handled smaller datasets more efficiently, the model returned good solution qual­
ities and, in two of the instances instances, the optimal solution.
Performance was inconsistent for medium­sized datasets. The model returned feasible
solutions but with high gaps, suggesting a significant deviation from the optimal solution.
On the other hand, larger datasets proved to be more challenging. These larger datasets
required the maximum computational time (1800s), and in the case of TR_Van_Double,
the model failed to find a feasible solution. This failure implies a strain in handling the
complexity or the constraints set for larger problems.
In summary, the model demonstrated reasonable adaptability to small and medium datasets,
but the efficiency and effectiveness vary, especially with respect to computational time
and the ability to find optimal solutions. The discrepancies in performance across differ­
ent dataset sizes and complexities highlight areas for model improvement, particularly
in handling larger, more complex problems and ensuring the solutions are closer to the
optimum. These observations demonstate the need for further model enhancement.
6.2.2
Results of the Capacitated Model ­ Model 2
Model 2 represents a substantive advancement over Model 1 in terms of mimicking real­
world scenarios. This enhancement is attributed to the incorporation of capacity con­
42
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:52==
straints, which lend the model a higher degree of realism. Despite making the model
computationally more intensive, these constraints are counterbalanced by the addition of
the Hamming Distance constraint, thereby enhancing the model’s efficiency to a certain
degree. The results attained from Model 2 are displayed in the subsequent table.
Table 6.3: Results of the Capacitated Model
Model 2
Quality of solution
Comp.
Time
Nodes
explored
Simplex
Iterations
Incumbent
Best
Bound
Gap
TR_Truck_5_18
10,6867
6,2410
41,6%
1800s
235675
19874726
TR_Truck_5_18_Double
19,7600
4,5448
77,0%
1800s
23783
6408798
TR_Truck_19_32
36,8750
aaa
93,9%
1800s
1118
545511
TR_Truck_19_32_Double
5,4017
5,4017
0%
1134s
599663
24139458
TR_Van
13,1533
5,3534
59,3%
1800s
290376
19686667
TR_Van_Double
Infeasible
­
­
­
Truck_5_18_Frozen
0,05
0,05
0%
1s
0
0
Truck_19_32
16,7917
0,7892
91,5%
1800s
9237
3587189
Truck_19_32_Frozen
Infeasible
­
­
­
Van
­
­
­
1800s
1
624591
Van_with_lift
7,6000
1,0488
86,2%
1800s
21134
5323055
Analyzing the performance of Model 2, the interaction between the number of nodes in
the dataset and the model’s performance becomes evident.
The model performed well in terms of solution quality for small datasets, even finding some
optimal solutions for DS4 which has 20 nodes. However, like Model 1, it was unable to find
a feasible solution for DS9, which has a smaller number of nodes (12). This suggests that
the infeasibility is tied to the constraints or specific characteristics of the dataset, rather
than the number of nodes alone.
In the case of medium­sized datasets, the model produced feasible solutions but with
substantial gaps, indicating that the solutions were far from optimal.
The performance on larger datasets, such as DS6 and DS10 was more challenging. The
model did not find a feasible solution for DS6 and it spent the entire computational time
of 1800s on the DS10 dataset without reporting a solution quality or gap.
In conclusion, while the Model 2 demonstrates the capability to handle various datasets
and find feasible solutions, the large gaps and infeasibility issues in some cases highlight
the need for further optimization and refinement of the model.
6.2.3
Results of the Column Generation ­ Model 3
The Column Generation implementation of the CPDPTW model is born off a need for
efficiency and optimization of the model. In the Table 6.4 can be seen its performance
with the 11 datasets.
Among the smaller datasets the model’s efficiency was evident. It was able able to solve
3 out of 5 datasets to optimality. This highlights Column Generation ability to quickly and
accurately solve smaller, less complex problems.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
43
==PAGE:53==
Table 6.4: Results of the Column Generation implementation
Model 3
Objective
Value
Solved to
Optimality?
Computation
Time
Number of Column
Generation iterations
TR_Truck_5_18
9,335
No
1800s
13
TR_Truck_5_18_Double
15,9743
No
1800s
17
TR_Truck_19_32
33,9099
No
1800s
28
TR_Truck_19_32_Double
5,4017
Yes
182s
24
TR_Van
9,1533
Yes
123s
15
TR_Van_Double
53000,653
No
1800s
4
Truck_5_18_Frozen
0,05
Yes
1s
2
Truck_19_32
14,9633
No
1800s
17
Truck_19_32_Frozen
Infeasible
­
­
­
Van
69000,265
No
1800s
4
Van_with_lift
6,9667
No
1800s
18
For medium­sized datasets the model was unable to solve to optimality despite reach­
ing the computation time limit. Nevertheless, a feasible solution was provided for all the
medium­size datasets.
However, Model 3 still faced difficulties with larger datasets. DS6 and DS10, with 130
and 150 nodes respectively, were not solved to optimality and required the maximum
computation time. The model was neither able to find a feasible solution for any of the
datasets.
In summary, the Column Generation implementation demonstrated effective performance
with smaller datasets, solving some instances optimally within a very short computation
time. Additionally, viable routes were derived for medium­sized datasets, which can serve
as useful benchmarks or reference points in our analysis. On a less positive note, Model 3
continues to struggle with large datasets, rendering its applicability limited in these bigger,
more complex scenarios.
6.3
Analysis of the results by dataset size
In this section, the performance of the models will be examined, with a particular emphasis
on the quality of results, computational time, and efficiency.
Due to the variability in dataset sizes, it has been determined that a categorization of
these datasets into three distinct groups ­ small, medium, and large ­ would provide a
more detailed understanding and comparison of the results across datasets of analogous
sizes. The classifications assigned to the various dataset sizes are delineated in Table 6.5.
44
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:54==
Table 6.5: Dataset classification
Dataset
Size
Dataset
Total #
of nodes
Small
TR_Truck_5_18 (DS1)
24
TR_Truck_19_32_Double (DS4)
20
TR_Van (DS5)
24
Truck_5_18_Frozen (DS7)
4
Truck_19_32_Frozen (DS9)
12
Medium
TR_Truck_5_18_Double (DS2)
38
TR_Truck_19_32 (DS3)
69
Truck_19_32 (DS8)
51
Van_with_lift (DS11)
38
Large
TR_Van_Double (DS6)
130
Van (DS10)
150
Tables 6.6, 6.7 and 6.8 can be found in the next page. These tables show an overview of
the results separed by dataset size.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
45
==PAGE:55==
Table 6.6: Small datasets comparison
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
DS
Inc.
Best
Bound
Gap
Comp.
Time
Inc.
Best
Bound
Gap
Comp.
Time
Obj.
Value
Opt?
Comp.
Time
DS1
5,96
5,62
5,7%
1800s
10,69
6,24
41,6%
1800s
9,34
No
1800s
DS4
5,84
5,84
0%
17s
5,40
5,40
0%
1134s
5,40
Yes
182s
DS5
4,88
3,06
37,4%
1800s
13,15
5,35
59,3%
1800s
9,15
Yes
123s
DS7
0,05
0,05
0%
1s
0,05
0,05
0%
1s
0,05
Yes
1s
DS9
Inf.
Inf.
Inf.
Table 6.7: Medium datasets comparison
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Inc.
Best
Bound
Gap
Comp.
Time
Inc.
Best
Bound
Gap
Comp.
Time
Obj.
Value
Opt?
Comp.
Time
DS2
4,69
1,66
65,5%
1800s
19,76
4,54
77,0%
1800s
15,97
No
1800s
DS3
8,05
2,22
72,4%
1800s
36,87
2,25
93,9%
1800s
33,91
No
1800s
DS8
8,07
2,11
73,9%
1800s
16,80
0,79
95,1%
1800s
14,96
No
1800s
DS11
5,37
3,32
38,15%
1800s
7,60
1,05
86,2%
1800s
6,97
No
1800s
Table 6.8: Large datasets comparison
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Inc.
Best
Bound
Gap
Comp.
Time
Inc.
Best
Bound
Gap
Comp.
Time
Obj.
Value
Opt?
Comp.
Time
DS6
Inf.
Inf.
53000,65
No
1800s
DS10
24,99
3,88
84,5%
1800s
­
­
­
­
69000,27
No
1800s
46
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:56==
6.3.1
Small datasets
Table 6.6 presents the performance of three different models: Model 1, Model 2, and
Model 3. The results are analyzed on different datasets (DS1, DS4, DS5, DS7, DS9) of
varying sizes, but all of them considered small.
For each dataset and model, Table 6.6 shows the incumbent value, the best bound found,
the gap between these two, and computation time. In the case of Model 3, the objective
value, whether the optimal solution was found and computation time. The incumbens,
bounds and objective values are expressed in hours.
Upon examination, it is apparent that the outcomes for Model 1 are equal to, if not better
than, the other models. This is a predictable occurrence as Model 1 operates without any
truck capacity constraints. As such, if the time windows permit, Model 1 has the potential
to accommodate all requests in a single trip using one truck. However, when capacity
constraints are introduced in the model, the ability of a single truck to fulfill all requests
is typically hindered. This will likely be the case for the other dataset sizes. Numerical
results from Model 2 and 3 can be directly compared, since both models share the same
constraints.
For DS1, Models 2 and 3 take the same computation time, 1800s, to reach their results,
yet the objective value of Model 3 (9.34) is significantly better than that of Model 2, which
emphasizes the superiority of the column generation approach.
Analyzing DS4, all models reach the same solution (5.40) and are, thus, optimal. Here,
Model 3 excels with its computation time of 182s, which is significantly less than Model
2’s computation time of 1134s, again underscoring the efficiency of the column generation
approach.
For DS5, Model 3 outperforms Model 2 by delivering a smaller objective value (9.15) in
much less computation time (123s), reaffirming its efficiency and effectiveness.
Dataset DS7, being a simple problem, is optimally solved by all models in just 1 second,
which doesn’t provide much information about the comparative performance of the mod­
els. The solution is identical across all three models, given that the dataset is comprised
of a single pickup and delivery node. Consequently, all three models can execute this
task with one truck.
Overall, despite Model 1 having fewer constraints, Model 3’s column generation approach
provides better results in less computation time compared to Model 2, thereby establishing
it as a more efficient and effective method for solving these problems.
An essential observation gleaned from the analyses of Models 1, 2, and 3 is the inherent
capacity of each to provide both a feasible solution and estimations of solution quality,
even when optimal solutions are not obtained within the given computation time. In the
case of Models 1 and 2, both an upper and lower bound on the objective function value
are established, offering a range in which the optimal solution is guaranteed to exist.
This bounding information is invaluable as it provides a quantitative measure of how far
the incumbent solution may be from the optimal one. For Model 3, an upper bound is
obtained, even if a lower bound cannot be directly calculated due to the nature of the
Column Generation approach. However, Model 3 compensates for this with its superior
computational efficiency and the quality of its incumbent solutions. Thus, in instances
where the models are not solved to optimality, they still provide a powerful tool for decision­
making by offering feasible solutions and insights into potential solution quality.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
47
==PAGE:57==
6.3.2
Medium datasets
Table 6.7 presents the performance of the three different models in the same way.
In comparison with the results obtained from small­size datasets, the medium­size datasets
present a greater challenge for the optimization models. It is worth noting that for all
medium­size datasets, neither Model 1, 2 nor 3 manage to reach an optimal solution
within the stipulated computational time limit of 1800 seconds. This is in contrast to the
small­size datasets, where optimal solutions were found for some cases, especially using
Model 3.
In the case of Model 1, despite having fewer constraints, the gaps between the incum­
bent solutions and the best bounds are large, ranging from 38.15% for DS11 to 73.9%
for DS8. This indicates that, for medium­size datasets, Model 1 struggles to find strong
lower bounds within the computational time limit of 1800 seconds due to the increased
complexity and size of these datasets. The resulting solutions, while feasible, are likely
far from the true optimal solution.
Model 2, despite its additional constraints, performs even worse in terms of the gap, which
reaches a maximum of 95.1% for DS8. This could suggest that the additional constraints
in Model 2 make finding a strong lower bound within the time limit particularly challenging
when dealing with medium­sized datasets.
However, it’s important to consider the quality of the incumbent solutions in addition to
the gap. A surprising observation is that the incumbent solutions from Model 2 are, in
fact, larger than those from Model 1 for all datasets. This implies that, while the additional
constraints in Model 2 make the problem harder to solve to optimality, they may also be
pushing the solution away from the optimal in our search space.
As anticipated based on the performance on small datasets, Model 3, which uses column
generation, performs better than Model 2 in terms of the quality of the solution (objective
value). Despite also reaching the computational time limit, the incumbent solutions from
Model 3 are lower than those from Model 2 for all datasets, highlighting the benefits of the
column generation approach.
To summarize, while none of the models find an optimal solution for the medium­sized
datasets within the computational time limit, they all provide feasible solutions. The qual­
ity of these solutions improves from Model 2 to Model 3. Despite the computational chal­
lenges posed by medium­sized datasets, these results demonstrate that column genera­
tion (Model 3) is an effective strategy, providing lower objective values than its predeces­
sor model within the same computational time. However, computational resources and
time management are increasingly important factors when tackling larger datasets.
6.3.3
Large datasets
Table 6.8 presents the performance of the three different models with large datasets.
In DS6, both Models 1 and 2 prove unable to yield a feasible solution, as indicated by
the ”Inf.” in the results. This reinforces the complexity and challenges that this specific
dataset poses to these models. It also highlights that the models, despite their design,
might not be flexible enough to accommodate every dataset or scenario, particularly those
of higher complexity. For dataset DS10, Model 1 does manage to find a feasible solution
(Inc. value: 24.99) but with a considerable optimality gap of 84.5%. This means that
while a solution was obtained, it is far from optimal, indicating that the true optimal solution
could be significantly lower. Model 2, on the other hand, fails to provide a feasible solution
within the computational time limit. This further emphasizes the problems that larger, more
48
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:58==
complex datasets can pose for these models.
Furthermore, Model 3 still faced difficulties with larger datasets. DS6 and DS10, with
130 and 150 nodes respectively, were not solved to optimality and required the maximum
computation time. The objective values 53000,635h and 69000,265h are excessively
high and do not accurately reflect reality. These values stem from an extraordinarily large
number of nodes. In such instances, the column generation approach does not perform
optimally since sufficient iterations cannot be completed to replace all the initial fictional
rewards in the model with real route costs. Initially, a fictitious reward of 1000 is allocated
for each unfulfilled request. Only four requests were served for the DS6 dataset. In the
case of DS10, even fewer requests were fulfilled. These figures are far removed from
reality; a random selection of requests would likely result in lower costs. Model 3 has a
very obvious limiation when working with large datasets.
Considering the results obtained on larger datasets, none of the three models under anal­
ysis proved to be particularly effective. This suggests that for larger datasets, the existing
models are limited in their capability to effectively navigate the increased complexity and
provide practical, useful solutions. It’s a clear signal that, in their current forms, these
models are unable to adequately address the scale and intricacy that come with larger
datasets.
6.4
Summary of Findings
Synthesizing the findings of the comparison between models across small, medium, and
large datasets uncovers several pivotal insights:
Firstly, Model 3 consistently offered a lower upper bound compared to Model 2 across
small and medium datasets. This indicates that Model 3 was more capable in identifying
feasible solutions closer to the optimum, thereby providing more favorable results for the
problem at hand.
Secondly, Model 3 demonstrated shorter computational times than Model 2. This sug­
gests not only a faster resolution of the problem, but also implies the potential of Model 3
to handle larger datasets more efficiently than Model 2, although it should be noted that
all models struggled when confronted with large datasets.
Thirdly, Model 3 was more effective at finding optimal solutions. Even when datasets
were increased in size, Model 3 continued to outperform Model 2, confirming its superior
efficiency and effectiveness in dealing with this type of logistics problem.
However, it’s worth noting that all the models struggled with large datasets. Despite the
apparent superiority of Model 3 over Model 2 in terms of solution quality and computational
efficiency, neither model was able to deliver optimal or even feasible solutions for the large
datasets.
In conclusion, column generation emerges as a clear advancement over the traditional
MIP implementation represented by Model 2. It showcased exceptional performance in
terms of solution quality, computational efficiency, and optimality with small datasets and
good performance with medium datasets. The decision to integrate column generation
into the CMPDPTW model has been vindicated, exhibiting the strength of this sophis­
ticated approach in managing small and medium­sized complex optimization problems.
However, if our goal is to fully optimize Novo Nordisk’s entire in­site transportation system,
an alternate approach and method are necessary. As it currently stands, the column gen­
eration implementation of the CMPDPTW is not sufficiently efficient or robust to handle
such a substantial amount of data.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
49
==PAGE:59==
50
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:60==
7
Practical Applications & Future Work
The following chapter is focused in two objectives. Firstly, it provides valuable insight to
the operational future practical applications of Model 3 for Novo Nordisk, specifically for
their in­site transportation logistics. Secondly, it provides directions for future exploration
and research pertaining to the MPDPTW and CMPDPTW.
7.1
Practical Applications for Novo Nordisk
This section will delineate the potential benefits identified through this research for Novo
Nordisk, and how these insights could enhance their in­site transportation. There are
numerous practical implications that can be derived from this study. Consequently, the
limitations for this problem will also be highlighted.
While it’s clear that the complete optimization of the on­site transportation system at Novo
Nordisk may be hindered by its inherent complexity, this work has nevertheless laid a solid
foundation for future improvements in this realm.
Model 3 has exhibited proficiency in solving smaller datasets comprising up to around
30 nodes to optimality. This signifies a critical advancement as it positions the model as
a powerful tool for generating new transportation routes as needed. It also stands as a
robust method for optimizing the scheduling of pickups and deliveries, thereby offering
a comprehensive solution for transportation planning. Such advancements elevate the
standards for the planning of future routes, which until now have been reliant on external
companies and truck drivers.
Moreover, Model 3 has demonstrated its capacity to provide an upper bound and establish
feasible routes for medium­sized datasets with around 70 nodes. This is an asset that
could serve as a valuable compass in guiding the establishment of new transportation
routes in the future.
This research also underscores the necessity of initiating a data standardization process.
Such an initiative forms a crucial stepping­stone to unlocking the full potential of future
optimization models, as well as Model 3. The benefits of standardized data stretch beyond
transportation optimization; they encompass enhanced decision­making across various
business functions. This leads to improved operational efficiency, cost savings, and an
overall boost in business performance. However, it is vital to bear in mind that this process
is likely to be resource­intensive and time­consuming, warranting strategic planning and
consistent efforts.
7.2
Future Work on the CMPDPTW
The exploration of the CMPDPTW has undoubtedly stemmed from a practical need in
transportation and logistics. As elaborated in Chapter 2, due to the MPDPTW’s novelty
and complexity, the research literature on it is scarce. The problem has been predomi­
nantly addressed through a combination of hybrid ALNS [1], branch­and­bound, branch­
and­cut [15], and ACO [14] methods. The novelty of this thesis lies in its application of
Column Generation, a method untested in this context, thereby broadening the landscape
of solution techniques for the MPDPTW and CMPDPTW.
This work has demonstrated that Column Generation can indeed serve as a viable, stan­
dalone approach, achieving satisfactory results with small instances (up to 24 nodes),
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
51
==PAGE:61==
and doing so in a time­efficient manner. However, there remains considerable potential
for improvement and further study.
In particular, future research could explore the integration of heuristics into solving the
Column Generation subproblem, given its complexity and individuality. A promising av­
enue could be the incorporation of the hybrid ALNS used by Naccache, Côté, and Coelho
(2018) [1] to solve the subproblem. It is anticipated that such an application could enhance
the efficiency of the model significantly, thereby enabling it to tackle larger datasets. This
prospect forms a compelling direction for further research, presenting an opportunity to
advance our understanding and performance in solving the CMPDPTW.
52
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:62==
8
Conclusion
This master’s thesis began with the goal of delving into and optimizing Novo Nordisk’s
in­site transportation system in Denmark, while also enriching the relatively unexplored
territories of MPDPTW and CMPDPTW. Unraveling the complexities of Novo Nordisk’s
transportation system proved to be a challenging yet enlightening endeavor. The multi­
plicity of truck types with differing capacities and operational constraints, coupled with the
diverse range of transportation requests, presented a multifaceted puzzle. The system’s
dynamic nature further emphasized the need for a solution that is not only optimal, but
also flexible and adaptable to varying circumstances.
The data­driven nature of this study accentuated the importance of having a robust, up­
dated, and structured dataset. Thus, it is strongly recommended for Novo Nordisk to
implement necessary protocols and processes for the consistent availability of quality,
usable data.
Progressing iteratively from Model 1 to Model 3 highlighted the evolving trajectory of op­
timization, characterized by significant enhancements in computational efficiency, model
realism, and the ability to pinpoint optimal solutions. Model 3 has proven to be a valuable
tool for Novo Nordisk, capable of quickly generating and optimizing new transportation
routes, specifically for small and medium­sized datasets, potentially yielding significant
cost savings and efficiency improvements. Column generation implementation was a
success and a good choice. However, the challenges faced with larger datasets signify
areas for future improvements.
The potential for optimization of Novo Nordisk’s in­site transportation certainly exists, but
it requires further research and time investment. The intricacies of managing numerous
nodes, different truck types, and diverse requests against a backdrop of real­world con­
straints heighten the problem’s complexity. Navigating this labyrinth of factors to develop
an effective and efficient solution necessitates a more profound understanding and appli­
cation of optimization strategies, reemphasizing the potential for further investigation and
development in this area.
While this thesis provides a solid foundation for Novo Nordisk’s in­site transportation opti­
mization journey, it should not be viewed as the final destination. Instead, it symbolizes a
promising inception, one that fosters an environment of continuous exploration and refine­
ment. It is also a call for the broader research community to further investigate the largely
uncharted realms of MPDPTW and CMPDPTW. Advancements in these fields could dra­
matically improve logistics operations for numerous organizations, beyond Novo Nordisk,
yielding extensive benefits in an increasingly competitive and resource­constrained world.
To conclude, the horizon of logistics optimization is replete with opportunities. Continuous
research and development in this field hold the promise of extensive benefits for organi­
zations globally, thereby revolutionizing our understanding and management of logistics
in the upcoming years.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
53
==PAGE:63==
54
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1]
S. Naccache, J. F. Côté, and L. C. Coelho. “The multi­pickup and delivery problem
with time windows”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 267.3 (2018),
pp. 1003–1019.
[2]
G. B. Dantzig and J. H. Ramser. “The truck dispatching problem”. In: Management
Science 6.1 (1959), pp. 80–91.
[3]
G. Clarke and J.R. Wright. “Scheduling of Vehicle Routing Problem from a Central
Depot to a Number of Delivery Points”. In: Operations Research 12 (1964), pp. 568–
581. DOI: 10.1287/opre.12.4.568. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.12.4.568.
[4]
M. Solomon. “Algorithms for the Vehicle Routing and Scheduling Problem with Time
Window Constraints”. In: Operations Research 35 (1987), pp. 254–265. DOI: 10.
1287/opre.35.2.254. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.35.2.254.
[5]
M. W. Savelsbergh. “Local search in routing problems with time windows”. In: Annals
of Operations Research 4.1 (1985), pp. 285–305.
[6]
M. W. Savelsbergh. “An efficient implementation of local search algorithms for con­
strained routing problems”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 47.1
(1990), pp. 75–85.
[7]
N. Ascheuer, M. Fischetti, and M. Grötschel. “Solving the asymmetric traveling
salesman problem with time windows by branch­and­cut”. In: Mathematical Pro­
gramming 90.3 (2001), pp. 475–506.
[8]
F. Guerriero and M. Mancini. “A cooperative parallel rollout algorithm for the se­
quential ordering problem”. In: Parallel Computing 29.5 (2003), pp. 663–677.
[9]
A. N. Letchford and J. J. Salazar­González. “Stronger multi­commodity flow formu­
lations of the capacitated vehicle routing problem”. In: European Journal of Opera­
tional Research 244.3 (2015), pp. 730–738.
[10]
S. Ropke, J. F. Cordeau, and G. Laporte. “Models and branch­and­cut algorithms
for pick­up and delivery problems with time windows”. In: Networks: An International
Journal 49.4 (2007), pp. 258–272.
[11]
A. Subramaniana, L. Drummonda, and C. Bentesb. “A parallel heuristic for the ve­
hicle routing problem with simultaneous pick­up and delivery”. In: Computers & Op­
erations Research 37.11 (2010), pp. 1899–1911.
[12]
G. Berbeglia et al. “Static Pickup and Delivery Problems: A Classification Scheme
and Survey”. In: Top 15.1 (2007), pp. 1–31.
[13]
I. Aziez, J. F. Côté, and L. C. Coelho. “Exact algorithms for the multi­pickup and
delivery problem with time windows”. In: European Journal of Operational Research
284.3 (2020), pp. 906–919.
[14]
T. Tran and M. A. A. Clariño. “Solving Multi­Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time
Windows using Ant Colony Optimization”. In: Journal of Telecommunication, Elec­
tronic and Computer Engineering (JTEC) 13.4 (2021), pp. 35–41. URL: https://jtec.
utem.edu.my/jtec/article/view/6144.
[15]
A. Kohar and S.K. Jakhar. “A capacitated multi pickup online food delivery problem
with time windows: a branch­and­cut algorithm”. In: Annals of Operations Research
(2021). DOI: 10.1007/s10479-021-04145-6.
[16]
School of Chemical Optimization Research Group and Cornell University Biomolec­
ular Engineering. Column Generation Algorithms. [Online; accessed 27­June­2023].
Accessed 2023. URL: https://optimization.cbe.cornell.edu/index.php?title=Column_
generation_algorithms.
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
55
==PAGE:65==
[17]
StudentNews. Heavy goods vehicles over 3.5 t standard speeds limits in Europe.
[Online; accessed 27­June­2023]. Accessed 2023. URL: https://trip.studentnews.
eu / s / 4086 / 77068 - Heavy - goods - vehicles - over - 35 - t - standard - speeds - limits - in -
Europe.htm.
[18]
Wikipedia. Richard Hamming — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online; ac­
cessed 27­June­2023]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Hamming.
[19]
Techopedia. Hamming Distance ­ Definition from Techopedia. [Online; accessed 27­
June­2023]. Accessed 2023. URL: https://www.techopedia.com/definition/19723/
hamming-distance.
[20]
Wikipedia. Dantzig–Wolfe decomposition — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 27­June­2023]. 2023. URL: https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki /
Dantzig%E2%80%93Wolfe_decomposition.
[21]
Thomas Stidsen. Column Generation. Technical Report. Available at http://www2.
imm.dtu.dk/courses/02717/columngeneration/columngeneration.pdf. DTU, Unknown.
56
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
==PAGE:66==
Optimizing Novo Nordisk in­site transportation
57
==PAGE:67==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 356
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/organisations/department-of-technology-management-and-economics
