==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Optimization of oxidative stability of starfish oil 
 
 
Master thesis project (30 ECTS) 
 
 
Written by: 
Supervisor: 
 
Christos Papakonstantinou, s213737 
Charlotte Jacobsen 
 
MSc student in Food Technology 
Ann-Dorit Moltke Sørensen 
 
Adane Tilahun Getachew 
 
 
23th June 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Preface 
The master thesis project is entitled “Optimization of oxidative stability of starfish 
oil” and it represented the completion of Master Degree in Food Technology at 
Technical University of Denmark. The project was 30 ECTS and starting from January 
2023 until July 2023. The experiments in the project were done at Research Group for 
Bioactives - Analysis and Application in Building 202 and Building 222, National Food 
Institute, Lyngby, DTU. The project was supervised by Professor Charlotte Jacobsen. I 
would like to thank my supervisor Charlotte Jacobsen for the great help and guidance 
for the experiment and feedback of thesis. I would like to thank also my other two co-
supervisors, Ann-Dorit Moltke Sørensen, Adane Tilahun Getachew for their precious 
contribution and support during these past months. Moreover, I would like to thank 
laboratory technicians Lis Berner, Inge Holmberg, and Thi Thu Trang Vu for the help 
of experiment training.  
Abstract 
 
The Master Thesis project is part of the project GrExOmega, an innovative project 
that focuses on the utilization of starfish and the usage of starfish in order to produce 
novel food products for future human consumption. The challenge of the project is to 
ensure that starfish oil has the quality needs to be further processed in order to continue 
with the food production. Marine oils have positive impact on human health, with a lot 
of benefits for the organism due the presence of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
There is an increased demand for marine oils which are aimed for human consumption 
in the past years. Starfish can become a new source of marine oil as it has been an 
unexplored species with many, unexplored potentials. Starfish is also considered as 
invasive species and hence it disturbs the ecosystem. The selected extraction method of 
the starfish oil has also been more environmentally friendly and more sustainable 
compared to the existing traditional extraction methods. Target of the project is the 
optimisation of the oxidative stability of the starfish oil which has been extracted using 
supercritical carbon dioxide in a pilot-scale plant, by adding antioxidants in order to 
delay the oxidation process.  
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Introduction 
The increasing demand for oils that contain health-beneficial nutrients such as 
omega-3 fatty acids, and the need to maintain sustainable fisheries, at the same time, 
resulted in finding new resources. Marine lipids are rich in omega-3 polyunsaturated 
fatty acids, especially eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). 
These two compounds are beneficial impact on human health, they are responsible for 
the proper function of the body, and they can prevent cardiovascular diseases and 
cancers. Starfish is an option with limited usage and it can be characterised as invasive 
species with unexplored possibilities. Due to the presence of bioactive compounds in 
the oil, starfish can become a new sustainable source of marine oil for future human 
consumption.  
The starfish oil has been extracted from dried powder was a new, ¨green¨, 
sustainable technology. The method is called Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE) and 
using supercritical (SC) CO2 as solvent and ethanol (EtOH 96% w/w) as co-solvent. 
The starfish powder was the raw material and the extracted oil is used for further 
analysis. The next step was the screening of the stability of starfish oil without the 
addition of antioxidants and comparison with other kinds of oil such as krill oil and cod 
liver oil. The starfish oil without the antioxidants was labelled as control sample. The 
analytical method for the screening experiments is OxypressTM and is based on oxygen 
consumption. The analysis was made in duplicate. The method is an accelerated method 
to determine the oxidative stability of the oils and often used for screening. 
The selected antioxidants are nature sourced and this selection was done based on 
literature. The screening of antioxidants was done by performing OxypressTM 
experiment in order to check the efficiency of each antioxidant to delay the oxidation 
process. The antioxidants with the best performance were chosen to be used for the 
storage experiments. The different antioxidants were added in the starfish oil in certain 
concentration. Throughout the storage period, 5 sampling points were selected to 
perform experiments on the starfish oil. The temperature was 20 ºC (room temperature, 
and the total storage period was 3 weeks. The analysis of the samples included the 
determination of peroxide values (PVs), volatiles (GC-MS), tocopherol (HPLC), fatty 
acid composition (FAME, GC-FID) in total lipids and in phospholipids and neutral 
==PAGE:4==
lipids. Regarding volatiles, the analysis is performed in the end of the storage period 
due to calibration curve. The same analytical methods were used in order to characterise 
the starfish oil after the extraction process and in order to compare the extracted oil with 
the other marine oils, krill oil and cod liver oil. There was one more analysis, the 
determination of free fatty acids (FFA) content in these 3 marine oils. 
1. Theoretical background 
1.1 Lipids 
Lipids are considered as an essential part of food and for the majority of biological 
systems and they are being used for a variety of industrial applications. Lipids serve as 
source of energy and lipid-soluble vitamins on food. Also, they compose cell 
membranes, as structural elements, and play significant role in biological systems as 
signalling molecules [1]. 
Lipids can be found in a wide variety of sources including plants, animals and 
microbials. Lipids used for the production of food, cosmetics and medicinal can 
originate from plants such oilseeds and tropical fruits, algae, herbs and spices. Another 
potential lipid source can be animals, including land-based animals, fish and marine 
mammals, and other derived sources [1]. 
Food lipids can be categorised in two groups. The non-polar triglycerides dominate 
in the edible fats and oils which can be found in plants, and they act as energy reserves, 
and animals. The second category is polar lipids, mostly phospholipids, are found in 
cell membranes and can have impact in the composition and behaviour of numerous 
food [2].  
For humans, lipids are one of the most fundamental nutrients. A diverse group of 
compounds can be identified as lipids. This group includes triacylglycerols (TAG), 
diacylglycerols (DAG), monoacylglycerols (MAG), glycolipids (GL), phospholipids 
(PL), fatty acids, sterols and fat-soluble vitamins. The total amount of these compounds 
are categorised based on various factors such as their physical properties, polarity and 
chemical structure. More specifically, the fatty acids are categorised as saturated fatty 
acids (SFAs), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) and polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(PUFAs), depending on the fact they contain none, two or more double bonds 
respectively. PUFAs can be further categorized as PUFA n-3 or n-6 depending on the 
==PAGE:5==
position of the first double bond from the methyl end of the fatty acid and as cis or trans 
depending on the configuration of these double bonds [1].  
Marine oils, including algae, marine fish and marine mammal oils are considered 
an excellent source of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), especially those with long 
chains, EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid, C:20) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid, C:22), 
These two compounds have beneficial health effects. They are related with 
antithrombotic, anti-inflammatory and relaxing effects and they ate responsible for the 
proper function of the brain. In addition, they can prevent cancer and diseases related 
to the heart. EPA and DHA can derive from linoleic and α-linoleic acid (ALA, C:18) 
which is another polyunsaturated fatty acid. While the body can synthesize some fatty 
acids, primarily saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, PUFAs must be obtained through 
diet and some kind of supplements in order to maintain and enhance health. This group 
is called essential fatty acids (EFA) and it contains omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids 
[3]. 
 
Figure 1.1: Chemical structure of EPA and DHA 
1.2 Lipid oxidation 
1.2.1 Production of primary oxidation products 
Lipid oxidation is an important factor in food quality degradation and can have 
negative impact on the integrity of biological systems. The oxidative changes in food 
are responsible for off-flavours, loss of nutrients and bioactives and formation of 
potential toxic compounds. Hence, the lipid or lipid-containing foods are not suitable 
for human consumption. The factors responsible for lipid oxidation could be light, 
oxygen, heat, enzymes, metals and others. These factors can initiate a series of complex 
processes such as autooxidation, photooxidation, and thermal oxidation. The different 
==PAGE:6==
types of oxidation include free radicals and other reactive species as the intermediate 
[4].  
The precise mechanism of lipid oxidation in a specific type of food depends on the 
nature of the present reactive species, the environment and the physicochemical 
properties of the studied system. Fish lipids are very sensitive to oxidation. This 
sensitivity of omega-3 PUFA to oxidation results from a high number of double bonds 
and their position in the fatty acid chain. Omega-3 PUFAs are vulnerable to oxidation 
in each process step including production, storage among others [5]. 
Fish lipids are susceptible to oxidation. The susceptibility of omega-3 PUFAs to 
oxidation can be the result of the high number of double bonds and their position to the 
fatty acid chain. The structures that contain two or more 1,4-diene system loses 
hydrogen easily, resulting in the initiation of the oxidation. EPA has four carbon atoms 
(7, 10, 13 and 16, counting from the carboxyl end of the acid chain). At the same time, 
DHA has five of these sensitive carbon atoms (6, 9, 12, 15, and 18).  
A. Autoxidation 
The oxidation processes that have high level of importance for the project due to 
the fact that factor like heat, oxygen and light must be avoided, can be further analysed. 
These two oxidation processes are autoxidation and photooxidation. 
Autooxidation is the main and most common oxidation process. It is the reaction 
that occurs between lipids and the atmospheric oxygen and it is chain reaction of free 
radicals [4]. The process of lipid oxidation can be divided into three clear stages, and 
these stages are initiation, propagation and termination.  
I. 
Initiation 
The presence of initiators, metal ions, can start the oxidation when the unsaturated 
lipids lose a hydrogen radical and form lipid free radicals. The reaction is described in 
the following reaction and includes three terms, the unsaturated fatty acid (LH), the 
hydrogen radical (H∙) and the free lipid radical (L∙). The initiation stage is proceeded 
slowly and requires the presence of initiators or catalysts.  
==PAGE:7==
 
 
II. 
Propagation 
Next, the lipid radicals (L∙) react rapidly with oxygen and form peroxyl radicals 
(LOO∙). These peroxyl radicals act as the chain carriers to the rapid progressing reaction 
by forming a new free lipid radical. This new free lipid radical can react again with 
oxygen, and this process can be repeated again and again, for thousand times during 
propagation [6]. The lipid radicals reacting with other fatty acids to propagate as chain 
reaction. The production of hydroperoxides are labelled as primary oxidation products 
and the reactions are presented: 
 
 
 
The sensitivity of lipids to autoxidation depends on how many hydrogens (allylic) 
are available and how easy they can react with peroxyl radicals to form the 
hydroperoxides. The hydroperoxides are unstable and they break down to other, 
secondary oxidation products. The secondary oxidation production includes aldehydes, 
ketones, alcohols, volatile organic acids and others. The decomposition of 
hydroperoxides can have as the result the generation of alkoxyl (RO∙), hydroxyl (∙OH), 
peroxyl (ROO∙) and new lipid radicals. 
 
Figure 1.2: Propagation stage pathway 
 
==PAGE:8==
III. 
Termination 
The termination stage is the last stage of oxidation pathway. After having reached 
the maximum point, the reaction rate decreases and hence the peroxyl radicals react 
with each other. The termination reaction includes their self-destruction and the 
formation of non-radical products. The reactions that occur during termination stage 
are presented below [6]. 
  
 
 
Figure 1.3: Termination stage reaction 
Lipid oxidation in marine sourced oils can cause loss in nutritional content, 
production of unpleasant and undesirable odour and flavour and production of 
hazardous chemicals. Secondary oxidation products can have genotoxic effects which 
can lead to alterations of metabolic system. Both safety parameters and quality 
assurance of the product must be priority and strategy against oxidation process has to 
be decided.  
B. Photooxidation 
Photooxidation is the type of oxidation that is accelerated with the exposure to light. 
It can contribute to the oxidation process and provoke changes in food or biological 
products. Hydroperoxides are produced from unsaturated lipids in the presence of light 
and oxygen. There are two possible pathways for photooxidation and include two 
different types of sensitizers. These sensitizers can absorb light and upgrade to a higher 
excitement state. The two types of sensitizers and the reactions are presented [6]. 
Figure 1.4: Photooxidation pathway, different sensitizers, different reaction 
==PAGE:9==
1.2.2 Production of secondary volatile oxidation products  
The primary oxidation products, lipid hydroperoxides, are unstable and from their 
decomposition the secondary oxidation products, volatiles, are formed. The pathway of 
their production is complex but the most possible decomposition process is the break 
of the bond between oxygen and the oxygen molecule of the hydroperoxide molecule. 
The result is the formation of alkoxy and β-hydroxy radicals. Subsequently, the alkoxy 
radical goes through another bond break, the carbon-carbon bond breaks and this results 
to the generation of different oxo-compounds and saturated or unsaturated alkenyl 
radicals. In addition, the products can boost the formation of aldehydes, ketones, acids, 
esters, alcohols or low-molecular weight hydrocarbons, short-chain hydrocarbons. All 
these products can be formed due to various factors such as electron rearrangement, the 
addition of hydroxyl radicals or hydrogen transfer. The formation of the secondary 
oxidation products is directly linked with the initial composition of the fatty acids of 
the oil. Thus, the appearance of certain compounds can be related to the presence or 
abundance of specific fatty acids [2].  
The break of the bond O-O of the hydroperoxide is the main reason for the 
decomposition of hydroperoxides. This bond cleavage can result into forming alkoxyl 
and hydroxyl radicals. The possible pathway of the formation of secondary oxidation 
products is presented [1]. 
 
Figure 1.5: Pathway of formation of secondary oxidation products 
 
The produced compounds (e.g., aldehydes) can be further oxidised to organic 
acids and other oxidation products which may initiate system conductivity changes. 
Hydroperoxides and other secondary oxidation products are reactive and are 
characterised as toxic to cells and tissues of living organisms [1]. 
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Improvement of oil stability  
1.3.1 Antioxidants 
Oxidation of fats or oils and other lipid-containing product can be delayed or even 
prevented. This can be done by excluding the initiator elements during processing, 
production or storage stage. The addition and usage of antioxidants is considered the 
most effective method against lipid oxidation. They shall be used to stabilise food 
products and prevent any possible decrease of product’s quality levels. The shelf life of 
a product can also be improved when antioxidants are added. Antioxidants, in most 
cases, are used at low concentrations and they can delay or prevent oxidation processes 
[7].  
The effectiveness of each antioxidant depends on various different factors such as 
their structure, temperature, used concentration, type of oxidation process and whether 
or not pro-oxidant substances are present. The chemical structure of the antioxidant 
indicates how active it can be towards, for example, free radicals [1].  
Naturally occurred antioxidants can be found in plant materials; animal tissues and 
microorganisms and they can be isolated as pure compounds from these natural sources. 
There are two groups of sources that can be characterised as rich sources in 
antioxidants. The plant-derived antioxidants (phenolic and tocols) can originate from 
fruits, vegetables, spices, herbs, grains, seeds, teas and oils. The second one is the 
antioxidants derived from marine sources such as algae, fish and marine bacteria. These 
antioxidants can be tocols, ascorbic acid, carotenoids and polyphenols [1]. 
 
Figure 1.6: Sources of most common naturally occurred antioxidants 
 
==PAGE:11==
1.3.2 Antioxidants mechanisms 
The use of various antioxidants, and specifically the use of naturally occurred 
antioxidants, can minimize the oxidation process in fish oils. Among others, they can 
act as free radical scavengers, singlet oxygen quenchers, inactivators of peroxides, 
metal ion chelators, quenchers of secondary oxidation products and inhibitors of pro-
oxidative enzymes [7].  
Antioxidants are using different mechanisms such as metals inactivation by 
chelators or scavenging of lipid radicals by phenolic compounds. Their activity can 
differ and that depends on the physico-chemical properties of the system. In order to 
stabilise fish oil, the used antioxidants could be ascorbic acid, citric acid and phenolic 
compounds. More specifically, phenolic compounds include tocopherols, rosemary 
extract and tea catechins. Phenolic compounds have strong antioxidant activity and can 
effectively minimize oxidation as they can act both as metal chelators and free radical 
scavengers [8].  Tocols, tocopherols and tocotrienols are fat-soluble antioxidants which 
can effectively scavenge lipid peroxyl radicals and can be part of mixture along with 
other antioxidants as well. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) can regenerate tocopherol-α and 
it can act as reducing agent [3].  
Primary antioxidants such as the phenolic compounds can neutralize free radicals 
by donating a hydrogen atom. The reaction presented below shows the mechanism’s 
performance [1].  
 
 
 
 
The antioxidant radicals, reaction result, are stabilised via the unpaired electron around 
the phenol ring and form stable resonance hybrids. These radical do not form new 
radicals and hence they do not initiate the chain-reaction of free radical propagation. 
Moreover, the antioxidant radicals can act as scavengers of free radical and terminate 
the oxidation process [1].  
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
 
The mechanism of primary antioxidants operates in two possible ways at the same 
time. The antioxidants can trap two lipid radicals. The first by donating a hydrogen 
atom to one radical and by receiving an electron from another radical to form stable 
non-radical products (second one) [1]. 
Another mechanism to minimise the oxidation process is the conversion of 
hydroperoxides into stable compounds in pathway that is non-radical. Metal ions act as 
catalysts of the oxidation reaction. They produce free radicals by electron transfer. 
Antioxidant compounds such as citric acid and phosphoric acid can decrease the effect 
of the metal ions and they are called metal chelators. The metal chelators are reducing 
the redox potentials and they are forming a stable complex instead. The pathway of the 
production of free radicals through the electron transfer is presented [1]. 
 
 
 
 
Singlet oxygen quenchers can inactivate singlet oxygen by absorbing the excess 
heat and converting it to ground state triplet oxygen. The absorbed amount of energy is 
released as heat. This ability is connected with the number of double bonds in the 
molecule. An example of a compounds that operates as single oxygen quencher are 
carotenoids and the reaction is presented [1]. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
The effect of antioxidants and the mechanisms against oxidation process can 
differ, it can be either short-term or long-term. It depends on the kinetics of the reaction, 
the thermodynamics, and the extend of the reaction. Also, the concentration of the 
antioxidant can play an important role in how effective it can be. Antioxidants added in 
higher concentrations can have pro-oxidative effects. The chemical structure of the 
antioxidant determines the effectiveness against free radicals [1]. 
1.4 Supercritical Extraction Method (SFE) 
The Supercritical Fluid Extraction method (SFE method) has presented in the last 
20 years as an alternative method that can be applied in various industrial fields such 
as fish oil extraction, seed oil extraction, alcohol removal from wine, coffee 
decaffeination [9]. This innovative, promising and environmentally friendly method has 
been used as an alternative solution for the extraction of natural oils from various 
sources [10]. The supercritical fluid extraction method (SFE) can be an effective 
method of natural products extraction and it is characterised as sustainable and safe 
compared to other traditional extraction methods [11].  
The method is called supercritical and that is based on the condition of the fluid 
used for the extraction. The term supercritical is used because it describes the physical 
state of the fluid. It has to be mentioned that a supercritical fluid is a fluid at a higher 
temperature and pressure than the critical point. At that point, both the gas and the 
distinct liquid phases do not exist. This can be clarified by observing the following 
figure, Figure 1 [12].  
==PAGE:14==
 
Figure 1.7: Phase diagram – Pressure vs. Temperature [12] 
There are physicochemical properties that can define a supercritical fluid, density, 
diffusivity and viscosity. The density of a supercritical fluid is similar to a liquid and 
the viscosity is similar to a gas. However, the diffusivity is intermediate between these 
two states and thus a supercritical fluid can be defined as a state in which gas and liquid 
cannot be distinguished between each other. These characteristics of the supercritical 
fluids can accelerate mass transfer and that means supercritical fluids have higher mass 
transfer rates [13]. Because of their density are able to dissolve other substances. 
Moreover, due to the fact that they can be highly compressible near the critical point, 
the density and hence their solvent capacity can be regulated through small changes in 
temperature and/or pressure. These physicochemical properties of different kinds of 
fluids are shown in Table 1.1 [14]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
Table 1.1: Physicochemical properties of gas, liquid and supercritical fluid [14] 
 
In the following table, Table 1.2, it is presented a list with the most common 
supercritical fluids which are used in the SFE method. The most popular solvent and 
the most preferred in analytical sciences and industrial applications is carbon dioxide 
(CO2) [15]. Carbon dioxide is easy to handle, it is available in great amounts and can 
also be obtained in a pure form. These are the reasons that CO2 prevails among the other 
fluids presented to Table 1.2.  
Table 1.2: Critical properties of solvents used in SFE method [15] 
 
CO2 has its critical point at 31.2 ºC and 72.9 atm (mild critical point). That low 
critical temperature can help preventing any thermal degradation of food components 
during the extraction process. In addition, CO2 is characterised as inexpensive, non-
flammable, non-toxic and generally recognised as safe (GRAS) solvent. Also, it has to 
be highlighted that after the extraction is complete it can be easily evaporated from the 
extract at ambient conditions, resulting in residue-free extract [16].  
==PAGE:16==
The SFE method, using CO2 as solvent, can overcome the various disadvantages 
of other conventional extraction methods such as the solvent extraction or the hydraulic 
pressing. The most crucial disadvantages of these methods are the high temperatures 
which can affect the quality of the extract (fish oil), the toxicity levels because of the 
solvent residue in the extract and any possible degradation of the heat sensitive 
compounds [10].  
However, there are limitations using the SFE method and the main one is the low 
polarity of the CO2. Carbon dioxide can be a great solvent for dissolving non-polar 
compounds (lipophilic) but it less effective in extracting more polar compounds. For 
that reason, it is suggested to use a co-solvent during the extraction, a highly polar 
compound. The usage of co-solvent in the extraction process can improve the 
efficiency. That means that the addition of a polar co-solvent can result in the separation 
of more polar compounds that they cannot be effectively separated by using carbon 
dioxide (solvent) alone. As co-solvent, ethanol is preferred. Ethanol is a harmless 
solvent (similar to supercritical CO2) that poses no risks to human health or the 
environment. These benefits set ethanol apart from other solvents such as n-hexane or 
methanol [16].  
This study is focused on a new sustainable source of marine oil and more 
specifically, it is focused on the extraction of starfish oil using the SFE as extraction 
method of choice. 
2.1 Experimental design    
The project consists of three different series of experiments. To begin with, the 
starfish oil was extracted using the Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE) method, using 
supercritical CO2 as solvent and ethanol as co-solvent. The next step was the screening 
of the extracted stability of starfish oil with and without the addition of antioxidants 
and comparison with krill oil and cod liver oil. The analytical method for the screening 
experiments is OxypressTM which is based on oxygen consumption. The method is an 
accelerated method to determine the oxidative stability of the oils. 
The three different types of oils are analysed and compared based on the results of 
each analysis. The analysis includes the determination of free fatty acids (FFA) content, 
peroxide values (PVs) tocopherol (HPLC), fatty acid composition (FAME, GC-FID) in 
==PAGE:17==
total lipids and in phospholipids and neutral lipids. Also, the starfish oil characterisation 
was done based on these analytical results. 
Next, the initiation of the storage experiment was planned. The selection and 
addition of antioxidants was done based on the results of the OxypressTM method, 
certain antioxidants were excluded and have not been added. The total number of added 
antioxidants was five. In order to determine the conditions and the total storage period, 
a 4-day long storage experiment was performed and at the end of the forth day, peroxide 
values (PVs) were determined. After that, the storage experiment followed with a total 
storage period of 21 days, including 5 sampling points. 
 
Figure 2.1: Schematic presentation of the experimental plan 
 
3. Material – Method 
3.1 Supercritical Extraction Method – SFE 
3.1.1 Raw Material  
Starfish (Asterias rubens) is provided to Denmark’s Technical University (DTU) 
by the project partner company, Nordic Marine Nutrition (NMN). Starfish were caught 
in Denmark, in the area of Limfjorden (Northern Jytland, Denmark) from different time 
points over the previous season. The company is responsible for the drying process of 
the fresh starfish. The total process and all steps required for obtaining and using the 
starfish as powder are the company’s responsibility.  
More specifically, the company has completed a series of steps, including catching 
the starfish, harvesting, cutting and drying, freezing and shipping the starfish powder 
==PAGE:18==
to DTU in order to initiate the experimental plan. The received starfish powder was 
stored until sorting at -40 ºC. There were two different batches of starfish powder, one 
from October (freeze-dried raw material) and one from January (dried raw material). 
Table 3 shows the weighted mass of starfish used in SFE and the dates of the extraction 
experiments that were conducted.  
Table 3.1: Starfish powder used in the SFE  
 
The powder for the first extraction experiment (15-Feb) came from October batch 
while the powder for the next two experiments (20 and 22-Feb) came from January 
batch. The last extraction (14-Mar) was an additional extraction from January batch 
from the residual meal and the aim was to obtain more starfish oil.    
3.1.2 Supercritical-CO2 extraction 
The extraction of starfish oil was done using supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) 
with CO2 extraction pilot plant scale system (Core Separations, Stockport, UK). Each 
extraction was performed at various conditions and the aim was to extract the maximum 
possible amount of starfish oil. The extraction process started with adding the starfish 
powder in the vessel. The extraction vessel of the pilot plant has a maximum capacity 
of 5 L, and it is suggested not to fill the vessel up to the maximum level. For every 
extraction experiment, there was starfish powder leftover. The leftover powder was 
stored at -40°C until further analysis. 
The parameters that influence most the extraction process, and hence the extraction 
yield, and have to be controlled are temperature, pressure and the flow rates of both 
CO2 and ethanol. Flow rates of both solvent and co-solvent were measured with a gas 
flow meter and were kept constant for every extraction experiment. CO2 was pumped 
into the extraction vessel by a high-pressure pump after passing through a cooling heat 
exchanger and the desired pressure was achieved. That value was regulated by a back 
pressure regulator. The temperature is measured with a digital thermometer during the 
extraction period of time.  
Raw Material 
15-Feb
20-Feb
22-Feb
14-Mar
Starfish powder (g)
2657
2314
2482
2629
Extraction experiments (dates)
==PAGE:19==
 
Figure 3.1: Schematic representation of the pilot plant installation used for 
the supercritical extraction experiments. 
In figure 3.1, the unit operations used for the extraction are shown and for 
simplicity reasons each unit operation has labelled. The pilot scale plant, used for the 
extraction of the starfish oil includes: (1) CO2 tank, (2) pressure gauge, (3) high pressure 
pump, (4) heat exchanger, (5) high pressure vessel, (6) (cyclone) separator, (7) 
collection vessel, (8) flow meter, (9) digital thermometer, (10) on-off valve, (11) check 
valve, (12) back-pressure regulator, (13) needle valve, (14) co-solvent bottle, (15) co-
solvent pump. 
==PAGE:20==
 
Figure 3.2: Core Separations pilot plant CO2 extraction system 
The initial extraction temperature and pressure was 45 ºC and 300 bar respectively. 
For the next extraction experiments, the pressure value was increased at 350 bar while 
the temperature was kept stable at 45 ºC. The flow rates of CO2 were 300 g/min, for the 
first experiment, and 350 g/min for the rest of the extractions. The flow rates of ethanol 
for each experiment were different and ranged between 10 ml/min and 25 ml/min. The 
extraction duration was also changing from experiment to experiment. The reason for 
this duration increase was to achieve higher yields and obtain more starfish oil. The 
extraction period was initial 120 minutes, in total, and during the last experiment the 
extraction lasted 360 minutes, in total. Also, it has to be mentioned that the extraction 
was conducted with the presence of co-solvent but after a specific amount of time that 
flow rate was stopped and only CO2 was running into the system. The reason for that 
was to remove all the reaming solvents from the extraction vessel.  The starfish oil is 
collected in a 1L flask. 
The specific parameters that were selected for each extraction experiment are 
shown in Table 4. It must be noted that for the 3rd extraction experiment (22-Feb), the 
initial mass flow rate of the co-solvent (ethanol) was 15 ml/min and after 120 minutes 
of extraction, the mass flow rate was decreased to 10 ml/min. 
==PAGE:21==
Table 3.2: Selected extraction parameters for every SFE experiment 
 
 
Figure 3.2: Collection of the extracted oil (plus solvent) in a 1L flask 
3.1.3 Solvent evaporation and oil recovery 
In order to evaporate the amount of ethanol in the extracted oil, a rotary evaporator 
was used.  An empty flask is weighed and was used for the collection of oil, after the 
evaporation of ethanol. 
Parameters
15-Feb
20-Feb
22-Feb
14-Mar
Sovent pump (g/min)
300
350
350
350
Co-solvent (ml/min)
10
25
15
10
Vessel temperature (°C)
45
45
45
45
Total extraction time (min)
120
240
240
360
Solvents flow rate (min)
60
160
180
240
Single solvent flow rate (min)
60
80
60
120
Extraction experiments (dates)
==PAGE:22==
The speed of the rotary evaporator and the temperature were set at 40 rpm and 45°C 
respectively. The temperature selection was following the temperature of the vessel that 
was used during the extraction of the starfish oil in the pilot scale plant. The evaporated 
ethanol was collected in a separate flask. The starfish oil was rinsed with chloroform 
and the flask was left under nitrogen in the fume hood overnight, for solvents 
evaporation. The full flask was weighted, and that mass value is subtracted from the 
mass of the empty flask in order to calculate the mass of the oil without the solvents 
(ethanol and chloroform). 
 
Figure 3.3: Rotary evaporator equipment used for solvents evaporation 
3.2 Oxidative stability – OxypresTM method 
The aim of this experiment is to compare the oxidative stability of the extracted 
starfish oil and two other marine omega-3 oils, krill oil and cod liver oil, using the 
OxypresTM method. Krill oil is provided by Rimfrost (Ålesund, Norway) and cod liver 
oil is provided by Vesteraalens A/S (Sortland, Norway). Furthermore, OxypresTM will 
be used to screen the efficiency of different antioxidant to protect starfish oil against 
==PAGE:23==
lipid oxidation. The method is based on oxygen consumption; the pressure increases 
because of the temperature increase until a certain value and then it stabilizes. Then the 
pressure decreases due to the oxygen consumption because of oxidation process. This 
induction periods of all three types of oil, starfish oil, krill oil and cod liver oil, were 
measured using an OxypresTM apparatus (Microlab Aarhus A/S, Højbjerg, Denmark). 
The starfish oil analysed for both cases, with and without the presence of antioxidants, 
and the used oil was from the 1st batch (October). 
During an Oxypres test, the sample is placed in a hermetically closed iron vessel 
and both high temperature and pressure conditions are applied into the system. The 
parameters for the screening experiments, temperature and pressure, were 80 ºC and 5 
bar respectively. There were used 3 blocks with 2 iron vessels fitting in each block. 
Every block operates with same conditions at the same time. Thus, 6 samples were 
analysed every time. The Oxypres experiments were performed in duplicate. 
The initiation of the experiment includes weighting 4g of oil sample and filling 
each flask with the sample. IFF (Denmark) provided four different antioxidants and 
Kalsec (USA) provided two different antioxidants, which were used to evaluate the 
oxidative stability of starfish oil with antioxidants (0.1%, w/w). One antioxidant was 
added per oil sample. The added antioxidants were added in order to evaluate the 
effectiveness of each one during Oxypres experiment. Based on the results, the 
selection of the proper antioxidants was done and they were used for the storage 
experiments. 
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.3: Selected antioxidants and their components
 
The next steps included transferring the flask into the iron vessel and sealing the 
vessel as tight as possible to avoid any possible leaks. Then, the vessel, including the 
flask with the sample, was filled with oxygen and after that it was immediately emptied. 
This process was repeated 3 or 4 times and the aim was to have the system completely 
filled the oxygen. There is the need to achieve a closed system and hence the valve was 
closed for every iron vessel. A water bath was used as test in order to check for leaks. 
The presence of bubbles would indicate a potential leak. After that, each iron vessel 
was placed to the right position in each block. First, the desired temperature and 
pressure value was achieved and then the measurement began. 
3.2 Oils characterisation and comparison  
The extracted starfish oil and the other two oils, the krill oil and the cod liver oil, 
were analysed and the results were compared. The results from the Oxypres experiment 
were the initial part of that comparison. Also, the extracted starfish oil was analysed 
and the results used for the oil characterisation and for further comparison of the oils. 
The used starfish oil for analysis and comparison was from the 1st batch (October). 
 
 
Company
Components
Name
Kalsec
Ascorbic acid                
Tocopherol                  
Rosemary extract              
Citric acid
Duralox Man-5 NS
Kalsec
Tocopherol                  
Rosemary extract
Duralox NM-110 XT
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-147
Synerox 4-002
Synerox LOD
Rosemary extract              
Tocopherol                  
Ascorbyl palmitate
IFF
Ascorbyl palmitate             
Tocopherol                  
Lecithin
IFF
Citric acid                   
Green tea extract
IFF
    Tocopherol                
Rosemary extract              
IFF
==PAGE:25==
 Determination Peroxide Values (PVs) 
For the determination of peroxide values, the primary oxidation products were 
measured using the following method: FF – Analysis Instruction no 121.03 [17]. More 
specifically, 20 mg of oil samples were weighted in a clear glass vial with round bottom, 
and then 10ml of chloroform/methanol (7:3 v/v) were added. That was followed by 
adding 50μl thiocyanate solution and 50μl of Fe(+2)chloride solution. Standard group 
with Fe(+3)chloride solution and blank group were prepared, 2 samples of each group. 
For each type of oil, an extra test sample was prepared and labelled as coloured sample. 
For that sample, 20mg were weighted and 10ml of chloroform/methanol (7:3 v/v) were 
added, without adding any reagent.  
All samples were stored for 5 minutes for incubation in a dark place, in room 
temperature. The absorbance of the liquid in the tubes was measured using a 
spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UVmini 1240, Shimadzu, Duisburg, Germany), 
operating in 500nm in order to calculate PV. The spectrophotometer was adjusted to 
500nm and then reset to detect the chloroform-methanol mixture as zero. The 
absorbance of the sample colour is subtracted. The analysis was performed in duplicate. 
 Determination of Free Fatty Acids (FFA) 
The concentration of free fatty acids in the oil samples is presented as percentage 
(%) of the amount of oleic acid in the oil. The method used for the calculation of FFA 
is FF – Analysis Instruction no 112.07 [18]. The initial step was weighting 20mg of 
each type of oil in an Erlenmeyer flask (100ml). Next was the addition of 20ml of 
chloroform and 25ml of ethanol, using a dispenser, in the same flask. The indicator, 
phenolphthalein indicator, was added last and the added amount was 5 drops. The 
solution was titrated with 0.1M NaOH solution until colour changes and a faint pink 
colour appears, using 715 Dosimat (Metrohm AG, Herisau, Switzerland) apparatus. The 
analysis was performed in duplicate and the FFA content was calculated as g/kg of oleic 
acid. 
 Determination of Tocopherols 
The tocopherol content in each oil was determined by FF – Analysis Instruction no 
113.07 method. This protocol is a modification of the original method AOCS Ce 8-89 
[19]. The analysis performed using HPLC-FLD Agilent 1100 (Agilent Technology, CA, 
==PAGE:26==
USA) with the column Waters Spherisorb 150mm x 4.6mm x film 3μm silica (Agilent 
Technologies). The mobile phase was heptane:2-propanol (100:0.4 v+v). The method 
includes the following steps: first 40mg of each oil were weighted and then 1ml of 
heptane (HPLC grade) was added in a small brown vial (1.5ml). For the analysis, a 
tocopherol standard mix and a toco-50 stock solution were used in the experimental 
sequence. In each of the tocopherol standard solution, the tocopherols of our interest 
(α, β, γ and δ) are included.  
 Determination of Lipid Classes and Fatty Acid Methylesters (FAME) 
The method separates lipid classes into three groups: neutral lipids (NL), free fatty 
acids (FFA) and phospholipids (PL). The production of fatty acid methylesters is the 
result of the conversion of bound fatty acids or free fatty acids. The used protocols are 
FF– Analysis Instruction no 702.07 [20] and FF– Analysis Instruction no 108.07 [21] 
for Lipid class separation and FAME respectively. 
To begin with, lipid classes were separated using a Sep-Pak column (3 cc/ 500mg). 
The initial action was to prepare the column by adding 2ml of heptane (p.a. grade), 
twice, and then heptane is collected in separate tubes. Then, next step included 
weighting 40mg of each oil in a glass tube with screw cup (8ml). The oil sample was 
dissolved in 0.5ml of chloroform (p.a. grade) and the solution was transferred into the 
column. The rest of the oil sample was rinsed 2 times with approximately 0.3ml of 
chloroform and added in the column as well. The collection tube was placed in the 
chamber and the solvent eluted when the needle valve was opened.  
 
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.4: Equipment used for the lipid class separation 
The two first fractions, neutral lipids (NL) and free fatty acids (FFA), were eluted 
in the same glass tube For the elution of the neutral lipids, 2ml of chloroform:2-
propanol (2:1 v/v) solution was added and the elution was stopped before solvent 
reached the surface of the column. The process was repeated twice. For the elution of 
free fatty acids, in the same tube, 2ml of diethyl ether: acetic acid (98:2 v/v) solution 
was added and that was repeated 3 times. Once again, the elution was stopped before 
solvent reached the surface of the column.  
For the elution of phospholipids (PL), a different tube was used. The tubes were 
changes for each sampling position and 2ml of methanol (p.a. grade) was added twice. 
The elution was stopped before solvent reached the surface of the column. The tubes 
were placed under nitrogen in order to evaporate the solvents. For both the two 
fractions, NL and FFA, and the PL fraction the solvent was evaporated near to dryness.  
The determination of FAME was followed after the lipid class separation. Oil 
sample was weighted and that was used for the determination of the total fraction 
(FAME composition analysis). 40mg were weighted and 100μl of internal standard 
solution (2% w/v, C:23 in n-heptane) was added. In addition, the internal standard 
solution was added in both the (NL+FFA) and PL fraction, 100μl and 25μl respectively.  
Next step was the methylation process. Firstly, 1ml of 0.5M methanolic sodium 
hydroxide was added in each glass tube. The tubes were boiled in water bath for 5 
minutes. The temperature used for the water bath was 100 ºC. The lids of every tube 
has to be screwed tightly. After the tubes were cooled down, 1.5ml of bortrifluoride in 
methanol solution was added in each tube. The tubes were boiled again in the water 
bath for 5 minutes. After the tubes were cooled down, the other two reagents were 
added.  
More specifically, 5ml of sodium chloride solution and 2.5ml of n-heptane 
containing 0.01% BHT were added. After the lids were screwed tightly, each glass tube 
was shaken intensively for 30 seconds. The tubes were left aside to rest until phase 
separation. The upper phase from each tube, approximately 1.5ml, were transferred into 
small brown vials (1.5ml) and were ready to be analysed. The vials were transferred in 
the GC-MS equipment, Agilent 7890A Gas Chromatograph (Agilent Technologies, CA, 
USA) for the gas chromatographic analysis of fatty acid composition. 
==PAGE:28==
3.4 Oxidative stability - Storage experiments 
3.4.1 ΄΄Small΄΄ storage experiment 
After the completion of oil characterization and the comparison among the oils, the 
storage experiments were planned to start. The initial conditions had to be decided. The 
temperature of choice would be 20 ºC or 30 ºC and the total duration would be 6 weeks. 
In order to finalise the storage experiment parameters, a ΄΄small΄΄ storage experiment 
decided to be performed.  
Both temperatures were used for the ΄΄small΄΄ storage experiment. The duration of 
this experiment was 4 days and there were 3 sampling points, day 0, 1 and 4. Day 0 was 
the same for both temperatures. The experiment was performed in duplicate. For the 
samples preparation, 250μl of starfish oil were weighted and this amount was 
transferred in small brown vials (1ml). Samples were flashed with nitrogen and stored 
at -40 ºC for PV analysis. The PV analysis was done by following the same protocol 
for oil characterisation. 
3.4.2 Final storage experiments 
The final parameters for the storage experiment were chosen and these were 20 °C 
(room temperature) and the total storage duration 21 days. This decision was made 
based on the results of the΄΄small΄΄ storage experiment.  
The selection of the antioxidants added in the starfish oil was done based on the 
results of the Oxypres experiment in which the effectiveness of each antioxidant was 
evaluated. The selected antioxidants were 5 and the list included 3 antioxidants from 
IFF (Denmark) and 2 antioxidants from Kalsec (USA). The antioxidants received from 
IFF and used for the storage experiments were: Grindox 539, Synerox 4-002 and 
Synerox 4-147 while the antioxidants from Kalsec were: Duralox MAN-5 NS and green 
tea. The added concentration of the antioxidants was 1000ppm (0.1% w/w of the 
weighted oil sample). 
The storage period was 21 days and included 5 sampling points. These sampling 
points were day 0, 3, 7, 14, and 21. At each sampling point, the samples were flashed 
with nitrogen and stored at -40 ºC for further analysis. Sampling at day 0 was done after 
the antioxidants were added. The available starfish oil for the storage experiments was 
==PAGE:29==
126g. There were 5 different samples (different antioxidant in each sample) and 1 
starfish oil sample was used as the control sample.  
The experiment started with the preparation of beakers and vials. 6 beakers (40ml) 
selected and label them based on the antioxidant that was added (A, B, C, D, E and 
STAR).  
Table 3.4: Code names of the used antioxidants 
 
Glass vials (8ml) and Eppendorf tubes were collected and labelled, the same way as the 
bakers, in order to divide the initial amount of oil for the analysis that was done for 
every sampling point. Firstly, the oil was transferred from each beaker into 5 glass vials. 
The amount oil in each glass vial was used for analysis and 3.7g of oil was needed.  
More specifically, 3.2g of oil were used for volatiles analysis and the rest of the oil 
was transferred again in the Eppendorf tubes for the individual analysis. The oil in 
Eppendorf tubes was used for FAME/Lipid class analysis and PV/tocopherol analysis. 
For beginning and ending sampling points of the storage period, 2 Eppendorf tubes 
were needed. One was used for FAME and Lipid class analysis (200mg) and the other 
for PV and tocopherol analysis (150mg). For the intermediate sampling points (week 1 
and 2), 1 Eppendorf tube was needed, for PV and tocopherol analysis (150mg). In 
addition, for the oil characterization of the starfish oil (control sample), one extra 
Eppendorf tube was needed in order to transfer 200mg of oil for free fatty acids (FFA) 
analysis (week 0). In total, there will be 30 glass vials and 43 Eppendorf tubes, labelled 
and ready to be used. 
Antioxidant
Code
Day 0
Day 3
Day 7
Day 14
Day 21
Grindox 539
A
A-0
A-0.5
A-1
A-2
A-3
Synerox 4-002
B
B-0
B-0.5
B-1
B-2
B-3
Synerox 4-147
C
C-0
C-0.5
C-1
C-2
C-3
Man-5 NS
D
D-0
D-0.5
D-1
D-2
D-3
Green tea extract
E
E-0
E-0.5
E-1
E-2
E-3
-
STAR
STAR-0
STAR-0.5
STAR-1
STAR-2
STAR-3
==PAGE:30==
The next step of the experiment included the addition of the antioxidants. The oil 
(126g) was divided in 6 beakers in order to have equal amount of starfish oil in each 
beaker (20g of oil per beaker). All antioxidants were weighted and expected to be 0.1% 
w/w of each oil sample. That means 0.02gr of each antioxidant corresponded for 20g 
of oil. Different antioxidant was added in every beaker. First, the selected antioxidant 
was weighted and then the amount of oil was added into the beaker. All samples were 
stirred on a magnetic stirrer to ensure that the antioxidant was distributed properly in 
the oil.  Next, the oil with the added antioxidant, from each beaker was further divided 
into the glass vials and the Eppendorf tubes. The amount of each sample was weighted 
to ensure that 3.8g of sample had been transferred from the beaker to the glass vial. 
The weighted amount of the sample (3.8g) is different from the original amount 
that was declared above (4g) and this is result from losses during transferring the oil 
(oil residue in the pipettes or sticky oil on the sides and the bottom of beakers and 
original storage bottle, respectively).  
Then, for day 0, oil sample was transferred from the glass vial to the Eppendorf 
tubes. The glass vials and the Eppendorf tubes were both flashed with nitrogen and 
stored in freezer (-40°C) until analysis. The rest of the glass vials, 24 in total, were 
stored in a dark cabinet in room temperature (20°C). The same procedure was followed 
for every sampling point of the total storage period. The analysis of the samples in every 
sampling point included the determination of peroxide values (PVs), tocopherols, free 
fatty acids (FFA), lipid classes and fatty acid methylesters (FAME). For these analysis 
the same protocols were used and they have been referred in the section with the starfish 
oil characterisation and comparison among the oils. 
Regarding the secondary oxidation products (volatiles), it was used GC-MS (Gas 
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry) as analytical method. Volatiles were formed after 
the decomposition of peroxides. GC-MS was used in order to analyse the type and the 
amount of volatiles in the starfish oil samples (control sample and samples that include 
antioxidants). 1g of starfish oil and 25mg of internal standard were added into a brown 
bottle (8ml). The experiment was performed in triplicate. Two samples of internal 
standard were prepared, 40mg in each one, and they were analysed in the beginning 
and at the end of the GC-MS analytical sequence. The analysis was performed using 
==PAGE:31==
Agilent HP 5973 Mass Spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). The 
experiment included the sample from every sampling point.  
Based on the volatile compounds found in the starfish oil, the external standards 
were selected and prepared. The selected external standards were pentanal, 2,3-
pentanedione, 1-penten-3-one, butanal-3-methyl, 1-penten-3-ol, hexanal, 4-methyl-1-
pentanol, 2,4-heptadienal, benzaldehyde, heptanal and 2-heptenal. These compounds 
were diluted to 0.5, 1, 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100 μg/g in rapeseed oil. In order to make the 
calibration curve, 1g of rapeseed oil 50mg of the diluted solution were added in a brown 
vial. For each different concentration, the volatile analysis was performed in triplicate. 
There were in total 21 vials ready for analysis, 3 vials for 7 different concentrations. 
The volatile compounds were identified individually by the MS-library Wiley 138K 
(John Wiley and Sons, Hewlett-Packard) and by comparison to calibration curve with 
external standards. 
5. Results and Discussion 
5.1 Supercritical Extraction Method – SFE 
5.1.1 Solvent evaporation and oil recovery 
The rotary evaporation and the use of nitrogen were used to evaporate the total 
amount of solvents in the extracted oil. For each amount of extracted oil, the 
concentration of the solvents in the oil was calculated, using the masses of the full flasks 
before and after the total evaporation process (rotary evaporation and nitrogen). 
Table 5.1 Values of flasks used for the solvent concentration calculations 
 
 
Values 
15-Feb
20-Feb
22-Feb
14-Mar
Empty flask (g)
233
331
226
335
Full flask (g)
367
363
287
438
Starfish oil (g)
134
32
61
103
Extraction experiments (dates)
==PAGE:32==
The aim was the recovery of the oil without any solvents residues. Thus, the drying 
oven method was used in order to calculate the First, two empty beakers (25 ml beakers, 
labelled as A and B) were placed in the oven, in 100 °C, for 30 minutes. Then, these 
beakers were placed in a box, isolated, in order to cool down to room temperature. 
When they had been cooled down, they were weighted. Next, 2g of starfish oil were 
weighted (1+1 g) and transferred in the beakers and placed in the same oven for 60 
minutes. The beakers with the oil were placed in the same box to cool down to room 
temperature and after approximately 30-40 minutes they were weighted again.  
The goal was the evaporation of the solvent residues in high temperature and the 
calculation of the initial concentration in the extracted oil samples. For both batches, 
October and January batch, the solvents concentration was calculated approximately 
30% in the extracted oil.  Aligned with this value, there were hints of presence of at 
least one of the solvents in the starfish oil (strong smell).  
Because of this calculation, it was decided to leave the extracted oil samples under 
nitrogen for a longer period of time, so that the maximum amount could be evaporated. 
The oil extracted from January batch which is going to be used for the storage 
experiment was transferred in one flask instead of having three different flasks and left 
under the nitrogen for 48 hours. The oil from October batch was left under nitrogen for 
the same period of time. After these two days, the drying oven method was repeated, 
and the concentration of the solvents was calculated again. For both oils, the 
concentration was below 1% in the oil. 
5.1.2 Yield calculation 
The final amounts of oil after the two evaporation processes are: 
 Oil extracted from October batch: 84g  
 Oil extracted from January batch: 126g 
==PAGE:33==
 
Figure 5.1: Starfish oil  
In Table 6, it is shown the mass of the initial starfish powder used for the extraction 
experiments, the mass of the extracted starfish oil and the calculated yield. 
Table 5.2: Yield calculation 
 
The extraction from the defatted starfish meal has been not included in the yield 
calculations. The aim of the extraction was to obtain as much oil as possible for the 
further analysis of the oil, the evaluation of the oxidative stability of the starfish oil. For 
that reason, the low extraction yield and hence the optimisation of the extraction 
conditions, is not the focus research area of this study project.  
Raw Material 
October 
January
Starfish powder (g)
2657
4796
Starfish oil (g)
84
126
3.2
2.6
Batch
Yield (%)
==PAGE:34==
The scale up process from laboratory conditions to pilot plant scale conditions 
might be affected by many factors such as the extraction duration, solvent and co-
solvent flow rates, raw material conditions, or a possible combination of these factors. 
In Table 4, there is an obvious increase in selected parameters e.g., the total extraction 
time and/or the co-solvent flow rate and the target was to extract more starfish oil that 
could be used for further analysis of the extracted oil.   
5.2 Oxidative stability  
5.2.1 Oxypres method 
The oxidative stability of the 3 different marine oils were evaluated using the 
Oxypres method. The behaviour of each oil to the oxygen consumption was 
significantly different. The induction period was higher for the krill oil, then the 
induction periods for both krill oil and the extracted starfish oil, without the addition of 
antioxidants, were much lower. The results of the Oxypres suggest that cod liver oil has 
lower oxygen consumption during the incubation compared to the other two oils. Also, 
the studied starfish oil, has the lowest induction period among the 3 oils, approximately 
50 minutes.  
 
Figure 5.2: Induction periods of the 3 different marine oils 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Induction period (min)
Oil performance
Oxypres Method
Cod liver oil
Krill oil
Starfish oil
==PAGE:35==
The starfish oil was further analysed when various different antioxidants were 
added. The addition of 6 antioxidants aimed to check their effectiveness regarding the 
oxygen consumption. There has been a delay in the oxygen consumption and hence a 
higher induction period. Especially for the 2 antioxidants, Duralox 539 and Synerox 4-
147, the induction period was doubled. The majority of the antioxidants were efficient 
and managed to prolong the induction period, except one antioxidant, the Synerox 
LOD. The Synerox LOD is a mixture of 2 antioxidants, citric acid and green tea extract 
and it is the only containing the green tea extract. The presence of green tea extract has 
made no difference in the oxygen consumption. The induction period was similar to the 
one of the starfish control sample, without any added antioxidant.  
 
Figure 5.3: Induction periods of starfish oil samples, including different 
antioxidants 
5.3 Oil characterisation and comparison 
For the oil characterisation, the analysis included determination of PV, Tocopherols, 
FFA and Lipid class and FAME. The most highlighted result from the oil comparison 
indicated that starfish sample from the first batch did not include any tocopherols of our 
interest, except tocopherol-α. 
 
  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Induction period (min)
Starfish oil performance
Oxypres Method
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
Synerox LOD
Duralox MAN-5 NS
Duralox NM-110 XT
Starfish control
==PAGE:36==
 Determination of PV 
The graph of the PV values is presented below and it includes both starfish oil 
samples, from the different batches, October and January. The peroxide value of the 
starfish oil from October has huge differences compared to the other oil samples. The 
peroxide values indicate that higher the value of their concentration, higher the rate of 
the oxidation in the fish oil. Once again, the differences between oils of same origin 
(starfish) might be the result of various factors such as handling of the raw material, 
different extraction parameters, raw material nature or storage conditions after the 
extraction until the analysis experiments. 
 
Figure 5.4: Peroxide values of the marine oils, starfish samples from different 
batches are included 
 Determination of Tocopherols 
The graph about tocopherol-α concentration indicates that the krill oil has the 
highest concentration of tocopherol-α. This differences between the starfish oil samples 
is because there were samples from two different batches. In the graph, the samples 
from the second batch (January) have higher tocopherol-α concentration. This might be 
the effect of the different processing of the starfish (drying process against freeze-
drying), raw material handling, harvesting period or a combination of these factors. Cod 
liver oil has the lowest concentration of tocopherol-α among these 3 marine oils.  
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Peroxide value (meq O2/kg olie) 
Oil samples
Peroxide values
Starfish oil - October
Starfish oil - January
Krill oil
Cod liver oil
==PAGE:37==
 
Figure 5.5: Tocopherol-α concentrations 
Regarding the tocopherols of interest (tocopherol-β, tocopherol-γ and tocopherol-δ), 
the starfish oil samples did not have any based on the results of the HPLC analysis. The 
other two marine oil samples have both low values of tocopherol-β. At the same time, 
krill oil has the best performance between the two oils as it has higher concentrations 
of both tocopherol-γ and tocopherol-δ. 
 
Figure 5.6: Tocopherols concentration of two marine oils, krill oil and cod liver oil 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Tocopherol-α concentration (µg toc/g olie)
Oils performance
Tocopherol-α
Starfish October
Starfish January
Krill oil
Cod liver oil
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Tocopherol β
Tocopherol γ
Tocopherol δ
Tocopherol concentration (µg toc/g olie)
Tocopherols concentration
krill A
cod liver A
==PAGE:38==
 Determination of FFA 
The analysis of the content of Free Fatty Acids (FFA) in the 3 different marine oils 
resulted in significant differences among them. Cod liver oil has the lowest percentage 
of free fatty acids, while the krill oil has almost double percentage of free fatty acids 
compared to the starfish oil. 
 
Figure 5.7: Free fatty acids content of 3 different marine oils 
 Determination of Lipid class and FAME 
The EPA [20:5(n-3)] and DHA [22:6(n-3)] content are presented each time from a 
different fraction, based on the lipid classes separation. The content of these 
compounds are presented as percentage of the total amount of SFAs, MUFAs and 
PUFAs which are presented in the oil samples. The quality of marine oils is 
characterized by the content of EPA and DHA.  
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
FFA (%)
Oil performance
Free Fatty Acid content
Starfish oil
Krill oil
Cod liver oil
==PAGE:39==
 
Figure 5.8: EPA percentage content (%) in total lipid fraction of the 3 different 
marine oils 
 
Figure 5.9: DHA percentage content (%) in total lipid fraction of the 3 different 
marine oils 
Based on the results of the total fractions of the 3 different marine oils, EPA content 
is similar for starfish and cod liver oil while krill oil has the highest content of EPA. 
Regarding DHA, starfish oil samples contain lower DHA levels compared to krill oil 
and cod liver oil. 
 -
 2.00
 4.00
 6.00
 8.00
 10.00
 12.00
 14.00
EPA  content (%)
Oil performance
EPA content - Total fraction
Starfish oil
Krill oil
Cod liver oil
 -
 1.00
 2.00
 3.00
 4.00
 5.00
 6.00
 7.00
 8.00
DHA  content (%)
Oil performance
DHA content - Total fraction
Starfish oil
Cod liver oil
Krill oil
==PAGE:40==
From lipid class separation, the two fractions (NL and FFA), starfish has EPA level 
between the other two marine oils, cod liver oil contains more EPA than the other two. 
Similar is the DHA levels among the oils, cod liver oil has the highest content while 
starfish has much lower DHA content but close to the levels of krill oil. 
 
Figure 5.10: EPA percentage content (%) in 2 lipid fractions, NL + FFA, of the 3 
different marine oils 
 
 
Figure 5.11: DHA percentage content (%) in 2 lipid fractions, NL + FFA, of the 3 
different marine oils 
 -
 1.00
 2.00
 3.00
 4.00
 5.00
 6.00
 7.00
 8.00
EPA % content (%)
Oil performance
EPA content - NL +FFA fractions
Starfish oil
Krill oil
Cod liver oil
 -
 1.00
 2.00
 3.00
 4.00
 5.00
 6.00
 7.00
 8.00
 9.00
 10.00
DHA % content (%) 
Oil performance
DHA content - NL +FFA fractions
Starfish oil
Cod liver oil
Krill oil
==PAGE:41==
The PL separation was able only for krill oil sample. The starfish oil was expected 
to have phospholipids; however, the analysis did not show any peaks in the 
chromatogram as result from the lipid classification. The reason for the absence of PL 
in the starfish oil samples might be analytical error during the experiment, human error 
or because of the extraction process, the extraction method or storage. Any step of the 
process might have been the reason for the final absence of PL in starfish. The 
percentage of EPA and DHA in the krill oil sample is 26.87 and 13.41 respectively in 
the PL fraction, after the lipid class separation experiments.  
5.4 Storage experiment 
5.4.1 ¨Small¨ storage experiment 
The experiment was performed in order to define the parameters of the final storage 
experiment based on the results of the PV measurement. The starfish oil was used as 
control sample and no concentration of antioxidants was added. It has to be noted that 
for both the initial and final storage experiment, the starfish oil from the second batch, 
January, has been used. For the storage period, 4 days, has been shown that the 
oxidation process is faster for the selected temperature of 30 ºC. The peroxide values 
have been significantly higher than these of the samples which were stored in a dark 
place, in room temperature. Hence, the final temperature of 20 ºC experiment has been 
selected for the final storage.  
Figure 5.12: Peroxide values of starfish oil samples in different conditions (day 0-4) 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
PV (meq O2/kg olie)
Storage period (days)
Peroxide values 
==PAGE:42==
5.4.2 Storage experiment 
During the total storage period, 21 days, experiments were performed in order to 
evaluate the oxidative stability of the starfish oil. There have been added 5 antioxidants 
in order to check how efficient they can minimise the oxidation process. Both primary 
and secondary oxidation products have been measured during the storage period.  
 Determination of PV 
The initial performance of the antioxidants was similar among all of them. After 
day 7, they have been started to differentiate. More specifically, it is shown that MAN-
5 NS and Grindox 539 have the best performance among the antioxidants as from day 
14, they had been able to decrease the peroxide values compared to the other 
antioxidants. It can also be observed that the green tea extract and Synerox 4-147 have 
similar peroxide values with the starfish control sample at the end of the storage period. 
Also, Synerox 4-002, has the worst performance due to te fact that has the highest PV 
at day 21. 
 
 
Figure 5.13: Peroxide values of starfish oil samples with different added antioxidants, 
storage period of 21 days 
==PAGE:43==
 Determination of Tocopherols 
The majority of the starfish oil samples contain only tocopherol-α in high 
concentrations and during the storage period it can be observed that the concentration 
eventually decreases as the period of 21 is completed. The samples that have shown 
that they contain other tocopherols in lower concentrations as well, especially 
tocopherol-β and tocopherol-γ.  
 
Figure 5.14: Tocopherol-α concentration during the total storage period (21 days) 
 
Figure 5.15: Tocopherol-β concentration during the total storage period (21 days) 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
5
10
15
20
25
Tocopherol-α concentration (μg/g oil)
Storage period
Tocopherol-α concentration
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
5
10
15
20
25
Tocopherol-β concentration (μg/g oil)
Storage period
Tocopherol-β concentration
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:44==
 
Figure 5.16: Tocopherol-γ concentration during the total storage period (21 days) 
 Determination of Lipid class and FAME 
The lipid class separation and FAME analysis was conducted at the beginning of 
the storage experiment (day 0) and at the end. The EPA content was measured and the 
results are presented in order to evaluate the efficiency of each antioxidant. In the 
beginning of storage period, day 0, Grindox 539 has the highest EPA content levels 
among antioxidants for the total fraction while Synerox 4-147 has the lowest. The 
control sample has similar levels as the green tea extract but still lower than the rest of 
the antioxidants. At the end of the storage period, Synerox 4-147 has increased EPA 
content compared to the others, same for MAN-5 NS. On the other hand, Synerox 4-
002 has shown a decrease in this value. Similar performance can be observed regarding 
DHA. For this compound, at the beginning of storage period, MAN-5 NS has the 
highest levels compared to the other samples. At the end, day 21, it can be noted that 
control starfish sample has almost the same levels of DHA, while Grindox 539 and 
Synerox 4-147 have higher DHA value. Foe the rest of the samples with added 
antioxidants there has been a decrease of DHA, at the end of the storage period. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
5
10
15
20
25
Tocopherol-α concentration (μg/g oil)
Storage period
Tocopherol-γ concentration
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:45==
 
Figure 5.17: EPA content (%) for the starfish oil with antioxidants, day 0 
 
Figure 5.18: EPA content (%) for the starfish oil with antioxidants, day 21 
 
 
 
6.10
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
EPA content (%)
Antioxidant performance
EPA content - Total fraction
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
Man-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
5.60
5.70
5.80
5.90
6.00
6.10
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
EPA content (%)
Antioxidant performance
EPA content - Total fraction
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
Man-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:46==
 
Figure 5.19: DHA content (%) for the starfish oil with antioxidants, day 0 
 
Figure 5.20: DHA content (%) for the starfish oil with antioxidants, day 21 
 
 
 
 
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
6.80
6.90
7.00
DHA content (%)
Antioxidant performance
DHA content - Total fraction
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
Man-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
6.00
6.10
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
DHA content (%) 
Antioxidant performance
DHA content - Total fraction
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
Man-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:47==
 Determination of secondary oxidation products 
The selected external standards were pentanal, 2,3-pentanedione, 1-penten-3-one, 
butanal-3-methyl, 1-penten-3-ol, hexanal, 2,4-heptadienal, benzaldehyde, heptanal and 
2-heptenal. The calibration curve for butanal-3-methyl has been created and presented 
for the different sample of antioxidants for the total storage period. The presence of 
antioxidants in the starfish oil has significantly decreased the concentration of one of 
the secondary oxidation compounds, e.g., butanal-3-methyl. The most effective 
antioxidant is MAN-5 NS and Synerox 4-147. Grindox 539 has shown better 
performance after day 7, by becoming more stable and with decreasing values until the 
end of storage. The rest of the calibration curves of the external standard compounds 
for every starfish oil sample with added antioxidant are presented in Appendix A1.  
 
Figure 5.21: Calibration curve for external standard, butanal-3-methyl, of starfish oil 
samples during the 21-days storage period 
 
 
 
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
160.00
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
Butanal-3-methy
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:48==
6. Conclusions 
The extraction method of SFE can become the most efficient method of extraction 
along with respect to the environment. The optimisation of the extraction parameters is 
crucial in order to achieve high extraction yields. The aim of this project was not the 
optimisation of the parameters for the scale up from laboratory conditions to pilot-plant 
scale conditions. The extraction took place to the pilot-plant and the goal was to extract 
the demanded amount of oil that was roughly calculated for the starfish oil analysis. 
The main part of the project was the optimization of the oxidative stability and the 
evaluation of certain antioxidants. The starfish oil has been extremely sensitive to 
oxidation process. The initial Oxypres experiments showed that the starfish oil has 
consumed the oxygen very rapidly compared to the other marine oils. The screening of 
the antioxidants helped to evaluate them. The addition of antioxidants enhanced the 
induction period. There have been antioxidants (Synerox 4-002) that managed to double 
the amount of that the oxygen was consumed. It has been clear that one of the IFF 
antioxidants had similar induction period with the control sample and made no 
difference during the experiment.  
Also, the comparison of the oils, helped to explore more the starfish oil. The control 
sample, without any antioxidants, appear not to have any other tocopherol, except 
tocopherol-α. At the same time. There are differences in the concentration of 
tocopherol-α is higher in starfish oil between different batch. That means that the 
oxidation process might has a different rate in the first batch compared to the second. 
The peroxide values showed that this accurate due to the significant differences between 
the two starfish oil samples. In general, the starfish sample (January) has slightly 
increased PV compared to krill oil and cod liver oil. The percentage of free fatty acids, 
can be also expressed as g/kg of oleic acid, showed that starfish oil has lower value 
compared to krill oil while cod liver oil had the lowest percentage of FFA. By 
comparing the graphs of EPA and DHA of the total lipid fraction, starfish oil has lower 
content of these compound. It can be assumed that the absence of PL has been the result 
of an analytical error or how the starfish oil was handled after the extraction until the 
analysis (storage conditions, continuously exposed to light or heat). The starfish oil was 
expected to actually have phospholipids.  
==PAGE:49==
The storage experiment was conducted after an initial storage experiment that 
lasted 4 days. The PV measurement showed how fast is the rate of the oxidation process 
in a higher temperature, 30 ºC. This was valuable in order to avoid having longer storage 
periods because oxidation was fast even at day 4. The presence of antioxidants 
decreased the PV during storage period and only one showed worse performance than 
the control sample. Antioxidants with tocopherols included in the mixture had lower 
PV compared to the rest of the antioxidants. The green tea extract had not been tested 
using Oxypres but it is obvious that has similar performance with the control sample, 
having checked both PV and tocopherol-α graph. 
By comparing day 0 and 21, it is possible to conclude that Grindox 539 and MAN-
5 NS has stable content levels of both EPA and DHA. These two antioxidants have an 
overall good performance during these 21 days of the storage period. Synerox 4-147 
has lower content of both EPA and DHA at the beginning (day) while both compound 
percentages are increased at the end (day 21). 
The secondary volatile oxidation products present an increase in the control sample 
while for the samples with added antioxidants the volatiles concentrations are lower. 
The differences among them are minor but it can be distinguished that MAN-5 NS has 
one of the best performances when the butanal-3-methyl calibration curve is observed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
 
 
7. References  
[1] Shahidi, F. and Zhong, Y. (2010). Lipid oxidation and improving the oxidative 
stability. Chemical Society Reviews, 39(11), p.4067.  
[2] Echegaray, N., Pateiro, M., Nieto, G., Rosmini, M.R., Munekata, P.E.S., Sosa-
Morales, M.E. and Lorenzo, J.M. (2022). Chapter 7 - Lipid oxidation of vegetable 
oils.  Available at: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780128233719000095 
[Accessed 20 Jun. 2023]. 
[3] Hrebień‐Filisińska, A. (2021). Application of natural antioxidants in the oxidative 
stabilization of fish oils: A mini review. Journal of Food Processing and Preservation, 
45(4). doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/jfpp.15342. 
[4] Shahidi, F. and Zhong, Y. (2010b). Novel antioxidants in food quality preservation 
and health promotion. European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology, 112(9), 
pp.930–940. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/ejlt.201000044. 
[5] McClements D.J., Decker E.A. (2000). Lipid Oxidation in Oil-in-Water Emulsions: 
Impact of Molecular Environment on Chemical Reactions in Heterogeneous Food 
Systems. 
Journal 
of 
Food 
Science, 
65(8), 
pp.1270–1282. 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2621.2000.tb10596.x. 
[6] Edwin Nessim Frankel (1998). Lipid oxidation. Dundee, Scotland: Oily Press. 
[7] Shahidi, F. and Zhong, Y. (2015). Measurement of antioxidant activity. Journal of  
Functional Foods, 18, pp. 757-781, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2015.01.047.  
[8] Wu, H., Ghirmai, S. and Undeland, I. (2020). Stabilization of herring (Clupea 
harengus) by-products against lipid oxidation by rinsing and incubation with 
==PAGE:51==
antioxidant 
solutions. 
Food 
Chemistry, 
316, 
p.126337. 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.126337. 
[9] Omprakash H Nautiyal, Food Processing by Supercritical Carbon Dioxide-Review, 
EC Chemistry 2.1 (2016): 111-135. 
[10] Saker M., Selamat J., Habib A. et al. (2012), Optimization of supercritical CO2 
extraction of fish oil from viscera of African Catfish (Clarias gariepinus), International 
Journal of Molecular Sciences, (2012), 11312-11322, 13(9). 
[11] De Melo M., Silvestre A., Silva C., (2014), Supercritical fluid extraction of 
vegetable matrices: Applications, trends and future perspectives of a convincing green 
technology, Journal of Supercritical Fluids, (2014), 115-176, 92.  
[12] Douglas N., Willson B., Marchese A. et al. (2011), Extract characteristics of 
supercritical carbon dioxide extraction of nannochloropsis oculata, Master of Science 
Thesis, Colorado State University Fort Collins, Colorado. 
[13] Rizvi, S.S.H., et al. (1986), Supercritical fluid extraction - Fundamental principles 
and modelling methods. Food Technology, 1986. 40(6): p. 55-65. 
[14] Herrero M., Cifuentes A., Ibanez E. (2006), Sub- and supercritical fluid extraction 
of functional ingredients from different natural sources: Plants, food-by-products, algae 
and microalgae - A review, Food Chemistry, (2006), 136-148, 98(1).  
[15] Rozzi N., Singh R. (2002), Supercritical Fluids and the Food Industry, 
Comprehensive reviews in food science and food safety - Vol 1.  
[16] Ali-Nehari A., Kim, SB., Lee, YB. et al. (2012), Characterization of oil including 
astaxanthin extracted from krill (Euphausia superba) using supercritical carbon dioxide 
and organic solvent as comparative method, Korean J. Chem. Eng. 29, 329–336. 
[17] 
Shantha, 
N.C., 
Decker, 
E.A. 
(1994) 
Rapid, 
Sensitive, 
Iron-Based 
Spectrophotometric Methods for Determination of Peroxide Values of Food Lipids., J. 
AOAC Int., 77, 421-424.  
[18] AOCS Official Method Ca 5a-40 (1989), Official Methods and Recommended 
Practices of the American Oil Chemists’ Society (4th edn), American Oil Chemists’ 
Society, Champaign, IL, USA. 
==PAGE:52==
[19] AOCS Official Method Ce 8-89 (1998), Determination of Tocopherols and 
Tocotrienols in vegetable oils and fats by HPLC, American Oil Chemists’ Society, 
Champaign, IL, USA 
[20] Kaluzny, M.A., Duncan, L.A., Merritt, M.V. and Epps, D.E. (1985). Rapid 
separation of lipid classes in high yield and purity using bonded phase columns. Journal 
of 
Lipid 
Research, 
26(1), 
pp.135–140. 
Available 
at: 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3973509/ [Accessed 20 Jun. 2023]. 
[21] AOCS Official Method Ce 2-66 (1985), Preparation of methyl esters of fatty acids, 
American Oil Chemists’ Society, Champaign, IL, USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
Appendix 
A.1 Calibration curves for the secondary oxidation products -Results 
 
Figure: Calibration curve for 1-penten-3-one 
 
Figure: Calibration curve for pentanal 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
5
10
15
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
1-penten-3-one
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
5
10
15
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
pentanal
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:54==
 
 
Figure: Calibration curve for 1-penten-3-ol 
 
 
Figure: Calibration curve for 2,3-pentanedione 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
1-penten-3-ol
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
5
10
15
20
25
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
2,3-pentanedione
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:55==
 
Figure: Calibration curve for hexanal 
 
Figure: Calibration curve for heptanal 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
hexanal
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
heptanal
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:56==
 
Figure: Calibration curve for 2-heptenal 
 
Figure: Calibration curve for benzaldehyde 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
2-heptenal
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
benzaldehyde
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
==PAGE:57==
 
Figure: Calibration curve for 2,4-heptadienal 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Compound concentration (ng/g oil)
Storage days
2,4-heptadienal
Grindox 539
Synerox 4-002
Synerox 4-147
MAN-5 NS
Green tea extract
Control
