==PAGE:1==
Automated and Early Detection of Disease
Outbreaks
AEDDO
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
AEDDO
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Kasper Schou Telkamp
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This master thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Dynamical Sys-
temsunder the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Scienceat the Techni-
cal University of Denmark, and the Department of Epidemiology Research / Model group
at Statens Serum Institut in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engi-
neering, MSc Eng., Quantitative Biology and Disease Modelling.
Kasper Schou Telkamp - s170397
Signature
Date
ii
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In recent years there has been a surge in interest and development of statistical meth-
ods for automated and early detection of infectious disease outbreaks. This growth can
largely be attributed to the widespread availability of computerized databases, such as
The Danish Microbiology Database. The accessibility of these databases has provided a
wealth of data that can be analyzed, facilitating the use of statistical outbreak detection
methods.
However, at the time of writing this thesis, there are no fully automated detection proce-
dures in place at Statens Serum Institut (SSI), and the identification of outbreaks relies
on the work of individual epidemiologists. Consequently, there is a momentous demand
for an automated procedure for the early identification of disease outbreaks.
This thesis presents the development of a novel method for automated and early detec-
tion of disease outbreaks, with a focus on comparing its performance to state-of-the-art
methods from the literature and the methods currently employed at SSI. The main ob-
jective of this research is to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method and its
potential for improving outbreak detection.
The methodology employed in the novel method centers around an innovative utilization
of generalized linear mixed effects models and hierarchical generalized linear models.
These models offer a robust framework for capturing the underlying dynamics of disease
spread and allow for the incorporation of various covariates and random effects.
Through case studies involving foodborne illnesses, including Listeriosis, Shigellosis, Shiga
toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli, and Salmonellosis, as well as a simulation
study, the key findings of this research highlight the promising potential of the novel
method. The developed approach demonstrates good performance in detecting disease
outbreaks compared to established methods, including the Farrington method and the
subsequently improved Noufaily method. Moreover, it effectively controls the number of
“false alarms”, thereby enhancing the reliability of the outbreak detection method.
Keywords— Automated outbreak detection, Prospective outbreak detection, Disease surveil-
lance, Generalized linear mixed effects models, Hierarchical generalized linear models, Food-
borne illneses
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my supervisors, Lasse Engbo Chris-
tiansen and Jan Kloppenborg Møller, for their invaluable guidance, support, and expertise
throughout the entire process of conducting my master thesis. Their extensive knowledge,
insightful feedback, and dedication have been instrumental in shaping the direction and
quality of this research.
Lasse Engbo Christiansen’s exceptional guidance and expertise in mathematical model-
ing have been crucial in providing me with a solid foundation and understanding of the
subject matter. His valuable insights, constructive criticism, and attention to detail have
immensely contributed to the development of this thesis. Furthermore, Lasse facilitated
my project and provided me with the best possible opportunity to succeed with my thesis
by offering me a work desk at Statens Serum Institut.
I am deeply grateful to Jan Kloppenborg Møller for his continuous support and mentorship.
His vast experience with hierarchical models and their application has been a huge asset
to this project. His guidance in refining research methodologies, analyzing data, and
interpreting results has been invaluable.
I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to both supervisors for their patience, en-
couragement, and willingness to dedicate their time and expertise to help me overcome
challenges and achieve the objectives of this research. Their unwavering support and
belief in my abilities have been a constant source of motivation throughout this journey.
I would also like to acknowledge the Section for Dynamical Systemsunder the Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Scienceat the Technical University of Denmark,
and the Department of Epidemiology Research / Model group at Statens Serum Institut for
providing a conducive environment for research and for the resources that have facilitated
the completion of this thesis.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to my family, friends, and loved ones for their
unwavering support, compassion, and encouragement throughout this endeavor. I am
especially grateful to my wife, Cecilia Schou Telkamp, who, aside from providing me with
endless support, listening to all my complaints, and hosting several reading sessions,
has also raised our two oldest daughters and given me the beautiful gift of a newborn boy
during this period of conducting my thesis.
iv
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:7==
Notation
The mathematical notation in this master thesis is adapted from Madsen and Thyregod
2011. All vectors are column vectors. Vectors and matrices are emphasized using a
bold font. Lowercase letters are used for vectors and uppercase letters letters are used
for matrices. Transposing is denoted with the upper index T . Random variables are
always written using uppercase letters. Thus, it is not possible to distinguish between a
multivariate random variable and a matrix. However, variables and random variables are
assigned to letters from the last part of the alphabet (X, Y, Z, U, V, . . . ), while constants
are assigned to letters from the first part of the alphabet (A, B, C, D, . . . ). From the context
it should be possible to distinguish between a matrix and a random vector.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acronyms
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Setting the scene
3
3
Surveillance data in Denmark
5
3.1
Data collection and data quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Introducing the case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Methods
15
4.1
State-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Novel outbreak detection algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Generalized mixed effects models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Hierarchical generalized linear models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Parameter estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Scoring rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Case studies
31
5.1
Outbreak detection in Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli . . 31
5.2
Outbreak detection in other case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Challenges in statistical outbreak detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4
Performance of statistical outbreak detection algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.5
Potential extension of the novel algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6
Simulation study
59
6.1
The simulated baseline data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.2
The simulated outbreaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6.3
Evaluation measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
6.4
Results of the simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7
Discussion
67
7.1
Alarm fatigue and the implications for outbreak detection . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7.2
For and against for the two modeling frameworks in the novel method . . . 68
7.3
Harnessing the potential of MiBa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
8
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
73
A Some probability functions
79
A.1 The Poisson distribution model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
A.2 The Gamma distribution model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
vii
==PAGE:10==
A.3 The Negative Binomial distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
A.4 The Gaussian distribution model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
B State-of-the-art detection algorithm
81
B.1 Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
C Clusters reported to The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database
83
D Alarms by state-of-the-art methods in the Listeriosis case study
91
E
Figures and tables related to the case studies
94
E.1 Listeriosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
E.2 Shigellosis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
E.3 Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
E.4 Salmonellosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
viii
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:11==
Acronyms
DTU Technical Univserity of Denmark.
ACF autocorrelation function.
CRAN Comprehensive R Archive Network.
DVFA Danish Veterinary and Food Administration.
SSI Statens Serum Institut.
GLM Generalized Linear Model.
WGS Whole Genome Sequencing.
LIST Listeriosis.
SHIL Shigellosis.
STEC Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli.
SALM Salmonellosis.
HUS Hemolytic uremic syndrome.
PCR Polymerase Chain Reaction.
FPR False Positive Rate.
POD Probability Of Detection.
MiBa The Danish Microbiology Database.
COVID-19 Coronavirus disease 19.
HAIBA The Healthcare-Associated Infections Database.
FUD The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
ix
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
The fight against infectious diseases not only requires proper treatment of patients and
implementation of preventive measures but also demands early detection of emerging dis-
ease outbreaks. Timely identification and intervention can mean the difference between
containing an outbreak or facing a devastating epidemic.
Statistical outbreak detection begins with the identification of an aberrant number of cases
of a particular disease within a specific time and space. When an increase in the number
of cases is detected, a signal or alarm is raised by the detection method. Subsequently,
an epidemiologist assesses the public health relevance of the aberration to determine if
further investigation is warranted.
In Denmark, the surveillance of infectious diseases is mainly carried out by Statens Serum
Institut (SSI), which plays a pivotal role in national and international disease preparedness.
The high quality of the Danish surveillance registers, facilitated by a robust regulatory com-
munity framework, presents a significant opportunity for data analysis and enables timely
detection of aberrant case counts. Additionally, the establishment of The Danish Microbi-
ology Database (MiBa) by SSI in 2010 (Voldstedlund et al. 2014) has further strengthened
the ability to monitor diseases promptly.
This master’s thesis emphasizes diseases caused by foodborne illnesses as they are
often associated with specific food sources, presenting opportunities for intervention and
preventive measures. Currently, SSI utilizes several approaches to detect outbreaks of
foodborne illnesses, which include:
1. Reports from doctors: Physicians may report cases of foodborne illnesses they
encounter in their practice to the relevant authorities.
2. Citizen reports: Individuals may directly contact food or health authorities to report
suspected cases of foodborne illnesses.
3. Cluster identification through laboratory surveillance: Clusters of cases can
be identified through routine laboratory testing and surveillance of samples from
patients with suspected foodborne illnesses.
4. Identification of identical ”fingerprints”: When bacteria or viruses are type-tested,
the presence of identical fingerprints among multiple cases can strongly indicate a
common source of infection.
These approaches contribute to the early detection and investigation of infectious disease
outbreaks, including foodborne diseases. However, at the time of writing this thesis, there
are only partial automated procedures in place at SSI, and the identification of outbreaks
relies on the work of individual epidemiologists. Consequently, there is a momentous
demand for fully automated procedures for the early identification of disease outbreak
signals. Such automated methods could effectively guide the work of epidemiologists at
SSI and other health institutes, enhancing the overall surveillance of infectious diseases
at national and international levels.
This master thesis proposes a novel method for automated and early detection of dis-
ease outbreaks. The method utilizes hierarchical models in an innovative way, offering
an alternative to state-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithms. The models are specifi-
cally formulated to model the case count observations y and assess the corresponding
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
1
==PAGE:13==
random effects u in a subset of diseases within the mandatory notification system. Subse-
quently, the random effects are directly utilized in the detection algorithm to characterize
and identify outbreak signals.
The main objective of this research is to assess the effectiveness and practicality of auto-
mated outbreak detection methods. To achieve this, a comparative analysis is conducted,
evaluating the ability of the novel method to detect outbreak signals in case studies.
Specifically, this thesis considers case studies of Listeriosis (LIST), Shigellosis (SHIL),
Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli (STEC), and Salmonellosis (SALM).
The performance of the proposed method is benchmarked against state-of-the-art meth-
ods identified in the literature as well as the methods currently employed at SSI.
It is important to highlight that while the case studies in this thesis are disease-specific,
the statistical algorithms utilized are not limited to these particular diseases. They can be
applied to detect abnormal case counts in any type of disease, enabling early detection
and timely response. The versatility of these algorithms allows for their application in
various disease surveillance systems, contributing to the enhancement of public health
efforts.
In addition to the case studies, a simulation study adapted from Noufaily et al. (2013) is
conducted to evaluate the performance of the novel outbreak detection algorithm com-
pared to the state-of-the-art algorithms. The objective is to assess the ability of the au-
tomated procedures to timely detect disease outbreaks. By leveraging the potential of
hierarchical models, this research seeks to improve the timeliness and accuracy of dis-
ease outbreak detection.
The novel outbreak detection algorithm proposed in this master thesis is open-source and
can be accessed at https://github.com/telkamp7/AEDDO
2
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:14==
2
Setting the scene
Outbreak investigations have a long history, dating back to John Snow’s iconic removal of
the handle of London’s Broad Street pump during the cholera epidemic in 1865 (Tulchin-
sky 2018). Indeed, while John Snow’s work was groundbreaking for his time, modern
disease outbreak investigations require more advanced and sophisticated techniques.
Today, epidemiologists and public health professionals utilize a range of tools and method-
ologies to effectively tackle disease outbreaks. Here, laboratory-based approaches play
a crucial role in outbreak investigations and may involve technique such as molecular
epidemiology (Honardoost, Rajabpour, and Vakil 2018; Struelens and Brisse 2013) and,
more recently, Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) (Koeser et al. 2012; Baldry 2010).
However, in recent years, there has been a growing interest in statistical methods for au-
tomated and early detection of disease outbreaks. These methodologies encompass var-
ious statistical techniques, including regression analysis, time series methodology, meth-
ods inspired by statistical process control, approaches incorporating spatial information,
and multivariate outbreak detection. A comprehensive review of these methods can be
found in studies by Buckeridge (2007) and Unkel et al. (2012).
To establish a golden standard, this master thesis will focus on the method initially intro-
duced by Farrington et al. (1996) and the subsequent improvements proposed by Noufaily
et al. (2013). These methods offer advanced statistical tools for detecting and monitor-
ing disease outbreaks and are currently the methods of choice at European public health
institutes (Hulth et al. 2010). They can be accessed through the R package called surveil-
lance developed by Salmon, Schumacher, and Höhle (2016).
It is a well known fact, that one limitation of these detection algorithms is an occasional lack
of specificity, leading to false alarms that can overwhelm the epidemiologist with verifica-
tion tasks (Bédubourg and Strat 2017). Therefore, in this master thesis, these established
methods will be compared to a novel outbreak detection algorithm based on hierarchical
models. The thesis introduces this new algorithm as an innovative approach to outbreak
detection and aims to assess its performance in comparison to already existing methods.
While hierarchical models have earned a reputation within ecology (Bolker et al. 2009;
Zuur et al. 2009), urban energy modeling (Palmer Real et al. 2022; Real et al. 2021), and
other fields, their application in the automatic detection of disease outbreaks is relatively
unproven. However, there is a promising paper by Heisterkamp, Dekkers, and Heijne
(2006) that applied a hierarchical time series model to detect infectious disease outbreaks
in empirical data from Rubella and Salmonella. The authors concluded that the method
is a powerful and versatile way of analyzing time series of routinely recorded laboratory
data.
Common to the aforementioned methods is that no accumulation of evidence takes place,
and they detect aberrations only when the count of the currently monitored time point is
above the threshold. However, not all disease outbreaks are characterized by a sudden
increase in the number of reported cases.
Specifically, some continuous-source out-
breaks may exhibit a small but consistent increase in the number of cases, making them
difficult for statistical outbreak detection methods to identify. To address this challenge,
a method known as the Negative Binomial cumulative sum was introduced by Höhle and
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
3
==PAGE:15==
Paul (2008) and is also implemented in the R package surveillance. This method allows
for the detection of sustained shifts by accumulating evidence over multiple time points.
In the context of this thesis, the focus will be on the prospective detection of disease out-
breaks, considering the potential of hierarchical models to effectively identify and respond
to emerging outbreaks in a timely manner.
4
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:16==
3
Surveillance data in Denmark
This chapter delves into the data collection methods and quality assurance procedures
within the Danish surveillance system. Moreover, it introduces the case studies selected
for this master thesis, which include Listeriosis (LIST), Shigellosis (SHIL), Shiga toxin
(verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli (STEC), and Salmonellosis (SALM). The epidemi-
ological background of the diseases, along with notable outbreaks investigated and doc-
umented by Statens Serum Institut (SSI) in the period from 2008 to 2022, is presented
3.1
Data collection and data quality
In Denmark, the surveillance of infectious diseases is conducted by SSI. This surveillance
system plays a pivotal role in national and international disease preparedness. It encom-
passes more than just the collection and registration of disease data; it also involves the
prompt and ongoing dissemination of knowledge to the relevant authorities responsible
for treatment, prevention, and control. This comprehensive approach ensures efficient
communication and facilitates appropriate measures to address infectious diseases.
The quality of the Danish surveillance registers is maintained at a high standard, thanks to
The National Board of Health Statutory Order on Physicians’ Notification of Infectious Dis-
eases (https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2000/277). This order specifies that several
diseases1 are individually notifiable by physicians and general practitioners. Notifications
consist of essential patient information and are submitted in paper form to both the Min-
istry of Health and to SSI. This rigorous notification process ensures accurate and com-
prehensive data collection for disease surveillance purposes in Denmark. In addition to
the individually notifiable diseases, SSI has implemented a laboratory notification system
for numerous microorganisms. Clinical-microbiological laboratories are obligated to re-
port the identification of specific microorganisms, along with relevant patient information.
These data are then stored in The Danish Microbiology Database (MiBa) (Voldstedlund
et al. 2014).
The Danish Microbiology Database (MiBa) is a nationwide and automatically updated
database specifically designed to collect and store microbiological test results. In order
to utilize the data from MiBa, the information in the test results needs to have a standard-
ized structure with common codes and terminology. MiBa employs national standards to
harmonize the data, which initially may be structured in diverse formats. The standards
currently used are XRPT05, which is widely employed for the exchange of microbiologi-
cal test results in the healthcare system, and a specific standard called XRPT06. These
standards are regularly revised and exist in various versions2. The national surveillance
system focuses on diseases of a severe nature, those that are highly contagious, and the
majority of vaccine-preventable diseases.
1For a full list of diseases see https://www.ssi.dk/sygdomme-beredskab-og-forskning/anmeldelse-af-
sygdomme/lovpligtige-meldesystemer/individ_anmeldelses_sygdomme
2Information on national standards and codes within the healthcare domain can be found on MedCom’s
website (https://medcom.dk/).
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
5
==PAGE:17==
3.2
Introducing the case studies
For the scope of this master thesis, only a specific subset of diseases from the mandatory
notification system is considered. This subset consists of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM.
These diseases have been chosen for analysis and investigation based on various char-
acteristics, such as seasonality, incidence, and severity.
Additionally, these diseases
are associated with documented outbreaks investigated and documented by SSI in the
past decade, which adds to their relevance for the study. However, not all outbreaks are
equally documented. Thus, for a full overview over the disease clusters reported in The
Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD), refer to Table C.1. For visualization
purposes, this figure only includes data from 2012 to 2022.
The count observations are observed in the period from January 2008 to December 2022.
An epidemic curve graph for selection of the data for each of the diseases considered in
this thesis is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Epidemic curve showing the incidence per 100,000 in Denmark, 2012-2022,
for the subset of diseases considered in this master thesis. (a) LIST, (b) SHIL, (c) STEC,
and (d) SALM.
Evidently, the subset of diseases in Figure 3.1 exhibits varying incidences and different
levels of seasonal patterns on an annual basis.
It is interesting to note that the incidences generally peak in August, which can be at-
tributed to several factors, including:
• Increased travel activity: Especially when individuals travel to countries with un-
safe drinking water, poor sanitation, and insufficient hygiene practices.
6
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:18==
• Large social gatherings: Events such as weddings, large festivals, or other gath-
erings where a significant number of people consume potentially contaminated food
or drinking water.
• Warmer climate impact: The warmer climate during the summer months may di-
rectly influence the proliferation of bacteria, which in turn can affect the transmission
and spread of these diseases.
In general, there is a noticeable decrease in the number of observed cases starting from
March 2020 and continuing until January 2021. This decline can be attributed to the strict
lockdown measures implemented in Denmark in response to the Coronavirus disease 19
(COVID-19) pandemic. These measures, which involved restrictions on movement and
social interactions, likely played a significant role in reducing the transmission of infectious
diseases, including the ones being investigated.
From Figure 3.1a, it is evident that the incidence of LIST remains relatively low but stable
over time. However, there are six specific months that stand out due to higher incidence
rates. These months include July and August 2014, May and June 2022, and October
and November 2022. These periods show a notable increase in the number of reported
cases compared to the rest of the time series.
In Figure 3.1b, the incidence of the SHIL exhibits a consistent pattern over the years, with
sporadic peaks occurring in the time series. Notable examples include a peak in August
2015, where the incidence reaches its highest level in the entire series. Additionally, Jan-
uary of 2016 stands out compared to other years. From the series alone, it is not evident
whether there is a significant seasonality in the data. Another interesting observation is
the substantial increase in incidence during August and September 2020 compared to the
period leading up to these months.
Furthermore, in Figure 3.1c, a notable increase in the amplitude of the seasonal variation
in STEC can be observed starting from 2018, with incidences doubling compared to the
preceding years. At a first glance, this increase in the incidences might be recognized as
a serious, reoccurring outbreak of the disease, but a more reasonable explanation can be
found. Up to 2018, most departments of clinical microbiology used culture-based methods
as a diagnostic test for bacterial pathogens and the process of changing the test method
to Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) methods was ongoing (Svendsen et al. 2023). In
general, PCR resulted in higher incidences compared to other test methods, which is to
no surprise as higher sensitivity is well documented for PCR (Buss et al. 2015; Knabl,
Grutsch, and Orth-Höller 2016).
Overall, the highest incidences among the diseases considered in this thesis are observed
for SALM in Figure 3.1d. SALM exhibits a notable pattern of high incidence throughout
the observed period. However, there is a significant drop in incidences observed in 2020,
which is consistent with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on disease surveillance
and reporting. Additionally, 2021 shows generally lower incidences compared to previous
years.
Some summary statistics for each of the diseases considered in this master thesis are
gathered in Table 3.1.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
7
==PAGE:19==
Table 3.1: Summary statistics of the monthly count observations for the subset of dis-
eases considered in this master thesis. Time series: normalized observations (0-1), first
time points minimum and maximum count (red)
Case definition
Min
Max
Mean
Median
Std. Deviation
Time series
LIST
0
20
4.909
5
3.145
SHIL
0
38
10.941
11
6.253
STEC
2
190
33.177
21
33.108
SALM
17
588
107.677
86
78.708
In Table 3.1, it is readily seen that the diseases exhibit different statistical properties,
including variations in mean number of monthly cases, standard deviation, and range.
These variations indicate that each disease has its own unique epidemiological charac-
teristics.
From an epidemiological perspective, all the diseases within the selected subset pose a
significant risk of infection and can vary in terms of severity for affected individuals. There-
fore, early identification of disease outbreaks is of utmost importance in order to promptly
implement necessary interventions. Timely detection allows for swift and targeted actions
to control the spread of these diseases and mitigate their impact on public health.
3.2.1
Epidemiological background and notable outbreaks of Listeriosis
Listeriosis (LIST) is a foodborne illness that is caused by consuming food contaminated
with Listeria monocytogenes. The bacteria is ubiquitous in the environment, found in
moist environments, soil, water, decaying vegetation, and animals. Furthermore, it can
survive and even grow under refrigeration and other food preservation measures.
This disease primarily affects pregnant women, unborn or newborn babies, the elderly,
and individuals with weakened immune systems. The disease is associated with high
mortality (Goulet et al. 2012) and manifests in three ways: sepsis, meningitis, and mother-
to-child transmission. Pregnancy-associated listeria can have severe consequences for
the fetus or newborn, including miscarriage, stillbirth, neonatal sepsis, and meningitis
(Awofisayo et al. 2015).
LIST is uncommon among individuals in other demographic
groups.
In 2014, Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) was employed by SSI as the routine testing
of Listeria isolates in Denmark (Wingstrand et al. 2015). This method involves mapping
the entire DNA of the bacteria and enables SSI to identify cases where patients are in-
fected with identical Listeria bacteria. However, it is important to note that for this thesis,
the DNA typing data is unavailable for use.
For modeling purposes, the LIST cases are divided into two age groups: below 65 years
and 65 years and above. Figure 3.2 shows a stacked bar graph illustrating the number of
monthly LIST cases in the two age groups.
8
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: A stacked bar graph illustrating the number of monthly LIST cases observed
in the period from 2008 to 2022 for the age groups below 65 years and 65 years and
above.
Generally, there are more reported cases in the age group of 65 years and above. There
can be several hypotheses for this, but one very probable explanation is that individuals
in this age group are more prone to becoming very ill from this disease and are therefore
more likely to get tested. Additionally, there may be a cultural aspect at play. Elderly
people have a tradition of eating the Danish dish smørrebrød, which often involves cold-
sliced meats and shrimps. Unfortunately, these toppings are high-risk foods that are more
likely to be contaminated with Listeria monocytogenes.
The first notified outbreak in the 20th century occurred in 2009 (Smith et al. 2011). This
outbreak affected 8 people, of which two died. The patient samples were isolated between
the 6th and 11th of May and it was believed that the cause was infected beef meat from
a meals-on-wheels delivery.
A notable outbreak investigated by SSI occurred between September 2013 and October
2014 (Kvistholm Jensen et al. 2016). This LIST outbreak involved a total of 41 cases,
resulting in 17 deaths. Deli meat products from a specific company were identified as the
source of the outbreak. The high mortality rate in this outbreak may be attributed to the
consumption of these products in nursing homes and hospitals, where patients are more
vulnerable. Following the discovery of Listeria at a producetion facility, the Danish Veteri-
nary and Food Administration (DVFA) recalled all products from the company. Following
the outbreak, a series of control activities and research project were initiated to improve
the control and management of Listeria in food production (Takeuchi-Storm et al. 2023).
In another LIST outbreak investigated by SSI, the source was traced back to cold-smoked
and cured salmon products (Schjorring et al. 2017). A total of 5 related cases were iden-
tified, with 4 of them occurring in August 2017, and the fifth case in May 2017.
In some cases, despite extensive investigations, the source of contamination in an out-
break cannot always be identified. Such was the case in an unresolved outbreak that
took place between the 13th of May and the 6th of June, 2022. During this period, a total
of nine cases were infected with the same type of Listeria, with the majority of affected
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
9
==PAGE:21==
patients located in the Capital Region of Denmark. Despite thorough efforts, the specific
source of contamination remained unknown.
Early identification of outbreaks caused by Listeria monocytogenes is crucial to imple-
ment timely interventions and mitigate the impact of the disease. Otherwise, these out-
breaks can persist over an extended period. SSI has successfully resolved several long-
spanned outbreaks in the last decade. For example, one investigation revealed that a
single outbreak was actually two simultaneous outbreaks both caused by the consump-
tion of smoked fish. Each outbreak consisted of ten cases and spanned from May 2013
to July 2015 (Gillesberg Lassen et al. 2016).
Other documented (Helwigh and Müller 2018; Helwigh, Petersen, and Torpdahl 2020;
Lassen et al. 2023) long-spanned outbreaks investigated by SSI include:
• A cold-smoked fish outbreak with 9 cases spanning from December 2016 to Febru-
ary 2019.
• A prolonged outbreak with 6 cases from 2016 to 2019, traced back to a local green-
grocer.
• An outbreak with 8 cases from October 2021 to June 2022, caused by a deli meat
product.
• Two unresolved outbreaks with 9 cases and 12 cases from the end of 2018 to
November 2021 and October 2020 to May 2022, respectively.
The use of WGS in these outbreaks provided the ability to link cases that occurred over
a period of years and revealed that they were, in fact, continuous-source outbreaks.
In a recent outbreak investigated by SSI, DVFA, and the National Food Institute at the
Technical Univserity of Denmark (DTU), fish patties were identified as the source of con-
tamination. This outbreak occurred from August 2022 to December 2022 and affected a
total of 11 cases (Lassen et al. 2023). In Figure 3.3 a timeline plot indicating the start and
duration of outbreaks investigated and documented by SSI is visualized.
Figure 3.3: Timeline plot indicating the start (triangle) and duration (line) of documented
outbreaks of LIST by SSI. Time of detection (circle) is indicated when the information is
available.
10
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:22==
Evidently, the figure shows that many of the LIST outbreaks are long-spanned and overlap
each other.
3.2.2
Epidemiological background and notable outbreaks of Shiggellosis
Shigellosis (SHIL) is a diarrheal illness that is caused by a group of bacteria called Shigella.
There are four types of Shigella bacteria, namely: Shigella dysenteriae, Shigella boydii,
Shigella flexneri, and Shigella sonnei. The latter is the most common species in Denmark.
The bacteria are highly contagious and can be transmitted through direct person-to-person
contact, consumption of contaminated food, or ingestion of water contaminated with hu-
man feces. SHIL infections are most commonly observed in children under the age of 5,
individuals traveling to regions with poor sanitation and unsafe water and food practices,
as well as gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men.
In this disease, the cases are divided into two age groups: below 25 years and 25 years
and above. As shown in Figure 3.4, the majority of cases are observed in the age group
of 25 years and above.
Figure 3.4: A stacked bar graph illustrating the number of monthly SHIL cases observed
in the period from 2008 to 2022 for the age groups below 25 years and 25 years and
above.
In Denmark, another significant cause of SHIL outbreaks is the importation of contami-
nated vegetables. This was evident in several incidents, including a 2007 outbreak where
215 individuals fell ill after consuming imported contaminated baby corn (Lewis et al.
2009), a smaller outbreak in 2009 linked to sugar snap peas from Kenya (Muller et al.
2009), and a 2020 outbreak associated with fresh mint as the source of infection (Hel-
wigh, Petersen, and Torpdahl 2020).
The 2020 outbreak is indeed a significant focus of this study, as it serves as a benchmark
for evaluating the effectiveness of outbreak detection algorithms. It took place from the
22nd of August to the 9th of September and was investigated by SSI in collaboration
with the DVFA and the National Food Institute at DTU The outbreak affected 44 patients,
mainly concentrated in the Capital Region of Denmark. The investigation identified at
least five independent events where individuals subsequently developed SHIL.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
11
==PAGE:23==
3.2.3
Epidemiological background and notable outbreaks of Shiga toxin
(verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli
Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) primarily spreads through con-
taminated food. Less common sources of infection include contaminated drinking and
bathing water, as well as direct or indirect contact with infected animals. Cattle and other
ruminants are primary reservoirs for STEC serotypes that are frequently associated with
human disease (Menge 2020). Therefore, in Denmark, the source of infection is often
products derived from beef, non-heat-treated dairy products, or other foods such as ready-
to-eat vegetables, leafy greens, vegetable sprouts, and berries contaminated with feces
from cows. Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is a severe complication that, in some
cases, particularly in children, can develop following an infection with STEC. Also, it is im-
portant to note that not all patients are routinely tested for STEC, and therefore, physicians
need to specifically request STEC testing when submitting stool samples.
In this disease, the cases are separated into six age groups, namely: below 1 year, be-
tween 1-4 years, 5-14 years, 15-24 years, 25-64 years, and 65 years and above. The
distribution of cases in these age groups is visualized in a stacked bar graph in Figure
3.5.
Figure 3.5: A stacked bar graph illustrating the number of monthly STEC cases observed
in the period from 2008 to 2022 for the six age groups.
In general, stool samples are commonly used for diagnostic purposes in cases of STEC
infections. Until 2018, most clinical microbiology departments relied on culture-based
methods to detect and identify STEC bacteria in stool samples. However, in recent years,
PCR methods have been increasingly adopted as a replacement for culture-based meth-
ods in the diagnosis of STEC infections (Svendsen et al. 2023). PCR methods offer ad-
vantages such as increased sensitivity and faster turnaround time, contributing to their
growing popularity in clinical laboratories.
One of the earliest documented STEC outbreaks occurred in 2007, involving 18 laboratory-
confirmed cases over a six-week period. The outbreak primarily affected children in day-
care settings, and most patients experienced mild symptoms without bloody diarrhea.
Investigations indicated a specific brand of organic beef sausage as the likely source of
infection.
12
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:24==
In September to October 2012, a STEC outbreak with a high risk of HUS was observed.
Thirteen cases were diagnosed, with eight individuals developing HUS. Epidemiological
investigations suggested that ground beef was the vehicle of the outbreak (Soborg et al.
2013; Helwigh, Sørensen, and Ethelberg 2013).
More recent outbreaks include a 38-case outbreak from September to November 2018,
with a suspected association with beef sausage as the source of infection (Helwigh, Pe-
tersen, and Müller 2019). Additionally, there were two unresolved outbreaks with 11 and
14 cases occurring from May to July 2019 and from December 2021 to January 2022,
respectively. The latter outbreak included three cases of HUS.
3.2.4
Epidemiological background and notable outbreaks of
Salmonellosis
Salmonellosis (SALM) is a bacterial disease that primarily affects the intestinal tracts of
humans. The Salmonella bacteria are commonly found in the intestines of animals and
humans and are excreted in feces. Human infection typically occurs through the con-
sumption of contaminated food or water. Salmonella infections are often associated with
the consumption of raw or under cooked meat, poultry, eggs or egg products, as well as
unpasteurized milk.
Like in the STEC case study, this disease is also divided into the same six age groups,
namely: below 1 year, between 1-4 years, 5-14 years, 15-24 years, 25-64 years, and 65
years and above. The distribution of cases in these age groups is visualized in a stacked
bar graph in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: A stacked bar graph illustrating the number of monthly SALM cases observed
in the period from 2008 to 2022 for the six age groups.
It is worth noting that an increasing proportion of infections in Denmark are now observed
in connection with international travel, particularly since Salmonella has been eliminated
from commercial chicken flocks in Denmark, making Danish eggs and poultry meat free
from the bacteria. However, imported meat products can still pose a risk of contamination.
Numerous clusters of SALM is reported to FUD every year, and the disease remains a
major public health issue. This was also evident in one of the longest lasting outbreaks
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
13
==PAGE:25==
with Salmonella. A total of 172 cases were reported between March and September
2010 (Kuhn et al. 2013; Helwigh, Krogh, and Müller 2011). Multiple other outbreaks are
investigated and well-documented by SSI. However, it is not feasible to describe all of
them in detail. For a full overview over the clusters of SALM reported to FUD, refer to
Table C.1. Also, Figure 3.7 shows a timeline plot for some of the outbreaks of SALM
documented by SSI and possible collaborators.
Figure 3.7: Timeline plot indicating the start (triangle) and duration (line) of documented
outbreaks of SALM by SSI and possible collaborators.
14
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:26==
4
Methods
In this chapter, the current state-of-the-art methods for disease outbreak detection will
be outlined (Section 4.1). Furthermore, the novel outbreak detection algorithm will be
introduced (Section 4.2), along with the theory related to generalized mixed effects models
(Section 4.3) and hierarchical generalized linear models (Section 4.4). The presentation of
theory related to these modeling frameworks are mostly inspired by Madsen and Thyregod
(2011).
In this thesis, these modeling frameworks are utilized to analyze the count observations
denoted as y, but more importantly they play a crucial role in assessing the unobserved
random variables or random effects represented by u, which are directly employed in the
detection algorithm for characterizing outbreaks.
Due to the complexity of generalized mixed effects models, obtaining closed-form so-
lutions is generally not feasible. Therefore, an overview of the Laplace approximation
technique will be provided in Section Section 4.3, which allows for approximating the like-
lihood function in these models. Additionally, the implementation of these models in the
R programming language will be presented in Section 4.5.
Lastly, an outline of the logarithmic score, which is used to objectively evaluate the per-
formance of the models in the novel method, is presented in Section 4.6.
4.1
State-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithm
In this section, the original method introduced by Farrington et al. (1996) and the subse-
quent improvements proposed by Noufaily et al. (2013) will be outlined. These methods
are recognized as the current state-of-the-art for disease outbreak detection and will be
used as benchmarks to evaluate the performance of the novel outbreak detection algo-
rithm proposed in this thesis.
Both of the aforementioned methods have been implemented in the R package called
surveillance by Salmon, Schumacher, and Höhle (2016), which can be accessed from
the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) at https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
surveillance/index.html.
The presentation of the two methods are strongly inspired by
Salmon, Schumacher, and Höhle (2016).
Both methods follow the same steps in the algorithm. The first step involves fitting an over-
dispersed Poisson Generalized Linear Model (GLM) with a log link to the reference data.
In this model, the baseline count yt corresponding to the baseline time point t is assumed
to have an expected value λt and a variance ϕλt, where ϕ ≥1 is ensured to account for
over-dispersion. The systematic component of the model includes only a linear time trend
in the frequency of reports. Therefore, the systematic component can be expressed as
log(λt) = α + βt
(4.1)
The original method incorporated seasonal effects by considering counts from comparable
periods in past years for threshold calculation. This approach is similar to the one used by
Stroup et al. (1989). The baseline weeks, which are used as reference, are determined
by two integers: b the number of years back, and w the window half-width. For a given
current week x of year h, only data from weeks x −w to x + w of years h −b to h −1 are
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
15
==PAGE:27==
considered, resulting in a total of n = b(2w + 1) baseline weeks. The default values are
b = 5 and w = 3, resulting in a total of n = 35 baseline values.
However, Noufaily et al. (2013) demonstrated that the algorithm performs better when
utilizing more historical data without disregarding seasonality. To achieve this, the author
introduced a 10-level factor with a 7-week reference period and nine additional 5-week
periods in each year. As a result, the systematic component of the model is modified as
follows
log(λt) = α + βt + δj(t)
(4.2)
In this equation, j(t) represents the seasonal factor level corresponding to time point t.
The reference week t0 is always associated with the reference seasonal level, denoted
by j(t0) = 0 and δ0 = 0.
The idea of incorporating more data while preserving seasonality has been further ex-
panded in the implementation of the method in the surveillance R package. The package
allows the user to choose an arbitrary number of periods in each year. Consequently, the
systematic component is adjusted as follows
log(λt) = α + βt + δc(t)
(4.3)
In this equation, c(t) represents the coefficients of a zero-order spline with noPeriods +
1 knots. It can be conveniently represented as a noPeriods-level factor that captures
seasonality. The function c(t) indicates which season or period of the year t belongs to.
Furthermore, Noufaily et al. (2013) demonstrated that it is beneficial to exclude the last 26
weeks before t0 from the baseline calculation. This exclusion helps prevent a reduction
in sensitivity when an outbreak has recently started before t0.
In the second step, the algorithm predicts the expected number of counts λt0 for the cur-
rent time point t0 using the fitted GLM. Both methods differ in their assumptions for cal-
culating the upper bound Ut0.
The original method assumes that a transformation of the prediction error, denoted as
g(yt0 −ˆλt0), follows a normal distribution. For example, when using the identity transfor-
mation g(x) = x, the assumption becomes
yt0 −ˆλt0 ∼N
 0, V(yt0 −ˆλt0)

(4.4)
The upper bound of the prediction interval is then calculated based on this distribution.
The variance of the prediction error is given by
V(yt0 −ˆλt0) = V(yt0) + V(ˆλt0) = ϕλt0 + V(ˆλt0)
(4.5)
Here, V(ˆyt0) represents the variance of an observation, and V (ˆλt0) represents the vari-
ance of the estimate. The threshold, defined as the upper bound of a one-sided (1 −α) ·
100% prediction interval, is calculated as
Ut0 = ˆλ0 + z1−αˆV
q
yt0 −ˆλt0

(4.6)
16
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:28==
However, this method’s weakness lies in the assumption of normality itself. Therefore,
an alternative assumption was presented in Noufaily et al. (2013). This approach as-
sumes that yt0 follows a Negative Binomial distribution, denoted as NB(λt0, ν), where λt0
represents the mean and ν =
λt0
ϕ−1 represents the over-dispersion parameter. In this pa-
rameterization, the expected value of yt remains λt, and the variance of yt is ϕλt, with
ϕ > 1. If ϕ ≤1, a Poisson distribution is assumed for the observed count. The threshold
is defined as a quantile of the Negative Binomial distribution using the plug-in estimates
ˆλt0 and ˆϕ.
In the final step, the observed count yt0 is compared to the upper bound Ut0, and an alarm
is raised if yt0 > Ut0. The fitting of the GLM in both methods involves three important steps.
First, the algorithm optionally performs a power transformation to correct for skewness
and stabilize the variance of the data.
Next, the significance of the time trend is checked. The time trend is included in the model
only if it is statistically significant at a chosen significance level, there are more than three
years of reference data, and there is no over-extrapolation due to the time trend.
Finally, past outbreaks are reweighted based on their Anscombe residuals. If the Anscombe
residual of a count exceeds a certain weight threshold, it is re-weighted in a second fitting
of the GLM. In the original method by Farrington et al. (1996), a re-weighting threshold
of 1 was used. However, Noufaily et al. (2013) suggests using a value of 2.56 for the
weight threshold to make the re-weighting procedure less drastic, as it also reduces the
variance of the observations. For a more detailed description of the re-weighting scheme
employed in the Farrington and Noufaily method, refer to Section 3.6 in Farrington et al.
(1996) and Section 2.1 in Noufaily et al. (2013), respectively.
4.2
Novel outbreak detection algorithm
In this section, the novel algorithm for the prospective detection of disease outbreaks
proposed in this thesis is outlined. The algorithm utilizes a generalized mixed effects
model or a hierarchical generalized linear model as a modeling framework to model the
count observations y and assess the unobserved random effects u. These random effects
are used directly in the detection algorithm to characterize an outbreak. The theoretical
foundations of these models will be further discussed in Sections 4.3 and 4.4.
The first step involves fitting either a hierarchical Poisson Normal or Poisson Gamma
model with a log link to the reference data. Here, it is possible for the user to include
an arbitrary number of covariates by supplying a model formula. In order to account for
structural changes in the time series, e.g. an improved and more sensitive diagnostic
method or a new screening strategy at hospitals, a rolling window with width k is used
to estimate the time-varying model parameters. Also, it is assumed that the count is
proportional to the population size n. Hence, in terms of the canonical link the model for
the fixed effects is
log(λit) = xitβ + log(nit),
i = 1, . . . , m,
t = 1, . . . , T
(4.7)
Here xit and β are p-dimensional vectors of covariates and fixed effects parameters re-
spectively, where p denotes the number of covariates or fixed effects parameters, m de-
notes the number of groups, and T denotes the length of the period.
In the second step of the algorithm, as a new observation becomes available, the al-
gorithm infers the one-step ahead random effect uit1 for each group using the obtained
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
17
==PAGE:29==
model estimates ˆθt0. Here, t0 represents the current time point, and t1 represents the one-
step ahead time point. The threshold Ut0 for detecting outbreaks is defined as a quantile
of the distribution of the random effects in the second stage model. This threshold can
be calculated based on either a Gaussian distribution using the plug-in estimate ˆσt0 or a
Gamma distribution using the plug-in estimate ˆϕt0. The choice of distribution depends on
the specific modeling framework and assumptions used in the analysis.
In the final step, the inferred random effect ˆuit1 is compared to the upper bound Ut0, and
an alarm is raised if ˆuit1 > Ut0. If an outbreak is detected, the related observation yit1 is
omitted from the parameter estimation in the future. Thus, resulting in a smaller sample
size for the rolling window until that specific observation is discarded.
The above algorithm is implemented in an R function, which can be accessed from the
associated GitHub repository at src/models/aeddo.R.
4.3
Generalized mixed effects models
In this section selected theory related to generalized mixed effects models is presented.
Moreover, an outline of the Laplace approximation is included.
The generalized mixed effects model can be represented by its likelihood function
LM(θ; y) =
Z
Rq L(θ; u, y)du
(4.8)
where y is the observed random variable, θ is the model parameters to be estimated and
U is the q unobserved random variables. The likelihood function L is the joint likelihood
of both the observed and the unobserved random variables. The likelihood function for
estimating θ is the marginal likelihood LM obtained by integrating out the unobserved
random variables. In general it is difficult to solve the integral in (4.8) if the number of
unobserved random variables is more than a few and hence numerical methods must be
used. Thus, an outline of the Laplace approximation is included in this section.
4.3.1
Hierarchical models
It is useful to formulate the model as a hierarchical model containing a first stage model
fY |u(y; u, β)
(4.9)
which is a model for the observed random variables given the unobserved random vari-
ables, and a second stage model
fU(u; Ψ)
(4.10)
which is a model for the unobserved random variables. Here β represent the fixed effects
parameters and Ψ is a model parameter. The total set of parameters is θ = (β, Ψ). Hence
the joint likelihood is given as
L(β, Ψ; u, y) = fY |u(y; u, β)fU(u; Ψ)
(4.11)
To obtain the likelihood for the model parameters (β, Ψ) the unobserved random variables
are integrated out. The likelihood function for estimating (β, Ψ) is as in (4.8) the marginal
likelihood
18
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:30==
LM(β, Ψ; y) =
Z
Rq L(β, Ψ; u, y)du
(4.12)
where q is the number of unobserved random variables, and β and Ψ are the parameters
to be estimated.
4.3.2
Laplace Approximation
The Laplace approximation will be outlined in the following. A thorough description of the
Laplace approximation in nonlinear mixed effects models is found in Wolfinger and Lin
(1997).
For a given set of model parameters θ the joint log-likelihood ℓ(θ, u, y) = log
 L(θ, u, y)

is approximated using a second order Taylor approximation around the optimum ˜u = ˆuθ
of the log-likelihood function w.r.t. the unobserved random variables u, i.e.,
ℓ(θ, u, y) ≈ℓ(θ, ˜u, y) −1
2(u −˜u)T H(˜u)(u −˜u)
(4.13)
where the first-order term of the Taylor expansion disappears since the expansion is done
around the optimum ˜u and H(˜u) = −ℓ′′
uu(θ, u, y)|u=˜u is the negative Hessian of the joint
log-likelihood evaluated at ˜u.
It is readily seen that the joint log-likelihood for the hierarchical model specified in (4.9)
and (4.10) is
ℓ(θ, u, y) = ℓ(β, Ψ, u, y) = log fY |u(y; u, β) + log fU(u; Ψ)
(4.14)
which implies that the Laplace approximation becomes
ℓM,LA(θ, y) = log fY |u(y; ˜u, β) + log fU(˜u, Ψ) −1
2 log

H(˜u)
2π

(4.15)
4.3.3
Formulation of the generalized mixed effects model
The generalized mixed effects model utilized in this thesis to model the count observations
y and assess the random effects u is presented in Definition 4.1, along with the joint
likelihood function for the first and second stage models.
Definition 4.1 (Hierarchical Poisson Normal model). In order to simplify the notation,
the probability density functions are presented for a specific observation. Hence, the
subscripts indicating the group and time are omitted. The conditional distribution of the
count observations is assumed to be a Poisson distribution with intensities λ
fY |u(y; u, β) = λ exp(u)y
y!
exp
 −λ exp(u)

(4.16)
Also, it is assumed that the count is proportional to the population size n. Hence, in terms
of the canonical link for the Poisson distribution the model for the fixed effects is
log(λit) = xitβ + log(nit),
i = 1, . . . , m,
t = 1, . . . , T
(4.17)
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
19
==PAGE:31==
The probability density function for the distribution of the random effects is assumed to
follow a zero mean Gaussian distribution, u ∼N(0, Iσ2), i.e.
fU(u; σ) =
1
σ
√
2π exp
 
−u2
2σ2
!
(4.18)
where σ is a model parameter.
Henceforth, the total set of parameters are θ = (β, σ) and the model can be formulated
as a two-level hierarchical model
Y |u ∼Pois
 λ exp(u)

(4.19a)
u ∼N(0, Iσ2)
(4.19b)
The joint likelihood for the count observations y and the random effects u becomes
L(β, σ; uit, yit) =
T
Y
t=1
m
Y
i=1
 λit exp(uit)
yit
yit!
exp
 −λit exp(uit)
 T
Y
t=1
m
Y
i=1
1
σ
√
2π exp
 
−u2
it
2σ2
!
(4.20)
4.4
Hierarchical generalized linear models
In this section selected theory related to hierarchical generalized linear models is pre-
sented. The model class was initially formulated by Lee and Nelder (1996) as a natural
generalization of the GLM to also incorporate random effects. A starting point in hierar-
chical modelling is an assumption that the distribution of random effects may be modeled
by an exponential dispersion family. This family of models were first introduced by Fisher
and Russell (1922), and has proven to play an important role in mathematical statistics
because of their simple inferential properties. The exponential dispersion family considers
a family of distributions, which can be written on the form
fY (y; θ) = c(y, ϕ) exp
 ϕ{θy −κ(θ)}

(4.21)
Here the parameter ϕ > 0 is called the precision parameter, which in some cases rep-
resents a shape parameter as for the Gamma distribution. In other cases the precision
parameter represents an over-dispersion that is not related to the mean. These distribu-
tions combine with the so-called standard conjugate distributions in a simple way, and
lead to marginal distributions that may be expressed in a closed form suited for likelihood
calculations. For an introduction to the concept of standard conjugate distributions and
the definition of a hierarchical generalized linear model, refer to Section 6.3 and Section
6.5 of Madsen and Thyregod (2011), respectively.
In general, when the conditional distribution of Y |u is a Poisson distribution, and the con-
jugate distribution is assumed to be a Gamma distribution with mean value 1, it follows
that the distribution of Y is a Negative Binomial distribution.
To further motivate this choice of distribution for the second stage model, an illustrative
example focusing on Listeriosis (LIST) is presented.
20
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:32==
Example 4.1 (Variation between observed cases of LIST). Usually, it is reasonable to
assume a Poisson distribution for count data, where the expected value and variance are
both equal to λ. However, it should be noted that this assumption may not always hold
true when modeling count data. Take, for example, the monthly cases of LIST analyzed
in this thesis. Table 4.1 presents the distribution of these cases from 2008 to 2022, along
with the expected numbers from both the Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions.
The distribution of cases over time is visualized in Figure 4.1.
Table 4.1: The distribution of observations with 1, 2, · · · , 10+ cases of LIST.
# of LIST cases
# of times observed
Pois. expected
Neg. bin. expected
0
4
6.26
14.44
1
5
15.52
21.41
2
28
25.66
24.75
3
25
31.83
24.58
4
26
31.58
22.01
5
34
26.11
18.27
6
19
18.51
14.31
7
14
11.48
10.72
8
10
6.33
7.73
9
3
3.14
5.41
10+
12
2.34
10.46
0
10
20
30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10+
Number of LIST cases
Number of times observed
Poisson exp.
Observed
Neg. Bin. exp.
Figure 4.1: Empirical distribution of monthly LIST cases together with the expected num-
bers from both the Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions
As observed in both the table and figure, the empirical distribution of LIST has notably
heavier tails compared to the Poisson distribution. Additionally, the mean of the Poisson
distribution for the monthly LIST cases is ˆλ = ¯y = 4.96, while the empirical variance is s2 =
10, which is considerably larger than the mean. These findings indicate overdispersion,
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
21
==PAGE:33==
suggesting that a Negative Binomial model would be more appropriate for modeling the
data.
4.4.1
Formulation of the hierarchical model
The hierarchical model used in this thesis to model the count observations y and as-
sess the random effects u is presented in Definition 4.2, along with the derivation of the
marginal distribution of Y and the joint likelihood function.
Definition 4.2 (Compound Poisson Gamma model). In the compound Poisson Gamma
model the conditional distribution of the count observations are assumed to be a Poisson
distribution with intensities λ
fY |u(y; u, β) = (λu)y
y!
exp(−λu)
(4.22)
The probability density function for the random effects u are assumed to follow a reparametrized
Gamma distribution with mean 1, u ∼G(1/ϕ, ϕ) that is
fu(u; ϕ) =
1
ϕΓ(1/ϕ)
u
ϕ
1/ϕ−1
exp(−u/ϕ)
(4.23)
Subsequently, the model can be formulated as a two-level hierarchical model
Y |u ∼Pois(λu)
(4.24a)
u ∼G(1/ϕ, ϕ)
(4.24b)
Given (4.22) and (4.23), the probability function for the marginal distribution of Y is de-
termined from
gY (y; β, ϕ) =
Z ∞
u=0
fY |u(y; u, β)fu(u; ϕ) du
=
Z ∞
u=0
(λu)y
y!
exp(−λu)
1
ϕΓ(1/ϕ)
u
ϕ
1/ϕ−1
exp(−u/ϕ) du
=
λy
y!Γ(1/ϕ)ϕ1/ϕ
Z ∞
u=0
uy+1/ϕ−1 exp
 −u(λϕ + 1)/ϕ

du
(4.25)
In (4.25) it is noted that the integrand is the kernel in the probability density function for
a Gamma distribution, G
 y + 1/ϕ, ϕ/(λϕ + 1)

. As the integral of the density shall equal
one, it is found by adjusting the norming constant that
Z ∞
u=0
uy+1/ϕ−1 exp

−u/
 ϕ/(λϕ + 1)

du = ϕy+1/ϕΓ(y + 1/ϕ)
(λϕ + 1)y+1/ϕ
(4.26)
Therefore, it is shown that the marginal distribution of Y is a Negative Binomial distribution,
Y ∼NB
 1/ϕ, 1/(λϕ + 1)

. The probability function for Y is
22
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:34==
P[Y = y] = gY (y; β, ϕ)
=
λy
y!Γ(1/ϕ)ϕ1/ϕ
ϕy+1/ϕΓ(y + 1/ϕ)
(λϕ + 1)y+1/ϕ
= Γ(y + 1/ϕ)
Γ(1/ϕ)y!
1
(λϕ + 1)1/ϕ

λϕ
λϕ + 1
y
=
y + 1/ϕ −1
y

1
(λϕ + 1)1/ϕ

λϕ
λϕ + 1
y
,
for y = 0, 1, 2, . . .
(4.27)
where the following convention is used
z
y

=
Γ(z + 1)
Γ(z + 1 −y)y!
(4.28)
for z real and y integer values. Consequently, the mean and variance of Y are given by
E[Y ] = λ
V[Y ] = λ(λϕ + 1)
(4.29)
The joint likelihood function for estimating (β, ϕ) is
L(β, ϕ; yit) =
T
Y
t=1
m
Y
i=1
yit + 1/ϕ −1
yit

1
(λitϕ + 1)1/ϕ

λitϕ
λitϕ + 1
yit
(4.30)
4.4.2
Inference on individual groups
Consider the compound Poisson Gamma model in (4.24), and assume that a value Y = y
has been observed.
The conditional distribution of u for given Y = y is found using Bayes Theorem. In order
to simplify the notation, the subscript indicating the group and time are omitted.
gu(u|Y = y) = fy,u(y, u)
gY (y; λ, ϕ)
= fy|u(y; u)gu(u)
gY (y; λ, ϕ)
=
1
gY (y; λ, ϕ)
 
(λu)y
y!
exp(−λu)
1
ϕΓ(1/ϕ)
u
ϕ
1/ϕ−1
exp(−u/ϕ)
!
∝uy+1/ϕ−1 exp
 −u(λϕ + 1)/ϕ

(4.31)
Here, the kernel of the probability density function is identified
uy+1/ϕ−1 exp(−u(λϕ + 1)/ϕ)
(4.32)
as the kernel of a Gamma distribution, G(y + 1/ϕ, ϕ/(λϕ + 1)), i.e. the conditional distri-
bution of u for given Y = y can be written as
u|Y = y ∼G
 y + 1/ϕ, ϕ/(λϕ + 1)

(4.33)
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
23
==PAGE:35==
The mean of the conditional distribution is given by:
E[u|Y = y] = yϕ + 1
λϕ + 1
(4.34)
And the variance of the conditional distribution is:
V[u|Y = y] = (ϕ2 + ϕ)
(λϕ + 1)2
(4.35)
These formulas provide the mean and variance of the conditional distribution of u given
the observed value Y = y.
4.4.3
The rationale for employing the Gamma distribution as a second
stage model
The choice of the Gamma distribution for modeling the random effects has been motivated
by several reasons. Firstly, the support of the Gamma distribution, which ranges from 0
to infinity, aligns with the mean-value space, denoted as M, for the Poisson distribution.
This ensures that the random effects are constrained within a meaningful range for the
underlying Poisson process.
Secondly, the two-parameter family of Gamma distributions offers considerable flexibility,
encompassing a wide range of shapes and distributions that can span from exponential-
like distributions to fairly symmetrical distributions on the positive real line. This flexibility
allows the model to capture various patterns and characteristics observed in the data.
Additionally, the choice of the Gamma distribution has benefits in terms of the derivation
of the marginal distribution of the response variable Y . The kernel uα−1 exp(−u/β) of the
Gamma distribution used for modeling the random effects exhibits a similar structure to the
kernel uy exp(−u) of the likelihood function corresponding to the sampling distribution of
Y . This similarity facilitates the analytical computation of the integral involved in deriving
the marginal distribution, as it can be expressed in terms of known functions.
Overall, the Gamma distribution is selected due to its alignment with the mean-value
space of the Poisson distribution, its flexibility in capturing diverse distributions, and its
analytical convenience in computing the marginal distribution of the response variable.
4.5
Parameter estimation
In this section, the parameter estimation and implementation of the models used in the
novel outbreak detection algorithm are presented. These model are implemented in R us-
ing the open-source R package TMB (Template Model Builder) developed by Kristensen
et al. (2016). This package facilitates efficient maximum likelihood estimation and uncer-
tainty calculations for the parameter set θ = (β, Ψ) and random effects u. The presen-
tation of the parameter estimation conducted in TMB is strongly inspired by Chapter 2 in
Kristensen et al. (2016) and Section 5.10 in Madsen and Thyregod (2011).
TMB maximizes a user-provided objective function in the form of a C++ template, to es-
timate the maximum likelihood for the parameter set θ = (β, Ψ). The following code
chunk illustrates the C++ template for the hierarchical Poisson Normal model1 specified
in (4.19):
1Refer to the associated GitHub repository at src/models/PoissonGamma.cpp to access the C++ template
for the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model.
24
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:36==
#include <TMB.hpp>
template<class Type>
Type objective_function<Type>::operator() ()
{
// R input data
DATA_VECTOR(y);
// Count data
DATA_VECTOR(x);
// Population size
DATA_MATRIX(X);
// Design matrix
PARAMETER_VECTOR(u);
// Random effects
// Parameters
PARAMETER_VECTOR(beta);
// Fixed effects parameters
PARAMETER(log_sigma_u);
// Model parameter
vector<Type> lambda
= exp(X*beta-log(x)+u);
// Construct 'lambda'
Type sigma_u = exp(log_sigma_u);
// And the model parameters
Type mean_ran = Type(0);
// Objective function
Type f = 0;
// Declare the objective
f -= sum(dnorm(u,mean_ran,sigma_u,true));
// Calculate the objective
f -= sum(dpois(y,lambda,true));
// Calculate the objective
return f;
}
The objective function maximizes the marginal log-likelihood function, which integrates
out the random effects u
ℓM(θ; y) =
Z
Rq ℓ(θ; u, y)du
(4.36)
where ℓ(θ, u, y) is the joint log-likelihood function of the data given the parameters and
random effects. The maximizer ˆuθ of the joint log-likelihood ℓ(θ; u, y) with respect to the
random effects u is defined as:
ˆuθ = arg max
u
ℓ(θ; u, y)
(4.37)
Using H(ˆuθ) to denote the negative Hessian of the joint log-likelihood evaluated at ˆuθ;
i.e,
H(ˆuθ) = −ℓ′′
uu(θ, u, y)|u=ˆuθ
(4.38)
The Laplace approximation for the marginal log-likelihood ℓM(θ) is
ℓM,LA(θ, y) = ℓ(θ, u, y) −1
2 log
H(ˆuθ)
2π

(4.39)
Our estimate of θ minimizes the negative log of the Laplace approximation, i.e.,
ˆθ = arg min
θ
−ℓM,LA(θ, y)
(4.40)
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
25
==PAGE:37==
The minimization of the Laplace approximation for the marginal likelihood is then per-
formed using conventional R optimization routines (e.g., BFGS) to optimize the objective
and obtain our estimate ˆθ. Uncertainty of the estimate ˆθ, or any differentiable function of
the estimate ϕ(ˆθ), is obtained by the δ-method:
V
 ϕ(ˆθ)

= −ϕ′
θ(ˆθ)

∆2ℓM,LA(ˆθ, y)
−1
ϕ′
θ(ˆθ)T
(4.41)
Additionally, TMB utilizes Automatic Differentiation (AD) techniques (Griewank and Walther
2008) to evaluate first, second, and potentially third-order derivatives. This approach en-
hances the computational efficiency and accuracy of the parameter estimation process
in the implemented models. Therefore, even though the random effects are analytically
integrated out in the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model, and the Laplace approxima-
tion is not needed, implementing the joint log-likelihood function in TMB can still result in
more efficient computations. For a comprehensive introduction to the concept of AD, it is
recommended to read Section 2.1 and Section 2.2 of Fournier et al. (2012).
It is important to note that the implementation of the hierarchical Poisson Normal model
requires the use of the Laplace approximation to approximate the likelihood function. To
investigate the impact on run time, the optimization of both the hierarchical Poisson Nor-
mal and Poisson Gamma models is compared using a simulated data set with n = 1000.
The simulated series Y = {y1, · · · , yn} follows a Poisson distribution with a rate of λ = 5,
i.e., Y ∼Pois(5). After generating the series, the following model for the fixed effects is
optimized in both modeling frameworks:
log(λ) = βIntercept
(4.42)
Finally, the optimization routines for each of the modeling frameworks is run 100 times
and the run time across these iterations are collected using the R package microbench-
mark, which can be accessed from the CRAN at https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=
microbenchmark.
The results are visualized in Figure 4.2. The figure shows a violin plot comparing the
running times for the optimization routines in each modeling framework. The plot demon-
strates that the run time in the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model is remarkably faster,
up to a factor of 4×, compared to the hierarchical Poisson Normal model. This indicates
that the Poisson Gamma model may offer computational advantages in terms of run time
efficiency.
26
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: A violin plot (Hintze and Nelson 1998) of the 100 run times for the optimization
routines in each modeling framework.
4.6
Scoring rule
In this section, the scoring rule used to evaluate the overall score of the models is outlined.
The approach is inspired by Bjerregård, Møller, and Madsen (2021). For a given time se-
ries yt = y1, . . . , yN, each forecast and its corresponding realized observation pair (Gt, yt)
is evaluated. The overall score of the model is then reported as the average score:
¯S(G, y) = 1
N
N
X
t=1
S(Gt, yt)
(4.43)
One commonly used scoring rule is the logarithmic score derived from likelihood theory,
which is defined as S(G, y) = −log
 G(y)

(Good 1992; Gneiting and Raftery 2007). In
this thesis, this scoring rule is based on the probability mass function and is equivalent to
the log-likelihood of the forecast model. The calculation of the logarithmic score is shown
in Example 4.2, which is adapted from Bjerregård, Møller, and Madsen (2021).
Example 4.2 (Calculation of the logarithmic score). The Gamma distribution is used to
represent the probabilistic forecast in this example. The Gamma distribution is parametrized
by two parameters, shape α and rate β, and its probability density function (PDF) is given
by:
f(y) =
1
Γ(α)β
 y
β
α−1
exp

−y
β

(4.44)
In this example, the parameters of the true model, denoted as f, is chosen to be (α, β) =
(3, 3). 10 observations are simulated, denoted as y1, y2, . . . , y10, which are shown in Table
4.2.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
27
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.2: 10 simulated observations following a G(3,3)-distribution.
i
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
yi
1.278
2.233
0.657
0.831
1.281
0.287
1.363
1.612
0.790
0.161
The true model f is compared to a competing model, denoted as g, which is a Gamma
distribution with parameters (α, β) = (3, 8). The true model f, the competing model g,
and the observations y are illustrated in Figure 4.3.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
1
2
3
y
PDF
f(y) (True)
g(y) (Wrong)
Figure 4.3: Observations (green dots) were simulated from a G(3, 3)-distribution. The
true model f (blue) is shown, along with the PDF for the competing model g (red), which
follows a G(3, 8)-distribution.
The logarithmic score of the true model f for the first observation, y1 = 1.278, is calculated
as follows
−log
 f(y1)

= −log
 f(1.278)

= −log
"
1
Γ(3)4
1.278
4
3−1
exp(−1.278/4)
#
= −1.156
(4.45)
Similarly, the logarithmic scores for the other observations can be calculated using the
same formula. The individual logarithmic scores for all 10 observations are presented in
Table 4.3.
¯S(f, y) = 1.1
¯S(g, y) = 3.22
(4.46)
28
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.3: Logarithmic scores of the two different Gamma models w.r.t. the 10 individual
observations.
i
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
S(f, yi) 1.16
3.86
0.00
0.23
1.16
0.18
1.37
2.03
0.17
0.83
S(g, yi) 4.19
10.71
0.55
1.47
4.21
-0.75
4.74
6.40
1.25
-0.60
Among the 10 observations, 8 of them are more likely to occur under the true model f
compared to the competing model g. The final key quantity, the average logarithmic score,
¯S(G, y), can be calculated using Equation (4.43).
The logarithmic score has desirable properties as it captures all possible information about
the observed data in relation to the model. However, it has a potential drawback in that
it heavily penalizes unlikely observations. Consequently, even small changes in the tails
of a density forecast can lead to significant changes in the logarithmic score, even when
the overall shape of the density remains unchanged.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
29
==PAGE:41==
30
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:42==
5
Case studies
This chapter presents the findings obtained from applying both the state-of-the-art and
novel outbreak detection algorithms to the subset of diseases examined in this master
thesis. To demonstrate the practical application of these algorithms, a case study focus-
ing on Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) will be presented. The
results of the remaining case studies will be summarized more concisely, highlighting the
differences observed. For a complete collection of figures and tables related to the case
studies, please refer to Appendix E.
It is widely recognized that effective monitoring of a surveillance time series necessitates
accurate modeling of the time series prior to assessing aberrations. Therefore, the per-
formance of these algorithms in identifying outbreaks within the selected diseases will be
thoroughly discussed and analyzed. Both the state-of-the-art and the novel algorithms
take into account trends and seasonality, which will be addressed in the analysis.
Additionally, a comparison of the two modeling frameworks used in the novel algorithm will
be presented, providing valuable insights into the strengths and limitations of generalized
mixed effects models and hierarchical generalized linear models.
Moreover, this chapter outlines some of the challenges encountered during the process
of conducting this thesis, specifically related to statistical outbreak detection. These chal-
lenges are showcased using real case studies of diseases in the mandatory notification
system, including Listeriosis (LIST), Shigellosis (SHIL) and Salmonellosis (SALM). Sev-
eral key topics will be discussed, including the role of overdispersion in statistical outbreak
detection, the influence of context and observational bias, and the approach to handling
diseases with numerous alarms. Furthermore, a comparative analysis will be conducted
to evaluate the effectiveness of different methods in detecting outbreaks.
For a detailed presentation of the data used to generate these results, please refer to
Chapter 3.
5.1
Outbreak detection in Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing
Escherichia coli
The initial analysis focuses on Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli (STEC).
The data set comprises monthly counts of Danish STEC cases, denoted as yit, where
i = 1, . . . , 6 represents the six age groups and t = 1, . . . , T represents the time period
of T = 180 months starting in 2008. The first step involves applying the state-of-the-art
outbreak detection algorithms to identify potential outbreaks in the time series.
Hereafter, the novel algorithm is utilized, and different models for the fixed effects are
proposed. Both the hierarchical Poisson Normal and Poisson Gamma models are con-
sidered as modeling frameworks. To determine the most appropriate models for further
analysis, the performance of the different fixed effects models is compared using the aver-
age logarithmic score, denoted as ¯S(G, y), within each of the modeling frameworks. The
average logarithmic score provides a measure of how well the models fit the observed
data and allows for objective comparison between different models.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
31
==PAGE:43==
5.1.1
Applying the state-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithm to STEC
To investigate outbreak detection, the method by Farrington et al. (1996) and the subse-
quently improved method by Noufaily et al. (2013) are initially explored. These methods
can be employed using the farringtonFlexible function, which is available from the
R package called surveillance. The methods are controlled using specific control ar-
guments. Here, a period of b = 3 years and a window half-width of w = 2 is chosen
for reference data. Consequently, the number of baseline months used to calculate the
thresholds are based on a total of n = 15 months. Also, the threshold calculation is based
on a significance level of α = 0.05. To access the other specific control arguments used
in this thesis, refer to Appendix B.1.
For the analysis of STEC, the reference values are based on data collected from January
2008 to February 2011. Subsequently, surveillance is performed using the data spanning
from March 2011 to December 2022. The resulting time series and alarms are visualized
in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Monthly STEC incidence per 100,000 in six age groups in Denmark, 2008-
2022. Monitored by Farrington (left) and Noufaily (right) methods. Reference data (grey
area) for the estimation of model parameters are in the period from January 2008 to March
2011. Threshold (dashed line) is computed for observation time points outside reference
data. Alarms are triggered (dark color) if observations exceed threshold.
32
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:44==
Multiple alarms are displayed in Figure 5.1 for both the Farrington and Noufaily methods.
The Farrington method generates a total of 151 alarms, while the Noufaily method pro-
duces a notably lower count of 101 alarms. It is not surprising that the Farrington method
generates more alarms, as it is known for its high sensitivity. This means that the method
is able to detect very small aberrations in the time series, but it also leads to a greater
number of “false positive” alarms.
The substantial number of alarms generated by both methods raises valid concerns re-
garding their practical utility. The sheer volume of alarms can overwhelm epidemiologists
and pose challenges in effectively prioritizing and investigating potential outbreaks. It is
essential to consider the overall disease picture and avoid overly burdening epidemiolo-
gists with verification tasks. Striking a balance between sensitivity and specificity is crucial
to ensure that the generated alarms are meaningful and actionable, leading to efficient
outbreak detection and response.
As a general rule, alarms that are triggered simultaneously in multiple age groups or during
concurrent time points are of particular importance. Such patterns indicate potential out-
breaks that warrant further attention and investigation by epidemiologists. By analyzing
and interpreting the alarms in context, epidemiologists can gain a more thorough under-
standing of the outbreak situation and make informed decisions about resource allocation
and intervention strategies.
When comparing the results from the Farrington and Noufaily methods in Figure 5.1, it is
interesting to note that the thresholds are inflated towards the end of the series. Specifi-
cally, the Noufaily method exhibits a higher threshold compared to the Farrington method.
This behavior is expected since the Noufaily method employs a less drastic approach in
weighting prior outbreaks, allowing more information to be transmitted from previous out-
breaks. As a result, the Noufaily method allows for a greater variation in the series and
may generate fewer alarms. This characteristic highlights the different sensitivities of the
two methods.
5.1.2
Applying the novel outbreak detection algorithm to STEC
The subsequent investigation focuses on the application of the novel outbreak detection
algorithm to monitor STEC for potential outbreak signals. In this analysis, a rolling win-
dow with a width of k = 36 months is selected for the parameter estimation. Thus, the
reference values are established using monthly data collected from January 2008 to De-
cember 2010. Similar to when applying the state-of-the-art algorithms, the time series
is recursively monitored for outbreaks by moving the rolling window one month at a time
using data from January 2011 to December 2022.
To identify outbreaks, an observation is classified as such if the one-step ahead random
effect uit1 for the specific age group exceeds the upper bound Ut0. In this case study,
the upper bound is determined as the 90% quantile of the distribution of random effects
obtained from the second stage model. This threshold helps identify significant deviations
in the outbreak intensity.
Introducing the fixed effects models
To ensure effective monitoring, a series of models for the fixed effects are proposed.
These models aim to capture different aspects of the disease dynamics and improve the
accuracy of outbreak detection.
In the initial model, the intensity λit is assumed to be solely dependent on the age group
and the population size nit. The model is formulated as:
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
33
==PAGE:45==
log(λit) = β(ageGroupi) + log(nit)
(5.1)
Here, β(ageGroupi) represents the fixed effect specific to the age group i, capturing the
age group’s influence on the outbreak intensity. The term log(nit) acts as an offset, ac-
counting for the population size at time t for age group i. This model will be referred to as
the constant model.
In the first extension of the constant model, the trend over time across all age groups is
incorporated. The extended model is termed the trend model and is formulated as:
log(λit) = β(ageGroupi) + βtrendt + log(nit)
(5.2)
In this model, βtrend quantifies the rate of change in the outbreak intensity over time. By
including this parameter, the model accounts for the overall trend in the outbreak inten-
sity across all age groups, allowing for a more comprehensive analysis of the outbreak
dynamics.
In addition to the models described earlier, another model is proposed, which incorporates
a seasonality component represented by Fourier terms into the analysis. This model
builds upon the constant model and assumes an annual seasonality pattern. This model
is termed the seasonality model. The intensity λit is modeled as follows:
log(λit) = β(ageGroupi) + sin
2π · τt
12

βsin + cos
2π · τt
12

βcos + log(nit)
(5.3)
In this model, τt represents the time period within a year, ranging from 1 to 12 (corre-
sponding to the months of January to December). The parameters βsin and βcos capture
the effect of the seasonal pattern on the outbreak intensity. By including sine and cosine
functions of τt, the model accounts for the periodic fluctuations in the outbreak intensity
observed throughout the year. This allows for the detection and analysis of seasonality
patterns in the outbreak data, providing insights into the seasonal variations in disease
occurrence.
In addition to the models described earlier, a final model is proposed that combines both
trend and seasonality components. This model builds upon the previous models and
includes the effects of both the overall trend over time and the seasonal patterns. Thus,
the model is labeled as the combined model. The intensity λit is modeled as follows:
log(λit) = β(ageGroupi)+βtrendt+sin
2π · τt
12

βsin +cos
2π · τt
12

βcos +log(nit) (5.4)
34
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:46==
Performance evaluation and parameter estimates of hierachical models
The proposed fixed effects models are subsequently implemented and estimated in the
two different modeling frameworks: the hierarchical Poisson Normal and Poisson Gamma
models. The performance of these models is evaluated using the average logarithmic
score, ¯S(G, y). An excerpt of these results, namely for the models that minimizes ¯S(G, y)
in both modeling frameworks, are summarized in Table 5.1. For the full table of results,
refer to Table E.3.
Table 5.1: An excerpt of the STEC modeling results, namely for the models that minimizes
the average logarithmic score, ¯S(G, y). The parameters are estimated in a rolling window
with width k = 36 and the estimates at time t0, i.e. the last time point, are presented in this
table for both modeling frameworks. Confidence intervals for the parameter estimates are
calculated using 95% profile likelihood confidence intervals.
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
Poisson Normal
¯S(G, y) = 14.18
ˆβtrend
0.04
[0.04, 0.05]
ˆβ<1year
12.56
[12.3, 12.81]
ˆβ1−4years
15.23
[15.03, 15.41]
ˆβ5−14years
15.68
[15.46, 15.88]
ˆβ15−24years
16.19
[15.99, 16.38]
ˆβ25−64years
18.74
[18.56, 18.9]
ˆβ65+years
17.60
[17.43, 17.77]
ˆβsin
-0.34
[-0.44, -0.25]
ˆβcos
-0.06
[-0.15, 0.04]
log(ˆσ)
-1.12
[-1.33, -0.92]
Poisson Gamma
¯S(G, y) = 14.15
ˆβtrend
0.04
[0.04, 0.05]
ˆβ<1year
12.61
[12.34, 12.85]
ˆβ1−4years
15.28
[15.09, 15.47]
ˆβ5−14years
15.72
[15.51, 15.92]
ˆβ15−24years
16.23
[16.03, 16.42]
ˆβ25−64years
18.77
[18.6, 18.94]
ˆβ65+years
17.65
[17.47, 17.82]
ˆβsin
-0.33
[-0.43, -0.24]
ˆβcos
-0.04
[-0.14, 0.05]
log(ˆϕ)
-2.21
[-2.63, -1.82]
It is shown, that the combined model for the fixed effects minimizes the logarithmic score
for both modeling frameworks, indicating a better fit to the STEC data. As a result, these
models have been selected for further investigation regarding their ability to detect out-
breaks. It is noteworthy that all parameter estimates, except one, are statistically signifi-
cant at t0. The only parameter estimate that is not significant is ˆβcos, as its 95% confidence
interval overlaps with zero in both modeling frameworks.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
35
==PAGE:47==
Moreover, it is worth noting that the parameter estimates and confidence intervals for the
fixed effects are consistent across the two modeling frameworks, despite the differences
in assumptions about the distribution of random effects. This suggests that the choice
of modeling framework does not have a substantial impact on the estimation of the fixed
effects parameters in this analysis.
A neat feature of the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model is, that the maximum likelihood
estimates for the fixed effects parameters can be directly interpreted as the contribution
from the specific parameter to the disease intensity. This is possible due to the properties
of the expected value described in Equation (4.29). However, this direct interpretation
does not hold for the parameter estimates obtained in the hierarchical Poisson Normal
model. Nevertheless, it can be observed that both sets of parameter estimates are similar
throughout the entire time period, indicating that this discrepancy is not important.
A slight, yet consistent, increase in the contribution from the age group to the overall
intensity of STEC cases is observed in Figure 5.2 over the analyzed period, with only one
instance of a decrease in intensity immediately after the 2020 COVID-19 lockdown.
Figure 5.2: Age group contribution in STEC in the time period between January 2011 and
December 2022. Recursive estimates (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confidence
intervals (dashed line) of ˆβ(ageGroupi) for the combined model. Estimates are obtained
using a rolling window with a width of k = 36 months and discarding observations that are
characterized as alarms.
For the most, the maximum likelihood estimate for ˆβtrend indicates a positive trend during
the observed period (See Figure 5.3). However, it is important to note that the trend is
not consistently statistically significant. The first significant positive trend is observed in
the mid-2014, lasting until 2016. Another significant positive trend is observed in 2018,
coinciding with the transition from a culture-based diagnostic method to a PCR method in
most departments of clinical microbiology (Svendsen et al. 2023).
Notably, a significant drop in the trend is observed in the mid-2020, immediately after the
COVID-19 lockdown, lasting until the mid-2021. Since then, the trend has been steadily
increasing and is currently at an all-time high for the observed period.
36
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.3: Disease trend in STEC in the time period between January 2011 and Decem-
ber 2022. Recursive estimates (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confidence intervals
(dashed line) of ˆβtrend for the combined model. Estimates are obtained using a rolling
window with a width of k = 36 months and discarding observations that are characterized
as alarms.
Figure 5.4 clearly demonstrates the presence of significant and pronounced seasonality
in the observed period for STEC. Moreover, the estimated seasonality parameters exhibit
variability over time.
Figure 5.4: Disease seasonality in STEC in the time period between January 2011 and
December 2022. Recursive estimates (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confidence
intervals (dashed line) of ˆβcos and ˆβsin for the combined model. Estimates are obtained
using a rolling window with a width of k = 36 months and discarding observations that are
characterized as alarms.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
37
==PAGE:49==
To further understand the variation in the seasonal component, the amplitude ω and phase
ρ are calculated using the following formulas:
ω =
q
(β2
sin + β2cos)
ρ = −arctan
βcos
βsin

(5.5)
Due to the challenges of propagating uncertainty estimates, bootstrap confidence inter-
vals are calculated based on 10,000 replicates for each parameter, in each time point, and
for each modeling framework. The maximum likelihood estimates for the amplitude and
phase is visualized along with its corresponding bootstrap confidence intervals in Figure
5.5.
Figure 5.5: Illustration of the amplitude (a) and phase (b) along with their corresponding
95% bootstrap confidence intervals for each of the modeling frameworks.
It is worth noting that the amplitude of the seasonal component exhibits temporal vari-
ation. Particularly, an increase in amplitude is observed after 2018, coinciding with the
introduction of a more sensitive PCR diagnostic method. This change in diagnostic prac-
tices may have influenced the detection and reporting of STEC cases, resulting in an
apparent intensification of the seasonal pattern. However, it is more likely attributed to a
change in observational bias rather than a true increase in disease intensity. The varying
amplitude highlights the importance of considering temporal changes and external factors
when modeling and interpreting disease outbreak data.
The estimated variance ˆσ for the hierarchical Poisson Normal model and the estimated
dispersion ˆϕ for the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model are visualized in Figure 5.6.
38
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:50==
These parameters provide insights into the variability of the random effects and play a
crucial role in determining the threshold for detecting outbreaks. The values of ˆσ and ˆϕ
help assess the magnitude of deviations from the expected disease intensity and aid in
distinguishing significant aberrations from normal fluctuations in the data
Figure 5.6: Variability and dispersion in STEC in the time period between January 2011
and December 2022. Recursive estimates (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confi-
dence intervals (dashed line) of ˆϕ and ˆσ. Estimates are obtained using a rolling window
with a width of k = 36 months and discarding observations that are characterized as
alarms.
It should be noted that the inability of the second stage model parameters (σ or ϕ) to con-
verge during certain time periods does not affect the performance of the novel outbreak
detection algorithm. These periods typically coincide with time periods with relatively few
reported cases, i.e. periods with no outbreaks. Generally, these periods occur when the
sample data show no overdispersion. In such cases, the time series can be adequately
modeled by a Poisson distribution, and therefore the second stage model is not informed.
Specifically, this becomes relevant in the case study of LIST, where the example of miss-
ing overdispersion is very explicit. The role of overdispersion in the disease data will be
discussed in Section 5.3.
Visualization of estimated one-step ahead random effects and upper bounds
Figure 5.7 illustrates the estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 for each age group,
along with their corresponding upper bounds Ut0, in both modeling frameworks.
The random effects uit1 represent the deviations from the expected outbreak intensity in
the subsequent time period for each age group. These random effects provide informa-
tion on whether there is an unusual or unexpected increase or decrease in the outbreak
intensity compared to the expected values.
The upper bounds Ut0 are calculated based on the 90% quantile of the distribution of the
random effects obtained from the second stage model. They serve as threshold values
to identify potential outbreaks. If the one-step ahead random effects uit1 exceed the up-
per bounds Ut0, it suggests a significant deviation from normal variation and indicates a
potential outbreak signal.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
39
==PAGE:51==
By visualizing the one-step ahead random effects uit1 and the upper bounds Ut0 together,
epidemiologists can easily identify periods or age groups where the random effects sur-
pass the upper bounds, highlighting potential outbreaks that require further investigation
and monitoring.
Figure 5.7: Estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 (circles) for STECs in Den-
mark, 2011-2022, are shown for the combined model. An alarm is raised (solid circle) if
ˆuit1 exceeds the threshold Ut0 (dashed line). In the hierarchical Poisson Normal model
(left), the random effects are exponentiated to exp(ˆuit1) to transform them into the same
domain as the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model (right).
From Figure 5.7, it is evident that the estimated one-step ahead random effects uit1 sur-
pass the threshold Ut0 on multiple occasions. Specifically, a total of 30 alarms are gener-
ated using the hierarchical Poisson Normal framework, while 31 alarms are generated in
the hierarchical Poisson Gamma framework. Notably, during the period from March 2021
to March 2022, a significant number of alarms are triggered in multiple age groups in both
modeling frameworks.
40
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:52==
5.2
Outbreak detection in other case studies
In addition to the case study of STEC, this section delves into outbreak detection in other
case studies of foodborne illness, including Listeriosis (LIST), Shigellosis (SHIL), and
Salmonellosis (SALM).
By exploring the outbreak detection methods in several case studies, the aim is to gain
an understanding of the versatility and effectiveness of both the state-of-the-art and novel
outbreak detection methods in various epidemiological contexts. Each of the selected
case studies presents unique challenges and patterns of spread. Also, it is also important
to mention that different age groupings are utilized in each of the case studies.
The ultimate objective is to assess how the statistical outbreak detection methods per-
forms across different disease scenarios and demographics, showcasing its potential to
contribute to disease surveillance and early intervention efforts.
As for the STEC case study, the reference data used in the state-of-the-art outbreak de-
tection algorithms is based on monthly data from January 2008 to February 2011. Sub-
sequent surveillance is conducted using data from March 2011 to December 2022.
In the novel outbreak detection algorithm, a rolling window of width k = 36 is used. Thus,
the reference data is established using monthly data collected from January 2008 to De-
cember 2010. The time series is then monitored for outbreaks using data from January
2011 to December 2022.
5.2.1
Analysis of outbreak detection in Listeriosis
Intuitively, it is not common to employ statistical methods for monitoring and detecting out-
breaks of Listeriosis (LIST). The current state-of-the-art approach for detecting outbreaks
of this disease relies heavily on laboratory-based methods, specifically Whole Genome
Sequencing (WGS).
WGS enables epidemiologists to link cases that have occurred over an extended period,
even months or years apart, and identify them as part of a continuous-source outbreak.
Statistical methods may face challenges in detecting such outbreaks due to their complex
and prolonged nature. However, it is crucial to include this case study in the thesis to
highlight both the strengths and limitations of the novel and state-of-the-art methods.
The data used in this case study consist of monthly Danish LIST case counts from the
laboratory notification system. These counts are denoted as yit. Here, the subscript i
distinguishes between two age groups, with i = 1 representing the age group below 65
years and i = 2 representing the age group of 65 years and above. As in the STEC case
study, the subscript t denotes the time.
Applying the state-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithms to Listeriosis
The Farrington and Noufaily methods are both investigated on their ability to detect out-
breaks of LIST. The resulting series is visualized in Figure 5.8 together with the alarms
triggered by each of the methods. The Farrington method triggers a total of 28 alarms,
while the Noufaily method produces slightly fewer alarms, specifically 26 alarms.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
41
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.8: Monthly LIST incidence per 100,000 in Denmark, 2008-2022. Monitored by
Farrington (left) and Noufaily (right) methods. Reference data (grey area) for the estima-
tion of model parameters are in the period from January 2008 to March 2011. Threshold
(dashed line) is computed for observations time points outside reference data. Alarms
are triggered (dark color) if observations exceed threshold.
Interestingly, both methods demonstrate the ability to correctly raise alarms coinciding with
ongoing outbreak investigations by SSI. One notable example is the outbreak that involved
41 cases and resulted in 17 deaths (Wingstrand et al. 2015). The Farrington method
successfully flags this event in September 2013, with alarms occurring sporadically in the
subsequent period. The Noufaily method also identifies this outbreak, although it first
does so in June 2014.
It is worth noting that the other observations flagged by the methods may be related to
some of the numerous other long-spanned outbreaks that occurred concurrently in the
period from 2016 to 2021.
Also, several alarms are raised sporadically in 2022 coinciding with the outbreaks inves-
tigated by SSI caused by cold-cut and fish patties, respectively (Lassen et al. 2023). For
a full list of the alarms raised by the methods see Table D.1.
Applying the novel outbreak detection algorithm to Listeriosis
For the LIST data, it is found that only the constant age group model for the fixed effects is
able to converge. However, even the constant fixed effects models struggle to accurately
capture the underlying process of the disease. Figure 5.9 provides a visual representation
of this, showing the estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 and the calculated
thresholds Ut0.
It can be observed that the estimated random effects and the calculated thresholds col-
lapse for prolonged periods, indicating that there is insufficient information in the data to
inform the second stage model. This is particularly evident in the hierarchical Poisson
Normal model, where the estimate of the variance parameter ˆσ approaches zero. The
role of overdispersion in the disease data will be further discussed in Section 5.3.
42
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.9: Estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 (circles) for LIST in Denmark,
2011-2022, are shown for the constant model described. An alarm is raised (solid circle)
if ˆuit1 exceeds the threshold Ut0 (dashed line). In the hierarchical Poisson Normal model
(left), the random effects are exponentiated to exp(ˆuit1) to transform them into the same
domain as the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model (right).
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that both modeling frameworks identify the same obser-
vations as outbreaks, all of which coincide with one or more concurrent outbreaks investi-
gated by SSI. The first two observations characterized as outbreaks occur in August and
September 2014 coinciding with the outbreak investigated by SSI that affected a total of
41 individuals. Notably, the investigation of this outbreak was initiated on the 26th of July
by SSI (Wingstrand et al. 2015).
The third outbreak is in January 2017 coinciding with multiple investigations, and the last
two outbreaks are in June and November 2022 coinciding with cold-cut and fish patties,
respectively (Lassen et al. 2023).
5.2.2
Analysis of outbreak detection in Shigellosis
The Shigellosis (SHIL) data set consists of monthly Danish SHIL case counts categorized
into two age groups. These counts are represented as yit, where the subscript i = 1
corresponds to the age group below 25 years, and i = 2 corresponds to the age group of
25 years and above.
Applying the state-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithm to Shigellosis
In Figure 5.10, a significant number of alarms are observed sporadically in the time series
for both of the state-of-the-art methods. For the Farrington method, the number of alarms
is 54, while for the Noufaily method, the number of alarms is 36.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
43
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.10: Monthly SHIL incidence per 100,000 in Denmark, 2008-2022. Monitored by
Farrington (left) and Noufaily (right) methods. Reference data (grey area) for the estima-
tion of model parameters are in the period from January 2008 to March 2011. Threshold
(dashed line) is computed for observations time points outside reference data. Alarms
are triggered (full opacity) if observations exceed threshold.
It is noteworthy that some of the alarms occur in clusters over specific time periods and
are raised simultaneously in both age groups. These clustering patterns are particularly
evident during periods with multiple alarms, such as from July 2015 to April 2016, from
July 2018 to October 2019, and from November 2021 to December 2022. Surprisingly,
none of these periods coincide with outbreaks investigated by SSI, and all methods fail to
identify the outbreak investigated in August and September 2020.
However, it is important to recognize the significant challenge faced by statistical algo-
rithms in detecting the outbreak during the summer of 2020. This difficulty arises due to
the concurrent COVID-19-related lockdown, which results in different disease dynamics
and a relatively low number of SHIL cases compared to similar periods in other years.
This highlights the importance of considering the context in which the statistical outbreak
detection algorithm is applied. Further discussion on this topic can be found in Section
5.3.
Applying the novel outbreak detection algorithm to Shigellosis
For SHIL it was found that the trend model for the fixed effects minimizes the average
logarithmic score, ¯S(G, y), in both modeling frameworks. Thus, the estimated one-step
ahead random effects ˆuit1 and thresholds Ut0 visualized in Figure 5.11 are calculated
using this model.
44
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.11: Estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 (circles) for SHIL in Denmark,
2011-2022, are shown for the trend model. An alarm is raised (solid circle) if ˆuit1 exceeds
the threshold Ut0 (dashed line). In the hierarchical Poisson Normal model (left), the ran-
dom effects are exponentiated to exp(ˆuit1) to transform them into the same domain as
the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model (right).
It is worth noting that both modeling frameworks agree on the raising an alarm in the
same 20 observations, indicating consistency in their detection. Additionally, it is observed
that the novel outbreak detection algorithms identify fewer alarms compared to the state-
of-the-art algorithms. However, it is important to highlight that both algorithms detect
outbreaks during certain overlapping time periods, demonstrating their ability to capture
similar patterns of disease occurrence.
However, it is also noted that the novel algorithm failed to identify the outbreak investi-
gated by SSI and collaborators in the summer of 2020. As previously described when
applying the state-of-the-art methods, this outbreak is particularly challenging to detect
for statistical outbreak detection algorithms.
5.2.3
Analysis of outbreak detection in Salmonellosis
Historically, Salmonellosis (SALM) is associated with frequent disease outbreaks. This
is no different during the time period investigated here. The data set consist of monthly
counts of Danish SALM cases, denoted as yit. Here, the subscript i differentiates between
the six age groups i = 1, · · · , 6. The subscript t represents time.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
45
==PAGE:57==
Applying the state-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithm to Salmonellosis
From Figure 5.12, it is evident that both of the state-of-the-art methods generate an over-
whelming number of alarms across all six age groups. The Farrington method produces
131 alarms, while the Noufaily method produces 89 alarms. Although these methods ex-
hibit high sensitivity, the excessive number of alarms undermines their usefulness and
practicality in a real-world setting.
Figure 5.12: Monthly SALM incidence per 100,000 in Denmark, 2008-2022. Monitored by
Farrington (left) and Noufaily (right) method. Reference data (grey area) for the estimation
of model parameters are in the period from January 2008 to March 2011. Threshold
(dashed line) is computed for observations time points outside reference data. Alarms
are triggered (full opacity) if observations exceed threshold.
46
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:58==
Applying the novel outbreak detection algorithm to Salmonellosis
In Figure 5.13 the estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 are visualized together
with the calculated threshold Ut0.
Figure 5.13: Estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 (circles) for SALM in Den-
mark, 2011-2022, are shown for the combined model. An alarm is raised (solid circle) if
ˆuit1 exceeds the threshold Ut0 (dashed line). In the hierarchical Poisson Normal model
(left), the random effects are exponentiated to exp(ˆuit1) to transform them into the same
domain as the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model (right).
In total, the hierarchical Poisson Normal framework generates 57 alarms, while the hi-
erarchical Poisson Gamma framework generates 54 alarms. This demonstrates that the
novel outbreak detection algorithm has lower sensitivity compared to the state-of-the-art
algorithms.
However, the large number of alarms raises valid concerns about how to handle them
effectively. In the novel algorithm, observations that trigger an alarm are identified and
excluded from future parameter estimation to prevent inflating the parameter estimates.
This approach aims to mitigate the impact of false alarms and maintain the accuracy of
the modeling process. However, as the alarms accumulate, the effective sample window
for parameter estimation diminishes, reducing the amount of available data for estimating
reliable parameters. This challenge is expanded upon in Section 5.3.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
47
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Challenges in statistical outbreak detection
In this section, the challenges encountered in this master thesis regarding statistical out-
break detection are outlined. These challenges encompass specific issues related to the
use of hierarchical modeling as well as more generalized challenges that are relevant to
statistical modeling in general.
The discussion will focus on the role of overdispersion in statistical outbreak detection,
the impact of context and bias, and the handling of a large number of alarms.
5.3.1
Investigating the role of overdispersion in statistical outbreak
detection for Listeriosis
Convergence issues were observed in the hierarchical models during the case studies,
particularly in the LIST case study. Only the constant fixed effects models were able to
converge, indicating challenges with the other models. The low incidence rate in the LIST
data and the absence of overdispersion are likely factors contributing to these conver-
gence difficulties.
To further investigate the lack of convergence, the empirical mean and variance of the
LIST data series in the two age groups are visualized in Figure 5.14 using a rolling window
approach. The rolling window width was set to match the parameter estimation window,
which was 36 months. This visualization provides a closer examination of the patterns in
the data and helps to identify potential factors affecting convergence.
Figure 5.14: Empirical mean and variance of the LIST data in the age group below 65
years and 65 years and above
The figure clearly shows prolonged periods in the sample window where there is no
overdispersion, as indicated by the similarity between the empirical mean and variance.
The duration of the window with overdispersion is directly influenced by the chosen win-
dow size, and even a small number of observations can introduce notable overdispersion.
It is worth noting that the periods where the estimated second stage model parameters
(ˆσ or ˆϕ) fail to converge align with periods where statistical evidence for an ongoing out-
break is not feasible. These periods are characterized by a low number of cases and,
48
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:60==
more importantly for the hierarchical models, the absence of overdispersion in the sam-
ple window.
As the number of cases are very low, it is also unlikely that an outbreak is occurring.
Regardless, it is not possible for statistical models to detect outbreak signals in these
periods.
In the case of the novel outbreak detection algorithm, particular attention is given to pe-
riods with overdispersion. This is because the modeling frameworks assume that the
distribution of random “noise” can be modeled by a Gaussian distribution or a Gamma
distribution. In the absence of overdispersion, count data can be adequately modeled by
a Poisson distribution alone, making an approach based on GLMs more suitable for these
periods.
5.3.2
The impact of context and observational bias
Deploying an outbreak detection algorithm blindly, without considering the context and
potential changes in observational bias, can lead to unreliable results. It is essential to
closely monitor the algorithms and critically assess the model inputs and the specific con-
text in which it operates. This is evident in the case study of SHIL, where an outbreak
investigated by SSI in August and September 2020 was challenging to detect using sta-
tistical methods due to the concurrent COVID-19-related lockdown and the resulting de-
crease in reported cases.
Considering the specific circumstances and potential changes in observational bias is cru-
cial when interpreting outbreak detection results. It is important to determine whether the
number of cases during an outbreak is considered aberrant compared to similar periods in
other years. However, in situations where there is a sudden decrease in reported cases,
such as during a lockdown, detecting outbreaks using statistical methods becomes more
challenging.
An important potential extension of automated statistical outbreak detection algorithms is
the incorporation of data drift monitoring. This involves detecting changes in the under-
lying data distribution and adapting the model accordingly to maintain its predictive per-
formance. Specifically, detecting sudden decreases in case counts can be considered a
form of data drift.
Indeed, sudden decreases in case counts can be treated similarly to sudden increases in
case counts, and detecting such data drift can be incorporated into hierarchical models
using the unobserved one-step ahead random effects uit1. One approach is to define a
lower threshold Lt0 by selecting an appropriate quantile of the random effects distribution
obtained from the second stage model, such as the 5% or 10% quantile.
As a proof of concept, Figure 5.15 presents the visualization of the estimated one-step
ahead random effects for the SHIL data, accompanied by a lower bound defined as the
10% quantile in the random effects distribution.
The extension to the novel method demonstrates potential, with a total of 5 and 6 data
drift alarms raised in the hierarchical Poisson Normal and Poisson Gamma model, re-
spectively. These data drift alarms are visualized in Figure 5.15. When a data drift alarm
occurs, it should be of concern to the epidemiologist, prompting further investigation into
the reasons behind the abnormally low numbers. It is crucial to critically assess the input
data and the fixed effects model employed recursively to ensure optimal performance of
the automated procedure.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
49
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.15: Estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 (circles) for SHIL in Denmark,
2011-2022, are shown for the trend fixed effects model described in (5.2). An alarm is
raised (solid circle) if ˆuit1 transcend the lower threshold Lt0 (dashed line) based on the
10% quantile in the random effects distribution. In the hierarchical Poisson Normal model
(left), the random effects are exponentiated to exp(ˆuit1) to transform them into the same
domain as the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model (right).
The inclusion of data drift monitoring can improve the algorithms’ ability to adapt to chang-
ing outbreak patterns and contextual factors, leading to more reliable and accurate de-
tection outcomes.
5.3.3
Handling diseases with frequent outbreaks
Dealing with diseases that generate frequent alarms presents a challenge in statistical
outbreak detection. The novel outbreak detection algorithm addresses this challenge by
excluding flagged observations from future parameter estimation. This exclusion reduces
the sample window for parameter estimation and results in a loss of information and re-
duced variation in the data. The purpose of this exclusion is to prevent inflated parameter
estimates.
On the other hand, the state-of-the-art detection algorithm employs a re-weighting scheme
using Anscombe residuals. It has been observed that the Farrington method’s correction
for past outbreaks is too drastic, and a higher re-weighting threshold of 2.58 rather than
1 is recommended in the Noufaily method to improve specificity (Noufaily et al. 2013).
Effectively handling previous outbreaks in statistical outbreak detection requires domain-
specific knowledge from epidemiologists to determine the most appropriate approach.
While the novel method completely excludes past outbreaks, this may not be the optimal
practice as it reduces the sample window.
A clear example of this can be seen in the SALM case study. In Figure 5.16, the effective
number of observations used for parameter estimation at a given point in time is visualized.
50
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.16: Effective number of observations in the SALM case study, that enter the
parameter estimation at a given point in time.
If the method is employed in an automated setting, it is essential to report the size of the
sampling window to the epidemiologists so that they can interpret the results appropriately.
In extreme cases, one could imagine that the number of observations used for parameter
estimation could approach zero, leaving the model with insufficient data to adequately
describe the process.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
51
==PAGE:63==
5.4
Performance of statistical outbreak detection algorithms
In this section, the performance of both the state-of-the-art and novel outbreak detection
algorithms is evaluated to assess their ability to identify outbreaks in the case studies.
A comparison is made between the alarms raised by each method using a timeline plot.
Additionally, the first identified cases in the outbreaks investigated by SSI are included
in the plot to provide context and evaluate the accuracy and timeliness of the outbreak
detection algorithms.
The overall caveat in evaluating methods for automated an early detection of disease
outbreaks, is the problem of defining an outbreak. In the case studies examined in this
thesis, an outbreak is defined as something officially investigated and documented by SSI.
However, this definition is neither standardized, nor reproducible, and depends largely on
what the individual epidemiologists have perceived as an outbreak. Thus, in the absence
of a gold standard definition for outbreak, these documented investigations have been
used.
Figure 5.17 demonstrates that the state-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithms, espe-
cially the Farrington method, raise a higher number of alarms compared to the novel
algorithms in the LIST case study.
Figure 5.17: Alarm plot displaying alarms for LIST time series using four different algo-
rithms, along with outbreaks investigated by SSI.
In general, SSI initiates an outbreak investigation when there are either 2 cases with
identical bacteria over a 12-week period or 3 cases at any given time. Therefore, it is
crucial to have a method with high sensitivity for automated LIST outbreak detection. As
discussed earlier, the Farrington method demonstrates lower sensitivity compared to the
other algorithms, which may impact its suitability for detecting LIST outbreaks.
Furthermore, it was discovered that the hierarchical models faced inherent convergence
issues due to the lack of overdispersion in the data. This resulted in insufficient information
to adequately inform the second stage model and impacted the performance of the models
in detecting outbreaks. Consequently, the novel method had prolonged periods where the
estimated random effects and thresholds collapse.
52
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:64==
However, it is worth noting that the novel outbreak detection algorithms successfully iden-
tified five outbreaks that aligned with ongoing investigations conducted by SSI.
In the SHIL case study, the incidence of cases is slightly higher, resulting in a relatively
higher number of alarms generated by both the state-of-the-art and novel outbreak detec-
tion methods. This can be observed in Figure 5.18. It is important to note that only one
well-documented outbreak of SHIL was investigated by SSI in the observed period. As a
result, the number of alarms generated by the methods may be overestimated in terms of
the priority given to investigating outbreaks in this specific disease.
Figure 5.18: Alarm plot displaying alarms for SHIL time series using four different algo-
rithms, along with outbreaks investigated by SSI.
Additionally, it is worth noting that none of the algorithms were able to identify the outbreak
in the summer of 2020, as it occurred during the COVID-19-related lockdown period when
there were very few reported cases. This highlights the challenge of detecting outbreaks
in periods of low incidence or during exceptional circumstances such as a lockdown.
Furthermore, it is interesting to mention that a total of 10 clusters with SHIL have been
reported to the FUD between 2008 and 2022. Unfortunately, due to the limitations of
this thesis, it was not possible to retrieve the necessary information to provide a detailed
description of these outbreaks. Therefore, with the available information, it is not possible
to reject the possibility that some of the alarms raised by the algorithms coincided with
one or more of these clusters.
In retrospect, it would have been more informative to differentiate between sexes rather
than age groups in the SHIL case study, as men who have sex with men have a higher
risk of contracting and spreading the disease. However, this information was received
towards the end of writing the thesis and was therefore not given priority.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
53
==PAGE:65==
When examining the STEC data, the substantial difference in sensitivity between the
state-of-the-art and novel outbreak detection methods becomes evident.
Figure 5.19
clearly demonstrates that both state-of-the-art methods generate a significant number
of alarms. This excessive number of alarms raises concerns about the practicality and
feasibility of these methods in real-world applications.
Figure 5.19: Alarm plot displaying alarms for the STEC time series using four different
algorithms, along with outbreaks investigated by SSI.
It is worth noting that both the state-of-the-art and novel outbreak detection algorithms
are capable of correctly raising alarms at several, if not all, of the investigated outbreaks.
This highlights the effectiveness of these algorithms in identifying potential outbreaks and
their ability to contribute to timely public health interventions. However, it is important to
consider other factors such as the number of false positives and the overall usability of
the methods in real-world settings.
In the case study of SALM, a large number of alarms are generated by both the state-
of-the-art and novel outbreak detection algorithms. These alarms are depicted in Figure
5.20. The vast number of alarms can be attributed to the inherent nature of the disease,
as SALM is known for frequently causing outbreaks. Therefore, the high number of alarms
generated in this case is not unexpected.
54
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.20: Alarm plot displaying alarms for SALM time series using four different algo-
rithms, along with outbreaks investigated by SSI. Note that there are several more clusters
with SALM, than what is included in this plot. This is because of missing or poor docu-
mentation of these clusters. However, for an overview over the clusters reported to FUD,
refer to Table C.1.
For future work, it is indeed beneficial to consider monitoring individual serotypes of
Salmonella bacteria instead of monitoring them collectively. This approach would en-
able more specific and targeted outbreak detection. By focusing on specific serotypes,
the algorithms can potentially reduce the number of false alarms and enhance the overall
effectiveness of outbreak signal detection for SALM infections.
Furthermore, monitoring individual serotypes provides an opportunity to prioritize out-
breaks of Salmonella serotypes that are known to cause particularly severe diseases.
This allows for a proactive response in identifying and containing outbreaks that pose a
higher risk to public health. By tailoring the detection algorithms to specific serotypes,
public health authorities can effectively prioritize their efforts and allocate resources ac-
cordingly, leading to more efficient and targeted outbreak management strategies.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
55
==PAGE:67==
5.5
Potential extension of the novel algorithm
A potential extension of the novel outbreak detection method proposed in this master
thesis involves incorporating correlation, either in time or between groups. To highlight
this, an example considering the SALM case study is presented. The autocorrelation
function (ACF) plot in Figure 5.21 provides insights into the temporal dependencies and
correlations withing the data.
Figure 5.21: ACF for the estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 for the six age
groups in the SALM case study. The plots are organized in increasing age group, i.e. (a)
<1 year, (b) 1-4 years, (c) 5-14 years, (d) 15-24 years, (e) 25-64 years, and (f) 65+ years.
The ACF plot reveals significant autocorrelation at lag 1 across all age groups, indicating
a strong temporal dependency. Some age groups, such as 15-24 years, 25-64 years,
and 65+ years, exhibit significant autocorrelation at lag 2. Additionally, a notable sea-
sonal autocorrelation is observed at lag 12 in most age groups. These findings suggest
the presence of underlying patterns and correlations that can be further explored and
leveraged in the development of the outbreak detection method.
The correlation plot in Figure 5.22 provides insights into the intergroup correlation, high-
lighting potential shared patterns or dependencies across different age groups.
56
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.22: Correlation of the estimated one-step ahead random effects ˆuit1 for the six
age groups in the SALM case study.
The plot clearly shows a strong intergroup correlation between the age groups, particularly
between 5-14 years, 15-24 years, and 25-64 years. This suggests that these age groups
may exhibit similar disease patterns or dynamics.
Analyzing the intergroup correlation can provide valuable information for understanding
the dynamics and interactions between different age groups. It can help identify common-
alities and differences in disease patterns, enabling targeted intervention strategies and
efficient resource allocation.
Further exploration and analysis of the intergroup correlation can enhance our under-
standing of disease dynamics and improve the accuracy and effectiveness of the outbreak
detection method, leading to better public health outcomes.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
57
==PAGE:69==
58
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:70==
6
Simulation study
In this chapter, a simulation study is conducted to evaluate the performance of the novel
outbreak detection algorithm compared to state-of-the-art algorithms. The simulations
cover various scenarios, adapted from the study by Noufaily et al. (2013).
The chapter begins by describing the method used to simulate the baseline data. These
data are generated using a Negative Binomial model with a time-dependent mean µ(t).
Next, the assumptions regarding the simulated outbreaks are outlined, including the out-
break size and distribution in time.
The evaluation measures used to assess the performance of the outbreak detection algo-
rithms are then presented. These measures are designed to capture relevant quantities
in the context of outbreak detection.
Finally, the chapter presents the results of applying both the state-of-the-art and the novel
outbreak detection algorithms to the simulated data. The performance of both algorithms
is evaluated based on the simulation results.
6.1
The simulated baseline data
The simulated baseline data is generated using a Negative Binomial model with a mean
parameter µ and a variance parameter ϕµ. The dispersion parameter ϕ is assumed to be
greater than or equal to 1. The mean µ(t) is defined by a linear predictor that includes a
trend component and a seasonality component represented by Fourier terms.
The equation for µ(t) is given as:
µ(t) = exp
 
θ + βt +
m
X
j=1

γ1 cos
2πjt
52

+γ2 sin
2πjt
52
!
(6.1)
In this equation, m represents the number of Fourier terms used to model seasonality.
When m = 0, it indicates the absence of seasonality, while m = 1 corresponds to annual
seasonality.
To cover a wide range of data sets encountered in practical applications, 28 different
parameter combinations are generated. These combinations vary in terms of trends (rep-
resented by different values of β), seasonalities (represented by different values of γ1 and
γ2), baseline frequencies of reports (represented by different values of θ), and dispersion
(represented by different values of ϕ). The specific parameter values for the 28 scenarios
are provided in Table 6.1.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
59
==PAGE:71==
Table 6.1: Parameters and criteria utilized to generate the 28 scenarios.
Scenario
θ
ϕ
β
γ1
γ2
m
Trend
1
0.10
1.5
0.0000
0.00
0.00
0
0
2
0.10
1.5
0.0000
0.60
0.60
1
0
3
0.10
1.5
0.0025
0.00
0.00
0
1
4
0.10
1.5
0.0025
0.60
0.60
1
1
5
-2.00
2.0
0.0000
0.00
0.00
0
0
6
-2.00
2.0
0.0000
0.10
0.30
1
0
7
-2.00
2.0
0.0050
0.00
0.00
0
1
8
-2.00
2.0
0.0050
0.10
0.30
1
1
9
1.50
1.0
0.0000
0.00
0.00
0
0
10
1.50
1.0
0.0000
0.20
-0.40
1
0
11
1.50
1.0
0.0030
0.00
0.00
0
1
12
1.50
1.0
0.0030
0.20
-0.40
1
1
13
0.50
5.0
0.0000
0.00
0.00
0
0
14
0.50
5.0
0.0000
0.50
0.50
1
0
15
0.50
5.0
0.0020
0.00
0.00
0
1
16
0.50
5.0
0.0020
0.50
0.50
1
1
17
2.50
3.0
0.0000
0.00
0.00
0
0
18
2.50
3.0
0.0000
1.00
0.10
1
0
19
2.50
3.0
0.0010
0.00
0.00
0
1
20
2.50
3.0
0.0010
1.00
0.10
1
1
21
3.75
1.1
0.0000
0.00
0.00
0
0
22
3.75
1.1
0.0000
0.10
-0.10
1
0
23
3.75
1.1
0.0010
0.00
0.00
0
1
24
3.75
1.1
0.0010
0.10
-0.10
1
1
25
5.00
1.2
0.0000
0.00
0.00
0
0
26
5.00
1.2
0.0000
0.05
0.01
1
0
27
5.00
1.2
0.0001
0.00
0.00
0
1
28
5.00
1.2
0.0001
0.05
0.01
1
1
To simulate the baseline data without outbreaks, 100 replicates are generated for each
of the 28 parameter scenarios. Each replicate consist of a time series of size T = 624
weeks.
The 624 weeks are divided into three periods: weeks 1-313 are used for training, weeks
313-575 are considered as baseline weeks, and weeks 576-624 are designated as the
test weeks for evaluation.
The simulation results are based on the test weeks of all the replicates, totaling 100×49 =
4900 weeks, for each of the 28 data scenarios and each method investigated.
6.2
The simulated outbreaks
The outbreaks starting in week ti are simulated using the following procedure. First, a
constant value k is chosen at random. The size of the outbreak, denoted as v, is then
generated randomly from a Poisson distribution with a mean equal to k times the standard
deviation of the baseline count in that scenario.
60
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:72==
Next, the outbreak is distributed randomly in time according to a discretized log-normal
distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.5, represented as Z ∼⌊LN(0, 0.52)⌋.
This is achieved by drawing v random numbers, which correspond to the outbreak size,
from the specified log-normal distribution and then rounding down these numbers to the
nearest integer.
The probability mass function for the discretized log-normal distribution is visualized in
Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Stairstep plot of the probability mass function for the discretized log-normal
distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.5, i.e. Z ∼⌊LN(0, 0.52)⌋.
Typically, outbreak durations of 2-4 weeks are observed when values of k are in the range
of 2-10. To simulate the outbreaks, the outbreak cases are added to the baseline count
in week ti + zi, where ti represents the start time of the outbreak and zi represents the
number of weeks after the start of the outbreak. The start and end times of the outbreaks
are recorded for evaluating the performance of the methods.
To simulate outbreaks, the following procedure is followed:
• Outbreaks in baseline weeks: For each data series, four outbreaks are gener-
ated. The start time of each outbreak is randomly selected from the baseline weeks
(weeks 313-575). The value of k is sampled randomly with replacement from the
set {2, 3, 5, 10}. It should be noted that different outbreaks are generated for each
of the 2800 runs.
• Outbreaks in current weeks: For each data series, one outbreak is generated.
The start time of the outbreak is randomly chosen from the last 49 weeks (weeks
576-624). The value of k is sampled randomly in the range of 1 to 10. Similar to the
previous case, different outbreaks are generated for each of the 2800 runs.
One randomly chosen realization for scenario 8, 12, 13, and 20 are visualized in Figure
6.2.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
61
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.2: Plots of one randomly chosen realization for scenario 8, 12, 13, and 20 (see
Table 6.1). During outbreaks (circles), outbreak cases are added to the baseline data.
Four outbreaks are added during the baseline weeks and 1 outbreak is added during the
test weeks. The results are based on the data obtained in the test weeks (grey area).
Evidently, the scenarios vary in their epidemiological characteristics, such as seasonality,
trend, and incidence.
6.3
Evaluation measures
To evaluate the performance of the outbreak detection system in the absence and pres-
ence of outbreaks, several measures are employed to assess its effectiveness. These
measures are specifically designed to capture relevant quantities in the given context.
In the absence of outbreaks in the data, one of the primary measures used is the False
Positive Rate (FPR). This is calculated for each of the 28 scenarios, before the addition
of the simulated outbreaks to the baseline data. The FPR is determined by calculating
the proportion of the 49 weeks and 100 replicates in which the observed value exceeds
the threshold in the absence of any simulated outbreaks.
Another measure is the Probability Of Detection (POD) of an outbreak. Likewise, this is
calculated for each of the 28 scenarios, but this time it is in the presence of the simulated
outbreaks. The algorithm is applied iteratively for the 49 current weeks, and an outbreak
is considered detected if the observed value exceeds the threshold at least once within
the start and end times of the outbreak. The POD of an outbreak is then determined as
the proportion of outbreaks detected out of the 100 runs.
It is important to note that the FPR is a rate per week, while the POD is a rate per real-
ization. These evaluation measures are chosen because they provide insights into the
performance of the detection system on individual time series.
6.4
Results of the simulations
In this section, the results of the simulation study are presented. Both the state-of-the-art
and novel outbreak detection algorithms are applied to the same simulated data, allowing
for the evaluation of their performance in a setting where the true parameters and process
are known.
62
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:74==
The data used consists of weekly counts of a simulated disease, denoted as yt, where
t = 1, · · · , T represents the time period of T = 624 weeks. In order to evaluate the
state-of-the-art and novel outbreak detection algorithms, it is decided to include 5 years
of reference data, corresponding to a total of 260 weeks.
The first step involves applying the state-of-the-art outbreak detection algorithms, with
specific control arguments determined for the Farrington and Noufaily methods. These
control arguments for the algorithms are specified exactly as in Noufaily et al. (2013), in
order to reproduce the same results. Notably, the thresholds calculated in the state-of-the-
art algorithms are based on the 99.5% quantiles. Also, in the Noufaily method, it is decided
to exclude the last 26 weeks before the current week to avoid adaption of the model to
emerging outbreaks, which would reduce its sensitivity. In the Farrington method, only
3 weeks are excluded before the current week. To access the full configuration of the
state-of-the-art methods, refer to Appendix B.1.
Hereafter, the novel outbreak detection algorithm is applied. For this purpose, the model
for the fixed effects in each of the modeling frameworks is defined as
log(λt) = βintercept + βtrendt + sin
2π · τt
52

βsin + cos
2π · τt
52

βcos
(6.2)
Unlike the state-of-the-art algorithms, the thresholds in the novel algorithm are based on
the 95% quantile of the distribution of the random effects in the second stage model. This
threshold is calculated based on either a Gaussian distribution using the plug-in estimate
ˆσ or a Gamma distribution using the plug-in estimate ˆϕ depending on the modeling frame-
work.
False Positive Rates
In general, the method introduced by Farrington et al. (1996) tends to have relatively
higher FPRs compared to the other methods. This observation is consistent with the re-
sults presented in Table 6.2. However, this outcome is not surprising since the Farrington
method is known to be overly sensitive, making it more prone to producing false alarms.
On the other hand, the improved method by Noufaily et al. (2013) outperforms the other
methods by minimizing the FPR.
Additionally, it is noted that the novel algorithms, using the two different modeling frame-
works, perform somewhere in between the two state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of min-
imizing the FPR.
Table 6.2: Summary statstics of the FPRs obtained in the 28 scenarios using the four
different methods.
Method
median(FPR)
mean(FPR)
sd(FPR)
min(FPR)
max(FPR)
Farrington
0.022
0.031
0.031
0
0.217
Noufaily
0.000
0.009
0.015
0
0.125
Poisson Normal
0.021
0.017
0.020
0
0.128
Poisson Gamma
0.021
0.017
0.020
0
0.128
Upon examining Figure 6.3, it becomes even more apparent that the Noufaily method
consistently outperforms the other methods. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that
scenario 8 and 15 consistently pose challenges for all methods, while scenarios 13-20
prove to be particularly problematic for the novel method.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
63
==PAGE:75==
A closer look reveals that scenarios 13-20 have the highest overdispersion parameters,
indicating increased variability in the data. On the other hand, scenario 8 incorporates
both a steep trend and a seasonality component, which can complicate the detection
process for all methods.
Figure 6.3: FPRs obtained in each of the 28 scenarios for each of the methods applied.
Probability an outbreak is detected
As expected, the POD of an outbreak increases with the size of k. Intuitively, when the
outbreak size v is larger, it becomes more likely to be detected by the outbreak detection
algorithms. In Table 6.3, it is evident that the Farrington method performs very well in
terms of POD, closely followed by the novel method using either modeling framework.
Moreover, it can be seen that the Noufaily method is outperformed by the other methods,
w.r.t. POD.
The high performance of the Farrington method can be attributed to its sensitivity in de-
tecting outbreaks. Similarly, the novel method utilizing both modeling frameworks demon-
strates its effectiveness in detecting outbreaks of varying sizes.
Table 6.3: Summary statistics of the POD of an outbreak of size k times the standard
deviations of the baseline data for each of the methods applied.
Method
k
median(POD)
mean(POD)
sd(POD)
min(POD)
max(POD)
2
0.261
0.285
0.179
0.000
0.625
4
0.462
0.493
0.173
0.091
0.778
6
0.845
0.800
0.174
0.375
1.000
8
0.971
0.914
0.147
0.375
1.000
Farrington
10
1.000
0.932
0.096
0.714
1.000
2
0.111
0.127
0.108
0.000
0.400
4
0.300
0.328
0.182
0.091
0.750
6
0.721
0.682
0.249
0.125
1.000
8
0.845
0.822
0.193
0.250
1.000
Noufaily
10
1.000
0.913
0.109
0.700
1.000
64
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:76==
Table 6.3: (continued)
Method
k
median(POD)
mean(POD)
sd(POD)
min(POD)
max(POD)
2
0.244
0.267
0.174
0.000
0.714
4
0.441
0.460
0.190
0.100
0.818
6
0.826
0.758
0.222
0.235
1.000
8
1.000
0.903
0.162
0.375
1.000
Poisson Normal
10
1.000
0.945
0.108
0.571
1.000
2
0.244
0.267
0.174
0.000
0.714
4
0.441
0.460
0.190
0.100
0.818
6
0.826
0.758
0.222
0.235
1.000
8
1.000
0.903
0.162
0.375
1.000
Poisson Gamma
10
1.000
0.945
0.108
0.571
1.000
In Figure 6.4, the variability in PODs of outbreaks can be observed across the 28 scenar-
ios. The level of variability in POD is generally low when the outbreak size factor k is set
to 1, indicating that only a few outbreaks are detected in these scenarios. Similarly, when
k is set to 10, indicating that almost all outbreaks are detected, the variability in POD is
also low.
On the other hand, the variability in POD across the scenarios is highest when k is set to
5, and around 75% of the outbreaks are detected.
Figure 6.4: POD of an outbreak of a random size v drawn from a Poisson distribution
withmean equal to k times the standard deviations of the baseline data. The x-axis shows
increasing values of k. The POD for each scenario is plotted along with the median curves
(bold) across all 28 scenarios.
It is important to bear in mind that an outbreak of size v is randomly distributed in time
according to a discretized log-normal distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation
of 0.5, denoted as Z ∼⌊LN(0, 0.52)⌋. The probability mass function of Z is shown in Figure
6.1. From the figure, it can be observed that 50% of the outbreak cases are added to the
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
65
==PAGE:77==
same week as the outbreak starts, 42% are added to the following week, and only 7%
are added two weeks after the start. Therefore, the simulated outbreak cases are not
observed in a single week only but rather in several concurrent weeks.
Consequently, an outbreak of size v generated from a Poisson distribution with a mean
equal to k times the standard deviation of the baseline series is perceived to be relatively
smaller than initially perceived in the simulation setup. For example, an outbreak of size
k = 4 times the standard deviation may only be perceived as an outbreak signal of size 2
times the standard deviation in an individual week.
66
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:78==
7
Discussion
This chapter delves into several topics that have not been previously addressed in this
thesis. Firstly, the implications of “alarm fatigue” caused be overly sensitive outbreak
detection methods is discussed.
Hereafter, an overview of the consideration when selecting a modeling framework for the
novel outbreak detection method is provided. Comparing the hierarchical Poisson Normal
model and the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model, their strengths and weaknesses are
examined, which can be helpful when deciding on the most suitable framework for specific
data scenarios.
Additionally, the immense potential of MiBa-based diseases surveillance is discussed.
The success of MiBa in various surveillance systems showcases the value of utilizing this
resource in outbreak detection. By leveraging advanced algorithms and methodologies
with MiBa data, automated disease outbreak detection becomes a reality, enabling timely
interventions and prevention measures.
Overall, this chapter not only identifies crucial aspects affecting outbreak detection, but
also underscores the potential of customizing methods to effectively leverage MiBa data
for improved disease surveillance and public health protection.
7.1
Alarm fatigue and the implications for outbreak detection
The field of automated disease outbreak detection has witnessed substantial advance-
ments in recent years, with the development of sophisticated statistical methods and the
utilization of computerized databases. These advancements have tremendous poten-
tial in supplementing epidemiologists and help them effectively prioritize their efforts and
allocate resources accordingly, leading to more efficient and targeted outbreak manage-
ment strategies. However, an emerging concern in the field is the phenomenon known
as “alarm fatigue” and its implications for statistical outbreak detection.
Alarm fatigue refers to the desensitization and decreased responsiveness that can occur
when epidemiologists are exposed to frequent or excessive alarms from a statistical out-
break detection method. Specifically, the method introduced by Farrington et al. (1996)
is known for its occasional lack of specificity, leading to false alarms that can overwhelm
the epidemiologists with verification tasks. Consequently, its usefulness and practicality
in real-world settings are undermined. In an effort to address the number of false alarms,
the subsequently improved method by Noufaily et al. (2013) was introduced. While it was
found that this method greatly reduced the number of alarms while maintaining a good
overall performance in detecting outbreaks, it has been unable to establish itself as a
reliable method.
An outbreak detection algorithm that can effectively control the number of false alarms,
while still maintaining the power to detect genuine outbreaks, is in increasingly high de-
mand. In this thesis it is shown, that the proposed novel method have immense potential
as a candidate tool for outbreak detection. It considerably reduces the number of alarms
generated compared to the Farrington and Noufaily methods, while still maintaining the
ability to generate alarms coinciding in time with outbreak investigations by SSI and during
the simulated outbreaks. Furthermore, the novel method allows for covariate incorpora-
tion, distinguishing it from both Farrington and Noufaily methods. These findings highlight
the potential of hierarchical models as a framework for outbreak detection in general.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
67
==PAGE:79==
7.2
For and against for the two modeling frameworks in the
novel method
The hierarchical Poisson Gamma model offers the advantage of directly interpreting pa-
rameter estimates as their actual contribution to disease intensity, thanks to the first mo-
ment of the resulting Negative Binomial distribution. In contrast, the hierarchical Poisson
Normal model lacks a known expected value for the distribution of Y |u, and necessitates
numerical methods like the Laplace approximation for parameter estimation and infer-
ence.
However, despite the differences in assumptions about the distribution of random effects,
this master thesis demonstrates that parameter estimates and confidence intervals for the
fixed effects model remain consistent across both modeling frameworks. Consequently,
the choice between the two frameworks may depend more on data characteristics and
computational considerations rather than the interpretation of parameter estimates.
A notable advantage of the hierarchical Poisson Normal model is its ease of extension to
incorporate correlation in time or between groups by including a covariance matrix in the
second stage model. This extension is relatively straightforward within this framework.
In contrast, implementing correlation in the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model is more
complex and requires further investigation. However, including correlation has the po-
tential to enhance the outbreak detection method’s performance and capture additional
patterns in the data, as observed in Figures 5.21 and 5.22 for the STEC case study.
Another significant difference between the two modeling frameworks is the run time effi-
ciency. The hierarchical Poisson Gamma model exhibits faster computation, up to a factor
of 4× faster, compared to the hierarchical Poisson Normal model. However, it is crucial
to note that for the task of outbreak detection, real-time decision-making may not heavily
depend on efficient run time. The outbreak detection procedure is typically performed
on a weekly basis, minimizing the practical importance of the computational advantages
offered by the hierarchical Poisson Gamma model.
7.3
Harnessing the potential of MiBa
In the future, the utilization of MiBa-based surveillance has immense potential for dis-
ease surveillance. It has already demonstrated its value in various surveillance systems,
such as The Healthcare-Associated Infections Database (HAIBA) for monitoring hospital-
acquired infections (Condell et al. 2016; Gubbels et al. 2017) and the COVID-19 surveil-
lance system (Schønning et al. 2021).
HAIBA, launched in 2015, was the first fully automated surveillance system built on MiBa
data. It provides monitoring capabilities for hospital-acquired infections, enabling health-
care professionals to track and manage these infections more effectively. Similarly, the
COVID-19 surveillance system, developed during 2020 and 2021, utilizes MiBa data to
monitor and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition to these systems, MiBa-based surveillance includes monitoring respiratory in-
fections (such as influenza, pertussis, Mycoplasma pneumonia, and respiratory syncytial
virus) and sexually transmitted diseases like chlamydia. While these surveillance systems
currently have partial automation in data processing, there are plans to fully automate
them in the near future.
Expanding on the field of automated disease outbreak detection is crucial to fully harness
the potential of MiBa. By developing advanced algorithms and methodologies, it becomes
68
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:80==
possible to automatically analyze MiBa data and detect disease outbreak signals in a
timely manner. This can lead to early identification of outbreaks, allowing for prompt
interventions and preventive measures.
This master thesis serves as a proof of concept and can serve as a catalyst for future re-
search and development in automated disease outbreak detection. The focus should be
on customizing methods to effectively utilize the valuable MiBa data, as this has the po-
tential to greatly improve the efficiency of detecting and responding to infectious disease
outbreaks. By fully leveraging the capabilities of MiBa-based surveillance and continu-
ously improving automated detection methods, the overall disease surveillance efforts
can be strengthened, leading to better protection of public health.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
69
==PAGE:81==
70
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:82==
8
Conclusion
This master thesis aimed to address the potential of automating the early detection of
disease outbreaks. The primary objective was to develop a novel method for outbreak
detection and compare its performance with established methods from the literature, such
as the method proposed by Farrington et al. (1996) and the improved method by Noufaily
et al. (2013). By utilizing innovative approaches based on hierarchical models, important
advancements were achieved in the field of statistical outbreak detection.
The key finding of this study underscores the immense potential of the developed method
in automating and detecting disease outbreaks. Through the analysis of various case
studies, the novel approach successfully identified anomalous counts coinciding with out-
break investigations conducted by SSI. Also, it considerably reduced the number of alarms
generated compared to the Farrington and Noufaily methods.
However, various challenges were encountered while conducting the case studies. Con-
vergence issues were particularly evident in the hierarchical models, especially in the
LIST case study. These issues are likely attributed to the absence of overdispersion in
the data. When overdispersion is lacking, the second stage model is not informed and
a Poisson distribution alone can adequately model the data. This makes an approach
based on GLMs more suitable for these scenarios.
Furthermore, the context in which the model operates should be carefully considered.
Sudden decreases or increases in the reported cases should trigger further investigation
by epidemiologists, prompting necessary adjustments to the model. Contextual aware-
ness is crucial for optimal outbreak detection performance.
Another vital aspect is handling the presence of previous outbreaks in the disease data.
Neglecting to address this appropriately can lead to inflated model parameters and de-
creased sensitivity of the method. Properly accounting for previous outbreaks ensures
more accurate outbreak detection results.
In the simulation study, the developed method exhibited a lower FPR compared to the
Farrington method but a slightly higher FPR than the Noufaily method. Nonetheless, it
maintained a high POD for varying sizes of simulated outbreaks, indicating its reliability
and practicality in real-world scenarios.
Overall, these findings highlight the effectiveness and robustness of the novel method in
accurately detecting disease outbreaks, offering a promising avenue for improving public
health surveillance and response systems. By integrating this method into existing public
health frameworks, such as MiBa, the preparedness and response capabilities can be
enhanced, ultimately leading to improved outcomes in disease prevention and control.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
71
==PAGE:83==
72
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
Madsen, Henrik and Poul Thyregod (2011). Introduction to general and generalized linear
models. English. Texts in statistical science. CRC Press. ISBN: 9781420091557.
Voldstedlund, M et al. (2014). “The Danish Microbiology Database (MiBa) 2010 to 2013”.
In: Eurosurveillance 19.1, 20667. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES2014.19.1.
20667. URL: https://www.eurosurveillance.org/content/10.2807/1560-7917.ES2014.19.1.
20667.
Noufaily, Angela et al. (Mar. 2013). “An Improved Algorithm for Outbreak Detection in
Multiple Surveillance Systems”. en. In: Online Journal of Public Health Informatics 32.7,
pp. 1206–1222.
Tulchinsky, Theodore H. (2018). “Chapter 5 - John Snow, Cholera, the Broad Street
Pump; Waterborne Diseases Then and Now”. In: Case Studies in Public Health. Ed. by
Theodore H. Tulchinsky. Academic Press, pp. 77–99. ISBN: 978-0-12-804571-8. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804571-8.00017-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780128045718000172.
Honardoost, Maryam, Azam Rajabpour, and Ladan Vakil (2018). “Molecular epidemiology;
New but impressive”. In: Medical Journal of the Islamic Republic of Iran 32.1. Cited by: 4;
All Open Access, Gold Open Access, Green Open Access. DOI: 10.14196/mjiri.32.53.
URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85065203514&doi=10.
14196%2fmjiri.32.53&partnerID=40&md5=31ba202c2698dce55f73f5bfb6efb1a7.
Struelens, M J and S Brisse (2013). “From molecular to genomic epidemiology: transform-
ing surveillance and control of infectious diseases”. In: Eurosurveillance 18.4, 20386.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2807/ese.18.04.20386-en. URL: https://www.eurosurveillance.org/
content/10.2807/ese.18.04.20386-en.
Koeser, Claudio U. et al. (June 2012). “Rapid Whole-Genome Sequencing for Investiga-
tion of a Neonatal MRSA Outbreak”. In: NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE
366.24, pp. 2267–2275. ISSN: 0028-4793.
Baldry, Susannah (2010). “Attack of the clones”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 8.6.
Cited by: 9; All Open Access, Bronze Open Access, p. 390. DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro2369.
URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-77952857458&doi=10.
1038%2fnrmicro2369&partnerID=40&md5=228603d5ee11cdcdf04bea3f5de7c9a8.
Buckeridge, David L. (2007). “Outbreak detection through automated surveillance: A re-
view of the determinants of detection”. In: Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40.4. Public
Health Informatics, pp. 370–379. ISSN: 1532-0464. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.
2006.09.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046406000980.
Unkel, Steffen et al. (2012). “Statistical methods for the prospective detection of infec-
tious disease outbreaks: a review”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A
(Statistics in Society) 175.1, pp. 49–82. ISSN: 09641998, 1467985X. URL: http://www.
jstor.org/stable/41409708 (visited on 02/15/2023).
Farrington, C. P. et al. (1996). “A Statistical Algorithm for the Early Detection of Outbreaks
of Infectious Disease”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in
Society) 159.3, pp. 547–563. ISSN: 09641998, 1467985X. URL: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/2983331 (visited on 01/27/2023).
Hulth, A. et al. (2010). “Practical usage of computer-supported outbreak detection in five
european countries”. In: Eurosurveillance 15.36. Cited by: 31, pp. 1–6. URL: https://
www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-77957607700&partnerID=40&md5=
ff916d06bcf38218b2388d0874eed9f8.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
73
==PAGE:85==
Salmon, Maëlle, Dirk Schumacher, and Michael Höhle (2016). “Monitoring Count Time
Series in R: Aberration Detection in Public Health Surveillance”. In: Journal of Statistical
Software 70.10, pp. 1–35. DOI: 10.18637/jss.v070.i10. URL: https://www.jstatsoft.org/
index.php/jss/article/view/v070i10.
Bédubourg, Gabriel and Yann Le Strat (2017). “Evaluation and comparison of statistical
methods for early temporal detection of outbreaks: A simulation-based study”. In: PLoS
ONE 12.7. Cited by: 27; All Open Access, Gold Open Access, Green Open Access.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181227. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-85024904807&doi=10.1371%2fjournal.pone.0181227&partnerID=40&md5=
0a18530ff75e9efd8643ca4a743097f7.
Bolker, Benjamin M. et al. (2009). “Generalized linear mixed models: a practical guide
for ecology and evolution”. In: Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24.3, pp. 127–135. ISSN:
0169-5347. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2008.10.008. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169534709000196.
Zuur, Alain F. et al. (2009). Mixed Effects Models and Extensions in Ecology with R. En-
glish. Statistics for Biology and Health. Springer New York, NY. ISBN: 9780387874586.
Palmer Real, Jaume et al. (2022). “A data-driven framework for characterising building
archetypes: A mixed effects modelling approach”. English. In: Energy 254. ISSN: 0360-
5442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2022.124278.
Real, J. Palmer et al. (2021). “Simulating heat load profiles in buildings using mixed effects
models”. English. In: vol. 2069. 1. IOP Publishing. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2069/1/
012138.
Heisterkamp, Simon H., Arnold L. M. Dekkers, and Janneke C. M. Heijne (2006). “Au-
tomated detection of infectious disease outbreaks: hierarchical time series models”.
In: Statistics in Medicine 25.24, pp. 4179–4196. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.
2674. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/sim.2674. URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sim.2674.
Höhle, Michael and Michaela Paul (2008). “Count data regression charts for the monitoring
of surveillance time series”. In: Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 52.9. Cited
by: 56, pp. 4357–4368. DOI: 10.1016/j.csda.2008.02.015. URL: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-42749087852&doi=10.1016%5C%2fj.csda.2008.02.015&
partnerID=40&md5=8d18fdad2a28d99ecbda5441a8fbeae3.
Svendsen, Anna Tølbøll et al. (2023). “The incidence of laboratory-confirmed cases of
enteric pathogens in Denmark 2018: a national observational study”. In: Infectious Dis-
eases 55.5. PMID: 36868794, pp. 340–350. DOI: 10 . 1080 / 23744235 . 2023 . 2183253.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/23744235.2023.2183253. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
23744235.2023.2183253.
Buss, Sarah N. et al. (2015). “Multicenter evaluation of the BioFire FilmArray gastroin-
testinal panel for etiologic diagnosis of infectious gastroenteritis”. In: Journal of Clinical
Microbiology 53.3. Cited by: 327; All Open Access, Bronze Open Access, Green Open
Access, pp. 915–925. DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02674- 14. URL: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84923376418&doi=10.1128%2fJCM.02674-14&partnerID=
40&md5=a31098bbc8437c1849360924f660dacd.
Knabl, L., I. Grutsch, and D. Orth-Höller (2016). “Comparison of the BD MAX® Enteric
Bacterial Panel assay with conventional diagnostic procedures in diarrheal stool sam-
ples”. In: European Journal of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 35.1. Cited
by: 22, pp. 131–136. DOI: 10.1007/s10096- 015- 2517- 4. URL: https://www.scopus.
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84954361539&doi=10.1007%2fs10096-015-2517-
4&partnerID=40&md5=2800622c88a129b3ed2c8dbf533d2a39.
74
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:86==
Goulet, Véronique et al. (2012). “Incidence of listeriosis and related mortality among groups
at risk of acquiring listeriosis”. In: Clinical infectious diseases 54.5, pp. 652–660.
Awofisayo, A. et al. (Jan. 2015). “Pregnancy-associated listeriosis in England and Wales”.
In: EPIDEMIOLOGY AND INFECTION 143.2, pp. 249–256. ISSN: 0950-2688. DOI: 10.
1017/S0950268814000594.
Wingstrand, Anne et al., eds. (2015). Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark 2014. En-
glish. Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark. DTU Food.
Smith, B. et al. (2011). “Outbreak of listeriosis caused by infected beef meat from a
meals-on-wheels delivery in Denmark 2009”. In: Clinical Microbiology and Infection
17.1, pp. 50–52. ISSN: 1198-743X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2010.
03200.x. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1198743X14609125.
Kvistholm Jensen, Anne et al. (Mar. 2016). “Whole-genome Sequencing Used to Investi-
gate a Nationwide Outbreak of Listeriosis Caused by Ready-to-eat Delicatessen Meat,
Denmark, 2014”. In: Clinical Infectious Diseases 63.1, pp. 64–70. ISSN: 1058-4838. DOI:
10.1093/cid/ciw192. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-pdf/63/1/64/6711273/
ciw192.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw192.
Takeuchi-Storm, Nao et al. (2023). “Presence and Persistence of Listeria monocytogenes
in the Danish Ready-to-Eat Food Production Environment”. In: Hygiene 3.1, pp. 18–32.
ISSN: 2673-947X. DOI: 10.3390/hygiene3010004. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2673-
947X/3/1/4.
Schjorring, Susanne et al. (Dec. 2017). “Cross-border outbreak of listeriosis caused by
cold-smoked salmon, revealed by integrated surveillance and whole genome sequenc-
ing (WGS), Denmark and France, 2015 to 2017”. In: EUROSURVEILLANCE 22.50,
pp. 8–12. ISSN: 1025-496X. DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2017.22.50.17-00762.
Gillesberg Lassen, S. et al. (2016). “Two listeria outbreaks caused by smoked fish consumption—
using whole-genome sequencing for outbreak investigations”. In: Clinical Microbiol-
ogy and Infection 22.7, pp. 620–624. ISSN: 1198-743X. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/j.cmi.2016.04.017. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1198743X16301148.
Helwigh, Birgitte and Luise Müller, eds. (2018). Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark
2017. English. Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark. Technical University of Den-
mark.
Helwigh, Birgitte, Channie Kahl Petersen, and Mia Torpdahl, eds. (2020). Annual Report
on Zoonoses in Denmark 2019. English. Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark. Tech-
nical University of Denmark.
Lassen, Brian et al., eds. (2023). Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark 2022. English.
Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark. DTU Food.
Lewis, H. C. et al. (2009). “Outbreaks of Shigella sonnei infections in Denmark and Aus-
tralia linked to consumption of imported raw baby corn”. In: Epidemiology and Infection
137.3, pp. 326–334. DOI: 10.1017/S0950268808001829.
Muller, L. et al. (June 2009). “Imported fresh sugar peas as suspected source of an out-
break of Shigella sonnei in Denmark, April – May 2009”. In: Eurosurveillance 14.24.
ISSN: 1560-7917.
Menge, Christian (2020). “The Role of Escherichia coli Shiga Toxins in STEC Colonization
of Cattle”. In: Toxins 12.9. ISSN: 2072-6651. DOI: 10.3390/toxins12090607. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2072-6651/12/9/607.
Soborg, B et al. (2013). “A verocytotoxin-producing E. coli outbreak with a surprisingly
high risk of haemolytic uraemic syndrome, Denmark, September-October 2012”. In:
Eurosurveillance 18.2, 20350. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2807/ese.18.02.20350-en. URL:
https://www.eurosurveillance.org/content/10.2807/ese.18.02.20350-en.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
75
==PAGE:87==
Helwigh, Birgitte, Anna Irene Vedel Sørensen, and Steen Ethelberg (2013). Annual Report
on Zoonoses in Denmark 2012. English. Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark. The
National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark.
Helwigh, Birgitte, Channie Kahl Petersen, and Luise Müller, eds. (2019). Annual Report on
Zoonoses in Denmark 2018. English. 2nd ed. Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark.
Kuhn, K. G. et al. (2013). “A long-lasting outbreak of Salmonella Typhimurium U323 as-
sociated with several pork products, Denmark, 2010”. English. In: Epidemiology and
Infection 141.2, pp. 260–268. ISSN: 0950-2688. DOI: 10.1017/S0950268812000702.
Helwigh, Birgitte, Anne Louise Krogh, and Luise Müller (2011). Annual Report on Zoonoses
in Denmark 2010. English. ISSN: 0909-3837. National Food Institute, Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark.
Stroup, D. F. et al. (Mar. 1989). “Detection of aberrations in the occurrence of notifiable
diseases surveillance data”. In: Statistics in medicine 8.3, pp. 323–329. ISSN: 0277-
6715. DOI: 10.1002/sim.4780080312.
Wolfinger, Russell D. and Xihong Lin (1997). “Two Taylor-series approximation methods
for nonlinear mixed models”. In: Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 25.4. Cited
by: 87, pp. 465–490. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-9473(97)00012-1. URL: https://www.scopus.
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-0031222254&doi=10.1016%2fS0167-9473%2897%
2900012-1&partnerID=40&md5=dbf7ca1e47d836029af4044ff9880463.
Lee, Y. and J. A. Nelder (1996). “Hierarchical Generalized Linear Models”. In: Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 58.4, pp. 619–678. ISSN:
00359246. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2346105 (visited on 05/16/2023).
Fisher, R. A. and Edward John Russell (1922). “On the mathematical foundations of theo-
retical statistics”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character 222.594-604, pp. 309–
368. DOI: 10.1098/rsta.1922.0009. eprint: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/pdf/10.
1098/rsta.1922.0009. URL: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rsta.1922.
0009.
Kristensen, Kasper et al. (2016). “TMB: Automatic Differentiation and Laplace Approxi-
mation”. In: Journal of Statistical Software 70.5, pp. 1–21. DOI: 10.18637/jss.v070.i05.
Griewank, Andreas and Andrea Walther (2008). Evaluating Derivatives. Second. Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. DOI: 10.1137/1.9780898717761. eprint: https:
//epubs.siam.org/doi/pdf/10.1137/1.9780898717761. URL: https://epubs.siam.org/doi/
abs/10.1137/1.9780898717761.
Fournier, David A. et al. (2012). “AD Model Builder: using automatic differentiation for sta-
tistical inference of highly parameterized complex nonlinear models”. In: Optimization
Methods and Software 27.2, pp. 233–249. DOI: 10.1080/10556788.2011.597854. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/10556788.2011.597854. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/10556788.
2011.597854.
Hintze, Jerry L. and Ray D. Nelson (1998). “Violin Plots: A Box Plot-Density Trace Syn-
ergism”. In: The American Statistician 52.2, pp. 181–184. DOI: 10.1080/00031305.1998.
10480559. eprint: https : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1080 / 00031305 . 1998 .
10480559. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00031305.1998.10480559.
Bjerregård, Mathias Blicher, Jan Kloppenborg Møller, and Henrik Madsen (2021). “An in-
troduction to multivariate probabilistic forecast evaluation”. In: Energy and AI 4, p. 100058.
ISSN: 2666-5468. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyai.2021.100058. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666546821000124.
Good, I. J. (1992). “Rational Decisions”. In: Breakthroughs in Statistics: Foundations and
Basic Theory. Ed. by Samuel Kotz and Norman L. Johnson. New York, NY: Springer
76
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:88==
New York, pp. 365–377. ISBN: 978-1-4612-0919-5. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4612-0919-5_24.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-0919-5_24.
Gneiting, Tilmann and Adrian E Raftery (2007). “Strictly Proper Scoring Rules, Prediction,
and Estimation”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 102.477, pp. 359–
378. DOI: 10.1198/016214506000001437. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437.
Condell, O. et al. (2016). “Automated surveillance system for hospital-acquired urinary
tract infections in Denmark”. In: Journal of Hospital Infection 93.3. Cited by: 7, pp. 290–
296. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2016.04.001. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-84965047492&doi=10.1016%2fj.jhin.2016.04.001&partnerID=40&md5=
02773b9c98c0bb1aa96633de924d50fb.
Gubbels, Sophie et al. (2017). “National automated surveillance of hospital-acquired bac-
teremia in Denmark using a computer algorithm”. In: Infection Control and Hospital
Epidemiology 38.5. Cited by: 16, pp. 559–566. DOI: 10.1017/ice.2017.1. URL: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85017657147&doi=10.1017%2fice.
2017.1&partnerID=40&md5=3a1da21170a0d88a4c14f9b932776d7d.
Schønning, Kristian et al. (2021). “Electronic reporting of diagnostic laboratory test results
from all healthcare sectors is a cornerstone of national preparedness and control of
COVID-19 in Denmark”. In: APMIS 129.7, pp. 438–451. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/
apm.13140. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/apm.13140. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/apm.13140.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
77
==PAGE:89==
78
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:90==
A
Some probability functions
This chapter serves as a reference, specifying notation, properties, and moments related
to the distributions used in this master thesis. The presentation of these probability func-
tions are greatly inspired by Madsen and Thyregod (2011). The densities and first two
moment are briefly summarized in Table A.1.
Name
Support
Density
E[Y ]
V[Y ]
Poisson
Pois(λ)
0, 1, 2, . . .
λ ∈R+
λy
y! exp(−λ)
λ
λ
Gamma
G(α, β)
R+
α ∈R+, β ∈R+
1
Γ(α)β

y
β
α−1
exp(−y/β)
αβ
αβ2
Neg. Bin.
NB(r, p)
0, 1, 2, . . .
r ∈R+, p ∈]0, 1]
r + y −1
y

pr(1 −p)y
r(1+p)
p
r(1−p)
p2
Normal
N(µ, σ2)
R
µ ∈R, σ2 ∈R+
1
σ
√
2π exp

−(y−µ)2
2σ2

µ
σ2
Table A.1: Density, support, mean value, and variance for a number of distributions used
in this master thesis.
A.1
The Poisson distribution model
A discrete random variable Y , that can assume the values 0, 1, 2, · · · is said to follow a
Poisson distribution with the parameter λ, if the density function of Y is of the form
f(y) = λy
y! exp(−λ)
(A.1)
for y = 0, 1, 2, · · ·, where 0 < λ. The notation Y ∼Pois(λ) is short for the above.
The mean and variance are
E[Y ] = λ
V[Y ] = λ
(A.2)
A.2
The Gamma distribution model
A continuous random variable Y , which can take all real non-negative values, is said to
follow the Gamma distribution with parameters α and β if the distribution of Y can be
described by a density function of the form
f(y) =
1
Γ(α)β
 y
β
α−1
exp(−y/β)
(A.3)
for y ∈R+, with α ∈R+ and β ∈R+. Short notation for the above is Y ∼G(α, β). The
parameter α is called the shape parameter, and β is a scale parameter for the distribution.
The mean and variance are
E[Y ] = αβ
V[Y ] = αβ2
(A.4)
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
79
==PAGE:91==
A.3
The Negative Binomial distribution
A discrete random variable Z with support 0, 1, 2, · · ·, is said to be distributed according to
the Negative Binomial distribution model if the probability mass function for Z is
f(z) =
r + z −1
z

pr(1 −p)y
(A.5)
for y = 0, 1, 2, · · ·. The Negative Binomial distribution describes the “waiting time”, i.e., the
number of “successes” before the r’th failure in a sequence of independent Bernoulli trials
where the probability of success in each trial is p. Short notation for this is Z ∼NB(r, p).
The mean and variance are
E[Y ] = r(1 + p)
p
V[Y ] = r(1 −p)
p2
(A.6)
A.4
The Gaussian distribution model
A continuous random variable Y , which can take all real values, is said to follow the
Gaussian distribution with parameters µ and σ2 if the distribution of Y can be described
by a density function of the form
f(y) =
1
σ
√
2π exp

−(y −µ)2
2σ2

(A.7)
for y ∈R, with µ ∈R and σ2 ∈R+. Short notation for the above is Y ∼N(µ, σ2). The
parameter µ represents the mean, and σ2 the variance of the distribution.
Hence, the mean and variance are
E[Y ] = µ
V[Y ] = σ2
(A.8)
80
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:92==
B
State-of-the-art detection algorithm
B.1
Controls
In the function farringtonFlexible, which is accessible from the R package surveil-
lance, users can select either the original Farrington method or the improved method
by Noufaily by specifying the appropriate control arguments. The choice of algorithm
variant is determined by the contents of the control slot.
In the example provided,
con.farrington indicates the use of the original method, while con.noufaily represents
the options for the improved method.
B.1.1
Case studies
Here, the specific control arguments used in the case studies is provided.
con.farrington <- list(
range = NULL, b = 3, w = 2,
reweight = TRUE, weightsThreshold = 1,
verbose = TRUE, glmWarnings = TRUE,
alpha = 0.05, trend = TRUE, pThresholdTrend = 0.05,
limit54 = c(0,4), powertrans = "2/3",
fitFun = "algo.farrington.fitGLM.flexible",
populationOffset = TRUE,
noPeriods = 1, pastWeeksNotIncluded = NULL,
thersholdMethod = "delta"
)
con.noufaily <- list(
range = NULL, b = 3, w = 2,
reweight = TRUE, weightsThreshold = 2.58,
verbose = TRUE, glmWarnings = TRUE,
alpha = 0.05, trend = TRUE, pThresholdTrend = 1,
limit54 = c(0,4), powertrans = "2/3",
fitFun = "algo.farrington.fitGLM.flexible",
populationOffset = TRUE,
noPeriods = 10, pastWeeksNotIncluded = NULL,
thersholdMethod = "nbPlugin"
)
B.1.2
Simulation study
Here, the specific control arguments used in the simulation studies is provided.
con.farrington <- list(
range = NULL, b = 5, w = 3,
reweight = TRUE, weightsThreshold = 1,
verbose = TRUE, glmWarnings = TRUE,
alpha = 0.005, trend = TRUE, pThresholdTrend = 0.05,
limit54 = c(0,4), powertrans = "2/3",
fitFun = "algo.farrington.fitGLM.flexible",
populationOffset = TRUE,
noPeriods = 1, pastWeeksNotIncluded
= 3,
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
81
==PAGE:93==
thersholdMethod = "delta"
)
con.noufaily <- list(
range = NULL, b = 5, w = 3,
reweight = TRUE, weightsThreshold = 2.58,
verbose = TRUE, glmWarnings = TRUE,
alpha = 0.005, trend = TRUE, pThresholdTrend = 0.05,
limit54 = c(0,4), powertrans = "2/3",
fitFun = "algo.farrington.fitGLM.flexible",
populationOffset = TRUE,
noPeriods = 10, pastWeeksNotIncluded
= 26,
thersholdMethod = "nbPlugin"
)
82
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:94==
C
Clusters reported to The Food- and
waterborne Outbreak Database
In this chapter, all the clusters of Listeriosis (LIST), Shigellosis (SHIL), Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-
producing Escherichia coli (STEC), and Salmonellosis (SALM) reported to The Food- and
waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) is presented. These clusters are summarized in
Table C.1.
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM re-
ported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
Salmonella
43
Private party
Unknown
809
Shigella flexneri
17
Private party
Unknown
795
S. Agona
4
Canteen
Composite meal
810
S. Agona
NA
General outbreak
Unknown
859
S. Enteritidis
40
Private party
Unknown
873
S. Enteritidis
NA
Tourists from Greece
Unknown
861
S. Derby
NA
General outbreak
Pork
875
S. Derby
22
General outbreak
Unknown
874
S. Kottbus
5
General outbreak
Unknown
784
S. Typhimurium U312b
NA
Slaughterhouse
Pork
863
S. Typhimurium U288
39
Food producer
Pork
855
S. Typhimurium DT 135b
109
General outbreak
Unknown
854
S. Typhimurium DT 3b
61
General outbreak
Unknown
853
S. Typhimurium DT 120
53
Shop
Pork (ham)
852
S. Stanley
5
General outbreak
Fresh vegetables
860
S. Chester
9
General outbreak
Unknown
796
Listeria monocytogenes
3
Other
Other meat
878
Listeria monocytogenes
8
Restaurant/catering
Beef
887
S. Enteritidis
4
Other
Unknown
871
S. Enteritidis PT 13a
NA
General outbreak
Eggs
917
S. Enteritidis PT 13a
86
Swimming meet
Eggs
928
S. Enteritidis PT 6a
NA
Abroad
Unknown
906
S. Enteritidis PT 11
NA
Regionel outbreak
Unknown
892
S. Enteritidis PT 8
150
General outbreak
Eggs
891
S. Typhimurium
53
Regionel outbreak
Unknown
945
S. Typhimurium DT 17
8
General outbreak
Unknown
902
S. Typhimurium DT 135a
90
General outbreak
Unknown
854
S. Typhimurium U292a
228
General outbreak
Unknown
788
S. Typhimurium DT 3a
30
General outbreak
Unknown
883
Shigella sonnei
4
Private party
Molluscs/Shellfish
894
Shigella sonnei
NA
General outbreak
Fresh vegetables
888
VTEC O157
3
Private home
Unknown
997
Listeria monocytogenes
9
National
Fish
1035
S. Enteritidis
NA
Tourists in Egypt
Unknown
977
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
83
==PAGE:95==
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM
reported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
(continued)
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
S. Enteritidis
NA
Tourists in Spain
Unknown
1038
S. Typhimurium DT104
8
Regional
Unknown
967
S. Typhimurium U292
19
National
Unknown
1010
S. Typhimurium DT10
7
Restaurant, Bulgaria
Unknown
1027
S. Typhimurium DT41
9
Tourists in Egypt
Unknown
1044
S. Typhimurium U323
172
National
Pork/pork
products
979
S. Typhimurium
DT120/DT7
20
National
Pork/deer
product
996
S. 4,5,12:i:- U311
9
National
Unknown
1045
S. 4,5,12:i:- DT120
13
National
Unknown
995
S. Infantis
87
Hotel
Composite meal
1039
S. Virchow
3
Private party
Chicken
994
S. Umbilo
4
National
Unknown
1000
VTEC
103
Canteen
Composite meal
1098
Salmonella spp.
4
Restaurant
Buff et meals
1074
S. Typhimurium DT104
NA
Shop
Pork products
(imp/dk)
1116
S. Typhimurium DT120
22
National
Pork products
(imp)
1067
S. Aberdeen
20
Private party
Buff et meals
1101
S. Strathcona
NA
National
Tomatoes (imp)
1112
Shigella flexneri
38
Private party
Buff et meals
1088
Shigella flexneri
32
Private party
Buff et meals
1087
S. Bareilly
11
Restaurant
Unknown
1215
S. Mikawasima
3
National
Unknown
1206
S. 4,5,12:i:-, MLVA0006
64
Canteens
Beef
1191
S. 4,5,12:i:-, MLVA0006
24
National
Beef
1192
S. 1,4,5,12:i:-, MLVA0126
9
Private party
Composite meal
1185
S. 4,5,12:i:-, MLVA0201
6
Restaurant
Buffet meal
1199
S. Saintpaul
3
Shop
Duck (imp)
1193
S. Typhimurium DT120,
MLVA0007
15
Shop
Pork
1245
S. Typhimurium DT120,
MLVA0995
7
Regional
Unknown
1186
S. Typhimurium DT120,
MLVA0006
6
Regional
Unknown
1200
S. Poona
10
National
Unknown
1174
VTEC O157
4
Regional
Unknown
1159
VTEC O157
14
National
Beef
1210
S. Enteritidis
12
National
Unknown
1327
S. Mikawasima
11
National
Unknown
1314
S. Typhimurium DT120,
MLVA0007b
22
Shop
Pork
1245
S. Typhimurium U312,
MLVA0550
43
National
Pork
1254
84
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:96==
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM
reported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
(continued)
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
S. Typhimurium,
MLVA0008
7
Regional
Unknown
1305
S. Typhimurium,
MLVA0642
6
Restaurant
Composite meal
1348
S. Typhimurium,
MLVA0817
7
National
Unknown
1258
L. monocytogenes,
MLST224d,e
41
National
Cold cuts
1373
L. monocytogenes,
MLST391
8
National
Unknown
1376
L. monocytogenes,
MLST399
6
Hospital
Composite meal
1384
L. monocytogenes,
MLST6
6
National
Fish
1385
S. Agonab
8
National
Unknown
1317
S. Enteritidis,
MLVA0206c,g
5
National
Unknown
1327
S. Enteritidis, MLVA0017
4
National
Chicken (imp)
1391
S. Enteritidis, MLVA0019
18
National
Eggs
1379
S. Infantis
8
Restaurant
Chicken (imp)
1380
S. Infantis
5
Regional
Unknown
1370
Salmonella 1,4,5,12:i:-,
MLVA0201
25
National
Pork
1372
S. Typhimurium,
MLVA1788
12
National
Unknown
1410
Salmonella 1,4,12:i:-,
MLVA0007
22
Shop
Pork
1368
Salmonella 1,4,5,12:i:-,
MLVA1277
19
National
Minced beef
1374
Salmonella 1,4,5,12:i:-,
MLVA0008
38
Sports event
Unknown
1378
Salmonella 1,4,5,12:i:-,
MLVA0334
5
Private party
Pork
1446
Shigella sonnei
5
Canteen
Sugar snaps
(imp)
1408
VTEC O103:H2, eae and
ehxA, vtx1a
5
National
Unknown
1377
VTEC O157:H-, eae,
vtx1a, vtx2a
4
Institution
Unknown
1392
VTEC O157:H7, eae,
vtx1a, vtx2a
7
Restaurant
Beef
1409
L. monocytogenes
MLST224a
2
Unknown
Unknown
1452
Salmonella 4,5,12:i:-,
MLVA0479b
6
National
Unknown
1487
Salmonella Newport
6
Restaurant
Composite meal
1453
Salmonella Oranienburgc
14
National
Unknown
1469
VTEC O157:H7, eae,
vtx1a, vtx2c
3
Restaurant
Kebab
1463
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
85
==PAGE:97==
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM
reported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
(continued)
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
L. monocytogenes
MLST391
2
National
Fish
1376
L. monocytogenes
MLST399
2
National
Composite meal
1384
L. monocytogenes MLST6
4
National
Fish
1385
L. monocytogenes ST6
3
Regional
Unknown
1574
L. monocytogenes ST4
7
National
Cold cuts of meat
1525
Salmonella Enteritidis,
MLVA0051d
6
Restaurant
Unknown
1531
Salmonella O:4,12;H:i:-,
MLVA1776
5
National
Unknown
1548
Salmonella O:4,5,12;-:-,
MLVA0126
16
Regional
Pork meat
1521
Salmonella O:4,5,12;H:i:-,
MLVA0338b
12
International
Dried spicy
snack sausage
1504
Salmonella O:4,5,12;H:i:-,
MLVA0478b
9
National
Unknown
1515
Salmonella O:4,5,12;H:i:-,
MLVA0617b,e
5
National
Composite meal
1558
Salmonella Reading
4
National
Unknown
1527
Salmonella Szentes
3
National
Unknown
1514
Salmonella Typhimurium,
MLVA0642
6
National
Unknown
1526
Salmonella Worthington
3
Regional
Unknown
1518
VTEC O103:H2, ST17
6
National
Unknown
1511
VTEC O121:H19, vtx2a,
eae, ehxA, ST655
5
Farm
Unknown
1520
VTEC O157:H7, vtx1a,
vtx2a, eae, ehxA, ST11
2
Regional
Unknown
1528
VTEC O157:H7, vtx1a,
vtx2c, ST11
6
Regional
Beef/Kebab
1530
L. monocytogenes, ST1b
1
National
Unknown
1592
L. monocytogenes,
ST1247
6
National
Unknown
1559
L. monocytogenes, ST55c
2
National
Unknown
1632
L. monocytogenes, ST6c
2
International
Sweet corn (imp)
1618
L. monocytogenes, ST8d
6
National
Smoked salmon
(imp)
1597
Salmonella Agona, ST13
10
National
Unknown
1589
Salmonella
Bovismorbificans,
ST1499b
7
National
Unknown
1593
Salmonella Enteritidis,
ST11
7
National
Unknown
1581
Salmonella Enteritidis,
ST11
6
National
Unknown
1582
Salmonella Enteritidis,
ST11
7
Private party
Composite meal
1585
86
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:98==
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM
reported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
(continued)
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
Salmonella O,4,5,12,H:i:-,
ST 34
10
Catering
Composite meal
1601
Salmonella O,4,5,12,H:i:-,
ST 34c
8
National
Unknown
1645
Salmonella O:4,5,12;H:i:-,
ST34
5
National
Unknown
1596
Salmonella O:4,12;H:i:-
13
National
Pork meat
1577
Salmonella O:4,5,12;H:i:-,
MLVA0617b
16
National
Composite meal
1558
Salmonella O:4,5,12;H:i:-,
MLVA0617, ST34
4
Regional
Unknown
1624
Salmonella Tennessee,
ST3288c
8
Regional
Unknown
1600
Salmonella Typhimurium
6
Regional
Unknown
1580
Salmonella Typhimurium,
MLVA1919
5
National
Unknown
1572
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST19
13
National
Dried pork
sausage (imp)
1603
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST2212
3
International
Dried pork
sausage (imp)
1615
Salmonella Worthington,
ST592
4
National
Unknown
1599
STEC O103:H2, ST17
4
National
Unknown
1621
STEC O131:H5
15
Restaurant
Buffet meal
1584
STEC O157:H7, ST11
3
National
Unknown
1620
STEC O157:H7, ST11
2
Regional
Unknown
1622
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST20a
4
Regional
Unknown
1691
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST8
5
National
Unknown
1652
Salmonella O:4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34
11
Private party
Pork meat
1681
Salmonella Enteritidis,
ST11
10
National
Unknown
1699
Salmonella Kottbus,
ST212
12
National
Unknown
1690
Salmonella Mikawasima,
ST1815
9
National
Unknown
1689
Salmonella Newport,
ST45
5
National
Unknown
1765
Salmonella O:4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34
17
National
Pork meat
1710
Salmonella O:4,[5],12:i:-,
ST5296
43
National
Raw pork
sausage, pork
meat
1713
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST19
4
National
Pork meat
1666
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST19
6
National
Unknown
1762
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
87
==PAGE:99==
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM
reported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
(continued)
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST36
8
National
Leafy greens,
rocket
1675
STEC O111:H8, ST16
7
National
Unknown
1702
STEC O26:H11, ST21
39
National
Cured dried beef
sausage
1707
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST1e
3
Retail, delicatessen
Salads
1592
Salmonella Coeln,
ST1995
26
National
Unknown
1790
Salmonella Derby, ST682
11
National
Pork meat
1787
Salmonella Enteritidis,
ST11
8
National
Unknown
1845
Salmonella London,
ST155
4
National
Unknown
1820
Salmonella Mikawasima,
ST1815
3
International
Vegetables,
lettuces
1828
Salmonella Muenchen,
ST82
4
International
Unknown
1801
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34#79
14
National
Pork meat
1772
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34#107
5
National
Pork meat
1771
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34#34
57
International
Minced beef /
beef meat
1728
STEC O157:H7, ST11
13
National
Unknown
1791
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST7#7
4
National
Unknown
1914
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST394#1
2
International
Hot-smoked trout
1910
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST451#2
2
Regional
Hot-smoked fish
products
1890
Salmonella Coeln,
ST1955#5
6
Regional
Unknown
1909
Salmonella Dublin,
ST10#22
7
National
Unknown
1908
Salmonella Kasenyi,
ST4546#1
12
National
Unknown
1888
Salmonella Kottbus,
ST1669#1
36
Restaurant
Unknown
1879
Salmonella Strathcona,
ST2559#1
25
International
Unknown
1883
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST36#6
7
National
Unknown
1898
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST19#60
4
Private party
Unknown
1913
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i.-,
ST34#25
6
National
Unknown
1901
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i.-,
ST34#123
9
National
Unknown
1900
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i.-,
ST34#127
9
National
Unknown
1899
88
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:100==
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM
reported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
(continued)
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
Shigella sonnei
44
National
Fresh mint (imp)
1893
STEC O55:H7 ST335#1
8
National
Unknown
1911
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST398#1
3
National
Unknown
2005
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST7#4
9
National
Unknown
1970
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST7#6
5
National
Unknown
1966
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST5#1
10
National
Unknown
1941
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST11#1
11
National
Unknown
1939
Salmonella
Bovismorbificans,
ST1499#4
8
Take-away
Chicken meat
2008
Salmonella Braenderup,
ST22#2
41
International
Sugar melons
1954
Salmonella Chester,
ST1954#6
8
International
Unknown
1989
Salmonella Enteritidis,
ST11#117
3
International
Eggs
2019
Salmonella Enteritidis,
ST11#142
26
National
Eggs
2009
Salmonella Litchfield,
ST214#1
7
International
Unknown
1991
Salmonella Mikawasima,
ST1815#13
4
National
Unknown
1981
Salmonella Montevideo,
ST2327#1
11
National
Unknown
1964
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i.-,
ST34#146
11
National
Unknown
2039
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST36#9
9
National
Unknown
1992
Salmonella Typhimurium,
ST36#7
52
International
Dietary
supplement,
psyllium
1917
Salmonella multiple
serotypes
6
International
Tahini
1988
Shigella sonnei, ST152#4
9
Canteen
Buffet meals
2031
Shigella sonnei, ST152#3
3
National
Unknown
1948
Shigella sonnei, ST152#2
12
Canteen
Ready-to-eat
salads
1940
STEC O12:H6, ST583#10
9
National
Unknown
2033
STEC O157:H7, ST11#19
12
National
Unknown
2032
STEC O103:H2, ST12#22
5
National
Unknown
1973
STEC O103:H2, ST17#23
7
National
Unknown
1972
STEC O26:H11, ST21#14
4
National
Unknown
1959
E. coli multiple types
(EAEC, ETEC, STEC)
11
Take-away
Mixed food
2079
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
89
==PAGE:101==
Table C.1: Food- and waterborne disease clusters of LIST, SHIL, STEC, and SALM
reported in The Food- and waterborne Outbreak Database (FUD) (n=229), 2008-2022.
(continued)
Pathogen
No. of
patients
Setting
Suspected
source
FUD
no.
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST8
9
National
Cold-cut meat
2074
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST8
2
National
Unknown
2098
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST37
9
Regional
Unknown
2080
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST37
5
National
Unknown
2006
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST7
10
National
Fish patties
2127
Listeria monocytogenes,
ST1607
4
National
Unknown
1969
Salmonella Ball ST3502
3
International
Unknown
2118
Salmonella Enteritidis
ST11
5
National
Unknown
2161
Salmonella Enteritidis
ST11
24
National
Unknown
2084
Salmonella Jukestown
ST5005
6
International
Unknown
2078
Salmonella Mikawasima
ST185
9
National
Unknown
2087
Salmonella Strathcona
ST2559
6
National
Unknown
2117
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34
11
National
Unknown
2116
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34
6
National
Minced beef
2086
Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:-,
ST34
4
International
Chocolate
2067
Salmonella Typhimurium
ST36
15
National
Unknown
2100
Salmonella Typhimurium
ST36
5
Regional
Unknown
2088
STEC O145:H28 ST32
(stx2a)
11
National
Unknown
2083
STEC O26:H11 ST21
(stx2a) and
Campylobacter jejuni
ST19
5
Farm
Raw milk from
cow
2076
90
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:102==
D
Alarms by state-of-the-art methods in
the Listeriosis case study
In this chapter, the alarms generated by the Farrington et al. (1996) method and the sub-
sequently improved Noufaily et al. (2013) method is summarized in Table D.1.
Table D.1: Longtable
Farrington
Noufaily
Date
Age group
yt
Treshold
Alarm
Threshold
Alarm
<65 years
2
5.194
FALSE
6.173
FALSE
2011-08-01
65+ years
8
8.021
FALSE
7.089
TRUE
<65 years
3
3.940
FALSE
2.818
TRUE
2011-12-01
65+ years
5
7.927
FALSE
3.944
TRUE
<65 years
2
3.407
FALSE
2.765
FALSE
2012-01-01
65+ years
6
4.345
TRUE
3.366
TRUE
<65 years
1
3.594
FALSE
4.022
FALSE
2012-05-01
65+ years
4
2.444
TRUE
4.149
FALSE
<65 years
0
4.424
FALSE
4.351
FALSE
2012-07-01
65+ years
5
2.715
TRUE
5.386
FALSE
<65 years
3
5.565
FALSE
2.801
TRUE
2013-02-01
65+ years
2
4.349
FALSE
5.168
FALSE
<65 years
1
2.749
FALSE
4.097
FALSE
2013-09-01
65+ years
7
6.321
TRUE
7.232
FALSE
<65 years
0
4.384
FALSE
3.976
FALSE
2013-10-01
65+ years
6
4.551
TRUE
6.524
FALSE
<65 years
0
3.920
FALSE
2.789
FALSE
2014-01-01
65+ years
8
5.530
TRUE
8.012
FALSE
<65 years
2
2.751
FALSE
1.457
TRUE
2014-06-01
65+ years
4
5.615
FALSE
7.483
FALSE
<65 years
6
3.093
TRUE
1.711
TRUE
2014-07-01
65+ years
14
10.223
TRUE
8.139
TRUE
<65 years
6
3.093
TRUE
1.429
TRUE
2014-08-01
65+ years
14
11.690
TRUE
9.242
TRUE
<65 years
2
3.061
FALSE
1.902
TRUE
2014-09-01
65+ years
9
6.705
TRUE
7.673
TRUE
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
91
==PAGE:103==
Table D.1: (continued)
Date
Age group
yt
Treshold
Alarm
Threshold
Alarm
<65 years
3
2.474
TRUE
3.652
FALSE
2016-04-01
65+ years
1
5.990
FALSE
6.471
FALSE
<65 years
0
3.012
FALSE
2.840
FALSE
2016-10-01
65+ years
6
9.634
FALSE
4.166
TRUE
<65 years
0
2.609
FALSE
2.524
FALSE
2016-11-01
65+ years
4
4.978
FALSE
3.561
TRUE
<65 years
1
2.420
FALSE
2.368
FALSE
2016-12-01
65+ years
4
6.653
FALSE
3.359
TRUE
<65 years
0
2.228
FALSE
1.857
FALSE
2017-01-01
65+ years
8
6.005
TRUE
3.566
TRUE
<65 years
1
2.440
FALSE
1.863
FALSE
2017-04-01
65+ years
4
2.789
TRUE
3.997
TRUE
<65 years
3
4.541
FALSE
2.904
TRUE
2017-07-01
65+ years
4
3.736
TRUE
7.894
FALSE
<65 years
3
2.618
TRUE
3.872
FALSE
2018-02-01
65+ years
1
6.040
FALSE
6.948
FALSE
<65 years
0
3.569
FALSE
6.717
FALSE
2018-06-01
65+ years
6
5.935
TRUE
6.853
FALSE
<65 years
0
2.622
FALSE
3.543
FALSE
2019-02-01
65+ years
7
5.962
TRUE
6.526
TRUE
<65 years
2
3.446
FALSE
4.647
FALSE
2019-09-01
65+ years
7
6.686
TRUE
7.582
FALSE
<65 years
2
2.432
FALSE
1.870
TRUE
2021-03-01
65+ years
2
5.097
FALSE
4.526
FALSE
<65 years
5
1.905
TRUE
1.692
TRUE
2021-05-01
65+ years
1
5.209
FALSE
4.848
FALSE
<65 years
0
2.802
FALSE
3.105
FALSE
2021-07-01
65+ years
8
7.258
TRUE
7.149
TRUE
<65 years
1
2.595
FALSE
3.115
FALSE
2021-12-01
65+ years
5
4.979
TRUE
6.479
FALSE
<65 years
6
2.714
TRUE
2.997
TRUE
2022-05-01
65+ years
9
5.562
TRUE
6.692
TRUE
<65 years
3
2.957
TRUE
5.696
FALSE
2022-06-01
65+ years
11
6.700
TRUE
8.252
TRUE
92
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:104==
Table D.1: (continued)
Date
Age group
yt
Treshold
Alarm
Threshold
Alarm
<65 years
5
3.864
TRUE
7.405
FALSE
2022-10-01
65+ years
7
8.298
FALSE
11.943
FALSE
<65 years
3
3.481
FALSE
5.569
FALSE
2022-11-01
65+ years
11
7.213
TRUE
10.783
TRUE
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
93
==PAGE:105==
E
Figures and tables related to the case
studies
In this chapter, a full overview over the figures and tables related to the case studies of
Listeriosis (LIST), Shigellosis (SHIL), Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli
(STEC), and Salmonellosis (SALM) are included.
E.1
Listeriosis
Table E.1: LIST modeling results. The average logarithmic score, ¯S(G, y), is computed
for the constant fixed effects model. The parameters are estimated in a rolling window
with width k = 36 and the estimates at time t0, i.e. the last time point, are presented in this
table for both modeling frameworks. Confidence intervals for the parameter estimates are
calculated using 95% profile likelihood confidence intervals.
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
Poisson Normal
¯S(G, y) = 3.75
ˆβ<65years
15.5977
[15.24, 15.91]
ˆβ65+years
15.1128
[14.83, 15.35]
log(ˆσ)
-0.8077
[-1.77, -0.35]
Poisson Gamma
ˆβ<65years
15.7017
[15.38, 16.01]
ˆβ65+years
15.2058
[14.96, 15.45]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.5751
[-3.57, -0.67]
Figure E.1: Considering LIST in the time period between January 2011 and December
2022. Estimate (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confidence interval (dashed line) of
ˆθ for the constant fixed effects model estimated using the rolling window with a width of
k = 36 months.
94
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:106==
E.2
Shigellosis
Table E.2: SHIL modeling results. The average logarithmic score, ¯S(G, y), is computed
for all the fixed effects models. The parameters are estimated in a rolling window with
width k = 36 and the estimates at time t0, i.e. the last time point, are presented in this
table for both modeling frameworks. Confidence intervals for the parameter estimates are
calculated using 95% profile likelihood confidence intervals.
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
Poisson Normal
Constant
¯S(G, y) = 5.3
ˆβ<25years
14.5005
[14.11, 14.84]
ˆβ25+years
16.5011
[16.2, 16.76]
log(ˆσ)
-0.5421
[-0.98, -0.19]
Trend
¯S(G, y) = 5.23
ˆβtrend
0.0270
[0.01, 0.05]
ˆβ<25years
15.0142
[14.55, 15.44]
ˆβ25+years
17.0063
[16.59, 17.4]
log(ˆσ)
-0.5975
[-1.06, -0.24]
Seasonality
¯S(G, y) = 5.28
ˆβ<25years
14.5056
[14.14, 14.83]
ˆβ25+years
16.4979
[16.22, 16.73]
ˆβsin
-0.3420
[-0.62, -0.07]
ˆβcos
0.3249
[0.05, 0.6]
log(ˆσ)
-0.7804
[-1.45, -0.35]
Combined
¯S(G, y) = 5.25
ˆβtrend
0.0260
[0.01, 0.05]
ˆβ<25years
15.0083
[14.55, 15.43]
ˆβ25+years
16.9888
[16.58, 17.37]
ˆβsin
-0.1290
[-0.41, 0.15]
ˆβcos
0.2826
[0.01, 0.56]
log(ˆσ)
-0.7095
[-1.27, -0.32]
Poisson Gamma
Constant
¯S(G, y) = 5.3
ˆβ<25years
14.6592
[14.31, 15]
ˆβ25+years
16.6720
[16.41, 16.94]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.0376
[-1.87, -0.39]
Trend
¯S(G, y) = 5.24
ˆβtrend
0.0239
[0.01, 0.04]
ˆβ<25years
15.1054
[14.67, 15.53]
ˆβ25+years
17.1086
[16.73, 17.5]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.1757
[-2.08, -0.5]
Seasonality
¯S(G, y) = 5.27
ˆβ<25years
14.6073
[14.27, 14.93]
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
95
==PAGE:107==
Table E.2: (continued)
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
ˆβ25+years
16.5995
[16.36, 16.84]
ˆβsin
-0.3498
[-0.62, -0.08]
ˆβcos
0.3317
[0.05, 0.61]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.4570
[-2.68, -0.67]
Combined
¯S(G, y) = 5.25
ˆβtrend
0.0240
[0.01, 0.04]
ˆβ<25years
15.0931
[14.67, 15.51]
ˆβ25+years
17.0766
[16.7, 17.47]
ˆβsin
-0.1271
[-0.4, 0.15]
ˆβcos
0.2854
[0.01, 0.56]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.3831
[-2.49, -0.64]
96
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:108==
Figure E.2: Considering SHIL in the time period between January 2011 and December
2022. Estimate (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confidence interval (dashed line) of
ˆθ for the considered fixed effects models estimated using the rolling window with a width
of k = 36 months.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
97
==PAGE:109==
E.3
Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli
Table E.3: STEC modeling results. The average logarithmic score, ¯S(G, y), is computed
for all the fixed effects models. The parameters are estimated in a rolling window with
width k = 36 and the estimates at time t0, i.e. the last time point, are presented in this
table for both modeling frameworks. Confidence intervals for the parameter estimates are
calculated using 95% profile likelihood confidence intervals.
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
Poisson Normal
Constant
¯S(G, y) = 17.89
ˆβ<1year
11.7028
[11.41, 11.97]
ˆβ1−4years
13.8781
[13.61, 14.13]
ˆβ5−14years
14.6666
[14.42, 14.9]
ˆβ15−24years
15.0082
[14.75, 15.26]
ˆβ25−64years
17.3903
[17.15, 17.63]
ˆβ65+years
16.2941
[16.03, 16.54]
log(ˆσ)
-0.8608
[-1.12, -0.63]
Trend
¯S(G, y) = 14.87
ˆβtrend
0.0508
[0.04, 0.06]
ˆβ<1year
12.6621
[12.38, 12.93]
ˆβ1−4years
15.3254
[15.11, 15.54]
ˆβ5−14years
15.7844
[15.55, 16.01]
ˆβ15−24years
16.3031
[16.08, 16.52]
ˆβ25−64years
18.8483
[18.65, 19.05]
ˆβ65+years
17.7083
[17.51, 17.91]
log(ˆσ)
-0.8741
[-1.05, -0.71]
Seasonality
¯S(G, y) = 14.58
ˆβ<1year
11.7751
[11.48, 12.06]
ˆβ1−4years
14.4147
[14.18, 14.64]
ˆβ5−14years
14.8871
[14.64, 15.13]
ˆβ15−24years
15.4167
[15.19, 15.64]
ˆβ25−64years
17.9597
[17.76, 18.16]
ˆβ65+years
16.8271
[16.62, 17.03]
ˆβsin
-0.5125
[-0.64, -0.38]
ˆβcos
-0.0983
[-0.23, 0.03]
log(ˆσ)
-0.5651
[-0.71, -0.42]
Combined
¯S(G, y) = 14.18
ˆβtrend
0.0442
[0.04, 0.05]
ˆβ<1year
12.5572
[12.3, 12.81]
ˆβ1−4years
15.2251
[15.03, 15.41]
ˆβ5−14years
15.6763
[15.46, 15.88]
ˆβ15−24years
16.1862
[15.99, 16.38]
ˆβ25−64years
18.7354
[18.56, 18.9]
ˆβ65+years
17.5977
[17.43, 17.77]
ˆβsin
-0.3402
[-0.44, -0.25]
98
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:110==
Table E.3: (continued)
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
ˆβcos
-0.0556
[-0.15, 0.04]
log(ˆσ)
-1.1158
[-1.33, -0.92]
Poisson Gamma
Constant
¯S(G, y) = 19.79
ˆβ<1year
11.7954
[11.53, 12.04]
ˆβ1−4years
13.8443
[13.61, 14.08]
ˆβ5−14years
14.8027
[14.6, 15]
ˆβ15−24years
15.1239
[14.91, 15.33]
ˆβ25−64years
17.2872
[17.07, 17.51]
ˆβ65+years
16.1486
[15.91, 16.39]
log(ˆϕ)
-2.4552
[-3.89, -1.7]
Trend
¯S(G, y) = 14.94
ˆβtrend
0.0499
[0.04, 0.06]
ˆβ<1year
12.7353
[12.46, 13]
ˆβ1−4years
15.4253
[15.22, 15.64]
ˆβ5−14years
15.8612
[15.64, 16.09]
ˆβ15−24years
16.3741
[16.16, 16.59]
ˆβ25−64years
18.9102
[18.72, 19.11]
ˆβ65+years
17.7576
[17.56, 17.96]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.7281
[-2.07, -1.41]
Seasonality
¯S(G, y) = 14.63
ˆβ<1year
11.9352
[11.66, 12.21]
ˆβ1−4years
14.6130
[14.4, 14.83]
ˆβ5−14years
15.0472
[14.82, 15.28]
ˆβ15−24years
15.5434
[15.33, 15.77]
ˆβ25−64years
18.0941
[17.9, 18.3]
ˆβ65+years
16.9806
[16.79, 17.19]
ˆβsin
-0.5067
[-0.63, -0.38]
ˆβcos
-0.0750
[-0.21, 0.05]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.1541
[-1.42, -0.89]
Combined
¯S(G, y) = 14.15
ˆβtrend
0.0438
[0.04, 0.05]
ˆβ<1year
12.6075
[12.34, 12.85]
ˆβ1−4years
15.2839
[15.09, 15.47]
ˆβ5−14years
15.7232
[15.51, 15.92]
ˆβ15−24years
16.2339
[16.03, 16.42]
ˆβ25−64years
18.7678
[18.6, 18.94]
ˆβ65+years
17.6451
[17.47, 17.82]
ˆβsin
-0.3350
[-0.43, -0.24]
ˆβcos
-0.0415
[-0.14, 0.05]
log(ˆϕ)
-2.2059
[-2.63, -1.82]
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
99
==PAGE:111==
Figure E.3: Considering STEC in the time period between January 2011 and December
2022. Estimate (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confidence interval (dashed line) of
ˆθ for the considered fixed effects models estimated using the rolling window with a width
of k = 36 months.
E.4
Salmonellosis
100
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:112==
Table E.4: SALM modeling results. The average logarithmic score, ¯S(G, y), is computed
for all the fixed effects models. The parameters are estimated in a rolling window with
width k = 36 and the estimates at time t0, i.e. the last time point, are presented in this
table for both modeling frameworks. Confidence intervals for the parameter estimates are
calculated using 95% profile likelihood confidence intervals.
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
Poisson Normal
Constant
¯S(G, y) = 21.43
ˆβ<1year
11.7785
[11.52, 12.02]
ˆβ1−4years
13.9431
[13.75, 14.13]
ˆβ5−14years
14.9380
[14.74, 15.12]
ˆβ15−24years
15.0651
[14.87, 15.26]
ˆβ25−64years
17.9479
[17.81, 18.08]
ˆβ65+years
16.6484
[16.51, 16.79]
log(ˆσ)
-1.1211
[-1.35, -0.91]
Trend
¯S(G, y) = 18.48
ˆβtrend
0.0185
[0.01, 0.03]
ˆβ<1year
12.1153
[11.83, 12.39]
ˆβ1−4years
14.3075
[14.07, 14.54]
ˆβ5−14years
15.3753
[15.14, 15.6]
ˆβ15−24years
15.6231
[15.39, 15.84]
ˆβ25−64years
18.3590
[18.16, 18.56]
ˆβ65+years
16.9722
[16.77, 17.18]
log(ˆσ)
-0.8790
[-1.05, -0.71]
Seasonality
¯S(G, y) = 18.4
ˆβ<1year
11.8322
[11.59, 12.06]
ˆβ1−4years
13.9902
[13.81, 14.16]
ˆβ5−14years
14.9578
[14.77, 15.13]
ˆβ15−24years
15.0840
[14.89, 15.27]
ˆβ25−64years
17.9905
[17.87, 18.11]
ˆβ65+years
16.6379
[16.51, 16.76]
ˆβsin
-0.2556
[-0.35, -0.16]
ˆβcos
-0.0713
[-0.16, 0.02]
log(ˆσ)
-1.3075
[-1.61, -1.06]
Combined
¯S(G, y) = 17.89
ˆβtrend
0.0128
[0.01, 0.02]
ˆβ<1year
12.0119
[11.74, 12.28]
ˆβ1−4years
14.2187
[13.99, 14.44]
ˆβ5−14years
15.2753
[15.06, 15.49]
ˆβ15−24years
15.5252
[15.31, 15.74]
ˆβ25−64years
18.2585
[18.08, 18.44]
ˆβ65+years
16.8735
[16.68, 17.06]
ˆβsin
-0.2763
[-0.38, -0.17]
ˆβcos
-0.1079
[-0.21, -0.01]
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
101
==PAGE:113==
Table E.4: (continued)
Parameter
Estimate
95% CI
log(ˆσ)
-1.0284
[-1.23, -0.85]
Poisson Gamma
Constant
¯S(G, y) = 20.53
ˆβ<1year
11.8293
[11.57, 12.08]
ˆβ1−4years
14.0385
[13.84, 14.23]
ˆβ5−14years
14.9949
[14.79, 15.19]
ˆβ15−24years
15.2123
[15.02, 15.41]
ˆβ25−64years
18.1409
[18, 18.29]
ˆβ65+years
16.7187
[16.57, 16.87]
log(ˆϕ)
0.0000
[NA, 0.03]
Trend
¯S(G, y) = 18.6
ˆβtrend
0.0186
[0.01, 0.03]
ˆβ<1year
12.2004
[11.92, 12.47]
ˆβ1−4years
14.3957
[14.17, 14.63]
ˆβ5−14years
15.4791
[15.26, 15.7]
ˆβ15−24years
15.7329
[15.52, 15.95]
ˆβ25−64years
18.4455
[18.25, 18.64]
ˆβ65+years
17.0377
[16.84, 17.24]
log(ˆϕ)
-1.7579
[-2.1, -1.44]
Seasonality
¯S(G, y) = 18.41
ˆβ<1year
11.8688
[11.63, 12.09]
ˆβ1−4years
14.0303
[13.85, 14.2]
ˆβ5−14years
14.9963
[14.82, 15.17]
ˆβ15−24years
15.1163
[14.93, 15.3]
ˆβ25−64years
18.0284
[17.91, 18.15]
ˆβ65+years
16.6702
[16.54, 16.8]
ˆβsin
-0.2525
[-0.34, -0.16]
ˆβcos
-0.0677
[-0.16, 0.02]
log(ˆϕ)
-2.6121
[-3.2, -2.13]
Combined
¯S(G, y) = 17.95
ˆβtrend
0.0124
[0.01, 0.02]
ˆβ<1year
12.0685
[11.8, 12.33]
ˆβ1−4years
14.2816
[14.06, 14.5]
ˆβ5−14years
15.3429
[15.13, 15.55]
ˆβ15−24years
15.6014
[15.4, 15.8]
ˆβ25−64years
18.3038
[18.13, 18.49]
ˆβ65+years
16.9192
[16.74, 17.11]
ˆβsin
-0.2706
[-0.37, -0.17]
ˆβcos
-0.1049
[-0.2, -0.01]
log(ˆϕ)
-2.0716
[-2.48, -1.7]
102
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
==PAGE:114==
Figure E.4: Considering SALM in the time period between January 2011 and December
2022. Estimate (solid line) and 95% profile likelihood confidence interval (dashed line) of
ˆθ for the considered fixed effects models estimated using the rolling window with a width
of k = 36 months.
Automated and Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks
103
==PAGE:115==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
