==PAGE:1==
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms
as Compared to Real Rooms
Master Thesis
Georgios Papadimitriou
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
Master Thesis
July 2023
By
Georgios Papadimitriou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørst­
eds Plads Building 352 DK, DTU, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
electro.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Engineering
Acoustics, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science
in Engineering Acoustics. It was conducted during the semester of Spring 2023
and it corresponds to 30 ECTS credits. The project has been carried out under the
supervision of Jonas Brunskog, associate professor in DTU Electro Department
of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Greta Öhlund Wistbacka, assistant pro­
fessor in Uppsala University Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences,
and Franz Maria Heuchel, postdoctoral researcher in DTU Electro Department of
Electrical and Photonics Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the area of acoustics.
Georgios Papadimitriou ­ s212869
Signature
Date
ii
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
While most of the research in the field of room acoustic has been focused on
enhancing the listener’s experience, there is an increasing interest in exploring
speech production as related to room conditions. In this manner, scientists from
three Nordic universities developed an experimental set­up for acoustic and visual
simulations of rooms.
This project implemented this set­up in order to investigate speech production in
real and virtual environments by exploring the speakers’ voice adjustment when
talking in them. It, further, aimed to evaluate how speakers react to virtual en­
vironments and their level of adaptation to them. To do so, an experiment was
conducted, where thirteen (13) participants were audio­recorded while speaking
in eight different rooms, under two different scenarios. The real scenario con­
tained an anechoic room, a long underground corridor, a lecture room, and a
reverberation chamber. The virtual scenario included their acoustic simulations,
using real­time auralization of a speaker’s voice in a 64­loudspeaker array in an
anechoic room, and their visual simulations, presented in virtual reality. The room
acoustic parameters examined were reverberation time, voice support and room
gain, while the speech parameters measured were voice sound pressure level
and fundamental frequency.
The findings of the said study highlight a similar influence of room acoustic pa­
rameters in speech production between the two scenarios and that participants
do adjust their voices in virtual environments. However, there is a contrasting
behavior between sexes with male participants adapting much more in the virtual
rooms than females.
Keywords: Virtual Acoustics, Room Acoustics, Speech Production, Simulated
Environments, Visual Simulation, Virtual Reality (VR), Voice Support, Room Gain.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Georgios Papadimitriou, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
This project marks the end of a wonderful two­year journey in Denmark. Coming
to a new country to study at a high­level university gave me new perspectives and
opportunities that I couldn’t dream of before. I met plenty of great people, made
good friends and transformed each difficulty into an experience. Going out of our
comfort zone is not always easy but the lessons we learn are invaluable.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to the following individuals whose
unwavering support, guidance, and encouragement have played a pivotal role in
the completion of this thesis:
First and foremost, I am indebted to my esteemed supervisors, Jonas Brunskog,
Greta Öhlund Wistbacka, and Franz Heuchel. Their profound expertise, invalu­
able insights, and dedication to academic excellence have been instrumental in
shaping the direction and quality of this research. I am truly grateful for their men­
torship, patience (especially Franz on this one), and continuous support through­
out this journey.
I would also like to extend my heartfelt appreciation to my family for their uncondi­
tional love and belief in me. Their sacrifices and endless support have made this
achievement possible, and I am forever grateful. To my close friends, thank you
for always being there, offering a listening ear, and lifting me up when I needed it.
Also, special thanks to my lovely flatmates Ioanna and Charis with whom I shared
this memorable experience.
A special mention goes to my loving girlfriend, Anastasia. Your unwavering sup­
port, understanding, and belief in me have been my guiding light through the good
and bad times of this journey.
Lastly, I would like to extend my gratitude to all the individuals who contributed
to this research project in various capacities, whether through their participation,
advice, or resources. Your involvement has been invaluable and has greatly en­
hanced the quality and depth of this work.
iv
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background
4
2.1
Vocal parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Voice components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Reverberation Time and Decay Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Methodology & Experimental Set Up
7
3.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Recording Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Statements for Subjective Ratings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.6
AVIL Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.7
Processing of Voice Recordings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.8
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Results
16
4.1
Voice Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Fundamental Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Subjective Impressions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Discussion
34
5.1
Suggestions for Future Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
A
AVIL Implementation
42
A.1 Laboratory Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.2 Real­time Convolution System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.3 Computing Reproduction Filters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.4 Calibration of the Reproduction Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B
T30 and GRG Regression Plots
44
C
ODEON Rooms Specs
45
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Oral communication is a multi­factorial procedure that involves the human voice
and hearing, as well as, exogenous factors of the environment. At first, under­
standing the fundamental components and principles of voice production is es­
sential in exploring how individuals perceive and adapt their own voices. On the
other hand, room acoustic conditions also have a strong impact on voice produc­
tion, and should be optimized to supplement the speaker. While much research
has concentrated on enhancing the listener’s acoustic experience and designing
rooms for optimal sound perception by the audience, it is equally important to pri­
oritize the speaker’s experience. Therefore, it is imperative to dedicate additional
efforts to considering the speaker’s perspective in order to foster effective oral
communication.
The production of human voice involves a complex interplay of physiological pro­
cesses, encompassing the respiratory system, vocal folds, vocal tract, and artic­
ulators. When air from the lungs passes through the vocal folds, they vibrate,
creating sound waves. These sound waves then travel through the vocal tract,
consisting of the throat, mouth, and nasal cavities, where further modifications
occur, resulting in the formation of specific speech sounds. The coordination and
control of these mechanisms allow us to produce speech and communicate effec­
tively.
While speaking, individuals are often aware of their own voice and make neces­
sary adjustments to adapt to the surrounding environment. The speaker can hear
their voice (also called sidetone) by two different media; mechanical vibrations
transmitted through the body (body­conducted sound) and sound waves propa­
gating in through the air (airborne sound), which travel to the cochlea. Both ways
are equally significant in self­perception, as reported by Reinfeldt et al [1].
The perception of one’s own voice through the air encompasses several com­
ponents. Firstly, there is the direct transmission of airborne sound between the
mouth and the ears.
This transmission is influenced by phenomena such as
diffraction around the head and scattering at the pinna, the outer part of the ear.
These effects shape the characteristics of the sound waves and contribute to our
perception of our own voice.
Additionally, the environment plays a crucial role in how we hear ourselves. Sound
waves emitted by the speaker can be reflected at the boundaries of the surround­
ing space and then return to the listener’s ears. This component, known as re­
flected sound or indirect sound, further contributes to our perception of our own
voice. This component can also be influenced by the electroacoustic amplification
systems used in certain environments.
Understanding how individuals adjust their voices to different environments is an­
other intriguing aspect. One phenomenon related to vocal adjustment is the Lom­
bard effect [2]. This effect refers to the instinctive behavior of raising our voices
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
1
==PAGE:10==
when the background noise increases. It is a natural adaptive mechanism aimed
at maintaining communication clarity in noisy environments. Exploring the mech­
anisms and underlying principles of vocal adjustment can have significant impli­
cations in various applications, such as speech communication systems, virtual
reality, and acoustic design.
The influence of the room acoustics on the speakers’ vocal behavior has also been
investigated by examining the room effect, which is a product of the relationship
between the room parameters voice support (STv) and room gain (GRG) and be­
havioral speech parameters, such as voice level [3, 4]. Voice support measures
the strength of the speaker’s voice reflection as related to the strength of the direct
sound. Room gain measures the level of amplification of the speaker’s voice at
his ear by using only the airborne paths. Speakers tend to modify their voice lev­
els depending on the auditory feedback caused by sidetone, which is influenced
by the room response in the form of reflections. Previous studies measured voice
level variations between ­0.78 to +0.84 dB per each dB change in STv and be­
tween ­13.5 to ­1.6 dB per each dB change in GRG [3, 5, 6, 7]. The decay time
derived from the impulse response measured between the mouth and the ear of
the speaker DT40 is also correlated to the modification of voice by the speakers.
Furthermore, it has been reported that speakers have a tendency to adapt their
voice production based on their perception of how effectively they are being heard
by the listeners [3]. The distance between the speaker and the listener has also
been described as a factor influencing the vocal loudness of the speaker [8, 9, 10].
In particular, they suggest that the voice level is increased linearly with the loga­
rithm of the distance between the speaker and the listener. In both these cases,
the effect of distance was found to be between 1 and 2 dB per double distance,
and it also depends on the acoustic conditions of the room. The more reverberant
a place is, the less the effect of the distance on the voice level. In addition, it is im­
portant to acknowledge the significant role of fatigue in influencing how individuals
adjust their voices during speech [3, 11]. Speaking under challenging conditions
can result in an elevated voice level, and if this situation occurs frequently, it may
contribute to the development of voice problems [12].
Apart from physical experiments and field studies conducted, for example, in
classrooms, there is also an increased interest in simulated room acoustic en­
vironments. Laboratory research conducted by Pelegrín García and Brunskog [3]
produced promising results on how to use simulated acoustic conditions, in or­
der to measure the room effect on the speaker’s vocal behavior. Following these
guidelines, Öhlund­Wistbacka et al [8] developed a complete experimental setup
at DTU’s Audio­Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL), which is an anechoic room with a
spherical loudspeaker array for sound field reproduction. One major improvement
as compared to older experiments is the inclusion of the visual environment sim­
ulated in virtual reality and presented by a Virtual Reality (VR) headset. Including
also a virtual audience gives the opportunity to create even more realistic exper­
imental conditions and can possibly induce the test participants to perform the
speech task more efficiently. Previous studies discuss the advantages of using
VR in training people who stutter to speak in public and report that they had similar
behavioral and cognitive experiences with virtual audiences as they had with real
2
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:11==
ones [13].
The scope of this project is to make use of the experimental set­up for simulated
acoustic and visual environments, created by Öhlund­Wistbacka et al [8], to in­
vestigate whether and how speakers adjust their voices when talking in different
environments. Additionally, it aims to examine the impact of virtual acoustic and
visual environments on voice production and the degree to which speakers adapt
to these simulated environments. This is done by comparing the results of two
speech­production experiments conducted in real rooms and in their virtual simu­
lated versions. The rooms chosen are all located in DTU’s acoustics department
and include the reverberation chamber in Building 355, lecture room 019 in Build­
ing 352, and a long underground corridor between these two buildings. The virtual
environments experiment has been conducted in DTU’s AVIL room in Building 354
with exactly the same set­up used by Öhlund­Wistbacka et al.
The experiment included thirteen participants speaking in a total of eight rooms,
in two different scenarios; four real and four virtual rooms, while being audio­
recorded. The virtual rooms are simulations of the real ones created by simulating
the acoustic environments in Odeon Room acoustics Software, and the visual
environments in Unity. As part of the experiment, the participants were asked
to give their subjective impressions by rating their experience in all the rooms.
This was achieved by answering questions asked by the test coordinator after
each room trial. The recordings were processed to extract the voice level and
fundamental frequency, in order to investigate the participants’ speaking behavior
in the different rooms and scenarios.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Vocal parameters
The human voice can be described by three dimensions; loudness, pitch and
quality. In this project, vocal loudness and pitch are analyzed as vocal sound
pressure level (SPL) and fundamental frequency (F0) respectively, in order to
examine the participants’ speech behavior.
Vocal loudness refers to the perceived loudness of one’s voice and measures the
amount of acoustic power carried by the sound waves produced during speech.
Hereby, it is represented by the equivalent on­axis, free­field sound pressure level
(SPL) at 1m in front of the talker.
Fundamental frequency (F0) describes the number of vibrations per second of
the vocal folds during the production of voiced sounds and it plays a crucial role in
communication and speech perception. F0 is perceived as the pitch of the voice
by the auditory system. Female speakers have thinner and shorter vocal folds,
which vibrate with double the frequency of the males’, hence their voice exhibits
higher fundamental frequency [14].
These vocal parameters, vocal loudness and fundamental frequency are affected
by several external factors and may vary significantly depending on the situation.
Speaking with excessive background noise leads to raised voice level and F0, and
a shift of the total energy towards high frequencies. However, when speaking in
quieter environments the speakers feel that they are easier to be heard by others,
they tend to lower both their voice levels and F0, the phenomenon called ”Lombard
Effect” or ”Cocktail Party Effect” [2]. Other factors that may have an effect on vocal
parameters are the acoustic environment, distance to the listener and the use of
amplification methods.
Vocal loudness, fundamental frequency, along with phonation time and spectral
distribution can be combined to account for the changes in voice production re­
quired for communication at different environments and distances [15].
2.2
Voice components
As mentioned earlier, speakers hear their voice through sidetone. That includes
body­conducted sound; mechanical vibrations transmitted through the body, and
airborne sound; sound waves propagating in through the air. The latter contains
the direct transmission of airborne sound between the mouth and the ears and the
reflected, or indirect, sound that is reflected at the boundaries of the environment
and then returns to the listener’s ears.
2.3
Reverberation Time and Decay Time
Reverberation time T30 represents the time needed for the sound pressure level
to decay by 30 dB and is defined as:
4
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:13==
T30 = 60
30(t−35dB −t−5dB) [dB]
(2.1)
Decay time DT40 refers to the duration it takes for the integrated energy curve of
an impulse response, measured between the mouth and the ears, to reduce by
60 dB after the initial arrival of the direct sound and it is derived from the initial
decay at 40 dB. It is defined by the following formula:
DT40 = 60
40(t−40dB −t0dB) [dB]
(2.2)
where t−40dB represents the time when the reverse integrated energy curve is 40
dB lower than before the direct sound arrives at t0.
2.3.1
Room Gain and Voice Support
The reflected sound is strongly dependent on the acoustics of the environment
and is lower than the body­conducted and direct airborne components of one’s
voice. Its significance can be justified by two measures introduced by Brunskog
et al [4], room gain and voice support.
Room gain (GRG) represents the degree of amplification caused by the room to
the speaker’s own voice during speech production. The room gain is defined as:
GRG = 10logED + ER
ED
[dB]
(2.3)
where ED is the airborne direct sound energy and ER is the reflected sound en­
ergy. It can also be determined by:
GRG = LE,r −LE,d
(2.4)
where LE,r is the level of the total energy including the direct and reflective com­
ponents between the mouth and the ears, and LE,d is the level of direct energy
between the mouth and the ears. The magnitude of room gain ranges between 0
and 2 dB in usual rooms.
Voice support STV represents the energy ratio in dB between the reflected and
direct airborne sound and can be found by:
STV = 10log ER
ED
[dB]
(2.5)
or
STV = LE,r −LE,d
(2.6)
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
5
==PAGE:14==
where LE,r is the level of the reflected sound. The direct and reflected sounds are
extracted from a single impulse response measured between the mouth and the
ears. The values of voice support range between ­20 and ­5 dB in normal rooms.
Room gain and voice support are connected by:
GRG = 10log

10
STV
10 + 1

[dB]
(2.7)
and it is worth mentioning that changes in these two room parameters, voice sup­
port and room gain, affect behavioral speech parameters, for instance, voice SPL.
This is described by room effect, which according to Brunskog, is the slope of the
linear relationship between room gain or voice support and voice level [3]. More
precisely, room effect refers to how much the vocal loudness changes in dB per
dB change of voice support or room gain.
Moreover, as Pelegrín García et al propose [16], voice support STV,i is speech
weighted in different frequency bands, as shown in Table 2.1.
Center frequency [Hz]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Lref,ears [dB]
58.0
69.1
73.5
71.7
69.0
63.0
Table 2.1: Speech levels in the eardrum in octave bands
The overall speech­weighted direct sound level eLD and the overall speech­weighted
reflected sound level eLR are calculated as follows:
eLD = 10log
 
6
X
i=1
10
Lref,ears,i
10
!
[dB]
(2.8)
eLR = 10log
 
6
X
i=1
10
Lref,ears,i+STV,i
10
!
[dB]
(2.9)
The speech weighted voice support f
ST V is derived from:
f
ST V = eLR −eLD = 10log
P6
i=1 10
Lref,ears,i+STV,i
10
P6
i=1 10
Lref,ears,i
10
(2.10)
6
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:15==
3
Methodology & Experimental Set
Up
In this section, the experimental procedure and the related methods utilised will
be presented, along with the technical procedures that took place during the ex­
periment. The experiment was based on recording the speech from thirteen par­
ticipants speaking to one listener at a fixed distance, in four different rooms under
two different scenarios. In the meantime, participants were also given ten state­
ments after each trial, in order to subjectively rate their experience. The speech
signals were processed to calculate measures of vocal loudness and fundamental
frequency. The participants’ answers to the statements were analyzed in order to
extract information about their experience during the experiment.
3.1
Participants
Seven male and six female participants aged between 22 and 32 years of age
went through the experimental procedure, as speakers. None of them reported
any hearing and visual impairments or vocal disorders. All subjects spoke in their
native language during the tests and they were encouraged beforehand to think
of possible topics they could talk about, such as hobbies, travel, and studies. The
room’s visual and acoustical environments were changed simultaneously by the
test coordinator.
3.2
Conditions
The experiment consisted of two phases, which were presented to the partici­
pants in random order; the real rooms and the virtual ones. The room order was
kept identical in both of the scenarios for each participant, in order to avoid bi­
ases caused by talking in such different acoustic environments one after the other.
The real scenario contained a total of four rooms: the anechoic room, the lecture
room, the reverberation chamber, and the corridor. The virtual scenario included
the simulations of the aforementioned rooms presented in AVIL. After every room
trial, the participant was asked to rate some statements regarding the experience,
which was done by the test coordinator asking them and keeping track of the par­
ticipant’s answers.
In the real scenario, the participants were placed in each room at the same speci­
fied point every time wearing the head­mounted microphone, and they were asked
to speak for 3 minutes while the test leader acted as the audience. In addition,
the statements were presented immediately after the speech, before moving to
the next room.
In the virtual scenario, the participant was placed on the chair in the center of the
loudspeaker array, wearing the head­mounted microphone and the VR HMD, as
shown in Figure 3.1. He/she was asked to speak for 3 minutes in each room, to
a virtual audience of a standing avatar.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
7
==PAGE:16==
The distance was chosen to be fixed at 4 m in every room due to the limited space
in AVIL, which was used as the anechoic room during the experiment. The floor
dimensions of the room are 8×8 and the chair is positioned in the middle so the
longest possible distance to use was 4 m.
Figure 3.1: Participant in AVIL positioned in the center of the loudspeaker array
wearing the VR headset and the head­worn microphone. The measurement mi­
crophone can be seen on the left side, 1 m from the participant’s mouth.
3.3
Recording Equipment
The recording equipment was always the same, the DPA­4088 head­mounted
microphone (DPA Microphones A/S, Denmark) and the B&K 4192 measurement
microphone, connected to a B&K Nexus conditioning amplifier TYPE 2690­A­0F2,
and placed at 1 m distance in front of the participant. In the real rooms, they were
connected to a Focusrite Scarlett 2i2 sound card and ran by the same MAX 8
patch via laptop, while in AVIL the equipment was connected to the system as
described in section A.1.
3.4
Instructions
The following text was given to each participant before the experiment. It con­
tains a short description of the experimental procedure and points out specific
instructions that need to be followed while doing the experiment.
8
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:17==
”OwnAura is investigating the talker’s voice in two different environ­
ments; real rooms and virtual reality.
The experiment runs in two
phases, which will be in random order for each subject: the real rooms
part consists of four different rooms located at DTU’s acoustic depart­
ment, while the virtual reality takes place in the Audio­Visual Immersive
Lab (AVIL) and uses VR models.
Your task is to speak freely for 3 minutes in each room about a topic
that you choose beforehand (can be hobbies, studies, vacation, etc).
Also, in the beginning of the AVIL part, you will be asked to speak for 1
minute in order to calibrate the system based on your voice. You may
use your native tongue in order to be more comfortable. In every room,
there will be a person acting as your audience. That person won’t be
responding or nodding to you, however, you need to focus your speech
on him and to speak in a way that makes you feel that he can hear you.
Moreover, after each trial, you will be asked 10 questions evaluating
your experience in the different rooms. The test coordinator will guide
you through every stage and instruct you when to start and stop talking.
There are two microphones recording your speeches, one that you
wear as a headset and one placed at 1m distance in front of you. More­
over, in the virtual reality part, you will wear an additional VR headset
where the different rooms will be presented. Try to stand still and move
your head as little as possible during the experiment in order to keep
the microphones intact. Do not remove any of the equipment without
being instructed to do so.
For any questions or further explanation, please refer to the test coor­
dinator.”
3.5
Statements for Subjective Ratings
This section presents the statements that participants were asked to rate during
the experiment, following each room. They represent the subjective evaluation
of the experiment. The answer to each statement is a number between 1 and 10
where: 1 – do not agree at all, and 10 ­ completely agree. The last two statements
were asked only in the virtual rooms as they only refer to the acoustic and visual
simulations. Moreover, the participants were also asked to estimate their distance
to the audience.
The statements are formed as follows:
1. The room helps me to speak comfortably.
2. It is easy for me to make myself heard in the room.
3. My voice reverberates in the room as I speak.
4. The room feels acoustically dry or damped.
5. I succeeded well with the task I was asked to perform.
6. I needed to make an effort to perform as I did.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
9
==PAGE:18==
7. The task made me feel insecure, irritated or stressed.
8. The task was fun.
9. The sound environment feels realistic.
10. The visual environment feels realistic.
3.6
AVIL Setup
As mentioned earlier, a speaker can hear their voice through body conduction,
direct airborne transmission and reflections from the environment. In the real
scenario, the varied acoustic conditions of each room change the environment
in which each participant speaks.
The purpose of the setup used in the virtual scenario was to substitute the reflec­
tions of the laboratory room with those of another room, while preserving the body
conduction and the direct airborne transmission of the voice. This process can be
achieved by real­time auralization, which consists of room acoustic simulation,
computing convolution filters, calibration of filters and real­time reproduction and
data acquisition.
This process was implemented in the Audio­Visual Immersive Lab (AVIL), shown
in Figure 3.2, a laboratory that contains distant loudspeakers that reproduce an
acoustic environment through real­time convolution, whereas the totally absorb­
ing (anechoic) environment attenuates the actual room reflections, while keeping
body conduction and direct airborne transmission intact.
The voice of the speaker, as seen in Figure 3.6, in the anechoic room was picked
up by a head­worn microphone, digitalized and sent to the computer system,
which applied an equalizer filter that adjusts the spectral balance of the speech
signal to match that of the speech in front of the talker and the acoustic effect of
the virtual room (RIR) by means of convolution. The resulting signal was amplified
and reproduced through the 64 loudspeakers.
The acoustics of each room were calculated before with the following procedure:
A computer­based geometrical room model was imported in an acoustic simula­
tion software to extract the information about the early reflections and the direc­
tional energy curves, which were then processed with the LoRA (Loudspeaker­
based Room Auralization system) toolbox [17] and produced a room impulse re­
sponse output suitable for the actual loudspeaker reproduction layout in the form
of 64 WAV files containing impulse responses. The geometrical room models,
the acoustic simulations and the virtual reality models were created by the author,
specifically for this project, and they are described below. The implementation in
AVIL was previously designed by Franz Maria Heuchel (fmheu@dtu.dk) for the
experiment run by Öhlund­Wistbacka.
A detailed description of the laboratory facility, the real­time convolution system
and the computation and calibration of the reproduction filters can be found in
Appendix A, as it has been done by Heuchel in “Vocal comfort in simulated room
acoustic environments experimental setup and protocol development” [8].
10
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Audio­Visual Immersive Lab
3.6.1
Room Acoustic Simulations
The rooms acoustics models were created according to Pelegrín García [18], in
order to investigate the acoustic behavior of each room and to extract the early
reflections and directional decay curves, which are then used to compute the re­
production filters. The tools used for that procedure are SketchUp [19], for build­
ing the geometrical room models, and ODEON Room Acoustics Software [20], for
creating the geometrical acoustic simulations. The real rooms’ impulse responses
(RIR) were measured, in order to extract their acoustic parameters and calibrate
the Odeon models to acoustically simulate them. The RIR were measured in ac­
cordance with ISO 3382­2 [21], using the method of integrated impulse response
as a means to obtain the acoustic parameters. They were conducted using Dirac
software with a B&K 4292 omnidirectional loudspeaker as the source and a B&K
4192 1/2’’ microphone as the receiver.
Each room model contains its most important details and furniture in order to be
consistent in terms of phenomena like absorption, reflections and scattering. The
surface properties are defined from Odeon’s existing global material list and their
absorption coefficients were adjusted by the Genetic Material Optimizer option,
to achieve a closer match to the measured results [20]. More details about the
materials used for each room model can be seen in Appendix C.
Figure 3.3 depicts the geometrical room models that were implemented in Odeon
and Figure 3.4 shows the tuning of reverberation time T30. The measured values
were extracted from the RIR measured in each room and the simulated values
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) Corridor
(b) Lecture Room
(c) Reverberation Room
Figure 3.3: Geometrical Room Models of the Different Rooms
are the ones achieved by the calibration of the models in Odeon.
Figure 3.4: T30 Tuning in Odeon Before Including Audience Materials
To model the speaking conditions, two audience boxes with material 11001 were
implemented to model the two persons acting as speaker and listener and placed
in the positions that are used in the real rooms experiment. The sound source,
placed at the speaker’s position, is Odeon’s BB93NormalNaturalSO8 which ap­
proximates the directivity pattern of the human voice. The receiver is an omnidi­
rectional microphone located 1 m in front of the source similar to the one used in
the experiment. The simulation settings were 5000 late rays, maximum reflection
order 2000, early reflections’ transition order 3 and impulse response length of
15000ms.
12
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:21==
3.6.2
Virtual Reality Simulation
The software used for simulating the visual environments is Unity, developed by
Unity Technologies, San Francisco, CA. The display is presented through an HTC
VIVE Pro Virtual Reality headset, manufactured by HTC Corporation, New Taipei
City, Taiwan. The SteamVR plugin from Valve Corporation, Bellevue, WA is used
to project the images to the headset. To avoid buffer under­runs in the audio
loop, Unity and MAX 8 are run on separate computers. [8]. The test participant
and audience are positioned similarly to the talker and listener in the real room
experiment. The audience is represented by a human avatar package called ”re­
alpeople.male” that replicates the test coordinator and is always located 4 meters
away from the listener.
The visual models of the four rooms are pictured in Figure 3.5.
(a) Anechoic Room
(b) Corridor
(c) Lecture Room
(d) Reverberation Chamber
Figure 3.5: Unity Models of the Different Rooms
3.6.3
Effective Room Acoustics Parameters
To accurately capture the room acoustic conditions as perceived by the human
ear, it is necessary to conduct separate measurements that deviate from the
calculations derived from the room impulse response (RIR) measurements and
acoustic simulations. This measurement procedure involves the utilization of a
head­and­torso simulator (HATS 4128; HBK Sound & Vibration Measurements
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
13
==PAGE:22==
A/S; Virum, Denmark). The HATS is equipped with built­in microphones posi­
tioned at the ear, allowing for the measurement of the impulse responses between
the mouth, acting as a loudspeaker, and the simulated ears.
These measurements were conducted in both real and virtual rooms using the
same equipment that will be used in the experiment in each case. In both scenar­
ios, the HATS is positioned at the participant’s location. The impulse responses
are measured using 30 sinusoidal sweeps of 240 s (frequency range: 1­20000
Hz, SR: 48 kHz) for each case, to achieve a good signal­to­noise ratio. During
the AVIL measurements, the HATS is also wearing the VR headset used in the
experiment, as VR HMDs have been seen to influence the head­related transfer
function and the sound localization [22, 23]. The personalized reproduction filters
are created in a similar manner as for a human participant, using white noise in­
stead of speech to estimate Hdirect,repr and then they are activated one by one, in
order to measure the impulse responses in each room simulation. For the ane­
choic case, a measurement with no filter activated was done in order to derive the
reference values for AVIL as a physical room.
The impulse responses are then used to obtain the room acoustic parameters,
therefore the effective measures represent the acoustic environment perceived
by the ears of the participant. For the computation of reverberation time, the first
5 ms were removed from the impulse responses in order to avoid the influence of
the direct sound on it. As the participant is not moving in the rooms and there is the
same person in all of them during the experiment, there is no need for averaging
measurements in different positions.
Table 3.1 showcases the parameters describing the room conditions perceived by
the speaker; reverberation time T30, decay time DT40, room gain GRG and voice
support STV , as well as, the volume of each room.
Rooms
Volume [m3]
T30 [s]
DT40 [s]
GRG [dB]
STV [dB]
Anechoic Chamber
336
0.2
0.1
0.08
­17
Corridor (Real)
450
2
1.8
1.1
­5.5
Corridor (Virtual)
1.9
1.5
0.8
­7
Lecture Room (Real)
186
0.6
0.5
0.2
­13
Lecture Room (Virtual)
0.58
0.3
0.17
­14
Reverb. Chamber (Real)
240
2.78
3.2
1.6
­3.5
Reverb. Chamber (Virtual)
2.6
2.6
1
­6
Table 3.1: Room Acoustic Parameters Measured at the Ears Using HATS
The just noticeable difference (JND) of reverberation time T30 is 5%, as estab­
lished by ISO3382­1:2009 [24]. The differences between the real and virtual mea­
surements for the lecture room and the corridor are within that range, while the
reverberation chamber has a deviation of 0.04 s.
14
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:23==
3.7
Processing of Voice Recordings
Voice SPL was extracted from the voice recordings by averaging the 3­minute
recordings measured in each room for each participant. To normalize the sound
pressure level to a distance of 1 meter, the transfer function between the head­
mounted microphone and the measurement microphone positioned 1 meter away
(Hrefl,repr) was used. The fundamental frequency (F0) of each participant in each
room was extracted automatically using speech analysis software Praat [25].
3.8
Statistical Analysis
The statistical analysis was carried out using linear mixed­effects models fitted to
the voice SPL and the F0. All analyses were performed in R version 4.3.0 [26]
with the lme4 library [27]. Participants were considered as random effects and the
room acoustic parameters, sex, scenario, and perceived distance were used as
main effects.
The top­down approach was implemented, starting with the full models and re­
moving the predictors that do not help out the model. These non­significant main
effects and interactions were evaluated with analysis of variance (ANOVA) and
the comparison of the Akaike information criterion [28].
The general mixed linear models are described by the expression:
y = Xβ + Zα + ϵ
(3.1)
where y is a vector of observations, X is a matrix of known covariates, β is a vector
of unknown regression coefficients called fixed effects, Z is a known matrix, α is
a vector of random effects, and ϵ is a vector of errors [29].
To analyze the current experimental results a total of six models were imple­
mented, divided into three for the voice SPL and three for the fundamental fre­
quency. Observations y is either Voice SPL or F0, fixed effects X are among
STV , GRG, T30, Distance, Sex, Scenario and their two­way interaction terms, and
random effect Z corresponds to the Participants.
In addition, box­plots are used to visualize the results and the variability of values
in the dataset. They illustrate the median, upper and lower quartiles, minimum
and maximum values, and any outliers existing in the data.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
15
==PAGE:24==
4
Results
After the completion of the experiment, all the recordings and subjective rating
answers were processed and analyzed in order to extract the results and their
correlations, which are presented in the following chapter.
4.1
Voice Level
This section is dedicated to the analysis of the voice SPL as it was measured
in the different rooms and compares it among different scenarios and different
sexes. Moreover, the relation between the voice SPL and other parameters, such
as STV , T30, GRG, Sex, Scenario, and Distance is illustrated in order to examine
how changes in the acoustic environment affect the voice level during speech
production.
Figure 4.1: Median Values and Interquartile Ranges of Vocal Levels for each Par­
ticipant. 1­7:Male, 8­13:Female
Figure 4.1 visualizes the median voice levels in dB for all 13 participants. Notably,
all participants’ voice levels fall within the range of 55 to 65 dB, which aligns with
the typical voice level of speech under normal conditions.
16
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.2: Median Values and Interquartile Ranges of Vocal SPL for Male (M)
and Female (F) Participants in the Different Rooms under Real (R) and Virtual (V)
Scenarios.
Figure 4.2 provides an overview of the median voice levels in dB for male and
female participants in each room and scenario. Differences in participants’ re­
sponses can be observed between the real and virtual rooms. In the real rooms,
male participants spoke with median values of 61 dB in the lecture room, 62 dB in
the anechoic room, 64 dB in the reverberation chamber, and 65 dB in the corridor.
Female participants exhibited voice levels of 61 dB in the lecture room, 59 dB in the
anechoic room, 62.5 dB in the corridor, and 83 dB in the reverberation chamber.
It is worth noting that there were minimal differences in voice levels between male
and female participants in the lecture room of the real scenario, while in the other
three real rooms, the differences ranged between only 1­3 dB.
In contrast, the virtual rooms displayed more distinct and noticeable differences
in voice levels. Male participants followed a similar pattern as in the real scenario
but with higher values in the corridor, lecture room, and reverberation chamber,
measuring 66 dB, 63 dB, and 66 dB, respectively. In the virtual anechoic chamber,
the median voice level was comparable to the real scenario at 61 dB.
On the other hand, female participants exhibited lower voice levels in the virtual
rooms. In the virtual anechoic chamber, the median voice level was again similar
to the real scenario at 58 dB. The most significant differences were observed in
the other three rooms, where the voice levels were 3­5 dB lower than in their
corresponding real rooms. Specifically, in the corridor, female participants spoke
with 57.5 dB, in the lecture room with 57 dB, and in the reverberation chamber
with 58.5 dB.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
17
==PAGE:26==
Interestingly, the corridor exhibits the larger deviation shows a larger deviation
of 5 dB from the real scenario. Therefore, a clear distinction can be observed
between male and female participants in terms of their voice levels within the
virtual scenario.
Figure 4.3: Median Values and Interquartile Ranges of Vocal SPL in Real (R) and
Virtual (V) Scenarios for Male (M) and Female (F) Participants.
In Figure 4.3, the median voice levels in dB and their interquartile ranges for fe­
male and male participants across the two scenarios are depicted. As expected,
male participants consistently exhibited louder voice levels in both real and virtual
scenarios compared to their female counterparts, with a median value of 62.5 dB.
However, it is worth mentioning that female participants displayed a discrepancy
in their voice levels between the two environments. In the real rooms, the median
voice level was measured at 61 dB, while in the virtual rooms, it decreased to 58
dB.
18
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.4: Linear Relationship Between Vocal SPL and Voice Support in Real
(R) and Virtual (V) Scenarios.
The relation between voice levels in dB and voice support in dB for each scenario
is illustrated in Figure 4.4. There is a clear correlation between the two values
with voice level increasing as STV rises. In the anechoic room, with voice support
of ­17 dB, the voice level hovers around 60 dB. As the STV becomes larger, such
as in the corridor and reverberation chamber where STV ranges from ­7 to ­3.5
dB, the voice level increases to approximately 63 dB. The significant influence of
voice support on voice level is confirmed by the statistical analysis demonstrated
in Table 4.1.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.5: Perceived Distances in the Different Rooms in Real (R) and Virtual (V)
Scenarios.
The perceived distance played a crucial role throughout the experiment, as par­
ticipants were asked to estimate the distance in each room they spoke in. An
interesting observation is that, in the real rooms, participants perceived the dis­
tance to be larger compared to the virtual scenario, aligning more closely with the
actual distance of 4 meters.
The median values of the perceived distances, as presented in Figure 4.5, indicate
that participants accurately estimated the distance in the real scenario. In the lec­
ture room, corridor, and reverberation chamber, the perceived distance matched
the actual 4­meter distance. In the anechoic room, the median perceived distance
was 3 meters, only 1 meter less than the actual distance.
In contrast, in the virtual rooms, participants perceived the distances to be slightly
shorter. On average, the perceived distance was judged as 1 meter less in the
lecture room, corridor, and reverberation chamber, and 0.5 meters less in the
anechoic room, as illustrated in Figure 4.5.
20
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.6: Linear Relationship Between the Vocal Level and Distance Under Real
(R) and Virtual (V) Scenarios.
Figure 4.6 displays the regression of voice levels in dB in relation to the perceived
distance. The slopes of the line segments suggest that as the distance increases,
participants tend to speak louder in virtual rooms compared to real rooms. In
virtual rooms, the voice SPL increases by 3 dB between the shortest and longest
perceived distances, while in real rooms, the increase is only 1.5 dB. However,
the correlation between distance and voice level did not prove to be statistically
significant, as shown in Table 4.1.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
21
==PAGE:30==
Model Ι Effect of STV . AIC = 416.6
V oice SPL = 65.496 + 0.273STV −0.611Distance + 2.211SexM
−6.561ScenarioV + 1.374Distance × ScenarioV
+3.225SexM × ScenarioV + u
Voice SPL
Fixed effects
F statistic
p
STV
F(1, 88.7) = 52.5
<.0001***
Distance
F(1, 94.3) = 0.04
0.8364
Sex
F(1, 10.9) = 11.4
0.0062**
Scenario
F(1, 87.9) = 9.5
0.0027**
Distance × Scenario
F(1. 88.6) = 7.6
0.0069**
Sex × Scenario
F(1, 86.7) = 19.9
<.0001***
Model ΙΙ Effect of T30. AIC = 459
V oice SPL = 60.588 + 1.367T30 −0.514Distance + 2.212SexM
−6.475ScenarioV + 1.282Distance × ScenarioV
+3.223SexM × ScenarioV + u
Voice SPL
Fixed effects
F statistic
p
T30
F(1, 88.4) = 51.3
<.0001***
Distance
F(1, 94.2) = 0.1
0.7329
Sex
F(1, 10.9) = 11.5
0.0060**
Scenario
F(1, 87.8) = 9.1
0.0033**
Distance × Scenario
F(1, 88.7) = 6.6
0.0115*
Sex × Scenario
F(1, 86.7) = 19.7
<.0001***
Model ΙΙΙ Effect of GRG. AIC = 459.9
V oice SPL = 61.001 + 2.612GRG −0.633Distance + 2.205SexM
−6.344ScenarioV + 1.369Distance × ScenarioV
+3.235SexM × ScenarioV + u
Voice SPL
Fixed effects
F statistic
p
GRG
F(1, 89.1) = 47.9
<.0001***
Distance
F(1, 93.6) = 0.01
0.8917
Sex
F(1, 10.9) = 11.4
0.0061**
Scenario
F(1, 87.9) = 8.4
0.0046**
Distance × Scenario
F(1, 88.5) = 7.3
0.0081**
Sex × Scenario
F(1, 86.7) = 19.4
<.0001***
Table 4.1: Summary results of the mixed­model Analyses of Variance for Voice
SPL. (AIC = Akaike information criterion. *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001)
22
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.1 presents a comprehensive analysis of the voice sound pressure level
(SPL). The statistical significance of the relationships between voice SPL and
the continuous variables, namely room parameters STV , T30, and GRG, has been
demonstrated. Holding all other variables constant, a 1 dB increase in voice sup­
port (STV ) is expected to result in a 0.271 dB increase in voice SPL. Similarly,
a 1­second increase in reverberation time (T30) is associated with a 1.367 dB in­
crease in voice SPL, while a 1 dB increase in room gain (GRG) leads to a 2.612
dB increase in voice SPL.
Furthermore, the relationships between voice SPL and the categorical variables
Sex and Scenario have also been found to be statistically significant. When all
other variables remain unchanged, the presence of male participants (SexM) cor­
responds to a 2.2 dB increase in voice SPL. In addition, being in the virtual sce­
nario (ScenarioV) is associated with a decrease in voice SPL ranging from 6.3 dB
to 6.5 dB.
Moreover, the two­way interactions of Distance×Scenario and Sex×Scenario ex­
hibit a statistically significant correlation to voice SPL. The effect of distance on
voice SPL depends on the scenario, with a bigger impact in the virtual scenario
compared to the real scenario. In particular, for every 1­meter increase in distance
within the virtual scenario, voice SPL is expected to increase by approximately 1.3
dB, assuming all other variables remain the same. Similarly, the influence of SexM
on voice SPL depends on the scenario.
In the virtual scenario, males have a greater positive impact on voice SPL com­
pared to females, with an increase of 3.235 dB, while holding all other variables
constant.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2
Fundamental Frequency
In this section, the fundamental frequency is examined and compared across the
various rooms and scenarios, considering the distinct characteristics of male and
female voices. Due to the nearly one­octave difference in fundamental frequency
between male and female voices, the analysis is conducted separately based on
the participants’ sex rather than averaging the results across all participants.
In Figure 4.7, the median values of the fundamental frequencies (F0) for each
participant are displayed.
Figure 4.7: Median values and interquartile ranges of fundamental frequency F0
for each participant. 1­7:Male, 8­13:Female
Figure 4.8 presents the mean values of the fundamental frequency (F0) for female
and male participants in each room under the two scenarios. In the anechoic room
under the real scenario, males’ F0 is 105 Hz and increases by 5 Hz in the virtual
scenario. In the lecture room and reverberation chamber, male voices show an
F0 of around 105 Hz under both scenarios. However, in the corridor, the F0 for
male voices increases to nearly 130 Hz in the real scenario and decreases to 100
Hz in the virtual.
24
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.8: Median values and interquartile ranges of F0 in the different rooms
under real (R) and virtual (V) for male (M) and female (F) participants.
On the other hand, female voices in the real scenario exhibit an F0 of 205, 210,
and 220 Hz in the anechoic room, corridor, and lecture room respectively, and
185 Hz in the reverberation chamber. In the virtual scenario, female participants
maintained their F0 only in the anechoic room and lowered it in the corridor and
lecture room by 10 Hz and in the reverberation chamber by 5 Hz. These findings
show different behavior in the pitch between male and female participants.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.9: Median values and interquartile ranges of F0 in real (R) and virtual (V)
scenarios for male (M) and female (F) participants.
Figure 4.9 illustrates the median values of the fundamental frequency for female
and male voices in both real and virtual scenarios. There are discernible differ­
ences between the two scenarios. For female voices, the F0 is 205 Hz in the real
rooms, while in the virtual ones, it decreases to 195 Hz. This difference of almost
a semitone suggests a slight lowering of the pitch in the virtual environment com­
pared to the real rooms. Similarly, for male voices, the F0 is 115 Hz in the real
rooms, whereas, in the virtual scenario, it decreases to 105 Hz. This difference
of 1.5 semitones indicates a more noticeable lowering of the pitch in the virtual
environment compared to the real rooms.
26
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.10: Linear Relationship Between STV and F0 in Real (R) and Virtual (V)
Scenarios.
The regression analysis of F0 for varying voice support values, depicted in Figure
4.10, reveals a noticeable disparity between the two scenarios. In the real sce­
nario, there is a minimal 2 Hz decrease in F0 across the range of extreme STV
values.
However, in the virtual scenario, F0 begins at 150 Hz for the lowest STV values
and gradually decreases by 10 Hz up to the highest STV values. This indicates a
more significant F0 decrease in the virtual scenario compared to the real scenario
which is confirmed by the statistical analysis shown in Table 4.2.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.11: Linear Relationship Between Perceived Distance in Meters and F0
in Real (R) and Virtual (V) Scenarios.
Figure 4.11 illustrates the regression analysis of F0 for perceived distances in both
scenarios. In the real scenario, F0 increases by 5 Hz per 1 meter, whereas, in the
virtual scenario it decreases by 3 Hz per 1 meter.
This discrepancy in the relationship between F0 and distance highlights the con­
trasting influence of distance in fundamental frequency between the two scenar­
ios. However, there is no statistically significant correlation between F0 and dis­
tance, as demonstrated in Table 4.2.
28
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:37==
Model I Effect of STV . AIC = 816.9
F0 = 181.749 −1.248STV + 2.099Distance
−74.474SexM −7.083ScenarioV
+1.351STV × SexM + u
F0
Fixed effects
F statistic
p
STV
F(1, 89.6) = 6.8
0.0109*
Distance
F(1, 97.9) = 0.9
0.3421
Sex
F(1, 17.7) = 69.1
<.0001***
Scenario
F(1, 96.1) = 4.8
0.0308*
STV × Sex
F(1, 87.3) = 10.9
0.0013**
Model ΙΙ Effect of T30. AIC = 805.2
F0 = 203.616 −7.325T30 + 2.299Distance
−98.546SexM −6.385ScenarioV
+7.437T30 × SexM + u
F0
Fixed effects
F statistic
p
T30
F(1, 89.2) = 11.2
0.0012**
Distance
F(1, 98) = 1.2
0.2815
Sex
F(1, 13.8) = 138.6
<.0001***
Scenario
F(1, 95.9) = 4.1
0.0467*
T30 × Sex
F(1, 87.2) = 13.4
<.0001***
Model ΙΙΙ Effect of GRG. AIC = 806.4
F0 = 202.201 −12.694GRG + 2.289Distance
−96.483SexM −7.491ScenarioV
+12.835GRG × SexM + u
F0
Fixed effects
F statistic
p
GRG
F(1, 89.8) = 8.6
0.0042**
Distance
F(1, 97.9) = 1.1
0.2996
Sex
F(1, 13.1) = 136.1
<.0001***
Scenario
F(1, 95.9) = 5.6
0.0204*
GRG × Sex
F(1, 87.3) = 10.9
0.0014**
Table 4.2: Summary results of the mixed­model Analyses of Variance for F0.
(AIC = Akaike information criterion. *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001)
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.2 provides a summary of the analysis conducted on the fundamental fre­
quency (F0). The correlation between F0 and the continuous variables, namely
room parameters STV , T30, and GRG proved statistically significant. Assuming all
other variables are held constant, a 1 Hz increase in voice support (STV ) results
in a reduction of 1.248 Hz in F0. Similarly, a 1­second increase in reverberation
time (T30) is associated with a decrease of 7.325 Hz in F0, while a 1 dB increase
in room gain (GRG) leads to a decrease of 12.694 Hz in F0.
Additionally, the relationships between F0 and the categorical variables Sex and
Scenario are also found to be statistically significant. Specifically, in the case
of male participants (SexM), F0 is linked to a decrease ranging between 74.474
Hz and 98.483 Hz, holding all other variables constant. Also, speaking in the
virtual scenario (ScenarioV) is associated with an approximate 7 Hz decrease in
F0 compared to the real scenario, assuming all other variables remain the same.
Finally, the interactions between room parameters and Sex exhibit a statistically
significant positive influence on the fundamental frequency. When all other vari­
ables are held constant, male participants are associated with an increase of 1.351
Hz in F0 per 1 dB increase of voice support (STV ), 7.437 Hz per 1­second increase
of reverberation time (T30), and 12.835 Hz per 1 dB increase of room gain (GRG).
4.3
Subjective Impressions
The ratings to the statements are presented below in ten charts showing the me­
dian values of the participants’ answers in the different rooms and scenarios. They
are categorized based on the statement’s context. The median values of state­
ments 1­8 in the two different scenarios were analyzed using t­tests but none of
them gave a statistically significant difference between the results (p>0.05 in every
case). Based on the comprehensive subjective findings portrayed below, it can
be confidently concluded that the test participants perceived the real and virtual
rooms in a similar manner.
(a) Statement 1
(b) Statement 2
Figure 4.12: Evaluation of Speech Conditions
30
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:39==
In the evaluations presented in 4.12, participants consistently rated the anechoic
room and lecture room as the most comfortable environments for speaking and
being heard by others in statements 1 and 2.
Conversely, significantly lower
ratings were assigned to the corridor and reverberation chamber, indicating that
these spaces were perceived as more unpleasant for speech communication.
(a) Statement 3
(b) Statement 4
Figure 4.13: Evaluation of Room Acoustics
Furthermore, in Statements 3 and 4, as depicted in Figure 4.13, participants pro­
vided similar judgments for the reverberation and dryness of the rooms in both
scenarios, which align with the measured parameters of the rooms. The only no­
ticeable difference was in the case of the corridor, which was perceived to have
less reverberation in the virtual scenario.
Specifically, the reverberation chamber was reported as the most reverberant and
the least dry, whereas the corridor exhibited lower levels of reverberation and
slightly higher levels of dryness. Similarly, the lecture room was characterized by
minimal reverberation and near­total dryness, while the anechoic chamber was
perceived as completely dry without any reverberation.
In Statements 5­8 of Figure 4.14, participants were specifically asked to rate their
levels of expended effort, enjoyment, insecurity, and stress during the task. Inter­
estingly, across all rooms, participants consistently expressed the belief that they
were completing the task without exerting excessive effort.
However, the reverberation chamber received somewhat higher ratings in terms
of effort, indicating that it was indeed the most challenging room for speaking. This
aligns with the acoustical characteristics of the reverberation chamber, which can
create difficulties in speech intelligibility and require greater vocal effort.
Regarding levels of insecurity and stress, participants consistently rated all rooms
quite low, indicating a sense of confidence and comfort in their speaking perfor­
mance. However, it is noteworthy that the reverberation chamber received sig­
nificantly higher ratings in terms of insecurity and stress compared to the other
rooms.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Statement 5
(b) Statement 6
(c) Statement 7
(d) Statement 8
Figure 4.14: Evaluation of the Total Experience
(a) Statement 9
(b) Statement 10
Figure 4.15: Evaluation of Acoustic and Visual Simulations
32
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:41==
Despite the potential difficulties and variations across rooms, all participants re­
ported enjoying the task. This finding indicates that despite the acoustic chal­
lenges and potential increased effort in certain environments, participants found
the overall experience of the task to be enjoyable.
Figure 4.15 shows participants’ rates in statements 9 and 1 regarding the level of
realism of the sound and visual environments. The acoustical environment was
rated as moderately good in the anechoic chamber, corridor and reverberation
room, whereas the lecture room was rated slightly higher. The same trend of
results can be seen in the visual environment ratings but with lower ratings in all
rooms.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
33
==PAGE:42==
5
Discussion
The findings described in Figure 4.2 underscore the influence of the virtual en­
vironment on participants’ voice levels, revealing distinct patterns in the level
adjustments made by male and female participants. Notably, male participants
exhibited a slight increase of only 1­2 dB in their voice levels in the virtual rooms.
In contrast, female participants demonstrated a contrasting behavior by lowering
their voice levels by 2­5 dB in the virtual setting.
However, the most intriguing observation is the difference in the trend of the voice
levels between real and virtual scenarios. Male participants exhibit a similar trend
in their median voice levels in both scenarios suggesting that they have adapted
their speeches to the different room conditions in the virtual scenario, as opposed
to females who did not seem to respond to the simulated environments. This diver­
gence in the level adjustments between male and female participants highlights
an interesting interaction between sex and the virtual environment.
Furthermore, the experimental results demonstrated a clear influence of rever­
beration time, voice support and room gain on voice level and fundamental fre­
quency. However, the relationship between voice level and the room parame­
ters, as described in section 4.1, deviates from previous findings by Brunskog
and Pelegrín García. In their corresponding studies, the voice levels decreased
with increasing room gain and voice support, in the present measurements they
are increasing.
This finding can be correlated with the participants’ ratings in the subjective im­
pressions. In particular, when rating Statements 1 and 2, as seen in Figure 4.12,
the participants assigned similar high values to both the anechoic chamber and
the lecture room, indicating that they found these environments more conducive
to speech compared to the corridor and the reverberation chamber. This obser­
vation can be attributed to the significantly lower reverberation time and higher
clarity exhibited by the first two rooms, facilitating clear audio perception. On the
contrary, the corridor and the reverberation chamber have considerably higher
reverberation times, resulting in a blurred sound experience, particularly during
speech, as the sounds tended to merge together.
The effective room acoustic parameters, as shown in Table 2.1, suggest a close
matching in reverberation time T30 and decay time DT40 between the real and vir­
tual rooms. However, room gain GRG and voice support STV are similar between
the two scenarios only in the lecture room. In the corridor and reverberation cham­
ber, there is a deviation between the two scenarios. The corridor’s room gain was
found to be 0.65 dB in a previous study by Pelegrín García [9] who measured the
exact same place. This suggests that the present measurements in the virtual
rooms might be more accurate as compared to the ones in the real ones.
34
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:43==
Moreover, the impulse responses measured with HATS in the physical corridor
and reverberation chamber had unexpectedly high levels of energy, even though
the exact same equipment and levels were used in the lecture room. It is im­
portant to mention that Pelegrín García has identified the sensitivity of these two
parameters to the measurement equipment and states that their values can vary
if measured with different equipment [18].
On the other hand, the participants’ subjective impressions described in section
4.3 indicate that they perceived the corresponding real and virtual rooms as acous­
tically similar. Their judgments of the reverberation and dryness of the rooms,
shown in Figure 4.13, are very close in each case. Thus, this congruence be­
tween the participants’ judgments adds credibility to the findings of the objective
measurements.
Some deviations from Öhlund­Wistbacka’s pilot study [8] are that no speech stim­
uli were used and that participants could speak in their native language, which all
of them chose to do. No participant showed any major difficulty in finding topics
to speak about and by using their native tongue they were more expressive and
relaxed while talking.
Statements 5­8, as illustrated in Figure 4.14 aim to assess the overall experience
of the experiment, focusing on participants’ responses regarding their levels of
expended effort, stress and enjoyment. These findings carry valuable insights
for the improvement of future experiments, enhancing both the participant expe­
rience and the reliability of the researcher’s outcomes.
According to Figure 4.14, the participants consistently evaluated their performance
in all tasks as highly successful, reporting minimal perceived effort and stress
throughout the process. It is also worth highlighting that participants expressed a
greater sense of effort and stress in the reverberation chamber compared to all
other rooms, an observation that can be attributed to the challenging speaking
conditions existing there.
Additionally, all tasks were consistently reported as enjoyable by the participants.
This could potentially be attributed to the demographic composition of the partic­
ipants, who were mostly young engineering students. As individuals with a keen
interest in their field, they were likely intrigued by the opportunity to be involved
in an experiment that took place in a unique location like the AVIL and utilized
cutting­edge equipment such as VR headset.
In Statements 9 and 10, as depicted in Figure 4.15, participants were asked to as­
sess the realism of the acoustic and visual environments presented in the AVIL.
Interestingly, this aspect of the experimental procedure revealed a potential limita­
tion as those who experienced the virtual scenario first expressed more skepticism
in their answers compared to those who initially experienced the real rooms.
The participants who began with the real rooms had a better understanding of the
correspondence between the physical and virtual environments, making it easier
for them to judge the realism of the latter.
On the other hand, the participants who started with the virtual scenario may have
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
35
==PAGE:44==
found it more challenging to evaluate the realism due to the absence of direct
comparison with a physical environment.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that the perceived lack of realism in the visual
environments can be attributed to the characteristics of the rooms themselves.
The reverberation chamber and the corridor, being relatively empty spaces, lacked
distinctive details that could be accurately portrayed in virtual reality.
In contrast, the lecture room, which has many specific features, received better
ratings in terms of realism as it provided more tangible elements for virtual recre­
ation. It should also be mentioned that, for consistency with the other rooms,
a simple Unity model was chosen for the AVIL room instead of a professionally
crafted one.
Moreover, participants showed uncertainty when rating the sound environment’s
realism. Those who were familiar with engineering acoustics tended to discuss
the quality of the system, including factors such as potential artifacts and delays.
On the other hand, participants without a technical background mostly associated
the reverberance of the room with its volume when considering the realism of the
sound environment. This perception possibly aligns with their low ratings of the
reverberation chamber, as the room’s unusually long reverberation time does not
correspond to its volume.
5.1
Suggestions for Future Study
After the completion of the experiment and discussions with the participants about
their overall experience, several suggestions can be made for future executions
of an equivalent experimental process:
1. To begin with, as mentioned above most of the participants who did the
virtual scenario first were more skeptical about the level of realism of both
the acoustical and visual environment. Therefore, a tour of real rooms before
the experiment could be beneficial so that participants know what it is about.
2. Moreover, participants reported that some way of interaction with the listener
would help them speak more lively and expressive. Some of them said that
speaking for three minutes without a specific reason and without someone
giving feedback made them distract and lose focus on the listener.
3. Lastly, more detailed virtual models could enhance the participants’ expe­
rience in the virtual scenario. However, this was also a drawback of some
rooms chosen for the experiment because the corridor and the reverbera­
tion chamber are almost empty and without windows so there was not much
that could be done. It is important to mention that participants rated the lec­
ture room, which was the most detailed virtual model, as the most realistic
compared to the other. They also were able to guess the distance much
more accurately, as seen in Figure 4.5, and their voice SPL values had less
variation, compared to the other rooms, as depicted in Figure 4.2.
36
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
This study considers speech production in virtual environments by conducting an
experiment where thirteen participants were asked to speak in four physical rooms
and in their virtual versions presented in Audio­Visual Immersive Lab through real­
time auralization. The acoustics of the real rooms were simulated using ODEON
room acoustics software and the visual environments were modeled in Unity.
The main objectives of the study were to investigate how speakers adjust their
voices when talking in a virtual environment, their level of adaptation to that, and
which room parameters have the biggest impact on their speeches. To do so,
the voice sound pressure level (SPL) and the fundamental frequency (F0) of each
participant were measured over 3­minute speeches in each room and scenario.
Their subjective impressions were also noted by asking the participants to rate
ten statements about the experience in each room trial.
The findings of this study highlight a significant difference in the behavior of par­
ticipants based on their sex.
Male participants, despite having slightly raised
their voice levels in the virtual scenario, have adapted their voices to the different
rooms. On the contrary, females not only decreased their voice level in all vir­
tual rooms but also exhibited almost the same levels in all of them, showing no
adaptation to the environment.
In terms of the fundamental frequency, both male and female participants have
decreased their pitch by approximately 10 Hz which is, of course, more prominent
for males due to the logarithmic scale of pitch. Additionally, room parameters
influence voice production but their relationship with voice SPL and F0 is consis­
tent between real and virtual scenarios. Voice SPL moderately increases and F0
decreases, by increasing voice support, room gain, or reverberation time
The subjective impressions suggest that all participants perceived the correspond­
ing real and virtual rooms as acoustically similar but their ratings for the visual
environments indicate that the VR models need to be improved for future imple­
mentation of this experiment. There were no cases where notable levels of stress
or excessive effort were reported by the experimental subjects while carrying out
the process, indicating a satisfactory experimental set up design and overall exe­
cution of the experimental process.
To conclude, the most important outcomes of the current study can be summarized
as follows:
• Speakers adjust their voices in virtual environments based on the room
acoustic conditions.
• Males and females’ contrasting behavior in their voice levels adjustment in
the virtual rooms shows a different level of adaptation between sexes, a fact
that is open for further investigation.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
37
==PAGE:46==
• Room acoustic parameters voice support, room gain and reverberation time
influence speech parameters voice SPL and fundamental frequency in a
similar manner in real and virtual rooms.
• The pilot created by Öhlund­Wistbacka et al has a high level of accuracy
and with certain improvements it can possibly serve as an ecologically valid
setup for simulated room acoustic environments.
38
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
S. Reinfeldt et al. “Hearing one’s own voice during phoneme vocalization–
transmission by air and bone conduction.” In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 128 (2010), pp. 751–762.
[2]
E. Lombard. “Le signe de l’elevation de la voix”. In: Annales Des Maladies
de L’Oreille, Du Larynx, Du Nez Et Du Pharynx 37 (1911).
[3]
David Pelegrín García and Jonas Brunskog. “Speakers’ comfort and voice
level variation in classrooms: Laboratory research”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 132.1 (2012), pp. 249–260. DOI: 10.1121/1.
4728212.
[4]
Jonas Brunskog et al. “Increase in voice level and speaker comfort in lecture
rooms”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 125.4 (2009),
pp. 2072–2082. DOI: 10.1121/1.3081396.
[5]
D. Pellegrin­Garcia. “Comment on “Increase in voice level and speaker com­
fort in lecture rooms” [J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 125, 2072–2082 (2009)]”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 129 (2011), pp. 1161–1164.
[6]
Viveka Lyberg­Ahlander et al. “Part Summary of the Project ’Speakers’ Com­
fort’: Voice use in Teaching Environments”. In: Building Acoustics 22.3+4
(2015), pp. 209–224.
[7]
Mary Rapp, Densil Cabrera, and Manuj Yadav. “Investigation into vocal
doses and parameters pertaining to primary school teachers in classrooms”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 150.4 (2021), pp. 2635–
2646. DOI: 10.1121/1.3689549.
[8]
Greta Öhlund Wistbacka et al. “Vocal comfort in simulated room acoustic
environments ­ experimental set­up and protocol development”. In: Interna­
tional Congress on Acoustics (2022).
[9]
David Pelegrín García et al. “Vocal effort with changing talker­to­listener dis­
tance in different acoustic environments”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 129.4 (2011), pp. 1981–1990. DOI: 10.1121/1.3552881.
[10]
D. Michael, G. Siegel, and H. Pick Jr. “Effects of distance on vocal intensity”.
In: J. Speech Hear Res 38 (1995), pp. 1176–83.
[11]
Pasquale Bottalico, Simone Graetzer, and Eric J. Hunter. “Effects of speech
style, room acoustics, and vocal fatigue on vocal effort”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 139.5 (2016), pp. 2870–2879. DOI:
10.1121/1.4950812.
[12]
Pasquale Bottalico and Arianna Astolfi. “Investigation into vocal doses and
parameters pertaining to primary school teachers in classrooms”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 131.4 (2012), pp. 2817–2827.
DOI: 10.1121/1.3689549.
[13]
SB Brundage and Hancock AB. “Real enough: Using virtual public speaking
environments to evoke feelings and behaviors targeted in stuttering assess­
ment and treatment”. In: American Journal of Speech­Language Pathology
24.2 (2015), pp. 139–149.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
39
==PAGE:48==
[14]
I. R. Titze, J. E. Hunter, and J. G. Svec. “Voicing and silence periods in
daily and weekly vocalizations of teachers.” In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 121 (2007), pp. 496–478.
[15]
H. Traunmüller and A. Eriksson. “Acoustic effects of variation in vocal effort
by men, women, and children”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 107 (2000), pp. 3438–3451.
[16]
David Pelegrín García et al. “Measurement and prediction of voice support
and room gain in school classrooms”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical So­
ciety of America 131.1 (2012), pp. 1981–1990. DOI: 10.1121/1.3665987.
[17]
S. Favrot and JM Buchholz. “LoRA: A loudspeaker­based room auralization
system”. In: Acta acustica united with Acustica 96.2 (2010).
[18]
David Pelegrín García. “The role of classroom acoutics on vocal intensity
regulation and speakers’ comfort: PhD thesis”. In: (2011).
[19]
Trimble Inc. SketchUp Pro Desktop. URL: my.sketchup.com.
[20]
Odeon A/S. ODEON Room Acoustics Software User’s Manual. 2021.
[21]
ISO3382­2. “Acoustics — Measurement of room acoustic parameters —
Part 2: Reverberation time in ordinary rooms”. In: (2008).
[22]
R Gupta et al. “Investigation of effect of VR/AR headgear on Head related
transfer functions for natural listening”. In: Audio Engineering Society Con­
ference: 2018 AES International Conference on Audio for Virtual and Aug­
mented Reality (2018).
[23]
A. Ahrens et al. “Sound source localization with varying amount of visual
information in virtual reality”. In: PloS one 14.3 (2019).
[24]
ISO3382­1. “Acoustics — Measurement of room acoustic parameters —
Part 1: Performance spaces”. In: (2009).
[25]
P. Boersma and Weenink D. Praat: doing phonetics by computer (Version
6.2.01). 2021. URL: http://www.praat.org..
[26]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria, 2022. URL: https:
//www.R-project.org/.
[27]
D. Bates et al. “Fitting linear mixed­effects models using lme4”. In: Journal of
Statistical Software 67(1) (2015), pp. 1–48. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18637/
jss.v067.i01.
[28]
H. Akaike. “A new look at the statistical model identification”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Automatic Control 19(6) (1974), pp. 716–723.
[29]
Jiming Jiang and Thuan Nguyen. Linear and Generalized Linear Mixed Mod­
els and their Applications. Springer, 2007.
[30]
WG Gardner. “Efficiency convolution without latency”. In: Journal of the Au­
dio Engineering Society 43 (1993).
[31]
A Harker and PA Tremblay. “The HISSTools impulse response toolbox: Con­
volution for the masses”. In: Proceedngs of the interntional music confer­
ence 43 (2012), pp. 148–155.
[32]
M. Marschall and A. Ahrens. “A Lora Toolbox repository”. In: (). URL: https:
//bitbucket.org/hea-dtu/lora.
[33]
P. Welch. “The use of fast Fourier transform for the estimation of power spec­
tra: a method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms”.
In: IEEE Transaction on audio and electroacoustics 15.2 (1967), pp. 70–73.
40
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:49==
[34]
J. Proakis and D. Manolakis. Digital Signal Processing. Prentice Hall inter­
national editions, 2007.
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
41
==PAGE:50==
A
AVIL Implementation
A.1
Laboratory Facility
The AVIL system is made up of 64 KEF LS50 loudspeakers that form a spherical
array within a soundproofed room measuring 7m x 8m x 6m, as shown in Figure
3.2. The loudspeakers are arranged in seven circles around the center of the
room where a chair for the participant is located. The circles are positioned at
±80°, ±56°, ±28°, and 0° with respect to the participant’s head, and each circle
has 2, 6, 12, and 24 evenly spaced loudspeakers, respectively. The radius of
the spherical array is 2.4m. The participant’s voice is captured using a DPA­4088
head­mounted microphone, which is connected to a PC via an audio interface
(Tesira SERVER­IO, Biamp Systems, Beaverton, OR), processed using MAX 8
(Cycling ’74, Walnut, CA), and then played back over the loudspeakers through a
set of amplifiers (Sonible d:24, Sonible GmbH, Graz, Austria).
A.2
Real­time Convolution System
The voice signal is convolved in real­time via zero­latency convolution [30] with
a set of 64 FIR filters using the Hisstools toolbox [31]. The signal is then played
back to the participant through the reproduction system, creating the sensation of
talking in the simulated room. The total round­trip time of the reproduction system
is around 22 ms, which is made up by the propagation time through the air, the
audio­interface’s I/O buffers, Max 8’s I/O buffers, and a look­ahead loudspeaker­
protection limiter in the audio interface. The sampling rate is 48 kHz. To allow
for interruption­free audio processing, the 64 convolution processes are running
in parallel on four CPU cores via the ‘mc.poly∼‘ object.
A.3
Computing Reproduction Filters
To play back the room­acoustic simulations through the reproduction system, a
list of early reflections and directional energy curves for the late reverberation in
the frequency bands ranging from 63 Hz to 8 kHz are exported from the source to
the receiver. The direct sound component is removed, and only the reflections are
played. To compensate for the system latency of 22ms, each early reflection within
the first 22ms (coming from surfaces closer than 3.8m) is moved back by 22ms.
The data is then transformed into 64 finite impulse­response filters using the LoRA
toolbox [17, 32]. The early reflections are rendered using the nearest­loudspeaker
technique, which is a modification from [17], where higher­order ambisonics were
used. The late reflections are generated using first­order ambisonics by multiply­
ing the envelopes of the room impulse responses with uncorrelated noise.
A.4
Calibration of the Reproduction Filters
The FIR filters are calibrated to match the distant­to­reverberant sound field be­
tween the simulated and reproduced environments and to compensate for the lo­
42
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:51==
cation of the head­worn microphone relative to the talker’s mouth. The procedure
is taken from Pelegrín García [18] and Pelegrín García and Brunskog [3].
The total transfer­function between source and receiver is separated into direct
and reflected components denoted by Hdirect,sim and Hrefl,sim respectively.
In
the reproduction environment: Let Hdirect,repr be the transfer function between the
head­worn microphone and the measurement microphone at 1 m distance from
the mouth. Let Hrefl,repr = ATWC be the transfer function between the head­
worn microphone and the talker’s head position via reproduction system, where A
is the 64 element vector of transfer function between the convolution engine and
the participant’s head through each loudspeaker, W is a 64 element vector con­
taining the frequency response of the reproduction filters and C is the calibration
filter.
Assuming the invertibility of the direct sound transfer­functions, the equivalence
of reflected­to­direct sound is expressed as
Hrefl,sim
Hdirect,sim
= Hrefl,repr
Hdirect,repr
.
(A.1)
Using a regularized inverse of ATW with regularization parameter ϵ, the calibration
filter is then given by
C = Hrefl,sim
Hdirect,sim
Hdirect,repr
(ATW)∗
|ATW|2 + ϵ
.
(A.2)
The regularization parameter was chosen manually to be around the noise vari­
ance in the measurement of impulse responses A.
In general, C will not be causal and as such not realizable. Instead, we smooth the
magnitude response of C in octave bands and approximate it by minimum­phase
FIR filter (with DFT Cmin) with N=511 taps and a simple (negative) delay τ such
that
C(ω) = Cmin(ω)e−jωτ.
(A.3)
The delay τ=22ms was estimated via cross­correlation. When combining the cal­
ibration and reproduction filters, the negative delay is implemented by removing
the first 22 ms of samples (which are approximately zero due to shifting of the early
reflections) at the beginning of the reproduction filters. The calibration thus ac­
counts for both gain and time differences between the simulated and reproduced
environments in contrast to the method of Pelegrín García and Brunskog [3], which
only calibrated the magnitude response. The direct sound Hdirect,repr is estimated
from 1 minute of speech for each participant. First, cross­ and autospectral den­
sities are estimated with Welch’s method [33] and a window of M=1024 samples.
Then, an FIR filter is designed via causally constrained, regularized Wiener filter
[34].
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
43
==PAGE:52==
B
T30 and GRG Regression Plots
(a) Vocal SPL ­ T30
(b) Vocal SPL ­ GRG
(a) F0 ­ T30
(b) F0 ­ GRG
44
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:53==
C
ODEON Rooms Specs
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Adjustment of One’s Voice in Virtual Rooms as Compared to Real Rooms
==PAGE:55==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Building 352 DK, DTU
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 45 25 63 52
electro.dtu.dk
