==PAGE:1==
Process dry lab
A scalable and novel approach to simplifying algorithm
sharing and review in process mining
Master’s Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of computer science
==PAGE:2==
Process dry lab
A scalable and novel approach to simplifying algorithm sharing and review in process
mining
Master’s Thesis
June 2023
Git repository: https://github.com/ProcessDryLab­master­project
By
Nicholas Dyhre and Sebastian Vestrup
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom­
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Computer Science,
Department of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of computer science,
process mining, and process analysis.
Sebastian Vestrup ­ s154282
Signature
Date
Nicholas Dyhre ­ s174871
Signature
Date
Process dry lab
ii
23-06-2023
23-06-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Process Dry Lab (PDL) is a new approach to sharing implemented artifacts for validation
and review in the fields of data science, process mining, and process analysis. PDL is
a fully distributed network of services that can be connected and utilized through a web
application to visualize and review results. There are 3 service types; service registry
nodes to discover and share other nodes, repository nodes to store and share resources,
and miner nodes to run or share algorithm implementations. The architecture of PDL
makes it possible to share, use and review implemented artifacts without having direct
access to their source code.
Process dry lab
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor and process mining expert, stakeholder and su­
pervisor
Andrea’s knowledge of process mining techniques and common needs in the community
has guided the project toward the final product.
Process dry lab
iv
==PAGE:6==
Glossary
miner node Located on a single hostname and can contain multiple miner actions.
repository node Located on a single hostname and stores and manages resources.
service registry node Located on a single hostname and stores and manages services
status and configurations.
frontend An interactable GUI in the form of a website, that works as a customizable
workspace.
workspace Describes the frontend for a specific user.
stream broker External component that manages streams and allows subscriptions to
stream topics.
resource Describes any file or stream, typically used by miner nodes as input or output
or visualizations of the frontend.
meta­information Information on resources, such as creation date, label, type, etc. Used
by repository nodes to create metadata objects.
metadata object Objects that are created and maintained by repository nodes containing
meta­information.
resource parent A resource that has been used in the process of generating another
resource.
resource child A resource that has been generated in a process, using another re­
source.
resource history Which processes were used to create it, what resources were used in
the process, and how they were used. Based on resource parents.
resource relation graph A graph showing the resource history.
miner action Describes any action run by a miner node.
miner algorithm These are miner actions specifically for algorithms.
file­consuming algorithm Describes any miner algorithm that only takes files as re­
source input.
stream­consuming algorithm Describes any miner algorithm that takes at least one
stream as input, though it can take a combination of streams and files.
clone miner action Describes a miner action where you clone/copy a miner algorithm
from one miner node, and save it in another miner node.
polyglot In computer science, a polyglot is a program or script written in different pro­
gramming languages.
resource privacy Implies that system functionality can be used in a controlled environ­
ment on private resources without sharing the resources with a third party.
Process dry lab
v
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
PDL Process Dry Lab.
RID Resource Identifier.
PID Process Identifier.
MID Miner Identifier.
Process dry lab
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
State of the Art
4
2.1
Related architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Problem statement and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
10
4
Solution
12
4.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.1.1
Service registry node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.1.2
Repository node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.1.3
Miner node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.1.4
Frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.1
Service registry node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.2
Repository node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2.3
Miner node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2.4
Frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Evaluation
33
5.1
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.1.1
Automated tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.1.2
Manual tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.1.3
Verification Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Threat to Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Discussion
43
7
Conclusion
45
8
Future Work
46
A Appendix
51
A.1 Service registry node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 Repository node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.3 Miner node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.4 Frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.5 Manual tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Process dry lab
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Data science is an interdisciplinary field of science that uses statistics, models, algorithms,
etc. to study data, either noisy, structured, or unstructured in an attempt to explain, extract
or understand the data. As this is one of the four paradigms of science (empirical, theoret­
ical, computational, and data­driven) it covers a wide range of applications and methods.
Process mining is a field of computer science that applies data science to discover, val­
idate and improve workflows [1]. Process mining algorithms can be run on information
extracted from event logs to get manageable visual representations of the processes in a
system. Process analysis is another way to improve workflows, by systematically review­
ing the sequence of business processes that can occur in certain situations. Similar to
process mining, it utilizes modeling and analysis of processes to provide a manageable
overview that can be used to identify unintended or inefficient behavior. The fields of data
science, process mining, and process analysis are constantly evolving. For scientific re­
search to be published, it needs to be peer­reviewed, and implemented artifacts must be
validated. There are currently very few solutions for sharing such implementations. The
ones that exist have high barriers to entry and generally require researchers to expose
their source code to third­party sources in order to share them. This thesis suggests a
new approach to solving the problem of sharing implemented artifacts for validation.
Figure 1.1: PDL architecture overview
Figure 1.1 shows the architecture of the proposed solution, called Process Dry Lab (PDL),
which is a fully distributed network of services. Beyond research sharing, it aims to provide
useful utilities such as reusable tools and functionality that can reduce the amount of work
required to develop and implement new algorithms. The architecture is designed to allow
Process dry lab
2
==PAGE:10==
anyone to contribute with new nodes, providing additional resources and functionalities
that others may use or review without having direct access to the source code of the node.
The solution’s design and purpose heavily focus on reducing the barriers to entry in both
the development and sharing process of new research.
The thesis will be structured as follows; Chapter 2, State of the Art, will cover the architec­
tures that were used as inspiration for PDL, any existing solutions related to the problem,
and finally, the problem statement and research questions that were derived as a result.
Chapter 3, Methodology, describes the approach that was used to identify, design and
implement a solution to the problem. Chapter 4, Solution, will initially detail the concep­
tual design of the architecture, followed by an in­depth and technical description of how
the architecture was implemented. Chapter 5, Evaluation, will verify that the implementa­
tion fulfills the conceptual design requirements and validate that the solution covers each
research question. Chapter 6, Discussion, intends to cover the design choices and limi­
tations of the proposed solution. Chapter 7, Conclusion, will provide a brief retrospective
of the thesis and a summary of its outcome. Chapter 8, Future Work, describes areas of
additions or changes that would provide additional benefits for PDL.
Process dry lab
3
==PAGE:11==
2
State of the Art
This section will look at state­of­the­art architectures and process mining tools that lead
to the problem statement and research questions of this thesis. The architectures are
selected based on their relevance for building PDL, and the tools cover all aspects of
process mining applications from commercial to learning and research.
2.1
Related architectures
Peer­to­peer architecture (P2P) [2] is a well­known and broadly used architecture that
builds on the principle of decentralization. Each peer or node in the system acts as both
the server and client and has equal responsibility. Decentralization means there is not
a single central governing component that all peers communicate with. Instead, peers
request resources or services provided by other peers. Utilizing a P2P architecture within
the context of sharing research would allow researchers to connect or disconnect imple­
mented algorithms in a network of nodes. However, in P2P, all nodes typically have the
same role and responsibilities which could be impractical for this purpose.
The microservice architecture [3] builds on three core principles, single responsibility, high
cohesion, and loose coupling. This means each service must have one purpose, get all
the necessary information to execute the job, and must be unaware of other services.
The architecture supports scaling, managing, and updating services individually as they
have their own lifecycles. This architecture can be used to share research by adding
algorithm implementations as new nodes within the system. However, maintaining the
core principles of single responsibility and high cohesion in a system that anyone can add
to may not be feasible or beneficial to uphold.
Pluggable microservices [4] is a spin on microservice architecture and follows the same
three core principles, but views services as plugins. If the core application is fully capa­
ble of running, additional functionality can be added as plugins thus allowing the system
to operate and add services that can be managed independently. This architecture re­
quires a running core application, and a coordinating component in the core application
to discover plugins and add them to a common API for integration.
2.2
Related Work
Process mining­ and analysis are fields of study that have been gaining traction from busi­
ness and academia, and thus the tools available are also increasing. This section is meant
to give an overview of these tools and compare them to the core problems that PDL in­
tends to solve. These problems have been defined and revised with the assistance of the
project stakeholder and supervisor Andrea Burratin. The main features needed to solve
the problems are a combination of research sharing, visualization, accessibility, privacy,
and the ability to utilize the solution as a development tool for new algorithms. Research
sharing covers the process of sharing new software with other users for review, valida­
tion, etc. Although open­source projects allow sharing by integrating new code from any
user, this exposes the source code and in many cases will require thorough testing and
review before the integration is accepted. Most of these systems do not present any other
way of sharing algorithms. Visualization covers the need for a graphical representation of
resources, which should provide flexible options to view the results of various algorithms.
Development tool covers the need for researchers to have a system that helps the de­
velopment of new process mining software. This requires a way to apply new code into
Process dry lab
4
==PAGE:12==
the system, which often requires the software to be written in a specific language and an
understanding of where this software should be implemented, which requires effort if not
directly stated in the project’s documentation. New algorithms should have the option to
utilize existing visualization options to reduce the necessary work. Accessibility is a way
to denote how easy a system is to get into, which should be as simple as possible. This
covers how much is necessary to download and read to start and understand the system
as well as the internal structure of the options. Privacy covers both resources and soft­
ware, which is desirable as these can be sensitive to publish openly. Open source will
fully expose the source code, whereas a desktop application will allow for full privacy of a
resource.
PM4PY [5] is a popular open­source process mining tool written as a Python library with a
console interface allowing users to integrate process mining directly into their codebase.
It is developed and managed by Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology
(FIT). The library is capable of running process mining algorithms, conformance checking,
and various other process mining operations. Because PM4PY is a library, it needs to be
activated through external means, and utilizing the features requires knowledge of the
library structure and functionality.
FIT has created a modular web­based user interface on top of PM4PY, called PMTK [6],
which comes in community and commercial editions. This thesis will only discuss the
free community edition and unlike PM4PY, PMTK is not open source. The application is
built to make it easier to work with process mining [7]. It provides visual representations
and statistics to the user which can be used to evaluate results and advance the process
mining analysis. It is possible to export results from the application, but not directly share
results through the application itself.
Cortado [8] is an open­source process mining desktop application developed for interac­
tive process discovery [9]. Interactive process discovery is an alternative to algorithms that
cannot be interacted with during the processing. Interactive process discovery allows for
the creation of process models through user knowledge combined with event data. Cor­
tado is divided into a frontend and a backend, which allows the core functionality to be
integrated into other systems. The core utilizes PM4PY thus providing process mining
technologies along with iterative process discovery which allows flexible and controlled
process discovery.
Smyrida described in article [10] is a web application with a shared open­source modular
software system as the backend. The article was published shortly after starting this
project. Their approach is similar to PM4PY and PMTK with an open­source core and
a user interface for visualization. Smyrida is intended to be integrated into information
systems much like PMTK although through open APIs. The application offers process
mining algorithms, conformance checking, and other necessary functionality, although
not exceeding the capability of PM4PY.
Disco [11] is a desktop application capable of running process mining algorithms, con­
formance checking, and filtering with visualizations of models and statistics. Disco offers
no functionality for sharing resources and they must be exported to share them via exter­
nal means, which is more complicated and time­consuming compared to other solutions.
Disco presents a large number of options with a recognizable and understandable user
interface, making it a good choice for certain scenarios.
ProM [12] is an open­source desktop application that provides various options to enable
users to apply process mining. ProM provides a core application that can be extended with
Process dry lab
5
==PAGE:13==
plugins to provide additional functionality such as visualizers, filtering, and other process
mining functionality. This structure also enables users to apply plugins from other sources
which can further enrich the capabilities of the tool. It is possible to export process mining
results from the tool, but not directly share through the application.
RapidProM [13] is an extension of RapidMiner [14] based on ProM. The RapidMiner is
a process analysis tool focused on analyzing the impact of employees’ collective impact,
expertise, and data. As seen on their website [14] RapidMiner’s primary focus is to an­
alyze and predict the internal employee structure and efficiency. RapidProm extends
this functionality with scientific workflows and analysis available through the RapidMiner
workspace as well as the plugins for ProM.
Celonis [15] is the global market leader in execution management which is a category
of software that combines artificial intelligence, process mining, and automation. Celo­
nis offers a software­as­a­service (SaaS) solution intended to hook up to an Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) core that allows its customizers to utilize the process analysis
capabilities of a foreign unit. Celonis offers a web application that allows the manage­
ment, generation, and viewing of resources or statistics, as well as a desktop application
used to create applications that can be shared on Celonis’ marketplace. The application
is intended for commercial applications for which Celonis offers a web application that
is capable of sharing or restricting resources relevant to specific employees which will
remove the clutter and allow the secrecy of resources.
Apromore [16], as with Celonis, offers a SaaS solution intended to hook up to an organi­
zation’s ERP and offers a web application to start­, interact with­, and inspect processes.
Through the web application, Apromore offers a collaborative repository that allows users
within the enterprise to share process models, event logs, and other resources. Apro­
more has released the core functionality of the commercial version in an open­source
community edition, allowing users to contribute to the software.
SAP Signavio is a tool that offers resource sharing through its web­based interface and
deep integration into other SAP systems capable of providing visibility into the real pro­
cess execution of a system and showing insights into the inefficiencies of the system.
According to themselves [17] SAP Signavio is recognized as the market leader in pro­
cess mining although it has lower process mining­ and analysis capabilities than Celonis
[18]. Since the acquisition of Signavio by SAP in 2021, the application has focused on
ease of deployment through its integration ability into ERP systems, setting it apart from
its competitors.
RuM (Rule mining) is an open­source desktop application [19][20] that provides process
mining capabilities based on the process modeling language Declare [21]. This is an al­
ternative graphical notation for process models, compared to procedural representations.
Because RuM utilizes the Declare notation it separates itself from its peers, however,
there is no built­in functionality to share resources.
A commonality between all prior solutions is that they have different focus areas or ap­
proaches to the core problems that PDL intends to solve, i.e. having a development tool
that allows for research sharing, visualization, accessibility, and privacy. Open source
tools allow code sharing such as; PM4PY, Cortado, Smyrida, Apromore community edi­
tion, and RuM, but will only accept complete and reviewed algorithms, which conflicts with
the research sharing problem. ProM is also an open­source tool, however, through plugin
options algorithms can be added without an extensive review process for research shar­
ing. In other cases, this is entirely impossible, which is true for some commercial tools
Process dry lab
6
==PAGE:14==
such as Disco, Celonis, Apromore commercial edition, and Signavio. Publishing source
code by adding to open­source projects, conflicts with the privacy feature of PDL. How­
ever, if the code of a tool is available it can be downloaded and used for research and
development while utilizing the functionality of the tool. For this to be desirable, good doc­
umentation or code abstraction is required, for which PM4PY provides a good solution.
Desktop applications and local­runnable applications such as PM4PY, Cortado, Smyrida,
Disco, ProM, Apromore community edition, and RuM, provide a way to ensure the privacy
of resources, event logs, etc. Table 2.1 shows solutions that ­ in their entirety ­ support al­
gorithm sharing by enabling extensions to the system, in comparison with PDL. Because
RapidProM is based on ProM this will be included and cover both ProM and RapidProM.
To understand the comparison table 2.1, the following is a definition of each row:
1. Dynamically scalable: Allows permissionless extension of the system without neg­
atively impacting previously added functionality.
2. Resource privacy: Enables the use of foreign algorithms on resources without
sharing the resources with a third party.
3. Resource visualization: Provides visual representation(s) of resources.
4. Resource history: Inherent support for presenting the history of a resource, con­
taining information on the process(es) and resource(s) used to create it.
5. Graphical user interface: Contains a graphical user interface.
6. Functionality customization: The tool is designed to allow individual users to cus­
tomize what functionality should be made available or included.
7. Polyglot support: Describes a system that has inherent support for writing new
code in various programming languages to extend the system.
8. Workspace collaboration: Inherent support that enables users to share resources
with others directly through the system.
9. Research collaboration: Inherent support that enables users to share algorithms
with others directly through the system, regardless of the state of the algorithm im­
plementation, that doesn’t involve external transfer methods.
Process dry lab
7
==PAGE:15==
PM4PY
Cortado
RapidProM
RuM
Smyrida
PDL
Dynamically scalable
×
×
✓
×
×
✓
Resource privacy
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
✓
Resource visualization
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Resource history
×
×
×
×
×
✓
Graphical user interface
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Functionality customization
✓
×
✓
×
×
✓
Polyglot
×
×
×
×
×
✓
Workspace collaboration
×
×
×
×
✓
✓
Research collaboration
×
×
×
×
✓
Table 2.1: Comparing features of different process mining solutions to PDL
From table 2.1 it can be concluded that no program covers the same core problems that
PDL intends to solve. Though research sharing is possible through some tools, no solution
offers research collaboration, i.e. inherent support for sharing implementations through
the system, regardless of their completion state. On the other hand, resource visualization
or a GUI is provided by most other solutions. These tools are generally designed for
applying process mining, however, none of them consider research sharing, code privacy,
and system­integrated collaboration to the extent of PDL. As there are no architectures or
tools that directly solve what PDL intends to, the following problem statement and research
questions were created.
2.3
Problem statement and research questions
Scientific research require peer review. In the fields of process mining, process analysis,
and data science no solution exist that contains the necessary steps for the review process
without source code exposure, has reusable utilities that can enhance the researchers’
work, and still allow validation of their prototypes.
RQ1: Is it possible to create a decentralized architecture with self­contained lan­
guage agnostic services that researchers can freely add to?
1.1 : Is it possible for any users to extend the system with new services that provide
additional functionality or resources without conflicting with previously added ser­
vices?
1.2 : Is it possible to create a service that can interpolate different programming lan­
guages?
1.3 : Is it possible to create an architecture that enables flexibility of functionality that
will reduce the required work for researchers?
RQ2: Is it possible to create an architecture that supports privacy of resources,
while also having the option to make them publicly accessible?
2.1 : Can this architecture allow researchers to share their mining algorithms without
exposing their source code?
Process dry lab
8
==PAGE:16==
2.2 : Can this architecture let users run external algorithms without sharing confidential
data?
2.3 : Can an architecture like this provide discoverability while reducing network com­
munication?
2.4 : Can a decentralized network be extended with publicly available prototypes without
removing the option to keep them private?
RQ3: Is it possible to allow customization, inspection, or management of different
types of services, processes, and resources in a workspace?
3.1 : Is it possible to create a customizable workspace in a system where new services
can be added by any user?
3.2 : Is it possible to create a workspace that can start, stop and manage processes in
foreign and local services with potentially unknown and varying use cases?
3.3 : Is it possible to create a customizable workspace capable of uploading, removing,
viewing, and changing resources of different types, sizes, and structures?
3.4 : Is it possible to view the history of resources, which processes they have gone
through, and how they have been used?
3.5 : Can such a system support both file and stream resources similarly as input and
output for mining algorithms?
Process dry lab
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
The thorough analysis of the currently available tools established a need for a new solu­
tion to enable efficient development and sharing of new research. To solve this problem,
additional research was conducted to discover and consider existing architectures or solu­
tions to the general challenges proposed by the research questions. These were used as
inspiration for the conceptual design of an architecture that could support all the specified
requirements. With the architecture in place, the development of a proof of concept could
begin, which initially focused on the implementation of the most essential requirements.
The artifact and the requirements to fulfill its purpose were evaluated and revised during
multiple iterations before reaching its final state.
Figure 3.1: Agile development methodology
On a more practical level, the agile methodology (see Figure 3.1) was used. The agile
methodology is designed to help software teams collaborate iteratively to create, verify
and validate an artifact. The agile methodology exists in many varieties as it can be
adjusted for specific purposes or preferences. PDL was developed using the 5 main
stages of the agile methodology: Plan, design, develop, test, and feedback.
The planning phase consisted of defining new features, researching the problem, scoping
the necessary features, and estimating development time as preparation for the iteration.
This allowed for a more structured workflow where related features could be implemented
together and increase the overall efficiency of the development.
Process dry lab
10
==PAGE:18==
The design phase consisted of trying to solve conceptual problems, create a graphical
design, or develop the architecture used to implement PDL. This allowed for coherency
and agreement about the system and implementation which increased the stability and
completion of the system.
The development phase was when the artifact was built. The discovered requirements
and design were turned into software.
The test phase was used to evaluate the features implemented during the development
phase. To ensure the quality and stability of the implementation, and ensure all require­
ments were fulfilled.
The feedback phase was spent discussing the recent development with the stakeholder,
which nicely led back to the planning phase where new features were discussed.
Before starting the first development cycle it was necessary to define the problems. The
process consisted of dividing the problems into manageable sizes and trying to discover
solutions for each of them separately hoping to find answers to some of the challenges with
developing PDL. When it was confirmed that there was no existing software architecture
that could solve all the problems of PDL, the start of the first development cycle began.
The first iterations of the agile development cycle were different compared to later ones as
it was necessary to create the foundation and prove that the architecture was possible.
The first agile cycle revolved around the creation of the Minimal Viable Product (MVP)
of the architecture, which was necessary for further development. It consisted of a very
long design phase for the architecture and implementation of the basic communication
and division of responsibilities for each service type. The following cycles worked on
the same requirements, which would be progressively implemented through each cycle.
Once the initial requirements were implemented, subsequent cycles had a narrower focus
on a small pool of additional features, which allowed these to be built faster and with bigger
chances of being competed within the time scope but had a higher probability of inefficient
development due to bottlenecks.
The scope of the system changed from the initial phases towards the end of the devel­
opment. During the development, feedback, and planning phases, new problems and re­
quirements were discovered, expanding or changing the scope of the solution. The agile
development methodology considers changing and evolving requirements, which meant
that the development could continue unhindered, although this did increase the number of
iterations necessary to complete the artifact. Extending the scope of the project has further
enriched the system with options, and features and thus changed the research questions
defined at the project planning. The system tries to solve a wide range of issues, which
meant it was necessary to divide the research questions into more manageable subques­
tions that in combination would answer their respective overarching research question.
Process dry lab
11
==PAGE:19==
4
Solution
This chapter will cover the proposed architecture for the solution in section 4.1, followed
by its implementation in section 4.2. The architecture section will provide an overview of
the system on a conceptual level, while the implementation section will cover the technical
design decisions.
4.1
Architecture
From this section, the conceptual design of PDL could be implemented in a number of
ways and is not necessarily tied to the actual artifact described in the implementation
section 4.2. PDL has multiple similarities with P2P [2], Microservice [3], and Pluggable
Microservice [4] architectures, to accommodate the need for local and foreign connections
to function together and allow different services with variable responsibilities to be added
freely. PDL’s closeness with P2P is that all services contribute and consume resources
in a decentralized network. Similar to P2P, services can be freely connected to or discon­
nected from the network. PDL deviates from P2P as it is not designed to distribute the
workload between peers [22], and unlike P2P, each service has varying responsibilities.
The similarities with Microservices, are that each component/service is loosely coupled
and can be developed and maintained entirely independent from any other service. The
differences with Microservices are that services cannot necessarily maintain high cohe­
sion or uphold the single responsibility principle. As with Pluggable Microservices, PDL
should make it possible to add or remove nodes and support the option of a coordinating
component to discover new services. Unlike Pluggable Microservices, PDL is intended to
be decentralized, which is realized by having the frontend function as the core component
where new plugins can be added. Additionally, the coordinating component to discover
new services exists as its own node, outside the frontend.
Figure 4.1: PDL architecture overview
Process dry lab
12
==PAGE:20==
PDL is a combination of independent services that can be freely added and removed to
create a highly customizable network of nodes with varying and expandable functionali­
ties. Figure 4.1 shows the different component types that create the basis for PDL. Every
component shown can have different variations, developed by different people, serving
different purposes. The role of service registry nodes is to provide discoverability, allow­
ing any workspace connected to a service registry node to find and connect with available
miner­ and repository nodes. Repository nodes’ primary purpose is to manage resources
and the resources offered may vary between nodes. Miner nodes are responsible for
processing resources into something new and each miner node may have many differ­
ent miner actions. Stream brokers are not an inherent part of PDL, though they can be
utilized to publish, manage, and distribute streams for stream resources. The frontend
functions as a customizable workspace for each user, in which different services can be
added or removed as plugins. Added services function similarly to SaaS since they can
run on a separate host machine. This provides an architecture in which multiple users
with their individual workspaces can connect to the same node, and one workspace may
be connected to a multitude of nodes, each with varying features or resources.
4.1.1
Service registry node
The service registry node is one of the supported service types within PDL, capable of
sharing and discovering new services. It is designed to have a moderator that manages
what services that should be added or made available through the node. There is no
limit to how many users can connect to a service registry, or how many services it can
manage considering it runs on a strong enough unit. Service registry nodes are intended
for creating groups that provide discoverability for services containing resources or algo­
rithms but can also be utilized by individuals as a way of managing references to nodes
of interest. This service is the only one that is not vital for PDL’s functionality, but it offers
quality­of­life inclusions to enhance collaborative work.
Figure 4.2: Service registry node connections
Figure 4.2 depicts the intended functionality of a service registry node. It should be able
to manage and update the connection status of its registered services, as well as their
configurations detailing how they are to be used. Connecting a service to a frontend
through a service registry node will not affect the information flow compared to connecting
to a service directly. However, it will rely on the service registry node for their connection
status and their configurations, i.e. what they can do and how they can be used. Multiple
service registry nodes can maintain status and knowledge of the same services, thereby
creating a grouping system that allows sharing between organizations.
Process dry lab
13
==PAGE:21==
4.1.2
Repository node
As the primary role of a repository node is to provide, store, and manage resources, it must
also manage any meta­information related to resources, such as file types, creation dates,
labels, etc. This information is managed as metadata objects which repository nodes are
responsible for creating so they can be sent to other components without their respective
resource. Repository nodes should not hold stream resources, however, they should still
be able to hold the meta­information for stream resources, detailing any information that
is required to subscribe to the stream.
Figure 4.3: Repository node conceptual overview
Figure 4.3 shows the main responsibilities of a repository node. This is shown from the
perspective of the frontend, as this is the only component that utilizes all of them. How­
ever, miner nodes will also need to send and retrieve resources. When uploading to a
repository node, whether it is a file or a reference to a stream, the repository node will
expect all the relevant meta­information for a resource. This information can be used to
create a resource relation graph, which is a visual representation of a resource’s history,
i.e. where it came from, what other resources were used to create it, etc. Finally, since
log files are intrinsically non­visual, the repository node must also be able to generate and
return a histogram from the resource, allowing users to gain an idea of a log’s contents
without having direct access to the log itself.
4.1.3
Miner node
The primary actions performed by miner nodes are called miner actions, which can be
split into two categories, miner algorithms, and clone miner actions. Additional supporting
options also exist to manage the miner actions or retrieve information on a miner node
and its available miner algorithms, i.e. its configurations.
Process dry lab
14
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.4: Miner actions conceptual overview
Figure 4.4 shows the communication options that a miner node should have related to
the primary miner actions, supporting options, and subsequent calls made as the result
of miner actions. Miner nodes will always be initiated by another component, typically the
frontend, and any subsequent calls made by the miner node will be the result of these
initial requests. The arrows are color­coded to show the relation between the initializing
calls and the potential resulting requests. The miner node must manage its active pro­
cesses as it is expected to run multiple miner actions at the same time and the frontend
needs a method of requesting status or stopping active processes.
4.1.3.1
Miner algorithms
Miner algorithms, shown as blue arrows in the diagram, offer versatile functionality and
are characterized by always outputting some type of resource. They are typically process
mining algorithms that are run with any number of resources as their input. However,
they are not restricted to only fulfill this purpose and they do not have to take any input
resources. Each miner node may have many different miner algorithms with varying in­
put/output types. For the frontend to know the requirements of a miner algorithm, the
miner node must be able to supply the configurations of each miner algorithm that it has
available. This defines what the required input is for a miner algorithm, both in terms
of parameters and resources, as well as what output it produces. Miner algorithms can
be further split into file­consuming algorithms and stream­consuming algorithms. These
follow a very similar flow and overlap in some aspects as they both input and output re­
sources. Both types may continuously publish their output to a topic on some stream
broker or output a file directly to a repository node.
Process dry lab
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.5: File­consuming algorithm conceptual overview
Figure 4.6: Stream­consuming algorithm conceptual overview
The two diagrams 4.5 and 4.6 show the interactions that may occur as part of file­consuming
algorithms and stream­consuming algorithms respectively. Comparing these diagrams
show the primary difference between the two types. File­consuming algorithms will only
take files as their input resources while stream­consuming algorithms will always take at
least one stream as its input resource. This means that a file­consuming algorithm can
either produce a static resource to a repository node or a dynamic resource to a stream
broker as shown in Figure 4.5. Stream­consuming algorithms will instead always pro­
duce a dynamic resource, either by publishing to a stream broker as with file­consuming
algorithms, or by creating and continuously updating a file in a repository node as seen in
Figure 4.6.
In both cases, the frontend will be the initiator, telling a miner node to run a miner algorithm
by supplying the necessary information to run it. This information includes details such
as which miner algorithm to run, which parameters and resources to use, and where the
resulting resource should be sent. If the result of a miner algorithm is published to a
stream broker, the miner node will still send the relevant meta­information to a repository
node, so that the resource can be used later. If the result is a file, the resource should
instead be sent directly to a repository node along with its relevant meta­information. In
either instance, the miner node must be able to inform the frontend via the status requests
that a resource has been generated and how to find it.
Process dry lab
16
==PAGE:24==
4.1.3.2
Clone miner action
Clone miner actions make it possible to copy specific miner algorithms from one miner
node into another miner node. Having this option allows users to run miner algorithms
from miner nodes in an environment they control. This makes it possible to use foreign
miner algorithms with resources as input, without sharing those resources with untrusted
parties.
Figure 4.7: Clone miner action conceptual overview
Figure 4.7 shows the communication flow that occurs when performing a clone miner
action. The frontend is expected to provide the configurations for the miner algorithm
from the foreign miner node. The miner node performing the clone miner action can use
the configurations to retrieve the required files to duplicate the miner algorithm. As with
other miner actions, the miner node must be able to respond with a status of the cloning
process so the frontend will have a way of knowing when the cloned miner algorithm is
ready to use.
4.1.4
Frontend
The frontend is a web application functioning as a user’s workspace with options for
managing connected services, resources from repository nodes, and processes in miner
nodes. The intended way to use PDL is through the frontend as it only presents actions
that are allowed, and restricts invalid service inputs. Both foreign­ and locally­hosted ser­
vices can be added, which enables unique options for both the development and sharing
of new nodes. These can be added, either through a service registry node, or by manually
typing in their URLs. Additionally, the frontend will track miner actions in order for users
to view their status or stop active processes. Finally, the frontend makes it possible to vi­
sualize resources from repository nodes as well as their history through resource relation
graphs. This makes it beneficial for researchers that intend to use PDL as a development
tool or to have miner algorithms verified for peer review.
Process dry lab
17
==PAGE:25==
4.2
Implementation
Figure 4.8: PDL architecture overview
This section will cover how the architecture for PDL 4.8 has been implemented, providing
more technical details about how the proof of concept artifact is designed. A combination
of frameworks and programming languages has been utilized to implement the solution.
This was done, in part, to illustrate the language­agnostic nature of the architecture, and
how nodes are loosely coupled. PDL implements the RESTful API architectural style to
communicate between the different nodes. The implementation can be found at the git
repository: Process Dry Lab git repo
4.2.1
Service registry node
The service registry node is implemented using ASP.NET Core 7.0 Minimal API. It uses
a file database consisting of two files, each with a JSON array to store the URLs for its
registered repository nodes and miner nodes. This ensures that the service registry node
will maintain knowledge of registered nodes on shutdown or restart. The arrays in each
file consist of the service URLs, which is the only necessary information for getting their
connection status and configurations. Both status and configurations are kept in memory
to make reading and writing the data faster, thus improving the response time of service
registry nodes.
Process dry lab
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.9: Service registry node interactions
Figure 4.9 shows the communication to and from the service registry node via the solid
lines, as well as the corresponding responses marked as dotted lines in the diagram.
Service registry nodes will ping and get configurations of their connected services period­
ically and update the held information from these calls. Frontends can request the status
of connected nodes by sending a list of their URLs, to which the service registry node will
respond with the URLs mapped to their connection status. Service configurations are re­
quested separately with longer intervals than their connection status. The service registry
node will respond with the last updated status or configurations that it has in memory for
all requested services. Service registry nodes provide endpoints for adding and removing
nodes, which is not shown in Figure 4.9. These are intended to be used by a moderator
to manage which services the service registry node should provide. A full overview of the
available endpoints can be seen in the appendix: A.1.2.
Figure 4.10: Requests by connecting services directly
Process dry lab
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.11: Requests by connecting services through a service registry node
Aside from providing quality­of­life features for discoverability and sharing, this also re­
duces the number of requests in the system by allowing frontends to request stored data
from a service registry node instead of requesting directly to the services. The growth rate
of requests by connecting services directly through frontends is exponential as seen in
Figure 4.10, while the growth rate of connecting services through service registry nodes
is linear as seen in Figure 4.11.
4.2.2
Repository node
The proof of concept for repository nodes has been implemented in ASP.NET Core 7.0
Minimal API written in C#, just like the service registry. Additionally, the NuGet csdot
extension is utilized to create resource relation graphs as dot­files, which can be visualized
through Graphviz by the frontend.
4.2.2.1
Resource storage
The repository node implementation uses file storage for resources and their respective
metadata objects. All metadata objects managed by a repository node are stored as
JSON objects in a file, separate from the resources they describe. A metadata object will
always hold the information required to find the actual resource. File resources are saved
with the same Resource Identifier (RID) as its metadata object, allowing the repository
node to find it. Additionally, the object will have a ”Host” key, with a value that specifies
the location of the resource, which is how miner nodes are able to retrieve resources
based on metadata objects alone. For file resources, the Host value will simply be the
endpoint for the repository node, while for stream resources the Host value is the URL of
the stream broker that holds it. For the implemented artifact, the free online MQTT broker
mqtt.eclipseprojects.io was used. The metadata object for file resources will also specify
its file extension if it has one, e.g. JSON, XML, etc., while for stream resources the stream
topic will be specified instead which can be used in combination with the stream broker
to subscribe and consume the resource. A resource type will always be specified by its
metadata object, which defines whether it is a stream, a log, a histogram, etc. This is
used by the frontend to determine if or how a resource can be visualized, which makes it
possible to match what resources are compatible with certain miner algorithms based on
the miner node configurations. Metadata objects help bridge the gap between resource
types, and especially between stream­ and file resources, as they can be passed around
PDL indiscriminately of their type and location. Refer to Appendix A.2.1 for a more detailed
understanding of metadata objects and their contents.
Process dry lab
20
==PAGE:28==
4.2.2.2
Communication and functionality
Figure 4.12: Repository node interactions
Figure 4.12 shows a more detailed overview of repository nodes’ communication and
their available functionality, compared to Figure 4.3 in section 4.1.2. When a resource
is sent to the repository node, it will expect a FormData object with the file itself, along
with all the meta­information that is required to create a valid metadata object for the
resource. This makes it possible to send a file along with additional information as a
single request, instead of sending its meta­information separately. Additionally, it leaves
all metadata object management for repository nodes to handle. To maintain consistency
across resource types and management, the repository node will also expect FormData
when receiving meta­information without a file, as is the case with stream resources.
When a metadata object has been successfully created and saved, the repository node
will respond with the RID that it generated. This is essential for miner nodes to tell the
frontend how to find the result of a miner algorithm.
The repository node is also able to send a list of metadata objects for all children of a spe­
cific resource, which makes it possible to see what else it has been used for. Additionally,
to support the ability to only get resources that are relevant for a specific miner algorithm,
it is also possible to request a filtered list of metadata objects, based on their resource
types, which is used by the frontend to prevent invalid miner algorithm inputs. Finally,
repository nodes also support the creation of certain resource representations, that are
meant to be visualized by the frontend. These are generic utilities that do not have to
be processed through miner nodes, specifically the representation of event logs and the
creation of resource relation graphs.
4.2.2.3
Event log representation
One such resource representation is the generation of histograms for event logs, showing
how many iterations of each event there are. This gives the user an overview of an event
log before potentially using it in a miner node, without having to see the contents of the
log itself. When a request has been received for a histogram of a resource, the repository
Process dry lab
21
==PAGE:29==
node will initially verify that the resource is an event log, meaning it is valid. If it is, it will
check if a histogram already exists for the resource and send that instead of creating a
new one. If no histogram exists, the repository node will accumulate all the events in the
log and how many iterations there are. Once all events have been counted, they will be
converted to a list of JSON arrays, which the frontend can use to visualize as a histogram.
The result will be saved as a new resource and a metadata object is created for it, which
is marked as a resource child to the original log. By doing this, any future requests for a
histogram of the specific event log would return this histogram instead of creating a new
one.
4.2.2.4
Resource relation graph
The other resource representation that repository nodes support is the creation of re­
source relation graphs, displaying the history of a resource. The resource history is in­
tended to show which processes were executed to create the resource and the resources
that were used as input, i.e. the resource parents. This means that resources uploaded
directly from the frontend are less relevant as they do not have a registered history. How­
ever, resources sent from miner nodes should always have some resource history defined
in the meta­information that they send. The metadata object will store this history, which
includes the URL of the miner node, as well as the Miner Identifier (MID) and label of the
miner algorithm that was used to create the resource. Additionally, resource parents hold
the RIDs of the resources that were used as input in the creation process, along with how
they were used in accordance with the miner algorithm configuration. This is done since
a miner algorithm may take multiple resources of the same type and it makes it possible
to show which resource parent was used for what purpose in the process.
Figure 4.13: Resource relation graph example
Figure 4.13 shows an example of what a resource relation graph could look like. The
repository node will create the graph as a DOT file, which the frontend can use to visualize
it. The blue circle marks the resource that the graph was requested for. A red circle means
that the metadata object is located in another repository node, which implies that some
history may be missing, such as additional parents. Note that in this section, ”graph node”
specifically refers to nodes in the resource relation graph and should not be confused
with PDL services/nodes. When a resource relation graph is requested for an RID, the
repository node will find the relevant metadata object and create a new graph node for
it. It will then fill in the resource label as well as the label of the miner algorithm that was
used to create it, inside the graph node. Any additional information, such as description,
resource type, etc. will be filled in as a tooltip that can be seen when hovering over the
Process dry lab
22
==PAGE:30==
graph node in the frontend. When the original graph node has been created, a recursive
function will be run to identify each resource parent and their respective metadata objects
will be found. Nodes will be created for the parents and the same information will be
filled in for these as well. Additionally, edges will be drawn from the parent to the child
graph node, and the key identifying how the resource parent was used, will be tied to the
connecting edge. The recursive function will repeat until all parents, grandparents, etc.
have been found for the resources that led to the requested metadata object. Once all
graph nodes have been created, the graph will be converted to a dot file and sent to the
frontend.
4.2.3
Miner node
The miner node is implemented in JavaScript with NodeJs. It uses Express to expose
endpoints and Axios to make outgoing HTTP requests. NodeJs Child Processes are
utilized to start asynchronous subprocesses, allowing the service to start any action that
can be called through a terminal.
4.2.3.1
Configurations
The miner node relies heavily on a config.json file to describe the miner algorithms that it
supports. The file is composed of a list of JSON config objects, each holding all the rel­
evant information a miner algorithm needs to be executed. See Appendix A.3.1 for more
detailed information on configurations. Each config object must have a unique Miner Iden­
tifier (MID), that is used to specify which miner algorithm to run, as well as a label that
functions as the name of the miner algorithm. Additionally, the config object must also
specify the resource input and miner algorithm parameters. These are both lists of ob­
jects, each describing the input resource/parameter, such as their ”Type” and ”Name”. Pa­
rameter types could be ”double” or ”integer”, while resource types could be EventStream,
EventLog, ProcessModel, etc. The parameter objects may also define minimum, maxi­
mum, and default values, as well as a description. The ”Name” key, defined in both input­
parameters and resources, is used to specify how the input should be used. As shown in
Figure 4.13 in section 4.2.2.4 a miner algorithm may take multiple resources of the same
type that should be used in different ways. The Name makes it possible for the frontend
to specify how the miner algorithm should use each input. The config objects must also
specify what output the miner algorithm will produce, however, the implementation only
supports a single resource output.
4.2.3.2
Miner wrapper
The miner node is implemented as a ”wrapper” around the miner algorithms. This is
responsible for everything except the actual algorithm execution, i.e. configuration val­
idation and management, communication, resource cleanup, foreign algorithm cloning,
etc. The wrapper will download and upload resources as specified by the incoming re­
quest bodies and manage its active processes. The config object holds a reference to
the file of the miner algorithm and the wrapper uses NodeJs Child Processes to run them,
regardless of what language they were written in. As long as the miner algorithm is able to
be run through a terminal, it can be executed as a Child Process. The wrapper currently
only supports .exe, .jar, and .py files, though more can easily be added. When a miner
action is started, the wrapper will use its Process Identifier (PID) to manage its status so
the frontend can know if the process is running, complete, or crashed.
4.2.3.3
Miner algorithms
A miner algorithm is started through a POST request with a JSON body containing all the
required information to execute the algorithm. The body must contain a MID that lets the
wrapper know which miner algorithm to run. Additionally, an ”Input” and an ”Output” key
will be defined in the request body, each with a JSON object as its value. The value for
Input will consist of 2 keys, ”Resources” and ”Minerparameters”, both of which are also
Process dry lab
23
==PAGE:31==
JSON objects that are tightly coupled with the input resources and parameters defined by
the config object of the miner algorithm that is to be run. The object for the MinerParame­
ters key has a key­value pair for each parameter defined in the config object. Similarly, the
Resources object will have a metadata object tied to each resource input defined by the
config object for the algorithm. The Output object in the request body will specify where
the resource result should go and what it should be called.
Figure 4.14: File­consuming algorithm interactions with Wrapper
Figure 4.15: File­consuming algorithm communication flow
Figure 4.14 shows an example of a file­consuming algorithm with the wrapper and figure
4.15 shows the communication order. The wrapper will initially download the resources
for the metadata objects specified by the request body. For a more detailed idea of how
a request body is structured, please see Appendix A.3.2. As seen in Figure 4.15, the
Process dry lab
24
==PAGE:32==
request body is updated by adding the local paths to the downloaded files, as the value
to each ”Name” key defined by ”ResourceInput” in the config object. Later, this will let
the algorithm read the resource and use it in the correct manner. Once all files have
been downloaded, the wrapper will execute the algorithm and send the updated request
body as input arguments. The algorithm is executed as a node Child Process, and the
frontend is given a PID, which can be used to request a status object for the process.
When the miner algorithm has been run, it saves the result in a new file and prints its
path, letting the wrapper know what to send. The wrapper knows the output destination
from the initial request body and will send the new file there along with any relevant meta­
information, i.e. its label, what miner algorithm was used to create it, the input it took, etc.
The repository node receiving the result should respond with a RID, which the wrapper will
add to the status object. The next time the frontend requests a status update, the RID will
be part of the response and can be used to get the algorithm output. Since the miner node
process is complete, the wrapper will remove the status object from managed processes
and delete any downloaded or generated resources from its temporary storage. The miner
node implementation has multiple file­consuming algorithms that utilize PM4PY [5] to run
algorithms with varying input and output types. The PM4PY Heuristic and Alpha miners
were implemented to generate a Petri Net output, while the Inductive miner is used to
create a BPMN output. Additionally, the PM4PY TBR and Alignment methods have been
used to illustrate miner algorithms that consume multiple resources.
Figure 4.16: Stream­consuming algorithm interactions with Wrapper
Process dry lab
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.17: Stream­consuming algorithm communication flow
As shown in Figure 4.16, a stream­consuming algorithm is largely similar to the file­
consuming algorithm, while the communication from Figure 4.17 shows how it deviates.
For the sake of simplicity, the example does not show the download of resources from a
repository node, since this is already covered in the file­consuming algorithm diagrams;
4.14 and 4.15. Similarly, the request body will specify which miner algorithm to run as well
as the metadata object for the resources to use. Since no files need to be downloaded
in this example, the wrapper will immediately start the stream­consuming algorithm and
return its PID. The miner algorithm will still receive the request body as input arguments
and the metadata objects in the body will specify which stream broker to connect to and
what topic it should subscribe to. The algorithm will consume messages from the stream
and process them in some way. Once a result has been produced, it is written to a file,
and the path to the file is printed by the algorithm, which will trigger the wrapper to send
it to the specified repository node. This part functions almost the exact same way as file­
consuming algorithms, except the wrapper will specify in the meta­information that the
new resource is ”Dynamic”. This means that the algorithm will continuously be updating
the file and printing its path, which will cause the wrapper to repeatedly request to update
the specific resource in the repository node. As shown in Figure 4.17, the status object is
not set to be complete once a RID has been returned from the repository node as it was for
file­consuming algorithm in Figure 4.15. Instead, the process will continue until a request
is made to stop it. The stream­consuming algorithm implementation uses Paho MQTT to
connect and subscribe to a topic on a stream broker in order to generate a continuously
updating histogram of the streamed messages.
Process dry lab
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.18: Miner algorithms publish to stream
As mentioned in 4.1.3.1, both types of miner algorithms can also publish their output to
a stream instead. Figure 4.18 is a simple illustration of how this could look. As with
any miner algorithm, it could also have files as input resources or consume from another
stream. The flow is largely similar, except that no file is sent to a repository node. The
wrapper will still start the miner algorithm and return a PID. The algorithm is expected
to print a single time once it has started publishing, triggering the wrapper to send the
necessary meta­information to a repository node, to act as a reference for this stream
resource.
4.2.3.4
Clone miner actions
Miner nodes have the ability to clone miner algorithms from other miner nodes. For a
miner algorithm to be clonable, it must be specified by its config object that it is allowed.
This will add an exact copy of a foreign miner algorithm to a miner node, adding it to its
list of available miner algorithms.
Figure 4.19: Clone miner action interactions with Wrapper
Process dry lab
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.20: Clone miner action communication flow
Figure 4.19 shows the interaction of nodes and internal components in the wrapper when a
clone miner action is initialized for a Python miner algorithm. Figure 4.20 shows the order
of operations that are executed when cloning a Python algorithm. The request body holds
the config object of the foreign miner algorithm and the endpoint it needs to receive the
necessary files. The wrapper will attempt to download and save the required files in a new
folder before responding with the PID that is used to request status updates. Since this
example is for a Python algorithm, the wrapper utilizes NodeJs child processes to create
a Python virtual environment in the newly created folder, after which the dependencies
specified by the requirements file are installed. Once the new algorithm has been fully
cloned and initialized, the config object will be updated with a new MID and a path to
reference its location. This config object is added to the list of configurations already in
the miner node. When a status request is made at this stage, the wrapper will respond that
the miner algorithm is ready to use. If the foreign miner algorithm was directly executable,
i.e. an EXE or JAR file, the wrapper would not download the requirements or install any
dependencies.
4.2.4
Frontend
The frontend presents all options users can execute through a graphical web UI and re­
stricts actions that should not or cannot be completed. The frontend is a single­page appli­
cation written in Javascript with the React framework, SASS (Syntactically Awesome Style
Sheets) for styling, and Axios for request handling. Libraries used for visualizations in­
clude BPMN­js from Camunda, Graphviz­react, and React­google­charts. Smaller pack­
ages for UI components consist of React­select, react­spinner, and react­icons. To enable
the frontend to remember customizations, processes, and resources between sessions,
without connecting the user to an external database, the frontend utilizes the browser
storage (also called local storage). The frontend is implemented using a recognizable UI
design consisting of a topbar, sidebars, and popups, to help users learn how to use the
system more quickly. The UI elements allow hiding and showing of the most important
Process dry lab
28
==PAGE:36==
aspect a user needs, which removes clutter, thereby creating a flexible workspace.
Figure 4.21: Frontend overview 1 ­ default
Figure 4.21 shows the UI when a visualization (3) is selected from the sidebar (1). There
are multiple visualizations that can be selected from the tabs (2), and options to expand
or collapse the shown sidebar (4) or the connected services sidebar (5).
Figure 4.22: Frontend overview 2 ­ hosts
Figure 4.22 shows that the connected services sidebar (6) is a way to add, remove or uti­
lize the connected services in the workspace. When open it will overlay the other sidebar
(1).
Process dry lab
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.23: Frontend overview 3 ­ popup
Actions are performed in popups (7), which can be accessed from sidebars, the visual­
ization, or the connected services. Figure 4.23 shows the miner algorithm popup, and the
recognizable UI patterns shared by all popups. For a full description of all UI elements,
please see Appendix A.4.1.
The frontend is the mediator between services, allowing it to control the information flow
and inspect results, and resources. Miner algorithms require metadata objects from a
repository node combined with user inputs for any required parameters and the output
location for the result. Resources from a repository node become available when con­
nected to it, allowing users to utilize these for starting miner algorithms or viewing them in
their workspace. When selecting resources as input for miner algorithms, the frontend will
display a filtered list of resources that comply with the expected input defined by the config
object of the miner algorithm. The dropdown components in the UI allow simple search
functionality to help users to find the desired miner algorithms or resources from the lists
that can contain large amounts of options. The following sections will take a deeper look
at the options provided by the frontend for starting actions, inspecting resources, or cus­
tomization.
4.2.4.1
Hosts
Users can connect any number of services to their workspace, either directly or through a
service registry node. Adding a service directly requires the user to know its URL, whereas
adding a service through a service registry node requires the user to be connected to the
service registry node. The frontend will request status and configurations from the ser­
vice itself if it is connected directly, while it will request status and configurations from the
service registry node for any services added through here. If the service registry node is
offline for any reason, the frontend will request the services instead as if connected di­
rectly. The frontend will store connected hosts in local memory as JSON object containing
their status and configuration, thereby not affecting the workspace of other users.
4.2.4.2
File handling
Workspaces can upload and download resources from repository nodes, but removing a
resource in the workspace will only remove it from the workspace. Resources are stored
in local memory to reduce the necessary communication of repeated retrieval of the same
resource and make them available offline. The implementation of the frontend requires
Process dry lab
30
==PAGE:38==
resources to be in local memory to be visualized. This would cause problems for large
resources that exceed the storage limit of entries in the local memory. However, this pro­
vides memory across sessions without utilizing a database that can hold this information.
Before a resource is requested, the metadata object is always requested first because its
contents are necessary for utilizing the resource in the frontend. The implementation of
resource handling and the workflow of users are similar as a consequence of this division
into metadata objects and resources. All resources in a workspace present options to in­
spect related resources through a tab. The resource history is seen through the resource
relation graph, while immediate resource children can be downloaded from a dropdown
menu. This gives context to the resource and allows insight into the applications of the
resource.
4.2.4.3
Visualizations
All Visualizations in the frontend are React components where each is capable of reading
and presenting resources of a very specific structure. Within the field of process mining­
and analysis there are many different ways to represent data which creates a need for
different visualization options. Visualizations are determined by an inclusion list in the
configuration of the frontend, which uses a combination of the resource type and file ex­
tension from metadata objects. This combination is necessary because resource types
can be visualized by different file extensions, e.g. a process model can be visualized with
BPMN or PNG file. Some file formats can be used to visualize multiple different resource
types, e.g. JSON files are used to visualize histograms and alignments. Visualization
components in the frontend only visualize a resource, which creates a need for external
conversion of certain resources e.g. converting event logs to histograms which happen in
repository nodes. To allow research in new resource formats, images, and Graphviz’ DOT
notation is supported to provide flexible visualization options that don’t require writing new
React visualization components for the frontend.
Figure 4.24: Visualization in the frontend
Figure 4.24 describes what happens in the frontend when a user selects a resource for
visualization. If the resource is located in local memory, it will be visualized, otherwise, it
will be retrieved from the repository node. The dynamic attribute in the metadata object
determines if a resource is expected to change. If a dynamic resource is selected for vi­
sualization it will trigger an update loop that will request the metadata object and resource
based on an interval. The loop breaks if the dynamic attribute changes, another resource
is selected, or the dynamic resource is removed from the workspace. It may be desir­
able to manually edit a resource, which is possible for the BPMN visualizer. When a user
Process dry lab
31
==PAGE:39==
saves a changed BPMN model, it will create a new resource to be stored in a repository
node. The changes will appear in the resource history graph of the resource.
4.2.4.4
Miner algorithm process handling
Figure 4.25: Miner algorithm process status in frontend
Figure 4.25 describes the internal flow in the frontend, where all running processes are
retrieved, and used to get the process status. A process object within the frontend is a
data object stored in local memory used to track the status of running miner algorithms. If
a process is complete, the resource will be retrieved from the repository node, otherwise,
the process object will be used in the next iteration. If a process has crashed, the error
will be saved in the process object and can be inspected through the icon in the process
overview. process objects are used to track how long it has taken to complete, which can
also be inspected through the process overview. The process overview can be accessed
from the button in the sidebar and will display all processes, their status, their time, and
what resource they have produced and allow running processes to be stopped.
4.2.4.5
Clone miner action process handling
Figure 4.26: Clone miner action process status in frontend
Starting a clone miner action will create a process object similar to miner algorithms,
but is managed differently. These process objects are not visually represented in the
process overview, and cannot be stopped. In Figure 4.26 the internal flow of the frontend
displays how a cloning process is used. When a cloning process is complete, it will be
deleted, therefore it is not necessary to distinguish between the process status. On every
iteration, all cloning processes are retrieved and used to retrieve status. If the process
is incomplete, nothing happens and will be used in the following iteration. If the process
is complete, it will retrieve and override the configurations of the miner node, delete the
process object, and display an information prompt stating the successful completion. If a
process crashes, the error will be shown in a prompt, and the new configurations will not
be retrieved.
Process dry lab
32
==PAGE:40==
5
Evaluation
This section will verify and validate the solution in terms of how the implementation ful­
fills the requirements of the specified architecture and if the solution covers each of the
research questions posed in section 2.3.
5.1
Verification
The implemented artifact is verified through automated integration­ and functional tests,
in combination with manual end­to­end testing in the frontend. Because PDL covers a
large number of features, the tests focus on the primary functionality that is required to
fulfill the architecture described in section 4.1. Certain edge cases and unique scenarios
have been tested as well to confirm certain functionality or confirm the services’ ability
to handle unexpected requests. To best test the architecture as a whole, the tests are
primarily focused on the verification of the service endpoints, which confirms internal logic
and functionality. The tests covered in all tables referenced in this section are successful.
5.1.1
Automated tests
The implemented services have a total of 33 endpoints, each of which has been verified
through a series of automated integration­ and functional tests. These are created as a
Python script and are intended to emulate the requests that would normally go through the
frontend in order to confirm that the endpoints respond as expected. Additional tests have
been made to further verify the functionality of the services, by confirming the final result
of a request instead of the immediate response. Finally, some negative tests have been
made to ensure the service’s ability to handle invalid requests. Since these scenarios are
not possible through the frontend, the negative tests only cover the functionality that best
displays the services’ ability to error handle.
5.1.1.1
Service registry tests
The service registry has 9 endpoints that can be seen in Appendix A.1.2. The service
registry node contains significantly less functionality compared to the other service types,
and as such it required less testing to verify. Table 5.1 shows the tests for each endpoint
provided by the service registry node.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
Ping
Confirm connection
Pong
Add miner
Send a JSON object with a URL and verify the
response message
Confirmation
message
Get miners
Request a list of available miner URLs and
confirm that a recently added miner URL is in
the response.
List of miner
URLs
Delete miner
Send a request body with an object containing
the URL of a recently added miner and verify the
response message
Confirmation
message
Add repository
Send a JSON object with a URL and verify the
response message
Confirmation
message
Process dry lab
33
==PAGE:41==
Get repositories
Request a list of available repository URLs and
confirm that a recently added repository URL is
in the response.
List of repository
URLs
Delete repository
Send a request body with an object containing
the URL of a recently added repository and
verify the response message
Confirmation
message
Get filtered
connections
Send request body with an array of active
repository and miner URLs. Confirm that these
URLs are in the response message.
Filtered list of
available node
URLs
Get filtered
configurations
Send request body with an array of active
repository and miner URLs. Confirm that these
URLs are in the response message.
Filtered node
configurations list
Table 5.1: Automated service registry node tests
5.1.1.2
Repository tests
Each of the 13 endpoints in the repository node has been tested, both in terms of their
immediate return value, as well as verifying the information of uploaded resources. The
details of the endpoints can be seen in Appendix A.2.3. Table 5.2 shows the positive tests
for the repository. This is meant to verify the functionality of the repository node that is
expected by miner nodes and the frontend.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
Ping
Confirm connection
Pong
Configurations
Request configurations and confirm the
response has a key ”Type”, with the value
”Repository”.
Repository
configurations
Upload file
POST request with FormData containing a file
and its relevant meta­information
Valid GUID
Get file metadata
object
Metadata GET request with the RID received
from uploading a file with valid meta­information.
The values in the meta­information are
compared to the response metadata object.
Meta­information
values exist in
metadata object
Get resource
Resource GET request with the RID from
uploading a file.
File with data
Update file
PUT request to update the file for an RID by
sending FormData with a new file. Afterward,
request the new file for the RID.
File has been
updated
Get histogram
Requests a histogram with the RID of an XES
file that has been uploaded.
JSON file with
data
Get resource
relation graph
Requests the resource relation graph for a valid
RID.
DOT file with
data
Process dry lab
34
==PAGE:42==
Upload stream
meta­information
POST request with FormData containing valid
meta­information for a stream, i.e. stream
broker and topic.
Valid GUID
Get stream
metadata object
Metadata GET request with the RID received
from uploading for a stream. The values in the
meta­information are compared to the response
metadata object.
Meta­information
values exist in
metadata object
Update stream
metadata object
PUT request to update the metadata object for
an RID by sending FormData with new values.
Afterward, request the metadata object to
confirm the updated values.
Metadata object
has been
updated
Filtered metadata
object list
Requests a list of metadata objects with filters
for resource types that are known to exist, via
previous uploads. The list will be searched for at
least one metadata object with the resource
types defined by the filters.
Metadata objects
for all resource
type filters in list
Metadata
children
Upload new meta­information with the RID of a
previously uploaded resource as its parent.
Request the new metadata object and confirm
its values. Request all children metadata
objects for the parent RID and confirm that the
child RID is in the response list.
Child RID in
response
Table 5.2: Automated positive repository node tests
The negative tests for the repository node are to confirm its ability to detect and handle
invalid requests in order for it to return meaningful error messages. Table 5.3 shows the
negative tests for the repository, wherein the most relevant endpoints have been tested.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
Upload file
POST request with FormData containing a file
and meta­information that is missing required
keys, i.e. ResourceLabel and ResourceType.
Error message
Upload stream
meta­information
POST request with FormData containing
meta­information that has EventStream as its
resource type, but without stream broker and
topic
Error message
Get histogram
Requests a histogram with the RID of a PNML
file that has been uploaded.
Error message
Filtered metadata
object list
Requests a list of metadata objects for resource
types that do not exist.
Empty list
Table 5.3: Automated negative repository node tests
Process dry lab
35
==PAGE:43==
5.1.1.3
Miner tests
The miner node implementation has a total of 11 endpoints, though the functionality sup­
ported by some of these endpoints varies significantly. Table 5.4 shows the positive tests
for the miner node, which does not include all potential functionality. Certain example
algorithms have been used to verify the features of a file­consuming algorithm and a
stream­consuming algorithm, though the verification of their output could be different if
other miner algorithms were used. Therefore, only the primary features of the miner node
have been tested.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
ping
Confirm connection
pong
Get miner
configurations
Requests the list of configurations for a miner
node and verifies that the config object for an
expected miner algorithm is in there by
searching for its MID.
Config obj for
MID
Start
file­consuming
algorithm
Creates a request body with the metadata object
of an XES file resource and specifies the output
to be an active repository node. Afterward,
request the miner node to run its alpha miner
algorithm.
PID
Get status list
Request a list of status objects for all active
processes and search through it to find an
object with the PID of a recently started miner
algorithm.
Status object for
PID
File­consuming
algorithm result
Request the miner node for a status object via
the PID until an RID is returned. Use this RID to
request the repository node for the
file­consuming algorithm output.
PNML File
Start and stop
file­consuming
algorithm
Starts a file­consuming algorithm and uses the
PID to stop it immediately. Verifies that the
response message is correct and then requests
a status list to verify that the PID is no longer
there.
PID not in status
list
Start
file­consuming
algorithm
publisher
Request a file­consuming algorithm with no
input resources that is expected to publish to a
stream. Request the status for the PID until an
RID is returned. Use this to request the
repository node for the resulting stream
metadata object.
Stream metadata
object
Start stream­
consuming
algorithm
Use the metadata object for an active stream in
the request body to start the example stream
miner in the miner node. Verify that the
response is a PID and not an error message
PID
Process dry lab
36
==PAGE:44==
Stream­
consuming
algorithm status
Request a status object for the PID of an active
stream­consuming algorithm until an RID is
returned. Check that the status is neither
”complete” nor ”crash” as the process should
keep running
Status object
with RID
Stream­
consuming
algorithm result
Request the output repository node for the result
file of a stream­consuming algorithm. Wait for 5
seconds before requesting the same file and
compare the 2 results to verify that they are
different and that they are not empty.
Updating file
Stream­
consuming
algorithm stop
Use the PID of an active stream­consuming
algorithm to send a stop request. Request the
status list and verify that the PID is no longer
there. Request the resource twice from the
repository node to verify that the process is no
longer active.
Resource no
longer updating.
Get algorithm file
Request a miner node for a Python file of a
cloneable algorithm and verify that the response
is a file with contents.
Python file
Get requirements
file
Request a miner node for the requirements.txt
file of a cloneable python algorithm and verify
that the response is a file with contents.
TXT file
Start clone miner
action
Request a miner to perform a clone miner action
by sending the configurations of a cloneable
miner algorithm.
PID
Clone miner
action status
Request the status of a clone miner action via
the PID response and verify that the process is
active.
Status is running
Cloned miner
algorithm
Request the status of a clone miner action until it
is complete. Afterward, run the cloned miner
algorithm and verify that the process is active,
that it can be stopped, and that the repository
node has a metadata object from the miner
algorithm.
Repository node
has miner
algorithm output
Table 5.4: Automated positive miner node tests
Table 5.5 shows the negative tests for the miner node, which is intended to confirm its
ability to reject or abort invalid requests and return meaningful error messages.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
Start
file­consuming
algorithm
Request the miner node to start the alpha miner
with the metadata object of a PNML file, instead
of the XES file it expects.
Error message
Process dry lab
37
==PAGE:45==
Get status list
After attempting to start a miner algorithm with
invalid input, request a status list to verify that no
new processes have been started.
Error message
and no new
process
Get algorithm file
Request a miner node for the algorithm file of a
miner algorithm that does not allow cloning.
Error message
Get requirements
file
Request a miner node for the requirements.txt
file for a miner algorithm that does not allow
cloning.
Error message
Start clone miner
action
Request a miner to perform a clone miner action
with configurations of a non­cloneable miner.
Error message
Table 5.5: Automated negative repository node tests
5.1.2
Manual tests
A total of 53 manual end­to­end tests have been performed, to confirm the functionality
of the services through the frontend and to test the frontend itself. These can all be
seen in Appendix A.5 and there are 8 tests for the service registry node A.5.1, 25 for
the repository node A.5.2, and 20 for the miner node A.5.3. As many of these tests are
similar or variations of the automated tests, the following table 5.6 only includes a subset
of the manual tests that are described in the Appendix. This subset consists of tests that
are specific to the frontend, such as manually changing a BPMN file or connecting hosts.
Some tests have been aggregated into a single row as they are variations of the same
test.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
Connect
repository node
By manually connecting a repository node, new
resources become available for viewing or to
use in a miner algorithm.
New resources
available
Connect miner
node
Connecting a miner node enables new miner
actions, such as new cloning options and new
algorithms.
New miner
actions become
available
Visualizers
All possible visualization types of the frontend
have been verified by viewing resource types for
each visualization option. These are BPMN,
DOT, JPG, SVG, and PNG files, as well as
JSON files that can be either alignments or
histograms
Viewable
resources for all
7 visualizations
Change BPMN
By viewing a BPMN file, the visualization option
allows for manual changes, which can be saved
in a repository node. This is verified by removing
the resource from the workspace and retrieving
it again from the repository node to confirm the
changes
Updated BPMN
Process dry lab
38
==PAGE:46==
View processes
By starting miner algorithms of different types
and forcing some of them to return an error, e.g.
by stopping the repository node, it is confirmed
that the frontend can show processes that are
running, have completed, have been stopped or
have crashed
All 4 process
states can be
seen
cloning
processes
By starting clone miner actions for different
types of miner algorithm, it is confirmed that the
frontend can show the end status of these
processes through a prompt for; completed,
stopped, or have crashed
All 3 process
states can be
seen when the
process ends
Table 5.6: Frontend specific manual tests
5.1.3
Verification Summary
This is a summary of the tests that have been conducted to confirm the implemented
solution’s ability to fulfill its expected requirements.
Node
Endpoints
Automated Tests
Manual Tests
All tests
Service registry
9
9
8
17
Repository
13
17
25
42
Miner
11
21
20
41
All nodes
33
47
53
100
Table 5.7: Summary of automated and manual tests
Table 5.7 shows a summary of the 47 automated and 53 manual tests that have been per­
formed to verify the integration, functionality, and output of the implementations. Through
a total of 100 tests, the implementation is confirmed to fulfill the expected requirements
of the proposed architecture.
5.2
Validation
Table 5.8 will clarify how each research question has been covered by the solution. The
overarching research questions are answered indirectly by answering their respective
sub­questions.
Research question
Answer
Research question 1: Is it possible to create a decentralized architecture with
self­contained language agnostic services that researchers can freely add to?
Process dry lab
39
==PAGE:47==
RQ1.1: Is it possible for
any users to extend the
system with new services
that provide additional
functionality or resources
without conflicting with
previously added
services?
The proposed architecture allows for any user to freely
add new independent nodes with varying functionality or
resources 4.2.4.1. Through repository nodes, new
resources can be made available from unknown users,
while also having the option to add repository nodes that
they have full control over 4.2.2. With miner nodes, new
features can be made available, providing a platform to
share, develop and validate new algorithms 4.2.3.
RQ1.2: Is it possible to
create a service that can
interpolate different
programming languages?
The implementation of the miner node introduced the
wrapper, which is designed to run scripts in foreign
programming languages like Python, or executable
algorithms such as .exe or .jar files. The implementation
is structured so additional file types can easily be added
as long as the algorithm can be run through a terminal
with input arguments 4.2.3.2.
RQ1.3: Is it possible to
create an architecture that
enables flexibility of
functionality that will
reduce the required work
for researchers?
The design and implementation of PDL make it possible
to be utilized as a development tool, by supplying various
reusable and commonly needed functionality, and the
loose coupling between nodes ensures that unfinished
additions may break without influencing the system as a
whole. The additional resource representations
supported through repository nodes, as well as the
features offered by the frontend, are specifically intended
to increase researchers’ productivity 4.2.2.2, 4.2.4.
Research question 2: Is it possible to create an architecture that supports privacy of
resources, while also having the option to make them publicly accessible?
RQ2.1: Can this
architecture allow
researchers to share their
mining algorithms without
exposing their source
code?
The core architecture of PDL is designed to enable
researchers to share their algorithm implementations
without sharing their code. By publicly hosting the
implementation as a miner node, other users may test
and validate it through the PDL frontend, without ever
having direct access to the code 4.2.3.
RQ2.2: Can this
architecture let users run
external algorithms
without sharing
confidential data?
By giving algorithm developers the option to have their
miner algorithms be clonable, users may copy algorithms
from foreign miner nodes into their own miner node,
thereby making it possible to run algorithms without
sharing resources with a third party. This is done through
the implementation of the wrapper, allowing algorithms in
a multitude of languages to be copied and run 4.2.3.2.
Since the ability to have a miner algorithm be clonable is
entirely optional it does not conflict with RQ2.1.
Process dry lab
40
==PAGE:48==
RQ2.3: Can an
architecture like this
provide discoverability
while reducing network
communication?
The service registry node is designed as an optional
method of sharing the location of repository­ and miner
nodes. This makes it possible to create a sub­network of
available nodes, where anyone connected to a service
registry node can see and connect to any of its registered
nodes. It also significantly reduces the communication
required, as pings and node configurations all go through
the service registry node, instead of having every client
maintain the availability status of all nodes they have
connected 4.2.1.
RQ2.4: Can a
decentralized network be
extended with publicly
available prototypes
without removing the
option to keep them
private?
It was important that the design supported the option to
use PDL as a development tool, which meant adding new
nodes that may be hosted locally or not ready to be
publicly available. Additionally, the system may be
extended with new public nodes that can be discovered
via a service registry node or by sharing the location
through external means. Due to the loose coupling
between nodes and the different options of adding and
managing nodes via the frontend, it is possible to add
nodes that are hosted locally, publically, or through a
service registry node 4.2.4.1.
Research question 3: Is it possible to allow customization, inspection, or
management of different types of services, processes, and resources in a
workspace?
RQ3.1: Is it possible to
create a customizable
workspace in a system
where new services can
be added by any user?
The implementation and design of the frontend enable
users to add or remove available nodes depending on
their needs. The additional convenience of service
registry nodes makes it possible to choose which of the
registered nodes should be added to your workspace
4.2.4.1.
RQ3.2: Is it possible to
create a workspace that
can start, stop and
manage processes in
foreign and local services
with potentially unknown
and varying use cases?
The miner node implementation ensures that when a
client initiates a miner action, the response includes a
PID. The miner node will manage all its active processes
and provide endpoints to stop or return a status update
based on the PID 4.2.3.3. The frontend implementation
utilizes this to give users an overview of active processes
or the ability to stop them 4.2.4.4.
RQ3.3: Is it possible to
create a customizable
workspace capable of
uploading, removing,
viewing, and changing
resources of different
types, sizes, and
structures?
Repository nodes’ primary responsibilities are upload and
download of resources, which the frontend utilizes
4.2.2.2. Through the frontend, resources can be added,
viewed, and removed to only see the resources that a
user needs 4.2.4.2. Via the integration of
Camunda­BPMN.js into the frontend, it is also possible to
change BPMN diagrams and save them in a repository
node 4.2.4.3.
Process dry lab
41
==PAGE:49==
RQ3.4: Is it possible to
view the history of
resources, which
processes they have gone
through, and how they
have been used?
Part of the functionality provided by repository nodes is
the ability to generate a resource relation graph 4.2.2.4.
This is a representation of the sequence of miner
algorithms, the resources used, and the order they have
been executed to reach a specific resource. This is
supplied as a dot file that the frontend can retrieve and
visualizes for any resource 4.2.4.3.
RQ3.5: Can such a
system support both file
and stream resources
similarly as input and
output for mining
algorithms?
The design and implementation are flexible in the
different types of resources it supports. The miner node
implementation supports both file and stream inputs and
outputs through file­consuming algorithms and
stream­consuming algorithms. While file­consuming
algorithms will normally output a static file, it can also
publish to a stream, as with stream­consuming
algorithms. Beyond publishing to a stream,
stream­consuming algorithms can also output a
”Dynamic” file to a repository node, which will
continuously update 4.2.3.3. By giving the metadata
object for the resource output a ”Dynamic” tag, the
frontend is able to identify that the resource is changing
and thereby repeatedly request and view the updated
resource 4.2.4.3.
Table 5.8: Validation of solution against research questions
5.3
Threat to Validity
The focus of this thesis has been to confirm that the research questions can be fulfilled and
how this could be implemented. However, certain verification methods have been omitted
due to time limitations and priority. Though the integration­, functional, and end­to­end
tests confirm the core communication and functionality requirements of the system, ad­
ditional unit­ or performance testing would have been beneficial. Unit testing could make
it safer for users to make changes to the service templates as they would have a faster
way of identifying potential problems with these changes. This was de­prioritized since
the most logic­intensive parts are the algorithms in the miner nodes, which the developers
would have to test themselves. Performance testing could have been used to verify the
stability and speed of the individual services. However, as will be covered briefly in Chap­
ter 8, Future Work 8, a service would likely need a load balancer and message queues to
be reliable in a production setting. The implementation could have been verified further
by hosting the services externally to ensure public sharing, as this was only confirmed
by connecting services from another machine over Wifi with their IP address, instead of
localhost.
Process dry lab
42
==PAGE:50==
6
Discussion
This section will consider the proposed architecture, the decision­making that went into
its implementation, and some of the limitations that have occurred as a consequence.
The primary purpose of PDL was to create a platform that provides a more efficient and
accessible way of sharing algorithms. Additional considerations were made to have it
function as a useful tool for the development of said algorithms, by supplying many com­
monly used features and visualization options. Though security was not a primary focus
of the implementation, several design choices were made to have the architecture support
privacy of miner algorithms and resources.
The pluggable nature of PDL’s design makes it possible to freely add or remove nodes,
both in terms of availability as well as what nodes a user wishes to see in their own
workspace. This is an alternative approach to typical open­source systems, which have
to be approved and go through a pull request. The loose coupling of PDL ensures that
newly added nodes are entirely independent of existing nodes. Although nodes may be
added that are incompatible with the system, this will have no impact on any other previ­
ously available functionality. The implementations of the different node types, function as
optional templates that create a low barrier to entry.
The design of the repository node conflicts with the Single Responsibility Principle from
Microservices by being responsible for the generation of histograms and resource relation
graphs. This is a trade­off for repository nodes to offer generic functionalities that reduce
the required communication and the need to send potentially sensitive log files across mul­
tiple nodes just to gain an overview. The repository node implements a split file database,
managing resources, and their metadata objects separately. Adding a file database di­
rectly in the repository node reduces the barrier to entry compared to requiring new users
to set up and host external databases. However, the implementation utilizes interfaces to
minimize the work needed to integrate a real database. The decision to split resources
from their meta­information was to bridge the gap between file­ and stream resources
since streams are located in stream brokers, allowing repository nodes to maintain their
primary responsibility of managing resources.
Metadata objects function as binding agents within the system as they are used by both
the frontend and miner nodes. Them having a fixed structure is essential as it allows
other components to access and extract the specific information they need from it, which
may vary depending on the use case. This creates a potential limitation as it relies on its
structure to remain the same as the system evolves. If metadata objects were to change
entirely, it would require changes to the frontend, as well as all pre­existing repository­
and miner nodes to fit this change. However, simple additions to the metadata object
in order to support a specific miner node’s requirements would not negatively affect any
other nodes that do not need it.
The design of the solution focuses heavily on having the nodes be language agnostic to
lower the barriers to entry, which was further explored with the polyglot approach to imple­
menting the miner node. Node.js child processes were chosen to achieve this as opposed
to alternatives such as Metacall [23] and GraalVM [24] which utilize virtual runtime envi­
ronments. The problems with these options are that Metacall has a paywall, and GraalVM
has limited support for non­standard libraries, making it less desirable than the command
line approach provided by Node.js child processes. Through the wrapper, users may write
Process dry lab
43
==PAGE:51==
new algorithms in a multitude of programming languages, without having to consider API
communication, config validation, etc. The wrapper increases the minimum complexity
required by a miner node as it needs to support as many potential miner algorithms as
possible. However, it significantly reduces the complexity and work required to add new
miner algorithms to the system, since you do not need to understand how the wrapper
works in order to use it. An additional benefit of the wrapper is the option to clone miner
algorithms from one miner node to another, enabling users to run foreign algorithms from
an untrusted source in an environment they can control to avoid leaking confidential re­
sources. This would not be possible without the wrapper as miner algorithms could be
written in any programming language.
Service registry nodes make it possible to create a sub­network that groups or organi­
zations may utilize to make new miner­ or repository nodes more easily discoverable.
Nodes can also be added manually, however, this would require users to share the URLs
to their nodes through external means, making it more impractical to share or discover
new nodes. In section 4.2.1, figures 4.10 and 4.11 illustrated the potential exponential in­
crease in ping and config requests when connecting nodes directly to the client, versus the
linear increase when miner­ and repository nodes are connected through a service reg­
istry. Even though it is unlikely that all nodes are connected to all clients, the increase is
still significantly lower when service registry nodes are utilized. A potential inefficiency of
the current service registry implementation is that registered nodes will be pinged even if
no frontend is connected to it, while direct connections would leave unused nodes entirely
dormant. This potentially creates needless communication, though it could be solved by
making service registry nodes smarter and only ping nodes that frontends are requesting
connection updates for. As these requests are simple, the potential inefficiency is minor,
so it was not a priority implementation.
Since PDL is intended as both a method of sharing and testing algorithms and resources,
as well as a convenient tool to assist in the development process, a number of visualization
options are offered through the frontend. The current implementation utilizes several pre­
existing solutions to visualize and interact with resources such as Camundas BPMN.js for
BPMN files and Graphviz for DOT files. A custom solution was made to show the results
of conformance checking, though this is minimal and requires additional development to
better represent alignments. The frontend is also currently unable to visualize or interact
with PNML files, which is a significant limitation of the available functionality. To counter­
act the current visualization limitations of the frontend, common image types, i.e. SVG,
JPG, and PNG, are supported as an alternative. Since miner algorithms in miner nodes
can offer a wide range of functionalities, they can also be used to convert unsupported
resource types, such as PNML, to an image so that it can be viewed in the frontend.
Resources may be viewed through the frontend by downloading them from a repository
node and storing the contents in the browser’s local memory. Local memory is utilized
as the private storage of a user’s workspace as a database that is integrated with the
frontend. This allows users to view saved data between sessions and enables offline ac­
cess to previously downloaded resources. By using local storage, the time it takes to load
resources when switching between them is significantly reduced as it does not have to
request it again. This has the downside of potentially filling up the user’s browser mem­
ory unless they manually remove unused resources from the inspection panel. Event
logs are among the resources expected to be the largest files and will never be down­
loaded by the frontend, it would take a very large number of unmanaged resources in
a workspace to fill up its memory. However, it would be beneficial to add the option of
having an automatic cleanup of unused resources. Ideally, the frontend would have ac­
Process dry lab
44
==PAGE:52==
cess to a database for this information, but this presents new questions such as if users
should host individual databases, or share a database with other users. If users need
to host their own database, the barrier to entry could increase, but having multiple users
share a database might cause security issues and provides a single point of failure for the
connected users.
7
Conclusion
Due to the growing attention towards the fields of process mining and analysis, from busi­
ness and academia alike, there is an increasing need for a solution that supports the
convenient sharing of algorithms for validation and review. In order for such a solution to
become enticing it must offer functionalities specifically designed to enhance research de­
velopment and enable options for privacy of algorithms and resources. PDL achieves this
by combining microservices, pluggable microservices, and P2P architectures. By treat­
ing nodes as SaaS plugins to a user’s workspace, algorithms can be shared, used, and
reviewed seamlessly without revealing source code. This also enables resource sharing
and through the option of cloning foreign miner algorithms to a controlled environment, it
is possible to maintain resource privacy as well. The solution offers a wide range of op­
tions to make it accessible. This is achieved by supporting visualization options, the miner
wrapper, and a fully functioning out­of­the­box repository node that lowers the barriers to
entry. Additionally, by allowing algorithms, or entire services, to be written in any program­
ming language, the barriers to entry are further reduced by removing the need to learn
a specific programming language. The limitations discussed in chapter 6 will be further
explored in chapter 8 with potential solutions and thoughts for resolving them. Despite
these limitations, the design offers a versatile, expandable, and accessible alternative to
the solutions that are currently available, and as such PDL could greatly improve research
sharing and development.
Process dry lab
45
==PAGE:53==
8
Future Work
This chapter will consider potential solutions and directions that could be taken to solve
the limitations from Chapter 6 of the current PDL implementation, as well as any additional
features that would enhance the artifact.
Services are limited by the hardware that is hosting them, which may cause long loading
times or unanswered requests. It is possible to start new nodes on new addresses but
two very similar and more suitable options exist which can be utilized. A reverse proxy will
provide one address for inbound requests with added benefits to security, caching, etc. A
load balancer distributes the load evenly across available servers thereby providing more
resources for request handling.
Figure 8.1: PDL architecture with load balancing and message queues
Figure 8.1 illustrates how a message queue and a reverse proxy can be implemented
to solve the problem. This solution would make services more scalable and secure, and
ensure requests are answered. For the repository to utilize such an approach, the internal
file database needs to be changed to an external database to ensure all nodes behind
the reverse proxy have access to the same data.
All services can be containerized with docker. For an explanation of how to container­
ize the service, see service registry node A.1.1, repository node A.2.2, and miner node
A.3.3. Docker creates a virtual environment containing all requirements necessary to run
a service, which provides a way for all users to run each service. However, docker’s host
network driver [25] is only supported for the Linux operating system, which would be the
simplest approach to enable communication between containers on the same machine.
Docker­network [26] is an alternative that should work for Linux, Mac, and Windows ma­
chines, however, the current implementation of this for PDL is unreliable and unstable.
More work is required to resolve the docker­network issues experienced during develop­
ment on Windows machines.
Process dry lab
46
==PAGE:54==
Though certain considerations have been made to enable privacy of algorithms and re­
sources in PDL, there are still many security gaps that must be considered. Running code
downloaded from a foreign source without control is very accessible for malicious shar­
ing of viruses, worms, and trojan horses. Requests with no encryption are easily read,
changed, or blocked by a malicious party. Resources can be retrieved without any secu­
rity, which makes sensitive data vulnerable to unwanted parties. PDL requires lots of se­
curity considerations such as access control, user identification (potentially through login),
DOS protection, man­in­the­middle protection, and protection against sharing worms,
viruses, and trojan horses.
Running file­consuming algorithms on very large resources presents some problems.
Firstly, uploading the resource from the frontend to a repository node is restricted by the
browser [27]. Secondly, if the resource is in a repository node it might still be too large for
the memory of a miner, which can be resolved by converting it to a stream. But sending
it, and processing it in chunks (inspired by batch processing [28]) would enable large files
to be handled the same as smaller files.
A repository node is capable of providing a resource history in the form of a resource
relation graph for all resource parents in the repository node. To expand the resource
relation graph to contain resources located in other repository nodes, these could be re­
quested and combined. Repository nodes could request the resource relation graph from
other repository nodes for any resource parent that it does not have information on, and
combine each DOT file it receives. This would utilize the existing endpoint and simply
expand its functionality. If the resource history is spread across many repository nodes
the amount of communication could become large, and the requests may become slow
with this proposed additional feature.
The frontend only supports certain visualization options and is still missing support for
file types such as PNML, which would need to be implemented directly into the frontend.
Although visualizations are isolated in the frontend codebase to reduce the complexity of
this task, an alternative would be to add a visualizer node and allow serverside rendering
of visualizations. This would allow any visualization to be added to the system the same
way miner algorithms and resources are added.
Process dry lab
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 8.2: PDL architecture with a visualizer node
As shown in 8.2 the node would only be used by the frontend. The intention is to have
miner algorithms specify the visualizer node that is capable of generating a visualization
of its output resource. The link between the output resource and the visualization node
could happen through the meta­information by adding more information to it before send­
ing it to the repository node. This comes with problems involving finding visualizations
within a specific node for an output, which would need further analysis.
Changes to the configurations of services are not instantly synchronized for all frontends
connected to those services since the frontend cannot receive requests. This problem
can be resolved by adding a centralized component that workspaces can notify and ask
for changes to configurations. Alternatively, the services could be updated to manage
which workspaces or service registry nodes they are connected to. This could enable the
synchronization of configurations while maintaining a decentralized architecture.
Process dry lab
48
==PAGE:56==
Figure 8.3: Centralized frontend synchronization
Figure 8.3 shows a simplified diagram of how workspaces would become aware of con­
figuration changes through a centralized component. Whenever a workspace makes a
change to a configuration it should notify the centralized component. All workspaces
would periodically send a list of URLs of their connected nodes and receive information
on whether the information has changed. Changes would trigger all workspaces con­
nected to the same service to request for an updated configuration. If this is done through
a service registry node, there has to be a guarantee that the service registry node sends
the latest configuration update, since workspaces could ask for new configurations before
the service registry node has been notified of any changes. One way to ensure this would
be to include timestamps or UUID for the latest configuration update.
Process dry lab
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 8.4: Decentralized frontend synchronization
Figure 8.4 depicts a different approach to ensure configuration updates in workspaces.
If the workspaces request configurations periodically and services know which service
registry nodes they are connected to, it is possible to ensure configurations are updated
on all workspaces. Changing the ping from service registry nodes to contain its own URL
would make services aware of where to notify in case of configuration changes. Using
timestamps or UUID would likewise resolve this problem for services connected directly to
workspaces. To further increase efficiency, configuration requests could contain a times­
tamp and be answered differently if no changes have happened since the given time.
To improve the user experience of the frontend, some quality­of­life improvements could
be considered. Firstly, improving the resource management to a folder structure would
make it easier to manage the workspace as the number of resources increases. Addition­
ally, right­clicking resources to start actions using that resource for actions could improve
work efficiency. Finally, an option to only add the miner algorithms from a miner node that
the user wants would reduce redundancy in their workspace. These are the most influen­
tial changes, but additional minor features or functionality could further improve the user
experience of the workspace.
Process dry lab
50
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
A.1
Service registry node
A.1.1
Service registry node documentation
A.1.1.1
Starting the service registry
This section describes how to start the service registry
A.1.1.2
How to add services
This sections describes how to add services to the service registry
A.1.1.3
Docker
This project supports docker runtime environment, for which you will need to download
docker from here: https://www.docker.com/products/docker­desktop/.
For this project, be aware that express listens on a specfic port (can be found in /End­
points), which must be the same port that is used in the docker file.
Open a terminal and navigate to the root of the project.
Development certificate
For this project, it is necessary to provide a development certificate to the docker container.
Open a terminal and navigate the root of the project. Run the commands below to create
and trust the certificate.
EXACTPROJECTNAME is default: ServiceRegistry CREDENTIAL_PLACEHOLDER is a
password you choose. Remember it, because it will be used to run the docker container.
dotnet dev-certs https -ep %USERPROFILE%\.aspnet\https\<EXACT_PROJECT_NAME>.pfx
-p <CREDENTIAL_PLACEHOLDER>
dotnet dev-certs https --trust
A.1.1.4
Docker network
If you run other services like a repository or service registry through docker locally, you will
also need to setup a network. This creates a connection between local docker containers
which is essential for establishing a connection.
If you want to run the project(s) with docker compose, the network needs to be created
before running the compose file.
To create a docker network run below the commands below in a terminal:
docker network create -d bridge data
A.1.1.5
Docker Compose
It is recommended to use this approach to run the application. To run this project using
docker­compose you need to follow the steps below:
Build the docker image:
docker-compose build
Run the docker image:
docker-compose up
Process dry lab
51
==PAGE:59==
Stop the docker image:
docker-compose down
A.1.1.6
Dockerfile
Alternatively you can build the image directly from the Dockerfile by running the following
commands from the root of the project:
Please beware, that only the last docker run will work ­ as this will provide the certificate
to the docker container.
Building the docker image:
docker build -t ServiceRegistry .
Running the docker container:
docker run -d -p 3001:3001 -p 3000:3000 --name ServiceRegistry
dockerserviceregistry:latest
When running in docker, localhost and 127.0.0.1 will resolve to the container. If you want
to access the outside host (e.g. your machine), you can add an entry to the container’s
/etc/hosts file. You can read more details on this here: https://www.howtogeek.com/devops/how­
to­connect­to­localhost­within­a­docker­container/ This will make localhost available as
your destination when requesting from your host­unit e.g. from postman or the browser,
not between containers.
To access the outside host, write the following docker run command instead of the one
written above:
docker run -d -p 3001:3001 -p 3000:3000 --add-host
host.docker.internal:host-gateway --name ServiceRegistry
dockerserviceregistry:latest
Here the value ”host.docker.internal” maps to the container’s host gateway, which matches
the real localhost value. This name can be replaced with your own string.
To establish connections between containers, add a reference to the network by adding
the below to your docker run:
--network=data
This run provides all the necessary information except for the certificate:
docker run -d -p 3001:3001 -p 3000:3000 --add-host
host.docker.internal:host-gateway --network=data --name
ServiceRegistry dockerserviceregistry:latest
The run command we recommend which includes the certificate:
docker run -d -p 3001:3001 -p 3000:3000
-e ASPNETCORE_URLS="https://+;http://+"
-e ASPNETCORE_HTTPS_PORT=3000
-e ASPNETCORE_Kestrel__Certificates__Default__Password="
<CREDENTIAL_PLACEHOLDER>"
Process dry lab
52
==PAGE:60==
-e ASPNETCORE_Kestrel__Certificates__Default__Path=/https/ServiceRegistry.pfx
-v %USERPROFILE%\.aspnet\https:/https/
--name ServiceRegistry dockerserviceregistry:latest
A.1.2
Service registry node swagger
A.1.2.1
Version: 1.0
A.1.2.2
/
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.1.2.3
/miners
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
POST
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
DELETE
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.1.2.4
/repositories
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
POST
Process dry lab
53
==PAGE:61==
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
DELETE
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.1.2.5
/ping
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.1.2.6
/connections/filters
POST
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.1.2.7
/config/filters
POST
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
Process dry lab
54
==PAGE:62==
A.2
Repository node
A.2.1
Repository node metadata object
1
{
2
"CreationDate": "ms_since_1970",
3
"ResourceId": "id_of_self_generated_from_repository",
4
"ResourceInfo": {
5
"Description": "description_of_self",
6
"Dynamic": false,
7
"FileExtension": "file_extension_of_self",
8
"Host": "{URL}/resources/",
9
"ResourceLabel": "name_of_self",
10
"ResourceType": "Type_of_resource",
11
"StreamTopic": "topic_of_self_if_stream",
12
},
13
"GenerationTree": {
14
"GeneratedFrom": {
15
"SourceHost": "URL of source",
16
"SourceId": "Id of miner algorithm in source",
17
"SourceLabel": "Name of miner algorithm"
18
},
19
"Parents": [
20
{
21
"ResourceId": "parent_resourceId",
22
"UsedAs": "miner_config_ResourceInput_Name_value"
23
}
24
],
25
"Children": [
26
{
27
"ResourceId": "child_resourceId"
28
},
29
]
30
}
31
}
1. CreationDate: This is used for sorting files, as well as a display value on file cards
in the frontend sidebar. Utility functions found in /src/Utils/Utils are used to convert
the format into human­readable information.
2. ResourceId: Used to find and retrieve a resource.
3. ResourceInfo: General information on a resource and how to retrieve it.
1. Description: Short description or additional information not covered by the
other keys.
2. Dynamic: Boolean ­ If true, lets the frontend know that the resource is contin­
uously updating, which will trigger periodic requests on the resource when it is
selected on the frontend.
3. FileExtension: Used to match resources with mining algorithms.
4. Host: A URL or endpoint that specifies the location of the resource. Could be
a Stream Broker URL or the repository endpoint to retrieve the resource.
5. ResourceLabel: The name of the file seen everywhere on the frontend.
6. ResourceType: Used to determine which visualization can be displayed. Also
used to filter input files when running a miner, to only provide files that match
a mining algorithm’s config object.
7. StreamTopic: Specifies which topic on the Stream Broker URL one must sub­
scribe to in order to retrieve the resource.
Process dry lab
55
==PAGE:63==
4. Generation tree: This information is used in the repository to create Resource Re­
lation Graphs.
1. GeneratedFrom:
1. SourceHost: The URL of the miner node.
2. SourceId: The id of the algorithm.
3. SourceLabel: Name of the algorithm.
2. Parents: All other resources that were used to create this one.
1. ResourceId: The id of the parent resource
2. UsedAs: Specifies how the resource was used. For algorithms, this value
will match the value of the algorithm config ”ResourceInput.Name”
3. Children: Other resources that have used this resource in the generation pro­
cess
1. ResourceId: The id of the child resource
A.2.2
Repository node documentation
A.2.2.1
Starting the repository
This section describes how to start the repository
A.2.2.2
File storage structure
A.2.2.3
Add a database
This section describes how to connect a database to the repository
A.2.2.4
Docker
This project supports docker runtime environment, for which you will need to download
docker from here: https://www.docker.com/products/docker­desktop/.
For this project, be aware that express listens on a specfic port (can be found in /API/End­
points), which must be the same port that is used in the docker file.
Open a terminal and navigate to the root of the project.
A.2.2.5
Docker network
If you run other services like a repository or service registry through docker locally, you will
also need to setup a network. This creates a connection between local docker containers
which is essential for establishing a connection.
If you want to run the project(s) with docker compose, the network needs to be created
before running the compose file.
To create a docker network run below the commands below in a terminal:
docker network create -d bridge data
A.2.2.6
Docker Compose
It is recommended to use this approach to run the application. To run this project using
docker­compose you need to follow the steps below:
Build the docker image:
docker-compose build
Run the docker image:
docker-compose up
Stop the docker image:
docker-compose down
Process dry lab
56
==PAGE:64==
A.2.2.7
Dockerfile
Alternatively you can build the image directly from the Dockerfile by running the following
commands from the root of the project:
docker build -t Repository . docker run -d -p 4001:4001 -p 4000:4000 --name
Repository dockerrepository:latest
When running in docker, localhost and 127.0.0.1 will resolve to the container. If you want
to access the outside host (e.g. your machine), you can add an entry to the container’s
/etc/hosts file. You can read more details on this here: https://www.howtogeek.com/devops/how­
to­connect­to­localhost­within­a­docker­container/ This will make localhost available as
your destination when requesting from your host­unit e.g. from postman or the browser,
not between containers.
To access the outside host, write the following docker run command instead of the one
written above:
docker run -d -p 4001:4001 -p 4000:4000
--add-host host.docker.internal:host-gateway
--name Repository dockerrepository:latest
Here the value ”host.docker.internal” maps to the container’s host gateway, which matches
the real localhost value. This name can be replaced with your own string.
To establish connections between containers, add a reference to the network by adding
the below to your docker run:
--network=data
The full run command we recommend for local development:
docker run -d -p 4001:4001 -p 4000:4000 --add-host
host.docker.internal:host-gateway --network=data --name Repository
dockerrepository:latest
To establish a secure connection on a development environment, a certificate is neces­
sary. Run the follow commands to generate a development certificate.
EXACTPROJECTNAME is default: Repository CREDENTIAL_PLACEHOLDER is a pass­
word you choose. Remember it, because it will be used to run the docker container.
dotnet dev-certs https -ep %USERPROFILE%\.aspnet\https\<EXACT_PROJECT_NAME>.pfx
-p <CREDENTIAL_PLACEHOLDER> dotnet dev-certs https --trust
Run the following commands from the project root to build an image and run it.
Build docker image:
docker build -t <Image_name> .
Run docker container:
docker run -d -p 4001:80 -p 4000:4000
-e ASPNETCORE_URLS="https://+;http://+" -e ASPNETCORE_HTTPS_PORT=4000
-e ASPNETCORE_Kestrel__Certificates__Default__Password="<CREDENTIAL_PLACEHOLDER>"
-e ASPNETCORE_Kestrel__Certificates__Default__Path=/https/<EXACT_PROJECT_NAME>.pfx
Process dry lab
57
==PAGE:65==
-v %USERPROFILE%\.aspnet\https:/https/ --name <Container_name> <Image_name>
If it is desired to update the docker­compose file to run a secure connection with this
project, we recommend looking at ASP.NET documentation: https://learn.microsoft.com/en­
us/aspnet/core/security/docker­compose­https?view=aspnetcore­7.0
A.2.3
Repository node swagger
A.2.3.1
Version: 1.0
A.2.3.2
/
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.3
/ping
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.4
/configurations
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.5
/resources/{resourceId}
GET
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
resourceId
path
Yes
string
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
PUT
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
resourceId
path
Yes
string
Process dry lab
58
==PAGE:66==
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.6
/resources
POST
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.7
/resources/metadata
GET
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
POST
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.8
/resources/metadata/{resourceId}
GET
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
resourceId
path
Yes
string
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
PUT
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
resourceId
path
Yes
string
Process dry lab
59
==PAGE:67==
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.9
/resources/metadata/{resourceId}/children
GET
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
resourceId
path
Yes
string
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.10
/resources/metadata/filters
POST
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.11
/resources/graphs/{resourceId}
GET
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
resourceId
path
Yes
string
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
A.2.3.12
/resources/histograms/{resourceId}
POST
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
resourceId
path
Yes
string
Process dry lab
60
==PAGE:68==
Responses
Code
Description
200
Success
Process dry lab
61
==PAGE:69==
A.3
Miner node
A.3.1
Miner node configurations
1
{
2
"MinerId": "Id",
3
"MinerLabel": "Miner_name",
4
"Type": "Miner",
5
"MinerPath": "Location_of_algorithm_file",
6
"MinerFile": "Name_of_algorithm_file",
7
"Access": "Public",
8
"Shadow": false,
9
"ResourceInput": [
10
{
11
"Name": "indicates_resource_use",
12
"FileExtension": "xes",
13
"ResourceType": "EventLog"
14
}
15
],
16
"ResourceOutput": {
17
"FileExtension": "png",
18
"ResourceType": "PetriNet"
19
},
20
"MinerParameters": [
21
{
22
"Name": "Param_name",
23
"Type": "double",
24
"Min": 0,
25
"Max": 1,
26
"Default": 0.5,
27
"Description": "What_does_param_do"
28
},
29
]
30
}
A.3.2
Miner node request body examples
1
{
2
"MinerId": "2",
3
"Input":{
4
"Resources":{
5
"LogToRun":{
6
"ResourceId": "33405ce3 -7265-4015-8d82-0d2d4cf89952",
7
"CreationDate": "31-03-2023 10:51:02",
8
"ResourceInfo": {
9
"ResourceLabel": "Custom Conformant",
10
"ResourceType": "EventLog",
11
"Host": "http://localhost:4001/resources/",
12
"FileExtension": "xes",
13
"StreamTopic": null,
14
"Description": "A filtered log of Custom Conformant Long",
15
"Dynamic": false
16
},
17
"GenerationTree": {
18
"GeneratedFrom": null,
19
"Parents": [
20
{
21
"ResourceId": "ee72a5ef -4156-4e7c-9ce7-
e3a65291f6c8",
22
"UsedAs": "LogToFilter"
Process dry lab
62
==PAGE:70==
23
}
24
],
25
"Children": [
26
{
27
"ResourceId": "2277f2f6-de91 -43bd-a9d6 -3
bcf3dda46a7"
28
}
29
]
30
}
31
}
32
},
33
"MinerParameters": {
34
"DEPENDENCY_THRESH" : 0.5,
35
"AND_MEASURE_THRESH" : 0.65,
36
"MIN_ACT_COUNT" : 1,
37
"MIN_DFG_OCCURRENCES" : 1,
38
"DFG_PRE_CLEANING_NOISE_THRESH" : 0.05,
39
"LOOP_LENGTH_TWO_THRESH" : 2
40
}
41
},
42
"Output": {
43
"Host": "http://localhost:4001/resources/",
44
"HostInit": "http://localhost:4001/resources/metadata/",
45
"ResourceLabel": "Heuristic PNG",
46
"FileExtension": "png"
47
}
48
}
1. MinerId: Unique identifier for miner algorithm
2. Input: Contains resources and user input necessary for running the algorithm
1. Resources: Has metadata objects for each resource mapped by the name from
the configuration.
1. NameFromConfig: The key is the name of the single resource this miner
example takes. The value is a metadata object chosen by a user.
2. MinerParameters: Contains a dictionary of parameters, with the keys being the
names defined in the config, and the value as a user input
1. NameFromConfig: Userdefinedvalue
3. Output: Contains necessary information to upload the output.
1. Host: Where the resource should be sent to.
2. HostInit: Where the metadata should be created.
3. ResourceLabel: Name of the resource.
4. FileExtension: The file type the resource should be uploaded as.
A.3.3
Miner node documentation
A.3.3.1
Docker
This project supports docker runtime environment, for which you will need to download
docker from here: https://www.docker.com/products/docker­desktop/.
For this project, be aware that express listens on a specific port (can be found in /API/End­
points), which must be the same port that is used in the docker file.
Open a terminal and navigate to the root of the project.
Docker network
Process dry lab
63
==PAGE:71==
If you run other services like a repository or service registry through docker locally, you will
also need to setup a network. This creates a connection between local docker containers
which is essential for establishing a connection.
If you want to run the project(s) with docker­compose, the network needs to be created
before running the compose file.
To create a docker network run below the commands below in a terminal:
docker network create -d bridge data
Docker Compose
It is recommended to use this approach to run the application. To run this project using
docker­compose you need to follow the steps below:
Build the docker image:
docker-compose build
Run the docker image:
docker-compose up
Stop the docker image:
docker-compose down
Dockerfile
Alternatively you can build the image directly from the Dockerfile by running the following
commands from the root of the project:
Build docker image:
docker build -t dockerminer .
Run docker image:
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 --name Miner dockerminer:latest
When running in docker, localhost and 127.0.0.1 will resolve to the container. If you want
to access the outside host (e.g. your machine), you can add an entry to the container’s
/etc/hosts file. You can read more details on this here: Howtogeek: How to connect to
localhost within a docker container
This will make localhost available as your destination when requesting from your host­unit
e.g. from Postman or the browser, not between containers.
To access the outside host, write the following docker run command instead of the one
written above:
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 --add-host
host.docker.internal:host-gateway --name Miner dockerminer:latest
Here the value ”host.docker.internal” maps to the container’s host gateway, which matches
the real localhost value. This name can be replaced with your own string.
To establish connections between containers, add a reference to the network by adding
the below to your docker run:
Process dry lab
64
==PAGE:72==
--network=data
The full run command we recommend for local development:
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 --add-host localhost:host-gateway --network=data
--name Miner dockerminer:latest
A.3.3.2
Standard
If you wish to use the Miner Wrapper directly on your machine (without Docker), you must
at least install ­ Node 16 or newer: https://nodejs.org/en/download
Additionally, if you wish to use the prebuilt miners, you will need:
• Python: https://www.python.org/downloads/
• Pip
• Venv
• Graphviz: https://graphviz.org/download/
When starting the Miner Wrapper the first time, you will need to download the necessary
node dependencies. Open a terminal and navigate to the root of the Miner Wrapper and
run the following command:
npm install
When the dependencies have been downloaded, start the project with the command:
node .\Index.js
If you’re running the Miner Wrapper with all the prebuilt python miners, the Miner Wrapper
will create virtual environments for each python miner and install their dependencies from
the provided requirements.txt files, which may take some time. Any Miner that is ready to
use, can be called while the virtual environments are intiialized for the other Miners.
A.3.4
Adding Miners
Miner nodes in PDL are not restricted to python, and it can be any language as long as the
communication described in the Swagger.yaml file is supported, as well as the config.json
remains the same. However, the Miner Wrapper currently only support .py, .exe and .jar
files, and can be extended to support any algorithm that can be run through a terminal.
The Miner Wrapper only has .py and .exe examples.
A.3.4.1
Location
When creating or adding new algorithms to the Miner Wrapper, a new sub­folder should
be created in:
Miner/Miners/<NewMiner>
The algorithm should be located in this sub­folder. If it’s a python algorithm, the virtual
environment and requirements.txt file should also be located on the same level in this
sub­folder, e.g.
Miner/Miners/<NewMiner>/env
Miner/Miners/<NewMiner>/requirements.txt
Miner/Miners/<NewMiner>/<NewMiner>.py
A.3.4.2
Configuration
Adding new miners, require that a corresponding item is added to the config.json file,
which must follow the same structure as the example miners:
Process dry lab
65
==PAGE:73==
1
{
2
"MinerId": "Id",
3
"MinerLabel": "Miner_name",
4
"Type": "Miner",
5
"MinerPath": "Location_of_algorithm_file",
6
"MinerFile": "Name_of_algorithm_file",
7
"Access": "Public",
8
"Shadow": false,
9
"ResourceInput": [
10
{
11
"Name": "indicates_resource_use",
12
"FileExtension": "xes",
13
"ResourceType": "EventLog"
14
}
15
],
16
"ResourceOutput": {
17
"FileExtension": "png",
18
"ResourceType": "PetriNet"
19
},
20
"MinerParameters": [
21
{
22
"Name": "Param_name",
23
"Type": "double",
24
"Min": 0,
25
"Max": 1,
26
"Default": 0.5,
27
"Description": "What_does_param_do"
28
},
29
]
30
}
• MinerId: string, must be unique.
• MinerLabel: string, the name that can be seen on the frontend, also a good idea to
keep unique.
• Type: string, should always be ”Miner”. Used to differentiate Miner nodes from
Repository nodes.
• MinerPath: string, the path to the folder that was created ­ e.g. Miners/<NewMiner>
• MinerFile: string, the name of the file, with file extension such as .py or .exe.
• Access: string, unused key, however, intended use is to add additional security to
each algorithm.
• Shadow: bool, true means the algorithm can be downloaded and used by external
miner nodes.
• ResourceInput: list of objects that specify what input resources the algorithm can
handle and how it should be used. Each object in the list has the following format:
• Name: string, used as a key to identify how the input resource should be used by
the algorithm
• FileExtension: string, specifies the file type the algorithm can handle, e.g. ”xes”,
”json”, ”pnml” etc. This is optional, since input streams for streaming algorithms
don’t have a file extension.
Process dry lab
66
==PAGE:74==
• ResourceType: string, specifies the resource type the algorithm can handle, e.g.
”EventLog”, ”Histogram”, ”ProcessModel” etc.
• ResourceOutput: object that specify the result/output of an algorithm. It has the
following keys:
• FileExtension: string, specifies the file extension of the algorithm output. This is
optional, as some algorithms don’t output a file (e.g. streams).
• ResourceType: string, specifies the type output resource type, e.g. ”Histogram”,
”EventStream”, ”PetriNet” etc.
• MinerParameters: list of objects that specify which parameters an algorithm takes,
if any. Each object in the list has the following format:
• Name: string,
• Type: string, e.g. ”int”, ”double”, ”string”
• Min: <Type>, the minimum value allowed, e.g. 0
• Max: <Type>, the maximum value allowed, e.g. 10
• Default: <Type>, a default value to help use the algorithm, e.g. 5
• Description: string, can be used to describe how the parameter should be used
A.3.4.3
Writing the algorithm
The Miner Wrapper will take care of all the necessary communication, error handling
and config validation, regardless of what type of algorithm it should call, as long as it’s
supported by the input and output defined by the config. It also takes care of sending
and receiving algorithms for shadowing, as well as sending their configurations or adding
external algorithm configurations to your config.json.
The request body used when starting a mining algorithm is reused and passed as args
to the algorithms main method. If the algorithm need any files as resource input, the
Wrapper will retrieve these from a repository and save them in the Tmp folder. The path
to these files are added to the body (the input args that the algorithm receives) under
the key(s) defined in the ResourceInput list from the configuration object. Any additional
inputs, such as streams or algorithm parameters are already defined by the request body
and can be extracted as well.
When writing a new algorithm you simply have to read the input args in main and unpack
it to a json object.
Algorithms should always save its result in a file in the ”./Tmp” folder and print the path
to this file. The Wrapper will read ”stdout” of any process/algorithm that is being exe­
cuted, which should always be the path to the file containing the result. If any additional
prints/logs are needed, these should be printed as ”stderr”, so the Wrapper can differen­
tiate between the output path and logging.
Once an output path has been printed, the Wrapper will send the file to the location defined
by the incoming request.
Examples
• View MinerInductivePy for a python example that takes 1 XES EventLog and no
parameters
Process dry lab
67
==PAGE:75==
• View MinerHueristicPy for a python example that takes 1 XES EventLog and multiple
parameters
• View MinerConformanceTBRPy for a python example that takes 2 input resources:
1 XES EventLog and 1 PNML PetriNet
• View MqttMinerHistogramPy for a python example that takes an EventStream as
input and outputs a Histogram
• View MqttFilterPy for a python example that takes an EventStream as input and
outputs a filtered EventStream
A.3.4.4
Stream Miners
Streaming algorithms can be implemented largely the same as regular miners, except they
will need to connect to the stream themselves. The Stream Broker, that the miner should
connect to, and the Stream Topic it should subscribe to, are provided in the request body.
Streaming miners should print the output file path, every time an update has happened
to the result, to avoid redundant requests. The Wrapper will ensure that each time the
algorithm prints a new path, the new result is being sent to the Repository.
Note: Both consumers and publishers must have a client name when connecting to a
Stream Broker. Having 2 clients connected to the same network with the same name
will cause errors. This applies to both consumers and publishers of the stream. The
example streaming algorithms use a UUID as their client name to avoid issues when
starting multiple instances of the same miner.
Streaming publishers
Since streaming algorithms don’t take resources from a Repository, it is up to the devel­
oper to ensure that the input stream that is being used, receives data on that Topic. The
streaming algorithms used in this project, all consume data from a publically available
Stream Broker, called ”mqtt.eclipseprojects.io”. The Stream Topic receives data from an­
other python script, either ”MqttPublisher1.py” or ”MqttPublisher2.py”. Running any of the
example streaming miners without anything publishing to the Topic will do nothing. To run
these publishers, you can run the command:
py .\Miners\MqttPublisher1.py
or
py .\Miners\MqttPublisher2.py
Both of these publishers do the same, except they are created using different client names
to avoid errors. You can either use these publishers directly or change the type of output to
suit the needs of your streaming algorithm. Note that neither of these publishers actually
publish events, but simply random letters of the alphabet to display a simple example.
Output streams
If the streaming algorithm outputs a new stream, instead of a result file, the stdout print
should be ”STREAM” to let the Wrapper know that it shouldn’t send a result file from the
Tmp folder. The input args that each algorithm receives will contain an output Stream
Broker and output Stream Topic, which the algorithm should publish its data to. The
Wrapper will still send a metadata object to the Repository, containing information on the
location and the type of data, which other streaming miners can consume from.
Process dry lab
68
==PAGE:76==
A.3.4.5
Python Virtual Environments
If you’re writing your algorithm in python, you will need to create a python virtual envi­
ronment for each miner. Each virtual environment, called ”env”, should be located in the
folder you created for your algorithm, along with the .py file and the requirements.txt, like
this:
Miner/Miners/<NewMiner>/env
Miner/Miners/<NewMiner>/requirements.txt
Miner/Miners/<NewMiner>/<NewMiner>.py
Creating a python virtual environment
To create a python virtual environment, consider reading the following: python.land: virtual
environments
Create and/or navigate to the folder where you python miner is/should be located. If we
use MinerAlpha.py as an example, navigate to
cd ./MinerWrapper/Miners/MinerAlphaPy
Create the virtual environment with the following command. Note that ”env” is the name
of the virtual environment and will create a folder called ”env”:
python -m venv env
Activate the virtual environment.
On Windows with cmd.exe, the command is:
env\Scripts\activate.bat
On Windows with PowerShell (usually default in vscode terminal), the command is:
env\Scripts\Activate.ps1
On Linux/Mac the command is:
source myvenv/bin/activate
Dependencies in requirements.txt
Make sure you have activated the virtual environment you wish to export/import from/to
before executing these steps. To export a list of all the dependencies in a virtual environ­
ment, run the following command:
On Windows:
pip freeze > requirements.txt
On Linux:
pip3 freeze > requirements.txt
To install the dependencies from a requirements.txt file, run the following command:
On Windows:
pip install -r requirements.txt
On Linux:
Process dry lab
69
==PAGE:77==
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
A.3.4.6
Converting a python script to an executable
The tool currently only support .py, .exe and .jar, however, any file/algorithm that can be
run from a terminal can easily be added to the Wrapper.js. If you wish to convert a python
script into an executable for any reason, such as to protect the source code, follow these
steps:
First you need to install PyInstaller from PyPi. Open a terminal and run:
pip install pyinstaller
Navigate to the location of the algorithm you wish to turn into an executable, e.g.
Miner/Miners/yourAlgorithmFolder
To pack everything into one .exe file, run the following:
pyinstaller -F yourPythonScript.py
Here you would need to replace ”yourAlgorithmFolder” with the name of your folder and
”yourPythonScript” with the name of your script. If you script is called ”minerInductiveBpmn.py”
the command would be:
pyinstaller -F minerInductiveBpmn.py
This will create a ”build” and ”dist” folder, as well as a new ”.spec” file. Move the newly
created .exe file from ”dist” to a new folder inside ”Miners”, e.g:
Miner/Miners/yourAlgorithmExeFolder
Delete the ”build” and ”dist” folders, and delete the ”.spec” file that were created in the
folder for your python algorithm, so the only new file is the new .exe file that you moved
out.
Add a reference to this new .exe in ”config.json” along with your other miners. The config
object should largely be able to be copied from the original, however, it should have a new
ID and the ”MinerPath” and ”MinerFile” keys should reference the new folder and .exe file
name.
A.3.5
Miner node swagger
A.3.5.1
Version: 0.0.1
A.3.5.2
/ping
GET
Summary:
Pulse check
Description:
Returns ”Pong” if the service is running.
Responses
Code
Description
200
The service is running
Process dry lab
70
==PAGE:78==
A.3.5.3
/miner
POST
Summary:
Execute action in the miner
Description:
Runs an action in the miner and returns the result. The available actions are listed in
/config.json.
Responses
Code
Description
200
The process id of a running process in the miner. Used to ping for process status later.
A.3.5.4
/configurations
GET
Summary:
Get the configurations of the miner
Description:
Returns the configurations of the miner. The configurations are defined in the config.json
file.
Responses
Code
Description
200
The configuration was sent successfully
A.3.5.5
/configurations/{minerId}
GET
Summary:
Get the configuration of a single miner
Description:
Returns the configuration of a single miner. The configurations are defined in the con­
fig.json file.
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
minerId
path
The id of the miner to get the configuration from
Yes
string
A.3.5.6
/shadow/{minerId}
GET
Process dry lab
71
==PAGE:79==
Summary:
Provide the shadow of a miner to a foreign host
Description:
Another miner is requesting an action from this host, which is returned from this request.
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
minerId
path
The id of the miner to be cloned
Yes
string
A.3.5.7
/shadow
POST
Summary:
Clone a miner from a foreign host
Description:
Clones a miner from a foreign host and returns the id of the new miner.
A.3.5.8
/shadow/requirements/{minerId}
GET
Summary:
Get the requirements of a miner
Description:
Returns the requirements of a miner. The requirements are defined in the requirements.json
file.
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
minerId
path
The id of the miner to get the requirements from
Yes
string
A.3.5.9
/status
GET
Summary:
Get the status of all running processes
Description:
Returns the status of all running processes
A.3.5.10
/status/{processId}
GET
Process dry lab
72
==PAGE:80==
Summary:
Get the status of a single running process
Description:
Returns the status of running process miner. The processId is generated and returned
when a process is started.
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
processId
path
The processId must match
the returned processId
when a process is started.
Yes
string
Table A.1: A description of the UI elements of the frontend
A.3.5.11
/stop/{processId}
DELETE
Summary:
Stop a running process
Description:
Stops a specific running process
Parameters
Name
Located in
Description
Required
Schema
processId
path
The processId of the
process that should be
stopped
Yes
string
Table A.2: A description of the UI elements of the frontend
Process dry lab
73
==PAGE:81==
A.4
Frontend
A.4.1
Frontend UI description
Figure A.1: Front end overview 1 ­ default
Figure A.2: Front end overview 2 ­ hosts
Process dry lab
74
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.3: Front end overview 3 ­ popup
Identifier
name
Description
1
Sidebar
Sidebar to start actions and select
resources for visualization.
1.1
Sidebar buttons
Buttons that are used to open popups that
can start actions.
1.1.1
Upload resource button
Opens popup for uploading a resource to a
repository node.
1.1.2
view resource button
Opens popup for downloading a resource
from a repository node.
1.1.3
Execute action button
Opens popup to start an action in a miner
node.
1.1.4
Inspect processes button
Opens popup to inspect and manage
processes.
1.2
Resource overview
Displays available resources for
visualization sorted on creation time.
1.2.1
Resource card
Displays a single resource available for
visualization. Clicking it will update the
visualization window.
1.2.2
Remove resource button
Will remove the resource from the user’s
workspace. It will still be available for
download in the repository node it is stored.
1.3
Collective host status
Will give the user an idea of the online
status of all connected services.
Process dry lab
75
==PAGE:83==
2
Visualization options
A dynamically generated set of tabs that
shows available visualizations for the
selected file.
2.1
Default visualization
option
If a resource has a resource available, it will
choose the best suited as the default. It can
be changed in the configuration in the
frontend.
2.2
Related resources option
A visualization option is available for all
resources. It will show the graph of actions
used to reach this resource.
3
Visualization view
Shows the visualization chosen from the
tab.
3.1
Save visualization button
Only implemented for BPMN visualization.
Clicking will open a popup to save the
changes as a new resource in a repository
node.
4
Open/close sidebars
buttons
Clicking a button will open/close the
corresponding sidebar.
5
Resource Children
Choosing a child from the dropdown will
enable the button. Clicking the button will
download the resource.
6
Sidebar for host
management
A sidebar containing various options for
managing connected hosts.
6.1
Host configuration buttons
Buttons that are used to open popups that
can change or add hosts.
6.1.1
Add host button
Opens popup for directly adding a new host.
6.1.2
clone miner action button
Opens popup for cloning a miner action
from one miner node to another miner node
6.2
Connected hosts overview
Showing connected hosts categorized by
their responsibility.
6.2.1
Connected repository
nodes
Shows a connected repository node, how it
was added, and allows the user to remove it
from the workspace. Clicking the card will
open a popup for downloading a resource
as described in 1.1.2.
6.2.2
Connected miner nodes
Shows a connected miner node, how it was
added, and allows the user to remove it
from the workspace. Clicking the card will
open a popup for starting an action as
described in 1.1.3.
Process dry lab
76
==PAGE:84==
6.2.3
Connected service
registry nodes
Shows a connected service registry node,
how it was added, and allows the user to
remove it from the workspace. Clicking the
card will open a popup for adding hosts
from the service registry node.
7
Popup
Shows a popup in the workspace. All
popups are structured identically, although
the content and outcome will differ.
7.1
Popup header
The popup header describes the outcome
that will happen and allows users to exit the
popup.
7.2
Popup body
The popup body varies between the various
popups but will contain some input form that
will provide the necessary information for
the desired outcome.
7.3
Popup footer
Will allow users to either cancel or submit
the form.
Table A.3: A description of the UI elements of the frontend
A.4.2
Frontend documentation
A.4.2.1
Scripts and startup
In the project directory, you can run:
npm install
Navigate to the location of this project on your machine and run:
npm install
This will install all the required dependencies needed to run the application.
npm start
Navigate to the location of this repository on your machine and run:
npm start
The frontend is hosted at http://localhost:8080 .
npm run build
If you want to get the application ready for production, navigate to the location of this
repository on your machine and run:
npm run build
This builds the app for production to the build folder.\ It correctly bundles React in pro­
duction mode and optimizes the build for the best performance.
Process dry lab
77
==PAGE:85==
The build is minified and the filenames include the hashes.\ Your app is ready to be de­
ployed!
See the section about deployment1 for more information.
A.4.2.2
Understanding the code
This section is targeted toward developers
Services
Services are represented as objects that are saved in local memory.
Connecting a service can happen through a service registry or directly by inserting the
URL of the service. This will influence how a service status and configuration will be
retrieved.
The following shows how adding a service will add a new object to the local memory.
Figure A.4: Connecting a service to the frontend
Services are pinged regularly for status, but as mentioned this differs depending on the
method used to add the service to the frontend.
Getting status from directly added service:
Figure A.5: Pinging services directly
Getting status from service add through a service registry.
1<https://facebook.github.io/create-react-app/docs/deployment>
Process dry lab
78
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.6: Connecting a service
Below is seen the object structure saved in local memory. The status and configuration
properties can change depending on what happens in the service:
1
{
2
"addedFrom": "hostname_of_service_registry_or_local",
3
"config": "config_of_resource",
4
"id": "uuid_id_made_in_frontend",
5
"name": "hostname_of_resource",
6
"status": "status",
7
"type": {
8
"label": "Host_type",
9
"value": "Host_type"
10
}
11
}
Processes
Processes are represented as javascript objects located in local memory with information
on which foreign process is running. From the frontend, this is used to determine the
state of the foreign process, and when to receive the results. To create a process, create
a process object, and save it to local memory. In App.jsx, an interval exists that will ping
running processes, thus keeping the user up to date with all processes created by the
initiator.
There are two types of processes, and thereby two process objects. The first type is
starting an algorithm, which will create a process to track status, output, and other useful
information. The second is started when cloning an algorithm is initiated.
Processes are created upon successfully submitting an action to a miner. This will save
a process to local memory, which will then be handled in an interval which will check the
status, and respond accordingly by either getting a metadata and file or by setting an error.
Only ”running” processes will be pinged.
Running an algorithm process
Starting an algorithm process:
Process dry lab
79
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.7: Starting algorithm process
Getting the status of a algorithm process:
Figure A.8: Pinging algorithm process
Running a cloning process
Starting an cloning process:
Figure A.9: Starting cloning process
Getting the status of a cloning process:
Figure A.10: Pinging cloning process
Process dry lab
80
==PAGE:88==
An algorithm process object looks like this:
1
{
2
"id": "uuid",
3
"objectType": "process",
4
"hostname": "hostname.net.org.com",
5
"processId": "number_from_miner",
6
"processName": "label_from_miner",
7
"status": "process_status",
8
"progress": "ms_runtime",
9
"startTime": "number_of_ms_since_1970",
10
"endTime": "number_of_ms_since_1970",
11
"outputDestination": "URL_for_resource_destination",
12
"error": null,
13
"resourceId": "some_uuid",
14
"saveOrUpdateFile": bool,
15
"resourceLabel": "name_of_generated_resource",
16
}
1. id:</b> Key that is used for storing and referencing this object from local memory.
2. objectType:</b> Used to filter processes from files and hosts in local memory.
3. hostname:</b> Reference to the host where the process is/was running.
4. processId:</b> Reference to the processId generated by the miner that is/was run­
ning.
5. processName:</b> Name of the process that is running. Given by the miner (e.g.
”Alpha miner”).
6. status:</b> The status of the process, given from the miner.
7. progress:</b> How long has the process been running (currentTime ­ startTime ||
endTime ­ startTime)
8. startTime:</b> Represented as ms since 1970. src/Utils/Utils.js help convert to a
human­understandable format.
9. endTime:</b> Represented as ms since 1970. src/Utils/Utils.js help convert to a
human­understandable format.
10. outputDestination:</b> Where the mining result will be sent.
11. error:</b> Errors will be save in this attribute.
12. resourceId:</b> Reference to the output that is created from this process.
13. saveOrUpdateFile:</b> A boolean that determines if the output should be saved/up­
dated. Is only changed and read in src/Utils/ServiceHelper.js.
14. resourceLabel:</b> Reference to the name of the generated file. As Files and Pro­
cesses are split and can be deleted independently, this ensures the process has the
name of the file.
Cloning algorithms consist of much of the same structure but has fewer keys as no re­
source will be generated.
Files
Files consist of two components: Metadata and content. Metadata is a bunch of informa­
tion wrapping the contents in this application, while it might be seen differently on external
services.
Metadata
Process dry lab
81
==PAGE:89==
The file metadata is a javascript object, that has relevant information pertaining to a file.
The contents are used to display information in various areas of the frontend, and de­
termine the type, visualization possibilities, and completion state of a file. Much of the
information is also used to determine if communication is necessary with either the pro­
ducer or the repository that holds it.
the Files are saved like this in local memory:
1
{
2
"CreationDate": "ms_since_1970",
3
"GenerationTree": {
4
"Children": null,
5
"GeneratedFrom": {
6
"SourceHost": "URL of source",
7
"SourceId": "Id of miner algorithm in source",
8
"SourceLabel": "Name of miner algorithm"
9
},
10
"Parents": [
11
{
12
"ResourceId": "parent_resourceId",
13
"UsedAs": "miner_config_ResourceInput_value"
14
}
15
]
16
},
17
"ResourceId": "id_of_self_generated_from_repository",
18
"ResourceInfo": {
19
"Description": "description_of_self",
20
"Dynamic": false,
21
"FileExtension": "file_extension_of_self",
22
"Host": "{URL}/resources/",
23
"ResourceLabel": "name_of_self",
24
"ResourceType": "Type_of_resource",
25
"StreamTopic": "topic_of_self_if_stream",
26
},
27
"fileContent": "the_file_contents",
28
"repositoryUrl": "used_to_request_the_actual_file",
29
"processId": "reference_to_process_that_created_file"
30
}
How this information is used for this project:
1. CreationDate:</b> This is used for sorting files, as well as a value displayed on file
cards in the sidebar. Utility functions found in /src/Utils/Utils are used to convert the
format into human­readable information.
2. Generation tree:</b> This is information is only used in repository.
3. ResourceId:</b> The metadata is stored in local memory using this key, and there­
fore the key to accessing the information from a specific file.
4. ResourceInfo:</b>
1. Description:</b> Not implemented. Intended for additional information.
2. Dynamic:</b> Is resource expected to update. The resource will be requested
in regular intervals when selected in the visualizations screen (only the file that
is selected).
3. FileExtension:</b> Used by miner and repository for running and saving.
4. Host:</b> Owner of the file. Used to request updates, or by miner to fetch the
file from repository.
5. ResourceLabel:</b> The name of the file is seen everywhere on the frontend.
Process dry lab
82
==PAGE:90==
6. ResourceType:</b> Used to determine which visualization can be displayed.
Also used to filter input files when running a miner, to only provide allowed files.
7. StreamTopic:</b> A pointer to a stream on a broker located on the address
shown in the ”Host” attribute.
5. FileContent:</b> This key only exist in the frontend, and holds the file data. This
could be a BPMN string, a saved image, or otherwise.
6. repositoryUrl:</b> This key is used as a reference to get the actual file content.
7. ProcessId:</b> Reference to the process that spawned this file. This is created
when starting a process from the frontend, and saved in the output files object on
this key.
File content
The file contents are important for certain file types. This will be the actual text, image, or
other that the file consists of. For log files, we don’t want to save it on the frontend and
request a histogram instead, but BPMN is necessary to visualize the model. The contents
are added to the file Metadata in local memory. Metadata will always be requested before
requesting the file contents. This is necessary because the frontend will never make
changes to these objects, thus relying on external processes to update them.
Service helper
ServiceHelper.js is an important file, as it contains a function that measures external data
such as process status, files, and hosts. Each function is designed to run once, where an
interval in the App.jsx will be responsible for running the functions. The interval request
rate can be found in config.js. This is where pings for services, processes, and resources
are located.
Visualizations
The rules that determine what visualizations the frontend can display, can be found in
config.js. The contents of metadata will be compared to the list of allowed visualizations,
and pull information from a repository as needed. Therefore, the frontend will not show
content that cannot be visualized.
To add visualizations, go to config.js and change the visualizationConfig variable. The
keys are used for lookup, as the combination of resourceType and file extension is neces­
sary to select the correct visualization. If the lookup returns nothing, only the generation
tree is available for the resource, such as for streams, flowcharts, and other unimple­
mented visualizations. This also means, that one resourceType can be represented by
many different file types. For example, a resource of type BPMN can be visualized as
either a BPMN diagram generated from a .bpmn file or as an image.
Resources must be located in local memory before they can be displayed. To ensure that
dynamic resources are always updated, the frontend will request the resource based on
an interval. This only happens if the correct visualization is selected to avoid unnecessary
communication.
Process dry lab
83
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.11: Selecting visualization
Create a new visualization
1. Add a new folder in /src/Components/Visualizations
2. Add a .jsx and .scss file in the new folder
3. Create the visualization component
4. Add the component by importing your new component in Visualizations.jsx
5. Near the bottom of the return in Visualizations.jsx, add your condition and compo­
nent
6. Update config.js with the new resource type and file extension combination. This
can also include changes to existing visualizations.
Popups
Most actions that the user can do, happen in a popup. This allows for a clear distinction
of what a user can do while keeping more space free for visualizations and an overview
of added processes and files.
Create a new popup
1. Add a state variable in App.jsx.
2. Add a toggle function for the variable.
3. Add the variable, setter and toggle function to the props object sent to the Home.jsx
component.
4. Create a new folder in /src/Components/Popup and add a .jsx file and a .scss file.
5. Create a component using the utility components BackdropModal Popup from the
Widgets folder.
6. Add the component in the Home.jsx return, and set the condition for displaying as
the state variable from step 1.
Clone a miner
It is possible to clone a miner algorithm from one miner node to another. This will update
the configuration of the receiver and thereby requires all interested parties to retrieve the
new configuration. The purpose of this feature is to allow users to run programs from
a controlled environment, which provides options for using sensitive data or measuring
efficiency. Configurations will be fetched on page reload. If the service is added through
a service registry, the configuration will be fetched from the service registry instead of the
service.
Process dry lab
84
==PAGE:92==
A.5
Manual tests
This section will describe the manual tests that has been conducted to test the endpoints
of the various nodes of PDL.
A.5.1
Service registry node manual test
There have been conducted 8 manual tests of the service registry node endpoints and
the frontends ability to handle the responses.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
Ping
Confirm connection
Status is updated
Get miners
Open popup for adding new services and check
that miner nodes from the service registry node
is available in the list.
Dropdown shows
a list of miner
node URLs
Add miner
Select miner node in the popup, and click
confirm.
New card for
miner node is
visible
Get repositories
Open popup for adding new services and check
that repository nodes from the service registry
node is available in the list.
Dropdown shows
a list of repository
node URLs
Add repository
Select repository node in the popup, and click
confirm.
Confirmation
message
Get status of
connected
services
Ensure online status and offline status is
correctly relayed to the frontend by shutting
down and restarting services.
Status is
correctly
displayed
Get filtered
configurations
Connecting to services returns configurations of
the services.
Filtered node
configurations list
Service registry
node goes offline
The status and configurations should be
retrieved as if the service was connected
directly.
Status and
configurations
are still available.
Table A.4: Manual E2E service registry node tests
A.5.2
Repository node manual test
There have been conducted 25 manual tests of the service registry node endpoints and
the frontends ability to handle the responses.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
Add repository
node directly
This relies on multiple request and the data to
be saved correctly.
The service will
appear as a card
in the
hosts­sidebar.
Ping
Confirm connection
Status is updated
Process dry lab
85
==PAGE:93==
Configurations
Returns a configurations with the ”type” key of
repository node such that the service will be
displayed correctly.
Repository node
configurations
Upload file
6 different request for uploading different
resources; .svg, .png, .jpg, .dot, .xes and .bpmn
Request is
responded with
resource id,
which is then
used to retrieve
the metadata
object and
resource, and a
card is displayed
for the resource
in the sidebar.
Upload stream
meta­information
Sending meta information that will create a
metadata object which is retrieved after
receiving resourceId.
Metadata object
is shown as a
card in the
sidebar.
Download
resource
6 different request for downloading different
resources; .svg, .png, .jpg, .dot, and .bpmn
Retrieves
metadata object
and resource.
Eventlogs are not
retrieved but
instead request a
histogram, and
eventstreams are
not requested for
a resource.
Download
eventstream
Only retrieves a metadata object of the resource.
The
eventstreams
metadata object
is used to display
a card in the
sidebar.
Download
Eventlog
When inspecting an eventlog, a histogram is
requested instead.
Valid histogram is
returned
Download
dynamic
resource
When displaying a dynamic resource, the
resource should be repeatedly requested
The resource is
repeatedly
requested and
overrides
previous
instances
Get filtered list of
metadata objects
Attempting to start a miner that requires at least
one resource as input will only show resources
of the allowed types for each input.
Only valid
resource types
are presented
Process dry lab
86
==PAGE:94==
Get resource
relation graph
Available for all resource types, and will be
requested when the specific tab is selected.
A resource graph
of the selected
resource is
retrieved in dot
format.
metadata object
resource children
Selecting a resource card from the sidebar, and
expanding the dropdown in the top right to see
the immediate children.
Requests and
receives a list of
metadata object
used to generate
the dropdown list.
metadata object
resource children
updated list
Using the resource to generate a new resource
The new
resource shows
up in the children
list (if it’s not a
card in the
sidebar).
Download
resource child
Selecting a child from the children dropdown
and clicking ”download”
The resource id
is sent to the
repository node,
a metadata
object and
resource is
retrieved, and a
card is created in
the sidebar.
Changing BPMN
Making changes to a BPMN and clicking save.
The old resource
reverts to the
state before
changes, but a
new resource is
created which
shows up as a
new card.
Table A.5: Manual E2E repository tests
A.5.3
Miner node manual test
There have been conducted 20 manual tests of the service registry node endpoints and
the frontends ability to handle the responses.
Test case
Details
Success criteria
ping
Confirm connection
Status is updated
Process dry lab
87
==PAGE:95==
Get miner
configurations
Getting configuration from miner which
determines available miner algorithm and the
required inputs and resource types
Configlist is
correctly stored
in the frontend
and a card is
shown of the
miner node
Start
file­consuming
algorithm
6 variations of input resource types, number of
inputs, and output types are tested by running:
Alpha miner, Inductive miner, Alignment,
Heuristic miner, Stream publisher, and alphabet
stream miner
A process is
started and
described by a
process object,
which can be
inspected in the
process popup
Get miner
algorithm status
running
When a process is ”running”, the process will
repeatedly be pinged for status
The process is
tracked
Get miner
algorithm status
crash
When a process is ”crash”, this information is
returned on the next ping request
The process is
updated to be
crashed an error
is shown in a
prompt and the
process card
Get miner
algorithm status
complete
When a process is ”complete”, this information
is returned on the next ping request
The process is
updated to be
complete an a
prompt will
appear to
indicate this
Stop miner
algorithm
process
When a process is in ”running” state and
manually stopped
The process is
updated to be
stopped and will
not request
further status
updates
File­consuming
algorithm result
When a status from a process returns
”complete”, the output resource will be retrieved
from the repository node
New card shows
up in the sidebar
Start clone miner
action
3 variations have been performed for different
miner algorithm: Alpha miner (.py), Alpha miner
(.exe), and Alphabet stream miner (.py)
Returns a
process id, which
is used to track
the process
Process dry lab
88
==PAGE:96==
Clone miner
action status
running
The status of the cloning should be requested
repeatedly until complete
Continuous
requests are sent
as seen in the
network tab.
Clone miner
action status
crash
Cloning a python miner algorithm with faulty
requirements should return a crash on the next
status request
A prompt is
shown describing
the crash
Clone miner
action status
stopped
Status is set to ”stopped” if the frontend does
not receive a response to a status request
A prompt is
shown describing
the unsuccessful
end of the clone
miner action
Clone miner
action status
complete
The status of the clone miner action should be
requested repeatedly until complete
A prompt will
appear
describing the
successful end of
the clone miner
action
Cloned miner
algorithm
New miner algorithm option in the miner node
can be chosen.
The miner
algorithm is
available and
works.
Table A.6: Manual E2E miner node tests
Process dry lab
89
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
What is Process Mining? | IBM. URL: https://www.ibm.com/topics/process-mining.
[2]
PEER­TO­PEER NETWORK EXPLAINED. Peer­to­peer, or P2P in its abbreviated…
| by XcelToken Plus | XcelLab Magazine | Medium. URL: https://medium.com/
xcellab-magazine/peer-to-peer-network-explained-c5038f6e8366.
[3]
Microservice Architecture at Medium | by Xiao Ma | Medium Engineering. URL:
https://medium.engineering/microservice-architecture-at-medium-9c33805eb74f.
[4]
Pluggable Microservices. You should treat your Microservices as… | by Volodymyr
Frolov | Medium. URL: https://medium.com/@volodymyrfrolov/pluggable-microservices-
734457c3a3b3.
[5]
pm4py ­ Process Mining for Python. URL: https://pm4py.fit.fraunhofer.de/about-us.
[6]
PMTK. URL: https://pmtk.fit.fraunhofer.de/#.
[7]
Alessandro Berti et al. “The Process Mining ToolKit (PMTK): Enabling Advanced
Process Mining in an Integrated Fashion (Extended Abstract)”. In: (). URL: https:
//icpmconference.org/2021/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2021/10/M-The-Process-
Mining-ToolKit-PMTK-Enabling-Advanced-Process-Mining-in-an-Integrated-Fashion.
pdf.
[8]
Daniel Schuster, Sebastiaan J. van Zelst, and Wil M.P. van der Aalst. “Cortado:
A dedicated process mining tool for interactive process discovery”. In: SoftwareX
22 (May 2023). ISSN: 23527110. DOI: 10.1016/j.softx.2023.101373. URL: https:
//cortado.fit.fraunhofer.de/#about.
[9]
Daniel Schuster, Sebastiaan J. van Zelst, and Wil M.P. van der Aalst. “Cortado: A
dedicated process mining tool for interactive process discovery”. In: SoftwareX 22
(May 2023), p. 101373. ISSN: 2352­7110. DOI: 10.1016/J.SOFTX.2023.101373.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352711023000699.
[10]
Ilias Merkoureas et al. “Smyrida: A web application for process mining and interac­
tive visualization”. In: SoftwareX 22 (May 2023), p. 101327. ISSN: 2352­7110. DOI:
10.1016/J.SOFTX.2023.101327. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2352711023000237.
[11]
Process Mining and Process Analysis ­ Fluxicon. URL: https://fluxicon.com/.
[12]
H M W Verbeek et al. “ProM 6: The Process Mining Toolkit”. In: (). URL: https://ceur-
ws.org/Vol-615/paper13.pdf.
[13]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst, Alfredo Bolt, and Sebastiaan J. van Zelst. “RapidProM: Mine
Your Processes and Not Just Your Data”. In: (Mar. 2017). URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1703.03740v1.
[14]
Best Data Science Platform for Your Enterprise | RapidMiner. URL: https://rapidminer.
com/platform/.
[15]
Process Mining and Execution Management Software | Celonis. URL: https://www.
celonis.com/.
[16]
Apromore. URL: https://apromore.com/.
[17]
SAP Signavio | The Only All­in­One Business Process Software. URL: https://www.
signavio.com/.
[18]
Celonis vs SAP Signavio Comparison (2023 Update) – Workfellow. URL: https :
//www.workfellow.ai/learn/celonis-vs-sap-signavio-comparison.
[19]
Anti Alman, Claudio Di Ciccio, and Fabrizio Maria Maggi. “Rule Mining with RuM
(Extended Abstract) *”. In: (2021). URL: https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2952/paper_296a.
pdf.
Process dry lab
90
==PAGE:98==
[20]
GitHub ­ Clyvv/DataAwareDeclareReplayer: A tool that aligns data­aware Declare
models with event logs. URL: https://github.com/Clyvv/DataAwareDeclareReplayer.
[21]
Fabrizio Maria Maggi. “Declarative Process Mining with the Declare Component of
ProM”. In: (). URL: https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1021/paper_8.pdf.
[22]
Peer to Peer Architecture. URL: https://www.enjoyalgorithms.com/blog/peer-to-
peer-networks.
[23]
Call functions between programming languages with MetaCall | by MetaCall | Medium.
URL: https://medium.com/@metacall/call-functions-methods-or-procedures-between-
programming-languages-with-metacall-58cfece35d7.
[24]
GraalVM. URL: https://www.graalvm.org/.
[25]
Host network driver | Docker Documentation. URL: https : / / docs . docker . com /
network/drivers/host/.
[26]
Bridge network driver | Docker Documentation. URL: https://docs.docker.com/
network/drivers/bridge/.
[27]
File Size Limits for Uploads through Web Browsers ­ SmartFile. URL: https://www.
smartfile.com/blog/file-size-limits-for-uploads-through-web-browsers/.
[28]
Batch Processing vs Stream Processing | Know the Difference. URL: https://www.
xenonstack.com/blog/batch-processing-vs-stream-processing.
Process dry lab
91
