==PAGE:1==
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­
Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
Master Thesis
DTU Management
==PAGE:2==
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect
Foresight
Master Thesis
July 23, 2023
By
Jonas Bodulv Broge
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, , Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Deparment of Technology, Manage­
ment, and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Operations Research,
and Energy Markets.
Jonas Bodulv Broge ­ s174415
Signature
Date
ii
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
23/07/2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In a world striving towards a green transition, the rapid growth of renewable energy is
causing electricity markets to become increasingly volatile. As a result, utility­scale en­
ergy storage systems have been found to be an attractive technology to balance the
production and demand of energy across time. With a focus on optimizing social wel­
fare for the integration of storage systems in the energy market, non­merchant storage
has in recent years been proposed. However, in existing research, the challenges as­
sociated with maximizing market efficiency while simultaneously ensuring cost­recovery
for the non­merchant storage in such markets have been highlighted. Consequently, the
FAP method is proposed to restore both of these market properties in a perfect foresight
setting. This work analyzes the market properties of the FAP method in an imperfect fore­
sight setting using a robust optimization approach to steer the storage levels at the end
of a market horizon. By using this method we show, that while the FAP method ensures
cost­recovery for the non­merchant storage, it is no longer guaranteed for other market
participants. In response to the identified flaws of the FAP method, we propose the novel
VOS method in which the charging price of stored energy is reflected by an artificial bid­
ding price in the market clearing process. By testing the VOS method on the example in
which the FAP method failed, we demonstrate that cost­recovery is ensured in both the
perfect, and imperfect foresight setting. Additionally, we conduct a comparative analysis
in an imperfect foresight setting, in which the market efficiency of the VOS method with
storage levels steered by the robust optimization approach is compared to that of a myopic
approach in which the stored energy at the end of a market horizon is fixed to zero. The
results of the analysis suggest that the VOS method outperforms the myopic approach in
terms of social welfare.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor Richard Martin Lusby, and PhD Student
Eléa Prat for providing top­quality guidance during our weekly meetings. Their input, and
our discussions has been indispensable to the creation of this thesis.
iv
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Sets and Indices
g ∈G
Generators
H = |T d1| The final timestep of a market horizon
l ∈L
Loads
s ∈S
Scenarios
T = |T |
The final timestep of a considered time­period
t ∈T
Time­steps in time­period
Parameters
λs
v
Value of the stored energy in stv at index v
D
µ
lt
Expected maximum consumption of load l at time t
D
v
lt
Maximum distance from expected maximum consumption of load l at time t
Dlt
Maximum consumption of load l at time t
G
µ
gt
Expected maximum production of generator g at time t
G
v
gt
Maximum distance from expected maximum production of generator g at time
t
Ggt
Maximum production of generator g at time t
S
Maximum storage level
Cgt
Cost of generator g at time t
Eend
Storage level at end of time horizon
Einit
Initial storage level
Sall
v
Remaining stored energy from previous market horizons of value index v
Ugt
Utility of load l at time t
Variables
αgt
Variable used for box uncertainty set
βlt
Variable used for box uncertainty set
bt
Charged(0<) or Discharged(0>) energy in time t
dlt
Scheduled demand of load l in time t
et
State of energy at end of time t
pgt
Scheduled production of generator g at time t
qtv
discharged energy from stv in time t of value index v
stv
stored energy in time t of value index v
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
v
==PAGE:7==
x
vector denoting all of the primal variables
Dual Variables
λt
Dual variable of balancing constraint. Used as market price
ρt
Dual variable of storage constraint. Used as market price(Chapter 4)
ξ
Dual variable to correct market price in first market horizon for FAP method
ζ
Dual variable to correct market price in second market horizon for FAP method
vi
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:8==
Glossary
ESS energy storage systems.
FAP Future­Aware­Plus.
intermittent renewables Renewable Energy sources that are not freely dispatchable, for
example due to being weather dependent..
market horizon A set of time steps covered by a given market clearing..
merchant storage Storage systems that are operated by independent entities submitting
bids to the market.
non­merchant storage Storage systems that do not submit bids but are co­optimized
with the market to optimize social­welfare and are operated by the market operator.
out­of­the­market uplifts Additional payments made to market participants after the reg­
ular market clearing to compensate for costs that were not captured by the market..
social welfare Measures the general well being of a market by adding together the con­
sumer surplus and the producer surplus.
SW Social welfare.
temporal arbitrage The concept of moving energy across to exploit price differences,
and increase profits or optimize resources..
time­period A range of time that may include several market horizons.
time­step The smallest increment considered in the market interval. For example 1 hour
for a day­ahead market..
utility­scale energy storage Utility­scale energy storage refers to large storage systems
that are used in the electricity grid to perform temporal arbitrage..
VOS Value of Storage.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
vii
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Glossary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview of Contents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Prior Work
4
3
Energy Market Theory
7
3.1
Market type and pricing mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Market Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Decision­making under uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Existing Models and Limitations
12
4.1
The Market Clearing Model with Non­Merchant Storage . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
The Full­Horizon and Split­horizon problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
The Future­Aware­Plus(FAP) method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
The FAP method with uncertain parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5
The Value of Storage (VOS) method
26
5.1
Market Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2
Testing the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6
Discussion and Conclusion
39
Bibliography
42
A Data and solutions for Examples
45
viii
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivations
Goals for higher shares of renewable electricity are getting continually more ambitious and
in May 2022, a new benchmark of 69% renewable power generation in Europe by 2030
was estimated as a requirement to meet the REpowerEU plans made by the European
Union[1]. However, as the majority of the planned installation to meet this goal will be from
intermittent renewables such as wind or solar power, other technologies are needed to aid
in aligning production and consumption of electricity across time. Currently, this is largely
balanced using dispatchable power from non­renewable sources such as coal and natural
gas, but also in part by renewable power from hydro and nuclear sources. However,
as the share of intermittent renewable power increases, while dispatchable conventional
power decreases, additional balancing mechanisms are needed for the stability of the
power grid. A possible solution to the aforementioned issue is the integration of utility­
scale energy storage which was predicted in the IEA Energy Outlook to increase from
approximately 20 GW in 2020 to over 3000 GW in 2050 for utility­scale battery storage[2].
This increase leads to significant opportunities in energy markets, as the integration of
energy storage systems (ESS) in energy markets allows for higher shares of renewable
electricity using temporal arbitrage of energy. In other words, the generated energy can
be stored in times when generation is abundant and prices are low and discharged at a
later time where there is a lack of generation and thus higher prices. However, there are
also significant challenges to the integration of ESS as most current electricity markets
are not explicitly designed to enable their participation. This is due to mechanisms not
being in place for handling the time­linking constraints which are an inherent property
of ESS. Nevertheless, Order No. 841 was released by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission in 2018 to regulate current electricity markets to facilitate the participation of
ESS, considering physical and operational challenges[3].
At present time ESS are generally included in the market clearing model in the same way
as any other market participant where the storage operators submit bid prices and quan­
tities as either a load if the ESS is planning on charging, or as a generator if planning to
discharge energy. We refer to this as merchant storage, since the storage is owned by
individual entities all seeking to maximize their profit. However, research has shown that
strategic merchant storage bidders may have incentives to underuse the ESS to maximize
their profit, leading to sub­optimal operation in terms of the social welfare[4], and in some
cases, the inclusion of ESS may even reduce the social welfare depending on its market
power[5]. As a result, alternate market structures are being investigated for the inclusion
of ESS. The concept known as non­merchant storage, or passive storage, is one such
structure that has been investigated in recent years. In a non­merchant storage setting
the ESS do not submit bids, but are co­optimized with generators and loads in the market
clearing process. Furthermore, the non­merchant storage will often be an asset owned by
the market operator, but can also be owned by private entities. As previously mentioned,
the principles of non­merchant storage mean that for the system to optimize the use of the
ESS, the constraints of the storage need to be included in the market clearing process.
This creates some challenges, as the storage is no longer viewed as an individual market
participant trying to maximize its profit, but as a ”tool” within the market clearing process
that aids in increasing social welfare. At the same time, in an ideal market, market prop­
erties such as cost­recovery and dispatch support should still be ensured for the storage
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
1
==PAGE:11==
system, generators, and loads. Consequently, the temporal arbitrage performed by the
storage system should be lucrative to ensure revenue adequacy for the market operator
and potential storage owners.
A main difference in the inclusion of non­merchant versus merchant storage in the energy
market is that with merchant storage time­linking constraints are considered within its
individual bidding problem while for non­merchant storage the time­linking constraints
become the responsibility of the market operator. As energy markets are usually cleared
for independent market horizons, however, there is no straightforward mechanism in place
for handling the time­coupling of the market. An analogy to time­coupling is the more well­
known geographical market coupling, which refers to the coordinated transfer and trading
of electricity between different locations and markets that create a unified and efficient
market with harmonized prices. Time­coupling the markets aims to achieve the same
results, as electricity can now be traded not only across different geographical zones but
also across market horizons.
In that regard, we’re left with the question of how to best handle the time­linking constraints
and time­coupling of the markets, in a way that ensures market efficiency and other desir­
able market properties across not only the current but also subsequent market horizons.
In a setting where perfect foresight is assumed addressing this question is a challenge
in itself, but when an uncertain future market is considered it becomes increasingly more
difficult. In reality, there are many inherent sources of uncertainty in energy markets, and
with the share of intermittent renewables seen in today’s power markets, the assump­
tion of perfect forecasts between market horizons is far from an accurate representation.
When this assumption is disregarded, a solution that might seem optimal based on the
forecasts will often prove to not be optimal at the time that the uncertainty is realized. As
such a market model and pricing mechanism must be formalized that ensures the desired
properties even in the case of uncertainty.
1.2
Contributions
This thesis makes several contributions to the field of market clearing and non­merchant
storage modeling under imperfect foresight. The key contributions are outlined below.
In recent work, a method hereby referred to as the future­aware­plus (FAP) method has
been proposed that preserves market efficiency and cost recovery in a perfect­foresight
setting[6]. As an initial contribution made in this thesis, we discover an edge­case of the
method, in which market efficiency is no longer guaranteed due to price multiplicity. Due
to this, a modification is made in collaboration with the authors of [6] which reinstates the
market efficiency.
As another significant contribution, we analyze the FAP market clearing method under im­
perfect foresight. By using a robust solution of the uncertain parameters for a full­horizon
model, we get an input for the end­of­horizon storage level that optimizes the worst­case
solution of social welfare. Through examples using possible realizations of the uncertain
parameters, we show that cost­recovery is not guaranteed for the market participants
when this solution is used as input for the method.
The primary contribution of this thesis is the development of an enhanced market clearing
method specifically designed to restore the cost­recovery of market participants for an
energy market with non­merchant storage under imperfect foresight. The method which
we have named the Value of Storage (VOS) method, utilizes the charging cost of stored
energy to reflect an artificial bidding price of the storage in later market horizons, thereby
allowing the stored energy to affect the market price. By testing the method with the same
2
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:12==
procedure and examples as the FAP method, we show that it can restore cost­recovery
in the imperfect foresight setting.
1.3
Overview of Contents
The remainder of this thesis is organized as follows. In Chapter 2, we present a com­
prehensive literature review that explores the existing body of knowledge on the thesis
research topic, shedding light on relevant findings and insights. In Chapter 3, we cover
the underlying theory surrounding energy market properties, market dynamics, and pric­
ing mechanisms. Moreover, the chapter explores two popular methods used for decision­
making under uncertainty, namely stochastic programming and robust optimization. In
Chapter 4, we introduce the set­up of this work by defining the setting, key assumptions,
and the fundamental market­clearing model. We also present the models and methods
covered by [6] and analyze market properties in a perfect foresight setting. The models
and methods include the full­horizon model, split­horizon model, and FAP method, which
lay the groundwork for this thesis. Furthermore, the final section of the chapter uses ro­
bust optimization to explore the impact on market properties when the FAP method is
used in an imperfect foresight setting. In Chapter 5, we propose the novel VOS method
for restoring cost­recovery in the imperfect foresight setting. The method is tested on nu­
merous examples to highlight its strengths and drawbacks. Finally, Chapter 6 concludes
the thesis and discusses the methods used, as well as future research directions. This
is followed by Appendix A and the bibliography. The code used to produce the results of
this thesis is written in the language Julia and can be found online [7].
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
3
==PAGE:13==
2
Prior Work
This chapter provides an in­depth review of the prior works and literature that have been
found relevant for the research done on the topic of non­merchant storage under imperfect
foresight in this thesis. Non­merchant storage as a concept has been investigated in
recent years as a way of optimizing the social welfare increase that energy storage can
offer to the energy market[8, 9, 10, 11]. However, paper [12] which focuses on the current
state­of­the­art on energy modeling, draws attention to a research gap as most of the
prior work done on non­merchant storage either completely ignores or uses simplifying
assumptions when considering the connection between market horizons.
In the prior research, two main simplifying assumptions are often used for the end­of­
horizon storage levels. The first assumption is that there are no constraints on the storage
levels, which is the method that was used in [8, 9, 10, 11]. The second assumption
allows a slightly larger degree of coordination between market horizons by setting the
final and initial levels of the storage to be equal, as is the case for the work done in [13,
14, 15]. However, in both of these myopic approaches to the market clearing process,
optimal end­of­horizon storage levels are neglected and the value that could be offered
from the storage systems between market horizons is not optimized, which causes market
inefficiencies. A visualization of this is seen in Figure 1, where the myopic state­of­energy
profile fails to closely simulate the profile of the state­of­energy profile that is selected with
perfect knowledge of future market horizons.
Figure 1: The effect of simplifying assumptions on the state of energy over several market
clearing horizons. Reprinted from [6].
To address the issue of myopic decision­making, a better alternative is to use a future­
aware method of determining the optimal end­of­horizon storage levels by using predic­
tions on the parameters of future market horizons. By using a future­aware method as
is visualized by the red line in Figure 1, the storage profiles can indeed better approach
the profiles of the perfect benchmark. Several previous studies have researched differ­
ent ways of setting future­aware end­of­horizon storage levels. The standard method
of determining the levels in previous work has been by using so­called ”rolling­horizon”,
or ”rolling­window” dispatch implementations, where each market clearing considers the
forecasts for several future market horizons when the optimal dispatch is determined, but
where only the dispatch decisions of the current market horizon are binding[16, 17, 18].
However, the authors in [6] show that even when the end­of­horizon storage levels are set
optimally for a multi­interval market­clearing process cost­recovery is not always ensured
for a non­merchant storage system due to market price multiplicity. This issue arises due
4
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:14==
to current pricing mechanisms of market horizons considering historical losses as sunk
costs. In the context of storage systems, this means that the storage can improve social
welfare without recovering costs, which causes incentives to deviate from schedules and
makes discriminatory out­of­the­market uplifts necessary[18]. This challenge has been
addressed for a rolling­horizon setting in [18] by using nonuniform pricing schemes, and
with a focus on ramping constraints in [17]. In [6] the pricing mechanism for energy storage
with a more general formulation is considered, where the final storage level is constrained
for each separate market clearing, and a method is proposed that maximizes social wel­
fare and ensures cost­recovery for the multi­interval market clearing process in a perfect
foresight setting. The proposed method works by using the optimal solution to the entire
time­period as a single optimization problem to steer the end­of­horizon storage levels
of a split­horizon model that solves each interval of the market­clearing procedure. The
assumption of perfect foresight is a general research shortage that is common for much of
the aforementioned work. This represents a significant simplification of the market mech­
anisms, as it overlooks the inherent uncertainties in renewable generation and loads that
are present in energy markets, which can significantly impact pricing outcomes, leading
to sub­optimal decisions, and inefficiencies in the market.
In other studies, the overall impact that uncertainty has on energy market properties has
been investigated with a stochastic[19] approach, and for the inclusion of energy stor­
age[20]. The authors of [20] propose a market design that combines a cost­recovery
mechanism with a rolling­horizon method and discusses how the addition of ESS as an
additional flexibility source in the market leads to additional challenges in balancing ef­
ficiency and fairness considering the flexibility offers of generators. A general flaw of
previous stochastic markets is that two of the most important market properties, namely
revenue adequacy, and cost­recovery are simultaneously satisfied in expectation only,
and not by scenario. The authors of [19] have developed a market model that ensures
both of the properties by scenario, but at the cost of increased market inefficiencies. An­
other direction of prior research is to directly model prices and other market properties
as variables and constraints in an optimization model. This allows the market operator
to have preferences by enabling flexible trade­offs between properties, which is relevant
when studying markets under uncertainty since fulfilling one market property often comes
at the price of another[21]. In other work, a temporal locational marginal price was im­
plemented for the ESS in a stochastic rolling­window setting. In other words, a specific
market price based on previous costs was incorporated for the ESS by using nonuniform
shadow prices to restore cost­recovery and remove the requirement for out­of­the­market
uplifts[22]. Although this approach is comparable to the VOS method used in this thesis,
it was done in the setting of merchant storage, whereas we consider a non­merchant set­
ting. Furthermore, the approach of the VOS method creates a uniform pricing mechanism
that can be perceived as less discriminating. Another proposal is that of a new energy
market design in which the charging and discharging operations of ESS are decomposed
to separate the net­charging/discharging components and the temporal energy transfer
using virtual links that capture the shift of power across time[23]. The authors show that
the use of virtual links for load shifting ensures cost­recovery for the ESS in a merchant
storage setting.
Another possible approach to ensuring that there are dispatch­following incentives for
a non­merchant ESS is by setting an optimal ”artificial” bidding price. Lots of research
has been done on the optimal bidding strategies for merchant ESS under uncertain day­
ahead outcomes [24] as both a price­taker [25][26][27] and price­maker[28]. However,
setting bidding prices based on what is perceived as optimal from the storage point of
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
5
==PAGE:15==
view, does not optimize market efficiency as the storage systems will be underused, and
thus another bidding price needs to be used in the case of non­merchant storage. Machine
learning methods have also been employed as a promising way of making optimal bidding
prices for price­maker ESS[29][30], however, these kinds of methods do not offer a lot of
transparency. For the operation of non­merchant storage, transparency is important as
the methods need to be reliable not only from the point­of­view of the storage owners
but also from the remaining market participants. In this thesis we instead investigate an
optimal artificial bidding price based on the previous charging price of the storage, to
simultaneously ensure cost recovery and optimize market efficiency.
6
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:16==
3
Energy Market Theory
To comprehend the dynamics of an energy market, it is important to define the properties
and mechanisms that concretize the stability and performance of that specific market.
This section aims at providing some background knowledge on the theory behind energy
markets, with a specific emphasis on the key topics and definitions relevant to this thesis.
3.1
Market type and pricing mechanism
For the market type in this thesis, we assume that we’re dealing with a market under per­
fect competition. In this kind of market, there are usually lots of smaller participants, none
of which have any significant market power. As such, all participants in the market are
price­takers who can not individually affect the price. Normally, perfect information will be
available for participants regarding costs and prices, but as we start to consider the mar­
ket under uncertainty this will be disregarded. What is especially important for this work
is that generators and loads bid their true utility and cost in perfect competition, meaning
that to focus on the effect of the storage system on the market price and properties, we
will disregard strategic bidding from other market participants.
For perfectly competitive markets a short­term equilibrium is reached at the point where
price is equal to marginal cost. In the case of a merit­order curve, this point will be reached
when the next unit of the most expensive generator will no longer provide a positive profit,
and the cost of the last unit is thus often used to set the price of the market. In the market
models in the later chapters, this price is reflected by the dual value λt of the balancing
constraint, unless otherwise specified. This dual variable reflects the marginal cost or
price of the last generator or demand, or in cases of price­multiplicity any value between
the two, meaning that if all costs are captured in the market clearing model every market
participant will recover their costs [31]. Furthermore, we assume a uniform price where
every load and generator either pays or receives the same market price per quantity of
energy.
Furthermore, we define a market­clearing process with linear cost and utility functions
in a convex market. This means that the bidding price from each generator or load is
linearly proportional to the quantity that they are scheduled to use, and in the examples
used in this thesis they are even treated as a constant. We use this simplification, as non­
linear cost­ and bidding functions can lead to a much more complicated model without
significantly impacting the main conclusions.
3.2
Market Properties
For electricity markets, it is paramount that proper pricing mechanisms are in place, as it
incentivizes market participants to follow expectations when bidding into the market. Fur­
thermore, the pricing mechanism is defined in an attempt to satisfy a range of market
properties such as non­discrimination, dispatch support, cost­recovery, and revenue ade­
quacy, while simultaneously trying to maximize social welfare. The properties are defined
below[21][6].
dispatch support:
A market offers dispatch support if the determined market price is such that no
participant is to gain from deviating unilaterally from the market outcome. In other
words, there is no lost opportunity cost for any participant.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
7
==PAGE:17==
cost-recovery:
The revenue for any market participant should cover its costs, and guarantee a non­
negative profit. This property is especially important for the work done in this thesis,
as the difference in price between two market clearings may cause a negative profit
for a storage unit if this is not carefully considered in the pricing mechanism.
non-discrimination:
In a market with non­discrimination, all market participants are paid the same and
pay the same per commodity. This is generally expected for a market with uniform
pricing, with an exception being out­of­the­market uplifts where the market operator
remunerates participants with costs not captured by the pricing mechanism.
revenue adequacy:
Revenue adequacy is essential for any market, as it means that the market operator
is guaranteed a non­negative profit. For this to be guaranteed the payment of the
consumers should be larger or equal to the price of the generators.
Market eﬀiciency:
A market is efficient if the social welfare of the market is maximized, and the market
provides dispatch­supporting incentives. In this thesis, we calculate the social wel­
fare as the difference between total demand utility and total generation cost which
can be summed over either the considered market horizon or time­period.
For all types of markets, it is important that both cost­recovery and revenue adequacy are
ensured, as these two properties secure that no negative profits are incurred from either
the market participants or the market operators.
3.3
Decision­making under uncertainty
In current energy markets, there are always sources of uncertainty, for which decision­
making methods need to be considered. This is becoming even more important with
a growing renewable energy sector, as the generation from such market participants is
subject to large uncertainties due to the inherent unpredictability and errors that come with
wind, solar and other forecasts. In this section, we present some of the fundamentals
of decision­making under uncertainty, specifically focusing on its application in energy
markets.
When it comes to decision­making under uncertainty in operations research, there are a
few popular methods that have different suitable application areas, strengths, and weak­
nesses. Two of the most widely used ones are stochastic programming and robust opti­
mization. One of the main differences between these methods lies in the way in which the
methods characterize the uncertainty of the parameters. While Stochastic Programming
creates a set of scenarios with different probabilities, robust optimization relies on contin­
uous uncertainty sets which bounds the possible realizations of the uncertainty without
considering the probability distribution.
3.3.1
Robust optimization
Robust optimization is one of the methodologies that can be employed to address uncer­
tain parameters in optimization problems. Robust optimization has two main objectives.
Firstly, it ensures feasibility for the full range of the defined uncertainty set in contrast
to deterministic problems where a slight deviation in parameters can render a solution
infeasible. Secondly, robust optimization is commonly utilized in situations where a risk­
averse approach is desired, as it aims to minimize the worst­case regret by optimizing the
worst­case solution. The worst­case regret refers to the difference between the optimal
8
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:18==
objective value and the objective value obtained by making decisions based on a realized
scenario. To achieve this, robust optimization solves a model by considering the most
pessimistic estimate for the parameters. Since the realized outcome will always be less
restrictive than initially anticipated, any solution deemed feasible by the model will also
be feasible in practice.
One of the challenges with robust optimization is that it can sometimes be difficult to
choose the bounds of the uncertainty sets for the uncertain parameters. For instance, if
the uncertainty set is overly pessimistic it may lead to very conservative solutions that sac­
rifice optimality. However, if the uncertainty set is too optimistic it might not adequately
account for every possible scenario, which could lead to infeasible scenarios. Further­
more, depending on the type of distribution of a parameter, it simply may not be possible
to bind every possible outcome of the parameter. As an example, this would be the case
for normal distributions where the probability gradually diminishes but never reaches zero.
In summary, robust optimization typically characterizes the uncertainty as continuous un­
certainty sets rather than discrete scenarios and optimizes the worst­case realization of
uncertainty which gives a very conservative risk­averse solution that ensures feasibility
for all cases of uncertainty. [32] [33]
Robust optimization using box uncertainty sets
One possible way of creating a robust linear problem that optimizes the worst­case sce­
nario when uncertainty sets have been defined is by using box uncertainty sets. Let’s
look at the general formulation of a robust linear optimization problem where there are un­
certain coefficients in the constraints. Such a formulation can take the shape seen below,
where c are the coefficients of the objective function, x are the here­and­now decision vari­
ables, a are rows in the constraint matrix of length m, b is the right­hand­side parameter,
and U are uncertainty sets.
min
cT x
s.t.
aT
i x ≤bi,
∀i ∈1, ..., m, ∀ai ∈U
In this problem, the uncertainty sets are continuous and lead to an infinite number of
constraints. Therefore the problem needs to be reformulated to get a computationally
tractable problem. By using box­uncertainty sets we can make some modifications that
give us a linear problem. In the following equation, the formulation of such a box­uncertainty
set is shown for a constraint where the parameter a varies in a given interval defined by
the deviation P to either side of its value.
(a + Pζ)T x ≤b,
∀−1 ≤ζ ≤1
↔aT x + (Pζ)T x ≤b,
∀−1 ≤ζ ≤1
The constraint with the box uncertainty set must be feasible for all outcomes of the un­
certainty depending on the value of ζ. Thus, we maximize the term with the uncertainty
since the largest outcome is the one that allows the least freedom for the problem, as the
term is on the left­hand side of a greater than or equal to constraint. This is equivalent to
taking the absolute value of the term and removing ζ since it in the worst­case scenario
will take the value at one of its bounds.
aT x + max
−1≤ζ≤1{(Pζ)T x} ≤b,
∀−1 ≤ζ ≤1
↔
aT x + |P T x| ≤b
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
9
==PAGE:19==
Finally, a new variable u in combination with the constraints seen below is used as a
method of always selecting the absolute value of the term.[33]
−u ≤P T x ≤u
aT x + u ≤b
u ≥0
By using this process, each constraint in a problem containing an uncertain parameter
can be linearized and transformed into a computationally tractable problem.
3.3.2
Stochastic programming
Another way of addressing uncertain parameters in optimization is with stochastic pro­
gramming.
In stochastic programming, the uncertain parameters are incorporated by
considering a set of possible scenarios each associated with a probability of being re­
alized. By simultaneously considering all of these scenarios when the optimal solution is
found for the problem, a solution can be found that performs well across multiple scenar­
ios taking into account their probabilities, rather than optimizing for a single deterministic
outcome. Furthermore, when a stochastic programming method is employed, the solution
that is found returns a better objective value across the scenarios on average than if the
expected value of each parameter is used to find a deterministic solution.
In two­stage stochastic programming, which we will be focusing on henceforth, there are
two decision stages. The first­stage decisions are the decisions that have to be made
before the uncertainty is realized, while the second­stage decisions, also known as wait­
and­see or recourse decisions, are the ones that can be made after the uncertainty has
been realized. We consider two market horizons of an energy market with non­merchant
storage as it is defined in this thesis as an example. While the first market horizon is ongo­
ing, the first­stage decisions in this example are the scheduling of market participants and
energy storage decisions for the current market horizon. These have to be made before
the uncertainty of the second market horizon is realized. In the second market horizon,
the first­stage decision can no longer be changed, and thus the second­stage decisions
must be made based on what is optimal for the specific scenario with the predetermined
level of the energy storage system. Hence, the decisions for the two­stage stochastic
problem are chosen in a manner that optimizes the weighted expected value across the
scenarios. This optimization takes into account the range of possibilities available for the
second­stage decisions, given each potential solution for the first­stage decisions.
While two­stage stochastic programming is a useful approach for decision­making under
uncertainty, it does have some limitations and challenges. Firstly, as the method uses a
scenario­based approach, feasibility is not guaranteed if realizations outside of the con­
sidered scenarios are a possibility, for example in the case of an uncertain continuous pa­
rameter. Furthermore, the quality of the acquired solution is very dependent on whether
the representative scenarios are generated accurately. Secondly, two­stage stochastic
programming typically focuses on the expected value of the objective function, without
considering preferences concerning risk­aversion. Thus, the selected solution which opti­
mizes the expected value might in specific scenarios lead to an extremely high opportunity
loss[33][34][35].
Deterministic equivalent linear model
A common way of using the two­stage stochastic programming model is by transforming
it into a deterministic linear programming problem and using representative scenarios.
We let ω ∈Ωbe the finite set of scenarios and π(ω) be the probability associated with
each scenario. The deterministic equivalent linear model then takes the form seen below,
10
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:20==
where c is the coefficients of the first stage decisions denoted by x, T is the technology
matrix with the stochastic influence factors, W is the recourse matrix, which contains the
reactions, once uncertainty is revealed, of the coefficients to the second­stage decision
variables denoted by y. Finally, b are the right­hand side requirements of the constraints
associated with the first­stage decisions, while h are the stochastic requirements of the
constraints for the second­stage, and q are the stochastic objective coefficients.
min
cT x +
∑
ω∈Ω
π(ω)q(ω)T y(ω)
s.t.
Ax = b
T(ω)x + W(ω)y(ω) = h(ω),
∀ω ∈Ω
x ≥0
y(ω) ≥0,
∀ω ∈Ω
By using the deterministic equivalent linear model, the expected value of recourse solution
can be found which is the optimal expected value considering the probability of each
scenario[33].
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
11
==PAGE:21==
4
Existing Models and Limitations
This chapter offers a comprehensive analysis of various models utilized in this thesis,
focused on different approaches to the non­merchant storage market clearing problem.
These models include the full­horizon problem, the split­horizon problem, and the Future­
Aware­Plus (FAP) method. The main purpose of the content of sections 4.1­4.3 in this
chapter is to summarize the key discoveries and conclusions presented in [6], as the pa­
per forms the basis for the discussed models, and lays the groundwork for the following
sections. Thus we refer to this paper for any further information on the fundamental mod­
els in this chapter. Furthermore, this chapter outlines the assumptions and definitions
upon which the thesis is based. The final section of the chapter focuses on exploring how
the proposed FAP method performs in an imperfect fore­sight setting.
The setting that the thesis focuses on is from one defined market horizon to the next. In a
realistic example, this would typically be the day­ahead market where one market horizon
would consist of 24 hours in the current day, and the next market horizon would be the 24
hours of the following day. Any other trading markets such as intraday and balancing are
disregarded for the remainder of this thesis.
4.1
The Market Clearing Model with Non­Merchant Storage
In the market model where non­merchant storage is considered, the operation of the stor­
age system is co­optimized alongside the dispatch of loads and generators to achieve the
highest social welfare. This means that the storage system does not submit bids but is
used to perform temporal arbitrage by moving cheap energy from one timestep to another,
thus improving the efficiency of the energy systems. The constraints of the storage sys­
tem, therefore, have to be directly included in the market­clearing model. Furthermore,
as the main focus of this thesis is on the time­coupling of the market­clearing procedure
only a single location is considered, and thus no locational constraints, such as power­line
capacities and losses need to be considered in the model, although the inclusion of such
parameters could be implemented without causing any dissonance to the models in the
thesis.
Thus, the model as seen below in (1) consists of two main parts, namely the standard
market­clearing model consisting of (1a)­(1d), and the storage constraints in (1e)­(1h).
max
x
∑
t∈T

∑
l∈L
Ultdlt −
∑
g∈G
Cgtpgt


(1a)
s.t.
∑
l∈L
dlt + bt −
∑
g∈G
pgt = 0,
∀t ∈T
: (λt)
(1b)
0 ≤pgt ≤P gt,
∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T
: (µgt, µgt)
(1c)
0 ≤dlt ≤Dlt,
∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T
: (χlt, χlt)
(1d)
0 ≤et ≤S,
∀t ∈T
: (νt, νt)
(1e)
et = et−1 + bt,
∀t ∈T ̸= 1
: (ρt)
(1f)
e1 = Einit + b1
: (ρ1)
(1g)
eH = Eend
: (ξ)
(1h)
12
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:22==
In (1) and throughout this thesis, the dual variables are indicated in parentheses on the
right side of each constraint. Furthermore for this model and any subsequent models we
denote all sets with capital letters in a calligraphic style, such as T which represents the
set containing all time­steps t within the current market horizon, L which represents the
set of loads, and G which represents all the generators. x is the vector that groups all
of the primal decision variables. The decision variables in (1) are denoted by lowercase
letters and include the consumption of load l at time t (dlt), the production of generator g
at time t (pgt), the storage level at the end of timestep t (et), and the charged (positive)
or discharged (negative) energy by the storage at time t (bt). Furthermore, all of the
parameters of the model are denoted by capital letters and include the bid prices of each
load (Ult), the offer prices of each generator (Cgt), the maximum production of generators
(Pgt), the maximum consumption of loads (Dlt), the maximum storage level (S), the initial
level of storage (Einit) and finally the final level of storage (Eend).
In equation (1a) the objective function maximizes the social welfare, defined as the differ­
ence between total demand utility and total generation cost, which is summed over the full
time­period. This definition of social welfare will be used for the remaining part of the the­
sis. The first constraint (1b) balances the production and consumption of the generators
and loads and ensures that any difference in the two is due to either a charging or dis­
charging operation of the storage. Constraints (1c)­(1e) bound the production, consump­
tion, and storage decision variables to be between 0 and their maximum capacity. Finally,
constraints (1f)­(1g) relate the storage levels to the amount being charged or discharged,
while (1h) is an optional constraint used in a lot of the framework for non­merchant storage,
that ensures that a defined level of storage is required in the final time­step of the interval.
In this constraint, and henceforth we denote the final time­step of a market horizon with
t = H. There are many ways to decide on a logical end­of­horizon storage level Eend
some of which will be discussed later. We define two different versions of model (1), the
free market­clearing problem F(T ) which disregards constraint (1h), and the constrained
market­clearing problem C(T ), which includes (1h).
It should be noted that the storage is modeled as a single storage unit in all of the models
presented in this thesis. This is equivalent to having multiple storage units, as the model is
considered as a single location and thus is not restricted by grid constraints. Additionally,
energy losses due to charge/discharge efficiency and self­discharge of the storage are
not considered in (1) and subsequent models of the thesis, which allows us to only use a
single decision variable for the operation of the storage and avoids simultaneous charging
and discharging. Charging limits are also disregarded as they complicate the model, and
don’t have any impact on the main findings of the thesis. In addition, there can be many
other parameters of the specific type of ESS which may have an impact on the market
properties due to incurred costs, but which are disregarded in the framework of the thesis
as the main conclusions do not change based on these parameters.
4.1.1
Dual Problem and Pricing Mechanism
The constrained market dual problem CD(T ) of model (1) which was derived in [6] is given
below.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
13
==PAGE:23==
min
ζ
∑
t∈T

∑
g∈G
P gtµgt +
∑
l∈L
Dltχlt + Sνt

+ Einitρ1 −Eendξ
(2a)
s.t.
Cgt −µgt + µgt −λt = 0,
∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T
(2b)
−Ult −χlt + χlt + λt = 0,
∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T
(2c)
−ρt + λt = 0,
∀t ∈T
(2d)
−νt + νt + ρt −ρt+1 = 0,
∀t ∈T \ {H}
(2e)
−νH + νH + ρH −ξ = 0
(2f)
µgt, µgt, χlt, χlt, νt, νt ≥0,
∀g ∈G, ∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T
(2g)
In the dual problem, the dual variables are grouped in the vector ζ. The corresponding
free market dual problem FD() would be given by removing all terms related to ξ. In the
constraint (2d) it is evident that ρt = λt for all t, and they will be used interchangeably
for the rest of chapter 4. Another note to be made is that ρt represents the marginal
value of an additional unit of energy stored at the end of hour t. For the remainder of
this thesis, unless otherwise specified, we consider a pricing mechanism that sets a non­
discriminative hourly market price based on the dual variable λt, which has previously
been mentioned to be the standard for perfectly competitive markets. Given that the
market price can also be expressed by ρt, constraints (2e)­(2f) show that the market price
only changes if the storage is at a bound. This leads to the definition of a ”time zone”
concept, which is the longest possible set of consecutive time steps without changes to
the market price. The concept is illustrated in Figure 2, where the bottom plot shows 4
colored boxes indicating 4 different time zones. In the top plot, the state of energy is seen.
By comparing the two plots, the figure shows that the market price only decreases when
the storage is at its lower bound, and the market price only increases when the storage
is at its upper bound.
Figure 2: Example of market­clearing price dividing the time­period into four time zones.
Top: Storage state­of­energy(et) profile related to the below market price signal. Reprinted
from [6].
14
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:24==
4.1.2
Market Properties Under Common Assumptions on Final Storage
Level
This section highlights the impact on cost­recovery and market efficiency arising under
assumptions that have been commonly made in prior literature on non­merchant stor­
age[8]­[11][13]­[15]. We assess two assumptions: 1) No constraint on the final storage
level, allowing maximum social welfare in the current horizon while disregarding future
welfare. This results in the stored energy being at its minimum by the end of a market
horizon, unless negative prices occur, and is equivalent to F(T ). 2) Assuming equal stor­
age energy levels at the start and end of a horizon, often set as zero, which may not be
ideal as the operator may prefer having energy available for high­priced periods. This
assumption is equivalent to C(T ) where the final storage level is set equal to the initial
one.
While cost­recovery is ensured for both generators and loads within a market horizon for
F(T ) and C(T ), this is not necessarily the case for the storage system when the previous
assumptions are discarded for C(T ). For example, the final storage level can be set to
a value that is higher than the initial one, where the cost of storing additional energy is
higher than the revenue from any sold storage. However, the authors in [6] prove that
when the previously mentioned assumptions are used as conditions for the operation of
the storage, cost­recovery is indeed ensured for the storage system within each market
horizon. Although having cost­recovery ensured for every individual market horizon is a
safe and easy approach, it is not a necessity as cost­recovery can be ensured in subse­
quent market horizons. Because of this, it could indeed be preferable to instead consider
the cost­recovery over a multi­interval market clearing of as many market horizons as pos­
sible. However, if the market horizons are considered completely independent of each
other there is no way to ensure cost­recovery. Setting equal starting and finishing levels
of the storage overcomes this issue, but there are downsides to using the assumptions
as this can have an impact on the market efficiency.
When examining market efficiency, enforcing equal initial and final storage levels can pose
problems as these do not ensure profit maximization across multiple market horizons. An
example of this is shown in the table below, which are the results of solving model (1)
using the input data seen in Table 14 in Appendix A and a storage capacity of S = 2.5Wh.
t
E0 = Eend
E0 = Eend
E0 = 0 &
= 0(Wh)
= 1.25(Wh)
Eend = 2.5(Wh)
T d1
1
­4
­4
­10
2
4
4
­2.5
T d2
3
­11
­11
6
4
11
11
9
Total T d1
0
0
­12.5
Total T d2
0
0
15
Total
0
0
2.5
Table 1: Profit(€) of the storage system for various initial and final states of energy.
Reprinted from [6]
in Table 1, we see the profit of a storage system calculated as ∑
t∈T −λtbt, that is cleared
across two market horizons in sequence. In the first two cases where the initial and final
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
15
==PAGE:25==
storage levels are set to be equal at storage levels 0Wh and 1.25Wh respectively, it is
seen that while the total profit within each market horizon is 0€ and thus non­negative
with cost­recovery ensured, the total profit of the two cases also end up being zero. For
the third case, the initial storage level is 0, the final storage level at the end of the first day
is set to 2.5Wh, and the final storage on the second day is free. In this case, the profit of
the storage in both time steps of the first day is negative as the storage is charged, while
both profits are positive for the second day. As a result, the total profit over both horizons
ends up being 2.5€. This goes to show that if the initial and final storage levels are forced
to be equal, it can create market inefficiencies as profit maximization is not ensured for
the storage system in the market output, which gives the storage system an incentive to
unilaterally deviate. Another effect of not forcing equal storage levels was that the social
welfare was increased from 46€ in the first case, to 55.5€ in the third case. Thus it has
also been shown that the simplifying assumption does not maximize social welfare, further
reducing market efficiency.
In conclusion, setting the final storage level of a market horizon based on future­aware
information can improve the market outcome by avoiding the market inefficiencies that
are present for the common simplifying assumptions on the final storage level. However,
taking this action leads to new difficulties in terms of cost­recovery for the storage system,
due to a possible multiplicity in the market price. This will be further discussed in the
following section.
4.2
The Full­Horizon and Split­horizon problem
While the previous section explains how the market clearing model works for a single
market horizon, this section focuses on the dynamics of a multi­interval market clearing
procedure, and the impact that splitting the market clearing into intervals has on the mar­
ket clearing solutions. In clarification, we define a market interval in the same way as a
market horizon, and use the two interchangeably. The splitting of the market is necessary
as the future demand and production of energy can only be known with relative certainty,
and thus in terms of the day­ahead market, a sequential clearing process allows the par­
ticipants to make informed decisions on a day­to­day basis. To this effect, two problems
are defined, namely the full­horizon problem, and the split­horizon problem.
Let us imagine a finite time­period T consisting of multiple market horizons (days) (T d1, T d2),
in which there are multiple time­steps (hours) T = (T d1, T d2) = ([t1, t2] , [t3, t4]). For such
a market the full­horizon problem solves the entire time­period simultaneously in a single
market clearing given by F(T ). Although it assumes perfect knowledge of more than the
current market horizon, the full­horizon problem is useful as it can be used to determine
the optimal solution across multiple market horizons, and will provide the optimal level of
storage at the end of each horizon, which we denote as e∗
H. Thus, a model that splits the
market clearing into multiple intervals should ideally yield the same solution as in the full­
horizon problem. The term split­horizon problem is used for the case that initially solves
all except the last T d1 market horizons using the constrained market clearing formulation
C(T d1), and subsequently solves the free formulation of the market clearing F(T d2) for
T d2. The free formulation is only used for the last market horizon in the time­period, such
that the split­horizon problem solutions can be compared to that of the full­horizon.
When the split­horizon problem is solved in a case of perfect foresight, the end­of­horizon
solution e∗
H from the full­horizon problem is used to set the final storage level optimally.
Furthermore, as the market horizons are solved separately in the split­horizon problem,
the initial storage level of a market horizon Einit should be set to be equal to the final
storage level Eend of the previous horizon. An assumption that is used in this thesis is
16
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:26==
that anything that happens before and after the finite time­period, T can be disregarded.
This allows us to use the full­horizon solution as a perfect baseline for comparison of the
split­horizon problem, as well as other models in the thesis. In the full­horizon problem,
the optimal values are denoted by the symbol (∗), while the symbol (′) is used for the
split­horizon values.
4.2.1
Market Properties of the Split­horizon Problem
To show the effect on the market solution of the primal and dual variables, when comparing
the split­ and full­horizon markets, a new illustrative example is created. With this example,
we show that the splitting of the market can lead to a lack of dispatch support, as the
storage system is exposed to a scenario in which it does not recover costs. To properly
compare the effect of market­splitting, both the full­ and split­horizon problems are solved
with perfect foresight.
The example consists of the non­merchant storage system with a capacity of 2.5Wh, two
generators, and a load with the specific parameters given in Table 2. We will refer to the
this example multiple times throughout this thesis as “example 2”.
t
D1t(Wh)
P 1t(Wh)
P 2t(Wh)
U1t(€/Wh)
C1t(€/Wh)
C2t(€/Wh)
T d1
1
0
2
2
12
5
10
T d2
2
3
2
2
12
2
9
Table 2: Input data from Example II in [6]
The full­horizon problem is solved for the two hours and the optimal storage is found to
be e∗
H = 1Wh after at the end of the first hour. Since the storage is not at its bound after
the first hour leading to the market price not changing, both time steps can be considered
within a single time zone and are depicted in a single market­clearing diagram as seen
in 3a. In the split­horizon problem, since perfect foresight is considered we force the
storage level Eend = e∗
H = 1, and see that the results for the primal variables are identical
to those from the full­horizon problem. The optimal primal variables are shown once for
both models in Table 3 as they are identical, while the dual variable representing the
market prices of each problem is shown independently.
T
t
et
d1t
p1t
p2t
λ∗
t (€/Wh)
λ
′
t(€/Wh)
T d1
1
1
0
1
0
5
5
T d2
2
0
3
2
0
5
[2,9]
Table 3: primal and dual variables of the optimal solutions to the full­ and split­horizon
problem in Example II
For the dual variable of the market price λt, we see that the prices are identical between
the full­ and split­horizon problems for t = 1. In t = 2 however, there is no marginal
generator or load for the split­horizon problem, and thus there is no unique solution to
λ2 as all values in the range [2,9]€/Wh are optimal for the social welfare as illustrated in
Figure 3c.
The price­multiplicity arising in this example is an issue to the split­horizon problem as
it leads to situations where the storage system can be discharged at a market price that
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
17
==PAGE:27==
is lower than the one it was charged at if a value in the range λ2 ∈[2, 5) is selected. In
this case, the profit of the storage system would be negative and could be improved by
decreasing e1, thus causing a lack of cost­recovery and dispatch support for the storage
system. On the other hand, the example also shows, that a dispatch supporting market
price does exist for any value in the range [5,9]€/Wh which recovers the cost of the storage
system. In [6], it has been proven that this is a general result, as any solution to the full­
horizon problem is also a solution to the split­horizon problem. There is, however, not
always a straightforward way to know which dual solution is going to preserve market
properties, and solvers usually only return a single solution that is not necessarily in the
range of property­ensuring solutions.
(a) Full­horizon
(b) Split­horizon for t=1
(c) Split­horizon for t=2
Figure 3: Market­clearing diagram for illustrative example 2. Reprinted from [6]
4.3
The Future­Aware­Plus(FAP) method
The FAP method is a modification of the split­horizon problem, with the main objective
of restoring the market properties lost in the multi­interval splitting of the problem. The
method is constructed for the perfect foresight setting in [6], by solving the full­horizon
problem and using the optimal solution for ρ∗
H+1 and e∗
H as input parameters in the FAP
method of the split­horizon problem. With these inputs, the FAP method subsequently
solves modified split­horizon models for each of the market horizons. The FAP method
with perfect foresight in the example with two market horizons can thus be solved as the
clearing of three sequential problems, starting with the full­horizon problem. The optimal
primal and dual variables of the FAP method are denoted by ′′, and the modifications from
the split­horizon model to the FAP method models are marked in blue.
In the modification of split­horizon model C(T d1) the storage level at the end of the first
market horizon t = H is set to the optimal value acquired from the full­horizon solution, and
the term e∗
Hρ∗
H+1 is added to the objective function where ρ∗
H+1 is the perfect prediction of
market price in the second market horizon. This term can be considered as the expected
value gained when the amount eH is stored from the last hour to the subsequent market
horizon.
18
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:28==
max
x
∑
t∈T d1

∑
l∈L
Ultdlt −
∑
g∈G
Cgtpgt

+eHρ∗
H+1
(3a)
s.t.
∑
l∈L
dlt + bt −
∑
g∈G
pgt = 0,
∀t ∈T d1
: (λt)
(3b)
0 ≤pgt ≤P gt,
∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T d1
: (µgt, µgt)
(3c)
0 ≤dlt ≤Dlt,
∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T d1
: (χlt, χlt)
(3d)
0 ≤et ≤S,
∀t ∈T d1
: (νt, νt)
(3e)
et = et−1 + bt,
∀t ∈T d1 ̸= 1
: (ρt)
(3f)
e1 = Einit + b1
: (ρ1)
(3g)
eH = e∗
H
: (ξ)
(3h)
The split­horizon model for the second market horizon uses as input e∗
H, ρ
′′
H, νt
′′, νt′′ and ξ′′
from the solutions of the full­horizon and solution of the previous market horizon. The term
e∗
H
(
ρH′ + ξ
′ −ν
′
H + ν
′
H
)
is subtracted from the objective function, and the final storage
unit of the previous market­horizon is fixed.
max
x
∑
t∈T d2

∑
l∈L
Ultdlt −
∑
g∈G
Cgtpgt

−eH
(
ρH′′ + ζ
′′ −ν
′′
H + ν
′′
H
)
(4a)
s.t.
∑
l∈L
dlt + bt −
∑
g∈G
pgt = 0,
∀t ∈T d1
: (λt)
(4b)
0 ≤pgt ≤P gt,
∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T d1
: (µgt, µgt)
(4c)
0 ≤dlt ≤Dlt,
∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T d1
: (χlt, χlt)
(4d)
0 ≤et ≤S,
∀t ∈T d1
: (νt, νt)
(4e)
et = et−1 + bt,
∀t ∈T d1 ̸= 1
: (ρt)
(4f)
e1 = Einit + b1
: (ρ1)
(4g)
eH = e∗
H
: (ζ)
(4h)
4.3.1
Results of the FAP method with perfect foresight
Example II is once again used to compare the results of the FAP method to those from
the full­ and split­horizon. In the FAP method with perfect foresight, a market price of
ρ2 = 5€/Wh has been predicted in the first market horizon and is used to obtain the
optimal value of e
′′
H = 1Wh. In the second market horizon, the price no longer gives a
solution with multiplicity due to the added term in the objective function. As a result, the
market prices in both market horizons are now equal to the ones that were found in the
full­horizon solution as seen in Table 4. As all of the primal variables for the three models
seen in the table are identical they are only written once.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
19
==PAGE:29==
T
t
et
d1t
p1t
p2t
λ∗
t (€/Wh)
λ
′
t(€/Wh)
(λ
′′
t + ξ
′′
t /ζ
′′
t )(€/Wh)
T d1
1
1
0
1
0
5
5
5
T d2
2
0
3
2
0
5
[2,9]
5
Table 4: primal and dual variables of the optimal solutions of full­horizon, split­horizon,
and FAP method problems with perfect foresight
4.3.2
Revision of the FAP method
It should be noted that the original proposed problem in [6] did not include the constraints
(3h) and (4h), as well as ζ
′′ in the objective function of the second market clearing. In
this variation of the model, the storage variable for t = H was only guided by the future
price and not by the optimal storage solution from the full­horizon problem. However, as a
contribution of this thesis, it was identified that this variation of the method introduced the
possibility of multiple solutions to the primal problem. An example of this is seen for the
input data from example 2, where ρ∗
H+1 = C11 = 5€/Wh. Since the future price at t = 2
was identical to the cheapest cost at t = 1, the objective value for the first market horizon
is identical regardless of the decision on the storage level, leading to multiple optimal
solutions. However, only the solution in which 1Wh is stored maximizes social welfare.
The previously mentioned modifications on fixing the storage level work to overcome this
problem. When the additional constraints are used however, we should calculate the price
for the last hour of the first day as λH + ξ, and the price of the first hour in the second day
as λH + ζ.
4.4
The FAP method with uncertain parameters
In the previous section, it was shown that the FAP method is a feasible way of guiding
the market prices leading to cost­recovery for the storage system for a perfect foresight
setting. However, in a setting with imperfect foresight, there is no guarantee that the future
market price is correctly predicted, and the storage level might not be set optimally as a
result of this. In this section, the performance of the FAP method is investigated in the
case where uncertainty is introduced to some of the participants in the market. In this
thesis, we define the considered uncertainty in such a way that we know the value of any
parameter within the current market horizon with certainty, while the parameters in any
subsequent market horizons are given under uncertainty.
4.4.1
Solutions of the full­horizon problem under imperfect foresight
For the investigation of how uncertainty will impact the solutions, we will assume that the
forecast of the uncertain parameters is accurate enough that we know a lower and upper
bound on the possible values of the parameter. We continue using the input data from
table 2 but introduce an uncertainty set of P 12 = [1, 3] for the second timestep of gener­
ator 1, and D12 = [2, 4] for the second timestep of the demand. Thus, when decisions
have to be made in the first market horizon, the realization of the maximum amount of pro­
ducible energy on the cheapest generator, and the maximum load in the second market
horizon can not be known with certainty. For a realistic representation of existing energy
markets, the uncertainty will unfold on the cheapest generator as this will often be one of
the intermittent renewable energy sources, which are less predictable.
By using these bounds as input in the full­horizon problem, we can attain the possible solu­
tion space for the optimal input parameters from the full­horizon problem. In other words,
if we knew in advance what the realization of the parameters in the second market horizon
would be, the optimal inputs for the FAP method would be found where the realized value
20
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:30==
of the two uncertain parameters intersect in the plots seen in Figure 4. The figure shows
the optimal solutions of e∗
H and λ∗
2, and the social welfare of the full­horizon problem eval­
uated for increments of 0.1 Wh variations of the maximum available generation and load
from P 12 and L12.
(a) End­of­horizon storage level at t=1
(b) Market Price in t=2
(c) Sum of social welfare for T
Figure 4: Optimal solutions of the full­horizon problem for all outcomes in the range of
uncertainty.
For the solution to the full­horizon problem we see that the storage will charge the highest
amount of energy of 2Wh in the case where the demand is 2Wh higher than the generation
in the second market horizon, while if the cheap generator has a generation equal to or
higher than the demand, the storage will not be necessary and thus isn’t charged. The
two same cases are seen for the highest and lowest market prices of 9€/Wh and 2€/Wh.
Furthermore, whereas the charged amount is a gradient for all scenarios in between these
two cases, we get a fixed market price of 5€/Wh.
4.4.2
Decision­making under uncertainty method
To investigate the impact of uncertainty on the FAP method solution, we formalize a
method of selecting which solution of the full­horizon model to use as input for the FAP
model, when the realization of uncertainty is not known at the time when the decisions on
the end­of­horizon storage levels have to be found. Two different methods from the field
of decision­making under uncertainty are considered for this purpose, namely, stochastic
programming and robust optimization which have been described in detail in chapter 3.
For the application at hand, there are pros and cons to using both methods.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
21
==PAGE:31==
If we consider the problem using the two­stage stochastic programming method, we need
to choose a subset of the possible outcomes for the uncertain parameters as represen­
tative scenarios with individual probabilities. Using these scenarios it is possible to find
the solution of the first market horizon as a first­stage decision which maximizes the so­
cial welfare in expectation. In other words, the scheduled consumption and generation
becomes a second­stage decision that is optimized for each scenario, and thus the first­
stage decision which has the highest weighted average of the social welfare across the
scenarios can be selected.
Alternatively, the first­stage decisions can be determined using a robust optimization ap­
proach. With this approach, we consider the scenario in which the uncertain parameters
are the most restrictive as the worst­case scenario. By using this scenario for the solution
to the problem it is ensured that every other outcome of the uncertainty is feasible. Further­
more, by using robust optimization we get a solution that is more robust and conservative,
and which aims to improve the outcomes in which the social welfare is the lowest.
In the remainder of this thesis, we have proceeded with using robust optimization as the
selected method for investigating models under uncertainty. This decision is made as we
wish to focus on optimizing the worst­case regret of social welfare. By using this approach
we know that we have optimized the social welfare in the solution that would lead it to
taking the lowest value. If the realized outcome differs from the worst­case, it can only
lead to higher social welfare than expected, as the production and demand constraints
are soft constraints that will simply offer more freedom in these scenarios. As a result, the
approach acquires a lower bound on social welfare. However, using the robust solution of
the full­horizon model does not necessarily give the solution in which the most storage is
stored, which one might mistakenly assume as this could be considered the most ”careful”
solution for future market horizons. In this regard, one should also consider that the stored
energy is not guaranteed to be needed within the considered time­period as the realized
outcome could include more cheap generation than anticipated. Thus, having charged an
excess amount into the storage in the first market horizon could lead to negative profits
of the storage and an overall reduction in social welfare. In the following sections of this
chapter, we explain how we use the robust solution of the full­horizon model as an input
for the FAP method.
Robust optimization of the full­horizon model
A robust optimization model is formulated where the previously defined uncertainty sets
are transformed into box­uncertainty sets, which considers the middle value of the uncer­
tainty sets which uses the parameters denoted by P
µ
lt or D
µ
lt as well as the distance from
the middle to the bounds denoted by P
v
lt and D
v
lt. The necessary constraints to transform
the full­horizon problem are added according to the method explained in chapter 3, as
seen in (5). The optimal solution to this model is the one that maximizes the objective
function and thus the social welfare of the worst­case scenario, which for this formulation
is the scenario in which the lowest values in the uncertainty sets are used.
22
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:32==
max
x
∑
t∈T

∑
l∈L
Ultdlt −
∑
g∈G
Cgtpgt


(5a)
s.t.
∑
l∈L
dlt + bt −
∑
g∈G
pgt = 0,
∀t ∈T
: (λt)
(5b)
et = et−1 + bt,
∀t ∈T ̸= 1
: (ρt)
(5c)
e1 = Einit + b1
: (ρ1)
(5d)
0 ≤pgt ≤P
µ
gt −αgt,
∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T
: (µgt, µgt)
(5e)
0 ≤dlt ≤D
µ
lt −βlt,
∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T
: (χlt, χlt)
(5f)
0 ≤et ≤S,
∀t ∈T
: (νt, νt)
(5g)
−αgt ≤P
v
gt ≤αgt,
∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T
(5h)
−βlt ≤D
v
lt ≤βlt,
∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T
(5i)
αgt, βlt ≥0
(5j)
We once again use example 2 to solve the robust formulation of the full­horizon problem
and use the previously defined uncertainty sets by defining the new parameters as seen
in Table 5.
t
D
µ
1t(Wh)
D
v
1t(Wh)
P
µ
1t(Wh)
P
v
1t(Wh)
P
µ
2t(Wh)
P
v
2t(Wh)
T d1
1
0
0
2
0
2
0
T d2
2
3
1
2
1
2
0
Table 5: value of expected outcomes and distance from the expected outcome to bounds
of maximum production and demand
From the solution, we find the optimal robust end­of­horizon storage level of e∗
H = 1, and
the predicted market price of the next market horizon ρ∗
H+1 = 5. This storage level is the
same that was found in Table 4, and thus the primal and dual variables are identical to
the ones in this table for the first market horizon giving us a market price of 5€/Wh for the
charging of the storage. The end­of­horizon storage level e∗
H = is used in the following
section as a robust input for the FAP model.
4.4.3
The FAP method with robust input
With a robust input having been found from the full­horizon solution, we now wish to in­
vestigate what happens once the FAP method is exposed to the full range of realizations
of the uncertainty. To accomplish this we once again test every combination of the maxi­
mum production and demand parameters with 0.1Wh increments in the same way that it
was done for figure 4, but this time by clearing the market with the FAP method with the
robust full­horizon end­of­horizon storage level solution as input.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
23
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5: Market price of the FAP solution with robust input for different realizations of
uncertain parameters
In figure 5 we can see that regardless of the realized uncertainty, the FAP method sets the
market price to 5€/Wh for t=2 to ensure cost­recovery for the storage system. From the
previous solutions to the full­horizon model seen in Figure 4 we know that if the solution
had perfect foresight, and no constraints on the end­of­horizon storage level there should
ideally be two areas with possible realizations where the market price should be equal
to either 2€/Wh or 9€/Wh. It is expected, that since the end­of­horizon storage level has
been fixed for the results of figure 5, the model is not capable of exactly replicating the
results. Anyhow, we consider the difference in market prices between the two solutions
to be a reason for skepticism. Furthermore, it is not possible to generate ideal prices by
using the robust solution as input for the constrained version of the full­horizon problem
as this leads to the same price­multiplicity issues previously seen for the split­horizon
problem with this example. Therefore we manually investigate whether cost­recovery is
still ensured for all market participants if a scenario is realized in one of the two areas that
previously had another market price when the market price is set to 5€/Wh.
By selecting the scenario in the top­leftmost corner of the figures with the values D12 =
4Wh and P 12 = 1Wh we look into the solution to see if the market participants are re­
covering their costs for the market price of 5€/Wh. The primal and dual solutions to this
scenario are seen in Table 6.
T
t
et
d1t
p1t
p2t
ρ
′′
t
ζ
′′
(ρ
′′
t + ζ
′′)(€/Wh)
T d1
1
1
0
1
0
5
­
­
T d2
2
0
4
1
2
9
­4
5
Table 6: primal and dual variables of the FAP solution
In the solution to this scenario, we see that to meet the high demand of 4Wh, while the
cheap generator 1 is only producing 1Wh, the more expensive generator 2 is scheduled
to generate. This maximizes the objective function since the bid price of 12€/Wh for the
load is still higher than the generator cost of 9€/Wh. However, due to the market price
being corrected by adding ζ
′′ to ρ
′′
2, the final market price of 5€/Wh ends up being lower
than the cost of the expensive generator. In conclusion, the generator ends up not having
recovered its costs proving that cost­recovery is not ensured for the generators when
using the current pricing scheme of the FAP method in a setting with imperfect foresight.
In the previous example, the cost­recovery was not ensured for the generator due to
24
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:34==
the market price correcting dual variable ζ
′′. It is necessary to include this dual variable
in the pricing when it takes a positive value as it ensures that the market price can not
go lower than the price at which the storage was charged. To further explore whether
the pricing mechanism can be modified to ensure cost­recovery for all participants, we
question whether it is possible to further modify the market price by only adding the dual
variable when it takes a positive value.
To test this we identify another edge case example where the input data of example 2
seen in Table 2 is once again used, but with the modification that we now consider two
loads, one with the bidding price of U12 = 12€/Wh and one with the bidding price of
U22 = 4€/Wh. Furthermore, the previous uncertainty set of P 12 = [1, 3] is still considered
for the maximum production of generator 1, while we change the uncertainty set for the
maximum demand of load 1 to D12 = [1, 3]. For both generator 2 and load 2 we define
a fixed maximum production of P 22 = 2 and demand of D22 = 2. If we take the robust
solution in this case, the model captures that there is a chance of the entire demand of the
expensive load being met by the cheap generator in the worst­case scenario and thus no
storage will be charged. However, we now consider what would happen in the case where
a non­robust method was used for finding the end­of­horizon storage level determining
e∗
H = 1 as the input for the FAP method. If the worst­case scenario was again realized
with this input both the production and demand of generator 1 and load 1 would equal
out, while the stored energy which was charged at 5€/Wh would be used to meet the
demand of load 2 with a bid price of 4€/Wh. With this solution we would get the dual
variables ρ
′′
2 = 4 and ζ
′′ = 1 giving us a market price of 5€/Wh. As a result of this, the
second load would be paying more than its initial bid price, and thus cost­recovery would
no longer be ensured. With this example, we show that even in the case where the dual
variable ζ
′′ is only included in the market price when positive, market properties are only
ensured when the end­of­horizon storage level is determined using robust optimization.
Furthermore, it would be a requirement when using the robust solution that the uncertainty
sets included outcomes with even the smallest possible probability, as market properties
would otherwise not be ensured with this approach. We consider it a weak assumption that
this would be feasible since setting such strict criteria for the uncertainty sets would lead
to extremely conservative solutions, and prohibit the ESS from being utilized effectively.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
25
==PAGE:35==
5
The Value of Storage (VOS) method
To ensure cost­recovery of the storage system, a new model is proposed. The general
principle behind this model is to keep track of the energy that was stored in previous
market horizons and the price at which it was stored, such that this energy can be used in
subsequent market horizons while simultaneously ensuring that the stored energy will not
be discharged at a lower market­price than the one it was charged at. This also means
that if a load has a utility that is higher than the price of stored energy, the storage system
will enter the merit­order­curve and the market price will settle on the “value of storage” if
this has the highest “generation cost”.
5.1
Market Modelling
In the market model where the Value of Storage method is implemented, which we will
henceforth refer to as the VOS method, the split­horizon problem is modified by adding
a few new variables, parameters, and constraints. First and foremost, two additional
variables stv, and qtv related to the storage level, and operation of the storage unit are
added to the problem. stv is the remaining amount, at time t, of storage charged in a
previous market horizon at value index v, which keeps track of the available amount of
energy in the storage from one market horizon to the next. qtv is the amount of energy of
value index v discharged at time t. It is important to note with this variable that the sign
convention is opposite compared to bt, as a positive value means energy being discharged.
While the s and q variables have been added to track the state of storage from previous
market horizons, the charging and discharging of the energy originating from within the
current market horizon still need to be accounted for. These variables however can not
be associated with a price until the market has been cleared, and therefore the variables
et and bt are kept in the model as a way of tracking these operations.
Additionally, two new parameters are added to the model. λs
v contains the market prices
of the previous market horizons at which the energy remaining in s was stored, while Sall
v
is the initial storage level of the different value indexes at the beginning of a new market
horizon. When the energy that was stored at a specific value index v has been completely
drained, these indexes can be removed from the parameters to simplify computations.
The VOS method (1) is seen below, where all the changes made from the split­horizon
problem have been marked in blue.
26
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:36==
max
x
T
∑
t

∑
l∈L
Ultdlt −
∑
g∈G
Cgtpgt−
∑
v∈V
qtvλs
v


(1a)
s.t.
∑
l∈L
dlt + bt −
∑
g∈G
pgt−
∑
v∈V
qtv = 0,
∀t ∈T
: (λt)
(1b)
0 ≤pgt ≤P gt,
∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T
: (µgt, µgt)
(1c)
0 ≤dlt ≤Dlt,
∀l ∈L, ∀t ∈T
: (χlt, χlt)
(1d)
0 ≤et+
∑
v∈V
stv ≤S,
∀t ∈T
: (νt, νt)
(1e)
et = et−1 + bt,
∀t ∈T , t ̸= 1
: (ρt)
(1f)
e1 = b1
: (ρ1)
(1g)
eH+
∑
v∈V
sH,v = Eend
: (ξ)
(1h)
stv = st−1,v −qtv,
∀t ∈T , t ̸= 1, ∀v ∈V
: ()
(1i)
s1,v = Sall
v
−q1,v,
∀v ∈V
: ()
(1j)
stv, qtv ≤0,
∀t ∈T , ∀v ∈V
: ()
(1k)
−S −et−1 +
V
∑
v
st−1,v ≤bt +
V
∑
v
qt,v ≤S −et−1 +
V
∑
v
st−1,v
, ∀t ∈T , t ̸= 1, ∀v ∈V
: ()
(1l)
−S +
V
∑
v
Sall
v
≤b1 +
V
∑
v
q1,v ≤S +
V
∑
v
Sall
v ,
∀t ∈T , ∀v ∈V
: ()
(1m)
−S ≤bt +
V
∑
v
qt,v ≤S
, ∀t ∈T , t ̸= 1, ∀v ∈V
: ()
(1n)
(1o)
The first change to the model is in the objective function (1a), where the social welfare
is penalized by the price associated with the value index when using stored energy from
a previous market horizon. In (1b) the discharged energy from previous horizons is sub­
tracted to correct the energy balance. To correct for two separate decision variables both
representing the amount of energy in the storage unit, a term for stv is added in (1e) to
ensure that the sum of the two is within the storage bound. Similarly, the term is added
on the left­hand side for the end­of­horizon requirement in constraint (1h), and we cre­
ate a constrained VOS model CV OS(T ) which includes this constraint and a free model
FV OS(T ) which doesn’t. The Einit variable has been removed in (1m), as any initial stor­
age is represented by Sall
v . Constraints (1i)­(1j) describe the storage energy balance for
s and q, and (1k) bounds the variables, such that they can’t take negative values.
One consideration with the implementation of the VOS method is that due to there being
multiple variables representing the charging/discharging of the storage system, the model
allows these two operations to occur simultaneously. An example of such a solution is that
storage is discharged from the variable qtv into bt and discharged from bt again later in
the same market horizon. However, when this happens it does not lead to an increase in
the objective function or changes to social welfare and market prices. This scenario only
happens when qtv in reality should have been used at the later time­step instead of bt, as
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
27
==PAGE:37==
a cost is incurred from discharging through qtv. Thus, the solution could just as well have
discharged the energy directly from qt,v at the desired time­step. We note that in a model
where storage efficiencies are included, this problem will solve itself, as any unnecessary
storage operation will lead to higher losses.
To clean up the results however, constraints (1l)­(1n) are added, which remove some of
the undesired solutions with simultaneous charging and discharging. (1n) ensures that
the sum of energy being charged through b and discharged through q does not exceed the
capacity of the storage unit, while the other two constraints limit the simultaneous charg­
ing and discharging for more specific cases based on the available amount of storage in
the unit. A more precise way to implement these constraints which could entirely remove
any undesired solution would be with non­linear constraints limiting only one of the two
variables to be positive at any given time. Given that non­linear constraints would signifi­
cantly slow down the run­time of the problem, however, we find it undesirable to use such
constraints, especially considering that the inclusion of efficiencies will solve the problem.
5.1.1
Storage value management (SVM) algorithm
As previously mentioned, after a market clearing is finished for a market horizon there
is a possibility that there is remaining storage left in the variable et. In this case, this
energy needs to be associated with the price at which it was charged, such that it can
be merged and collected in the parameter Sall
v
for subsequent market horizons. For this
purpose, an algorithm is implemented that gets the market price for each timestep in the
horizon and determines the remaining amount of energy stored at each given market
price. Although this thesis does not explicitly incorporate factors such as self­discharging
over time, charging efficiency, and discharging efficiency, it is essential to recognize the
significance of these parameters. In a real­world scenario, correcting the value of storage
for these specific parameters becomes crucial for ensuring cost­recovery,
The algorithm essentially works by subtracting any discharged energy in bt by order of
the cheapest previously­stored amounts as an iterative process until the remaining stored
energy­price pairs are determined. The remaining energy of the market horizon is cap­
tured by the variable sadd and the associated price at which it was stored is captured by the
variable λadd
t
. These are then concatenated to the current values from previous market
horizons in sall
v
and λs
v. We will henceforth refer to this algorithm as the SVM algorithm.
The expected solution Sall for a given example market horizon with 6 time­steps is seen
in the table below.
t
1
2
3
4
5
6
b_t (Wh)
5
3
­2
­3
4
­3
λadd
t
(€/Wh)
4
5
7
8
2
5
Sadd (Wh)
0
3
0
0
1
0
Table 7: Construction of the Sadd variable for a given example with a market horizon
containing 6 time­steps.
In the example, energy is first charged at the price of 4€/Wh and 5€/Wh at time­step 1 and
2 respectively. In time­step 3 and 4, 2Wh and 3Wh are discharged with the associated
value from time 1 as the charged energy was cheapest at this time. At time­step 5 and
6, 4Wh is first charged, and subsequently discharged at the associated price of 2€/Wh
as this is once again cheaper than the price of 5€/Wh of timestep 2. With the storage
operations of the market horizon being done, the algorithm ends up with 3Wh value at the
28
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:38==
price of 5€/Wh, and 1Wh valued at the value of 2€/Wh that can be used in later market
horizons.
VOS method procedure
With the two main components of the VOS method having been defined, a multi­interval
market clearing process uses the following procedure. For the first market horizon of a
period containing multiple horizons, the constrained split­horizon problem is solved C(T ).
The SVM algorithm is then used to determine the parameters Sall
v
and λs
v. For the following
market horizons CV OS(T ) is solved and the parameters are updated again, until the final
market horizon where the free model FV OS(T ) is used to clear the market.
The first step of this procedure is necessary in the case considered in this thesis as we
only have knowledge over a given ”window” of market horizons, and not of what happened
before the perceived window. Thus the parameter Sall
v
has not yet been defined, and the
problem can instead be solved by the split­horizon problem. However, if we consider a
setting where we have knowledge of the previous markets and are given values for Sall
v
and λs
v, we can instead simply solve CV OS(T ) for the first market horizon.
5.2
Testing the Model
5.2.1
Cost­recovery of the VOS method
In Table 3 we showed that price­multiplicity in the split­horizon problem solution of Exam­
ple II resulted in cost­recovery not being ensured for the storage system. To illustrate
that the dual­multiplicity price issue of the split­horizon problem for this example has been
resolved, we now solve the same example with Eend = 1 using the VOS method and get
the optimal values seen in Table 8, where the primal variables included in the table are
still identical for the three problems. In t = 2 there is still no marginal load or generator
for the VOS method, and therefore no unique dual solution for the market price, as can
be seen from the merit order curve in Figure 6. However, the value that the storage was
charged at in t = 1 is now reflected in the market price, and all values of λv
t (€/Wh) in the
range [5,9]€/Wh ensure cost­recovery for all participants including the storage.
T
t
et
d1t
p1t
p2t
λ∗
t (€/Wh)
λ
′
t(€/Wh)
λv
t (€/Wh)
T d1
1
1
0
1
0
5
5
5
T d2
2
0
3
2
0
5
[2,9]
[5,9]
Table 8: primal and dual variables of the optimal solutions of full­horizon, split­horizon,
and VOS method models
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
29
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6: Market­clearing diagram with VOS method of t=2
Cost­recovery in imperfect foresight
In the previous section, we have shown that the VOS method ensures cost­recovery for
example 2 under the assumption of perfect foresight. However, as it was seen for the FAP
method, this is not a guarantee that cost­recovery will also be recovered in an imperfect
foresight setting. In this section, we expose the VOS method to example 2 with the same
uncertain parameters and in the same way that it was done in sections 4.4.2 and 4.4.3.
We once again use the robust solution from the full­horizon problem as an input to fix the
end­of­horizon storage level, e1 = 1Wh in the VOS solution. Thus the second market
horizon of the VOS method will start with an initial storage of ∑
v∈V s2v = 1Wh with an
associated price of 5€/Wh. The optimal solution of the VOS method is found for every
combination of the uncertain production and demand parameters with 0.1Wh increments
and yields the results seen in Figure 7
30
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:40==
(a) Discharged energy of storage
(b) Produced energy of gen 2 at 9€/Wh
(c) Market price
Figure 7: Results of the VOS solution for example 2 with robust input for different realiza­
tions of uncertain parameters
In figure 7c we see that depending on the outcome of the parameters, three different mar­
ket prices are possible. Firstly, in the bottom­right corner, there’s a group of solutions
with a market price of 2€/Wh. By comparing with figure 7a we see that the market set­
tles on this price in all of the scenarios where no energy is discharged from the storage.
Furthermore, In this group of solutions, the entire demand is also able to be met by the
cheapest generator which has an offer cost of 2€/Wh. Thus, we can conclude that this
group of solutions makes sense in terms of the dispatch schedule and market price, as
cost­recovery is ensured for the cheap generator, and the generator is scheduled before
the storage since the stored energy is valued at a higher price of 5€/Wh.
In the next group of market prices at the value of 5€/Wh, we can compare the plots again
to identify that this is the group of solutions where the ESS is discharging, while either
not being at its capacity or being exactly at its capacity. If the storage is not at a capacity
it becomes the marginal generator, while if the storage is at its capacity there is price­
multiplicity between the storage value at 5€/wh and the next cheapest generator at 9€/Wh.
The scenarios with the highest market price of 9€/Wh are exactly the ones in which this
generator is used, which is clear by comparing with figure 7b.
Based on the findings from table 10 and figure 7, we present compelling evidence that
the utilization of the VOS method successfully restores cost­recovery, even in situations
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
31
==PAGE:41==
involving price­multiplicity. This holds for both perfect foresight and imperfect foresight
settings.
5.2.2
Generalizing to multiple time­steps and market horizons
To verify that the VOS method also works when there are more than two time­steps within
the horizons and additional market horizons, we expand on the tested examples.
Example 3
The VOS method is tested for an example with two time­steps within each market horizon
with a storage capacity of S = 2.5Wh and end­of­horizon requirement Eend = 1Wh input
data given in Table 9, and the model solution given in Table 10.
t
D1t(Wh)
P 1t(Wh)
P 2t(Wh)
U1t(€/Wh)
C1t(€/Wh)
C2t(€/Wh)
T d1
1
1
4
2
4
5
10
2
5
2
2
7
5
10
T d2
3
7
2
2
9
2
9
4
4
2
2
12
2
10
Table 9: Input data of VOS method example 3
T
t
∑
v stv
et
d1t
p1t
p2t
λv
t (€/Wh)
T d1
1
­
2.5
0
2.5
0
5
2
­
1
3.5
2
0
7
T d2
3
1
1
3
2
2
9
4
0
0
4
2
0
9
Table 10: primal and dual variables of the optimal solution of VOS method for example 3
In the first market horizon of the example, the bid price and cheapest production cost are
equivalent for the first time­step, and thus no demand is met by production. However,
since the bid price is higher for the second market horizon and can not be met by cheap
generation in this time­step alone, generator 1 produces 2.5Wh of energy for the ESS at
t=1. 1.5Wh of this energy is then used to meet the demand in t=2, along with the maximum
production of generator 1, while 1Wh is kept in storage due to Eend requirement. For T d2,
the remaining 1Wh of storage from T d1 is now included at the charged value of 5€/Wh.
In t=3 both generators produce 2 Wh, where the most expensive generator has a cost of
9€/Wh, and the 3Wh of demand is met while 1Wh is stored to meet the full demand in t=4
at a higher bid price. Finally for t=4, the demand of 4Wh is met by using 2Wh of stored
energy and 2Wh of generator 1 production.
In this example, it is noticed that multiple optimal solutions are present. This occurs at
t=3 when 1 Wh of the energy produced by generator 2 is used to meet the demand with
an equivalent bid price of 9€/Wh, as this does not affect social welfare. The example also
shows that in the case that the storage system does not reach its upper bound between
time­steps in a horizon, the price does not increase. The Market­clearing diagrams are
seen in Figure 8, where t=3 and t=4 have been combined into one clearing as their market
prices are identical and the storage is not at its bound.
32
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:42==
(a) VOS method for t=1
(b) VOS method for t=2
(c) VOS method for t=3,4
Figure 8: Market­clearing diagram for the VOS solution to example 2.
Example 4
To further test that the model also worked for more than two market horizons another
example was created with 9 total time­steps across 3 market horizons. For this example,
an end­of­horizon value was set to 1Wh for both the first and second market horizons. As
expected the model was feasible. The input data and solution for this example can be
seen in Tables 15 and 16 in Appendix A.
5.2.3
Social Welfare of the VOS method
To investigate whether the VOS method maximizes social welfare in a perfect foresight
setting, we set a future­aware storage level at the end of each market horizon by setting
the storage level to be identical to the one from the full­horizon solution. The social wel­
fare of the VOS method was compared to the social welfare of the full­horizon solution by
testing different variations of the parameters in an example with 3 market horizons con­
taining 5 time­steps in each. While doing this, a scenario was found for which the primal
solution and thus the social welfare ended up with a small difference. We will illustrate
this by presenting the optimal solutions of the two models as an example.
Example 5
In this example, the full­horizon problem and VOS method were solved using the input
data given in Table 17 found in the appendix. The VOS solution uses the end­of­horizon
storage levels based on the full­horizon solution since perfect foresight is assumed.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
33
==PAGE:43==
T
t
e∗
t
d∗
1t
p∗
1t
p∗
2t
λ∗
t (€/Wh)
∑
v sv
tv
ev
t
dv
1t
pv
1t
pv
2t
λv
t (€/Wh)
T d1
1
1
0
1
0
2
­
1
0
1
0
2
2
1
0
0
0
2
­
1
0
0
0
2
3
0
1
0
0
2
­
0
1
0
0
2
4
2.5
1
0.5
3
2
­
2.5
1
0.5
3
2
5
0.5
2
0
0
4
­
0.5
2
0
0
[2,4]
T d2
6
0
2.5
2
0
4
0.5
0
2
2
0
4
7
1
0
1
0
3
0.5
1
0
1
0
3
8
1
0
0
0
3
0.5
1
0
0
0
3
9
0
4
3
0
3
0.5
0
4
3
0
3
10
2.5
3
3
2.5
3
0.5
2
3
3
2
3
T d3
11
0
4
0
1.5
7
0
0
4
0
1.5
7
12
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
13
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table 11: primal and dual variables of the optimal solution of VOS method for example 5
For this example, the social welfare of the optimal full­horizon solution was 116€, while the
social welfare of the optimal VOS solution was 115.5€, proving that complete maximization
of social welfare for the VOS method was not achieved with perfect foresight. It is however
also noted, that the difference in social welfare between the solutions is relatively small.
The difference in the solutions arises at t = 6, where the full­horizon solution discharges
the 0.5Wh currently in the storage, while the VOS solution does not. The equation below
explains why using the full­horizon solution decreases the objective value for the VOS
solution.
∆Obj = 0.5 · U1,6 −0.5 · λv
4 −0.5 · C2,10 = 0.5 · 4 −0.5 · 2 −0.5 · 3 = −0.5
(2)
In this equation, the objective function of the VOS method is increased by the utility of the
met demand in t = 6 but decreased by the penalty of the amount of used storage times
the cost it was charged at in t = 4 and also decreased by having to charge back to the
fixed storage level of 2.5Wh for t = 10. This leads to a decrease of 0.5 to the objective
value if this solution was to be used instead. Thus this solution leads to a worse objective
function for the VOS method, despite having a higher total social welfare.
Social Welfare under imperfect foresight
We now investigate what happens in the case where uncertainty is introduced to the pa­
rameters of the input data for the VOS method and how this impacts the total social welfare.
To do this 10 different examples are generated for a time­period with 5 market horizons
with 10 time­steps in each, in which parameters of the load and generators are randomly
selected. The maximum production levels of each generator are in the range [0,5]Wh, the
production cost of each generator is in the range [0,9]€/Wh, the demand of the load is in
the range [0,4]Wh, and the Bid price of the load is in the range [0,14].
The values taken by each parameter are then considered as the expected outcome of the
variable. To introduce uncertainty to the examples the maximum production and demand
of the generators and loads are given an uncertainty interval with bounds that are 1Wh
lower or higher than the expected outcome with a minimum outcome of 0Wh, as a negative
34
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:44==
production or demand is not possible. An example of what the expected outcome versus
worst­case outcome for a single time­step could be is given in Table 12.
D1t(Wh)
P 1t(Wh)
P 2t(Wh)
U1t(€/Wh)
C1t(€/Wh)
C2t(€/Wh)
Expected
3
4
2
12
6
7
worst­case
2
3
1
12
6
7
Table 12: Example of randomly generated example data
The robust version of the full­horizon problem as seen in (5) is solved, which optimizes the
worst­case scenario for the realization of the uncertain parameters. The robust solution
is then used to fix the end­of­horizon storage levels of the VOS method. This solution
we call the future­aware VOS solution. As a comparison, the social welfare of a perfect
solution given the realized outcome has been calculated using the full­horizon problem,
while the myopic solution with an identical start and end storage level of 0Wh for each
market horizon is solved using the split­horizon problem.
We investigate two different realizations of the market. In the first realization, the parame­
ters of the load and generator take the expected outcome, while in the second realization,
we consider the worst­case outcome of the maximum demand and production parame­
ters in which they take the lowest value in the uncertainty interval. While the expected
outcome scenario shows the performance of the VOS method where the optimal end­of­
horizon storage level is guessed ”incorrectly” due to imperfect foresight, the scenario of
the worst­case outcome is similar to having perfect foresight as the end­of­horizon stor­
age levels in both cases are set optimally for this scenario using the robust full­horizon
solution.
The social welfare of the three solutions across the 10 examples are seen in 9, where
the same examples are solved for both a maximum storage capacity of 2.5Wh and 10Wh
for the expected and worst­case outcome. Furthermore, the percentage increase from
the social welfare of the myopic to the social welfare of the future­aware VOS solution is
given in Table 13.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
35
==PAGE:45==
(a) Expected outcome, S = 2.5Wh
(b) Worst­case outcome, S = 2.5Wh
(c) Expected outcome, S = 10Wh
(d) Worst­case outcome, S = 10Wh
Figure 9: SW of the perfect, future­aware VOS, and myopic solutions for randomly gen­
erated examples. Each plot shows the results when either the expected or worst­case
outcome is realized.
Example
2.5Wh expected
2.5Wh worst
10Wh expected
10Wh worst
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
1
0
0
2.28
6.23
2
1.66
2.95
6.78
9.3
3
1.02
2.71
4.53
8.04
4
­0.64
1.22
6.59
11.93
5
­0.88
4.09
7.93
17.48
6
0.77
0.93
1.94
4.00
7
1.43
8.36
9.35
24.1
8
5.23
10.43
9.62
16.28
9
2.8
4.74
7.27
10.19
10
0.5
0.82
0.78
1.29
Average
2.47
5.17
6.93
11.96
Table 13: Percentage increase from the social welfare of the myopic solution to the social
welfare of the future­aware VOS solution
36
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:46==
The results seen in Figure 9 and Table 13, suggest a few different conclusions. Firstly, the
social welfare of the future­aware VOS solution is higher for every example tested except
for two cases in the expected outcome case with the 2.5Wh storage system, which in gen­
eral is the setting where the average percentage difference is the smallest. Furthermore,
with the amount of uncertainty used in these results, the social welfare of the future­aware
VOS solutions is always close to that of the perfect solutions. When comparing the fig­
ures of the expected outcome to the worst­case outcome, we see as expected that the
difference in social welfare between the myopic and VOS solutions appears even larger,
as the end­of­horizon storage levels of the VOS method are set using robust optimization,
and thus have been optimized for the worst­case scenario.
For the results where the storage capacity has been increased, the difference in social
welfare once again grows larger between the future­aware and myopic solutions, as more
energy can be moved between market horizons. This suggests that using an approach
such as the future­aware VOS instead of simplifying assumptions on the end­of­horizon
storage level as in the myopic approach becomes even more valuable when the storage
system grows in size. A general result for the social welfare of the investigated models is
that for every tested example, there was a higher social welfare of the worst­case scenar­
ios for the future­aware VOS solutions than for the myopic solution. Additionally, this was
also the case for the scenario with the expected outcome of the parameters with the 10Wh
storage system that the end­of­horizon storage levels of the future­aware VOS solution
had not been optimized for.
It should be noted for these results that the robust model in this case considers all 5 market
horizons at the same time and finds the optimal end­of­horizon storage levels given the
worst­case realization of the parameters for every market horizon. In a more realistic
setting the uncertainty would get smaller with time, and the end­of­horizon storage levels
could then be updated from one horizon to the next.
5.2.4
Limitations and challenges
While the VOS method exhibits promising results in terms of cost­recovery and social
welfare under both perfect and imperfect foresight, it is important to recognize and address
some of the key limitations and challenges that could impact the applicability of the model.
These limitations stem from various aspects, such as assumptions and side effects of the
modeling procedure.
Firstly, one of the most notable limitations of the model is caused because the discharging
from the variable qtv is penalized in the objective function, while the variable bt is not. This
modeling choice is made to correct for the value of storage from previous market horizons
when determining the market price. As a side­effect of this implementation, from the
model’s point­of­view any storage contained in the variable et will always be used before
the storage contained in the variable stv despite having been charged at a higher price.
Because of this, the storage kept in variable stv will not get used as often as it should, and
thus will also not be exchanged with more recently stored energy as often. However, as
the energy in the storage will not as often be replaced with more expensive energy, this
simultaneously reduces the frequency of very expensive energy getting transferred across
multiple market horizons due to repeatedly being valued higher than the market price.
The limitation still needs to be addressed in future work, however, as it can be considered
discriminating in a case where multiple individual storage units are considered.
Secondly as was explained in the presentation of the model, due to the limitations of
linear programming the VOS method does not prohibit solutions that have simultaneous
charging and discharging. These simultaneous opposite flows of power are theoretically
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
37
==PAGE:47==
impossible for ESS, and thus these solutions should be avoided. With the implementation
of charging and discharging efficiencies, however, any unnecessary charging/discharging
operation will reduce the objective value and the solutions would no longer be optimal.
This implementation requires some modification to the model, however, as the charging
and discharging within a single horizon can no longer be represented by a single variable
bt when efficiencies are considered.
38
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:48==
6
Discussion and Conclusion
In this thesis, we have investigated the topic of non­merchant storage for energy markets
focusing on how we can strive to uphold certain market properties, namely market effi­
ciency, dispatch support, and cost­recovery for market participants with an emphasis on
the ESS. Our investigation particularly highlights addressing the challenges and implica­
tions of imperfect foresight in this context.
In previous work, the authors of [6] showed that, while some dual solutions to the split­
horizon market problem may fail to provide dispatch­following incentives for non­merchant
storage, there always exists a dual solution to the split­horizon problem which preserves
properties in a setting with perfect foresight. Subsequently, the challenge to this issue
is that of selecting the correct dual solution. To this end, the authors propose a method
that we refer to as the FAP method, which restores market properties in the split­horizon
problem in the perfect­foresight case. The initial part of the investigation in this thesis is
done specifically by evaluating the effect of imperfect foresight on the performance of the
FAP market clearing method in terms of the previously mentioned properties and overall
feasibility. Since the model was originally designed under a perfect foresight assump­
tion, where the end­of­horizon storage level could be set optimally for any given example,
investigating the imperfect foresight setting is a natural continuation as the selected end­
of­horizon storage level can prove to be sub­optimal in this case.
By using a robust solution of uncertainty sets as an input for the FAP method, we show
that a constant market price is acquired for the uncertain market horizon regardless of the
realized outcome of the uncertain parameters. Furthermore, we show that cost­recovery
is not guaranteed for the FAP method under imperfect foresight, as one of the generators
is scheduled to produce energy at a higher cost than the market price depending on the
realized outcome. As a further continuation of attempting to improve the FAP method,
we have investigated whether it is possible to alter the application of the dual variable ζ
used for pricing in the FAP method, to restore cost­recovery. Although cost­recovery is
ensured if the uncertainty sets for the robust solution are perfect, we argue that this is
a weak assumption as the uncertainty sets would have to be extremely conservative to
achieve this with absolute certainty. As a result of this, we show that in the case where
the uncertainty is realized outside of these uncertainty sets, cost­recovery is not ensured
for the loads as ζ can turn out positive and correct the price to be higher than that of a
scheduled loads bidding price. Furthermore, it is essential to emphasize that the reason
for cost recovery not being ensured is not attributed to the use of robust optimization
as a method. On the contrary, it is exactly due to the robust optimization approach that
cost­recovery can be ensured within the uncertainty set.
Recognizing the limitations of the FAP method, we introduce a novel approach called the
Value of Storage (VOS) method which better supports an imperfect foresight setting. In
the VOS method, the future does not need to be accurately anticipated to set a property
restoring market price, as the value of stored energy is considered as an artificial bidding
price. In other words, at any time the storage is being charged, the charged amount
is connected to the market price of that time­step. In examples in which the previously
considered methods failed to do so, we have shown that cost­recovery has indeed been
restored for the non­merchant storage with the VOS method even in the specific case of
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
39
==PAGE:49==
price multiplicity where there is no marginal generator or load. This was determined to be
the case in the setting of both perfect and imperfect foresight.
In addition to cost­recovery we have also evaluated the results of the VOS method in terms
of market efficiency. While we show that the VOS method is not able to ensure complete
market efficiency in a perfect foresight setting, we show that in the case of uncertainty, a
future­aware version of the VOS method in which the end­of­horizon storage level was set
using the optimal robust full­horizon solution was able to outperform a myopic approach
in every tested example where a large enough storage system was used. This was tested
both in the case where the realization of the uncertain parameters took their worst­case
outcome and the average outcome of the uncertainty set.
In conclusion, we have shown that in an energy market with uncertain generation and
demand the VOS method presents a promising avenue for enhancing market efficiency in
comparison to myopic alternatives. Furthermore, while we have not proven that the VOS
method ensures cost­recovery, we have through examples given strong evidence for it.
While the examples tested on the VOS method have yielded promising results, the method
has some key challenges that have been highlighted. One of the main challenges that we
identify happens in the case where the ESS gets charged at a very high price compared
to the average market price, as the ESS might be stuck with the stored energy across
multiple market horizons until the next time its value is surpassed by the market price.
However, the magnitude of this issue decreases in direct proportion to the method and
forecast quality employed in determining the end­of­horizon storage levels, as they reduce
the likelihood of energy being charged without subsequent discharge within a reasonable
time frame.
The previously mentioned conclusions that have been drawn give us insight into some of
the challenges and possible methods that can be used when investigating the efficiency
of energy markets with non­merchant storage in an imperfect foresight setting, and some
key assumptions and simplifications are instrumental in arriving at these insights. One
such simplification is that the examples presented in this thesis assume a market with
constant linear costs and bid prices. Although this type of market clearing is common in
practice, other electricity market types such as non­linear convex markets and non­convex
markets can also lead to the same problems for cost­recovery and market efficiency when
non­merchant storage is considered. However, these markets are more challenging to
model by nature, and we leave it to future works to analyze the proposed VOS method for
this case. In addition, this thesis relies on the assumption of perfect competition, wherein
participants bid based on their true utility and cost, and strategic bidding is disregarded.
While electricity markets often deviate from perfect competition, this assumption serves
to mitigate the influence of strategic bidding on the results. Investigating the implications
of markets with non­perfect competition thus stands as another potential extension to this
research.
Another area of the thesis in which we make some simplifications is in the implementation
of the ESS. The first simplification that is used here is that we only consider a few pa­
rameters of a single ESS in the thesis, whereas in a real­life scenario, there would likely
be multiple storage systems of different types with different parameters in terms of e.g.
charging and discharging efficiencies, degradation, power rating, and self­discharge. All
of these parameters need to be considered if the methods in this thesis are to be used
in a real­world application, as many of them have an impact on costs which should be
included when valuing the storage in the VOS method, or because additional constraints
and other modifications of the methods and algorithms might be necessary to incorporate
40
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:50==
them.
In this thesis, we use a robust optimization approach to determine the end­of­horizon stor­
age levels used in the examples with uncertainty. Furthermore, as the examples used are
manually generated the constructed uncertainty sets are considered as constant, and do
not change as they get closer in time. In a real­life setting with data from realistic forecasts,
however, the uncertainty of each market horizon will become smaller as it approaches in
time. While finding the optimal end­of­horizon storage level is not one of the main focus
points of this thesis, this opens up the question of how the optimal levels would be selected
in a realistic setting. As a point of further development for this thesis, one of the possible
ways in which this could be done is by implementing a rolling­horizon approach, in which
a given number of future market horizons would be used for the prediction used to set the
end­of­horizon storage level of the current interval. The following market horizon would
then use both the initial storage level, and an updated forecast on the subsequent market
horizons to once again make this prediction.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
41
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Is the European Union on track to meet its REPowerEU goals? – Analysis. en­GB.
URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/is-the-european-union-on-track-to-meet-its-
repowereu-goals (visited on 04/18/2023).
[2]
“World Energy Outlook 2021”. en. In: ().
[3]
Order No. 841 | Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. en. URL: https://www.
ferc.gov/media/order-no-841 (visited on 07/13/2023).
[4]
Karl Hartwig and Ivana Kockar. “Impact of Strategic Behavior and Ownership of
Energy Storage on Provision of Flexibility”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Energy 7.2 (Apr. 2016). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable En­
ergy, pp. 744–754. ISSN: 1949­3037. DOI: 10.1109/TSTE.2015.2497967.
[5]
Ramteen Sioshansi. “When energy storage reduces social welfare”. en. In: En­
ergy Economics 41 (Jan. 2014), pp. 106–116. ISSN: 0140­9883. DOI: 10.1016/
j.eneco.2013.09.027. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0140988313002223 (visited on 02/28/2023).
[6]
Linde Frölke et al. On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage.
arXiv:2210.05305 [math]. Oct. 2022. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.05305. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2210.05305 (visited on 02/21/2023).
[7]
JonasBroge. JonasBroge/Jonas_thesis. original­date: 2023­07­20T13:53:01Z. July
2023. URL: https://github.com/JonasBroge/Jonas_thesis (visited on 07/20/2023).
[8]
Joshua Taylor. “Financial Storage Rights”. In: Power Systems, IEEE Transactions
on 30 (Mar. 2015), pp. 997–1005. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2014.2339016.
[9]
Daniel Muñoz­Álvarez and Eilyan Bitar. “Financial storage rights in electric power
networks”. en. In: Journal of Regulatory Economics 52.1 (Aug. 2017), pp. 1–23.
ISSN: 1573­0468. DOI: 10.1007/s11149-017-9327-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11149-017-9327-9 (visited on 07/13/2023).
[10]
Martin Weibelzahl and Alexandra Märtz. “On the effects of storage facilities on
optimal zonal pricing in electricity markets”. en. In: Energy Policy 113.C (2018).
Publisher: Elsevier, pp. 778–794. URL: https://ideas.repec.org//a/eee/enepol/
v113y2018icp778-794.html (visited on 07/13/2023).
[11]
Yuzhou Jiang and Ramteen Sioshansi. “What Duality Theory Tells Us About Giving
Market Operators the Authority to Dispatch Energy Storage”. In: The Energy Journal
44.3 (July 2023). ISSN: 01956574. DOI: 10.5547/01956574.44.2.yjia. URL: https:
//www.iaee.org/en/publications/ejarticle.aspx?id=4003 (visited on 07/13/2023).
[12]
Ramteen Sioshansi et al. “Energy­Storage Modeling: State­of­the­Art and Future
Research Directions”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 37.2 (Mar. 2022),
pp. 860–875. ISSN: 0885­8950, 1558­0679. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2021.3104768.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9513574/ (visited on 03/02/2023).
[13]
Pedro Crespo Del Granado, Stein W. Wallace, and Zhan Pang. “The impact of wind
uncertainty on the strategic valuation of distributed electricity storage”. en. In: Com­
putational Management Science 13.1 (Jan. 2016), pp. 5–27. ISSN: 1619­6988. DOI:
10.1007/s10287-015-0235-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10287-015-0235-0 (vis­
ited on 07/13/2023).
42
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:52==
[14]
Jiasheng Zhang, Nan Gu, and Chenye Wu. “Energy Storage as Public Asset”. In:
Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Future Energy Sys­
tems. e­Energy ’20. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
June 2020, pp. 374–385. ISBN: 978­1­4503­8009­6. DOI: 10.1145/3396851.3397760.
URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3396851.3397760 (visited on 07/13/2023).
[15]
Niklas Vespermann, Thomas Hamacher, and Jalal Kazempour. “Access Economy
for Storage in Energy Communities”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 36.3
(May 2021). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, pp. 2234–
2250. ISSN: 1558­0679. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2020.3033999.
[16]
Jinye Zhao, Tongxin Zheng, and Eugene Litvinov. “A Multi­Period Market Design
for Markets With Intertemporal Constraints”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Sys­
tems 35.4 (July 2020), pp. 3015–3025. ISSN: 0885­8950, 1558­0679. DOI: 10.1109/
TPWRS.2019.2963022. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8945389/ (visited
on 05/15/2023).
[17]
Bowen Hua et al. “Pricing in Multi­Interval Real­Time Markets”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Power Systems 34.4 (July 2019). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, pp. 2696–2705. ISSN: 1558­0679. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2019.
2891541.
[18]
Cong Chen, Lang Tong, and Ye Guo. “Pricing Energy Storage in Real­time Market”.
In: 2021 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM). ISSN: 1944­
9933. July 2021, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/PESGM46819.2021.9638013.
[19]
Jalal Kazempour, Pierre Pinson, and Benjamin F. Hobbs. “A Stochastic Market De­
sign With Revenue Adequacy and Cost Recovery by Scenario: Benefits and Costs”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 33.4 (July 2018). Conference Name: IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, pp. 3531–3545. ISSN: 1558­0679. DOI: 10.1109/
TPWRS.2018.2789683.
[20]
Ting Qiu, Tobias Haring, and Daniel Kirschen. “Cost recovery in a rolling horizon
unit commitment with energy storage”. In: 2014 Power Systems Computation Con­
ference. Aug. 2014, pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.1109/PSCC.2014.7038451.
[21]
Yi Wang et al. “Pricing in non­convex electricity markets with flexible trade­off of
pricing properties”. en. In: Energy 274 (July 2023), p. 127382. ISSN: 0360­5442.
DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2023.127382. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360544223007764 (visited on 05/03/2023).
[22]
Cong Chen and Lang Tong. “Pricing real­time stochastic storage operations”. en. In:
Electric Power Systems Research 212 (Nov. 2022), p. 108606. ISSN: 0378­7796.
DOI: 10.1016/j.epsr.2022.108606. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0378779622006745 (visited on 06/05/2023).
[23]
Weiqi Zhang, Philip A. Tominac, and Victor M. Zavala. “Pricing and remunerating
electricity storage flexibility using virtual links”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineer­
ing 168 (2022), p. 108019. ISSN: 0098­1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compchemeng.2022.108019. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0098135422003532.
[24]
Benedikt Finnah, Jochen Gönsch, and Florian Ziel. “Integrated day­ahead and intra­
day self­schedule bidding for energy storage systems using approximate dynamic
programming”. en. In: European Journal of Operational Research 301.2 (Sept. 2022),
pp. 726–746. ISSN: 0377­2217. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejor.2021.11.010. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221721009565 (visited on 07/12/2023).
[25]
Dheepak Krishnamurthy et al. “Energy Storage Arbitrage Under Day­Ahead and
Real­Time Price Uncertainty”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 33.1 (Jan.
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
43
==PAGE:53==
2018). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, pp. 84–93. ISSN:
1558­0679. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2017.2685347.
[26]
Yishen Wang et al. “Look­Ahead Bidding Strategy for Energy Storage”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Sustainable Energy 8.3 (July 2017). Conference Name: IEEE Trans­
actions on Sustainable Energy, pp. 1106–1117. ISSN: 1949­3037. DOI: 10.1109/
TSTE.2017.2656800.
[27]
Mohammad Farahani, Abouzar Samimi, and Hossein Shateri. “Robust bidding strat­
egy of battery energy storage system (BESS) in joint active and reactive power of
day­ahead and real­time markets”. en. In: Journal of Energy Storage 59 (Mar. 2023),
p. 106520. ISSN: 2352­152X. DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2022.106520. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352152X22025099 (visited on 07/15/2023).
[28]
Huajie Ding et al. “Optimal Offering and Operating Strategy for a Large Wind­Storage
System as a Price Maker”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 32.6 (Nov.
2017). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, pp. 4904–4913.
ISSN: 1558­0679. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2017.2681720.
[29]
Mathilde D. Badoual and Scott J. Moura. A Learning­based Optimal Market Bidding
Strategy for Price­Maker Energy Storage. arXiv:2106.02396 [cs, eess]. June 2021.
DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2106.02396. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.02396 (visited on
07/13/2023).
[30]
Yi Dong et al. “A Strategic Day­ahead bidding strategy and operation for battery
energy storage system by reinforcement learning”. en. In: Electric Power Systems
Research 196 (July 2021), p. 107229. ISSN: 0378­7796. DOI: 10.1016/j.epsr.2021.
107229. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378779621002108
(visited on 07/15/2023).
[31]
Bethany A. Frew et al. Marginal Cost Pricing in a World without Perfect Compe­
tition: Implications for Electricity Markets with High Shares of Low Marginal Cost
Resources. en. Tech. rep. NREL/TP–6A20­69076, 1414901. Dec. 2017, NREL/TP–
6A20–69076, 1414901. DOI: 10.2172/1414901. URL: http://www.osti.gov/servlets/
purl/1414901/ (visited on 06/10/2023).
[32]
Bram L. Gorissen, İhsan Yanıkoğlu, and Dick den Hertog. “A practical guide to ro­
bust optimization”. en. In: Omega 53 (June 2015), pp. 124–137. ISSN: 0305­0483.
DOI: 10.1016/j.omega.2014.12.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0305048314001698 (visited on 07/12/2023).
[33]
08­RobustOptimization1­LectureSlides ­ 02435 Decision­Making Under Uncertainty
Spring 21. URL: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/60223/viewContent/
244955/View (visited on 07/12/2023).
[34]
John R. Birge and François Louveaux. Introduction to Stochastic Programming. en.
Springer Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering. New York, NY:
Springer, 2011. ISBN: 978­1­4614­0236­7 978­1­4614­0237­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4614-0237-4. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4614-0237-4 (visited
on 06/25/2023).
[35]
Andrzej Ruszczyński and Alexander Shapiro. “Stochastic Programming Models”. en.
In: Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science. Vol. 10. Stochas­
tic Programming. Elsevier, Jan. 2003, pp. 1–64. DOI: 10.1016/S0927-0507(03)10001-
1. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927050703100011 (vis­
ited on 06/25/2023).
44
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:54==
A
Data and solutions for Examples
t
D1t(Wh)
P 1t(Wh)
P 2t(Wh)
U1t(€)
C1t(€)
C2t(€)
T d1
1
0
2
2
12
4
8
2
1
2
2
12
5
10
T d2
3
3
2
2
12
2
9
4
3
2
2
12
6
11
Table 14: Time­Dependent inputs for the illustrative example in table 1
t
D1t(Wh)
P 1t(Wh)
P 2t(Wh)
U1t(€)
C1t(€)
C2t(€)
T d1
1
0
5
0
1
4
6
2
1
1
4
8
3
3
3
3
0
5
11
9
6
T d2
4
4
2
5
7
0
8
5
1
3
0
13
2
0
6
4
4
4
11
8
9
T d3
7
1
3
0
13
5
9
8
2
0
2
11
3
0
9
2
0
3
3
2
5
Table 15: Input data for example 4
T
t
∑
v stv
et
d1t
p1t
p2t
λv
t (€)
T d1
1
­
0
0
0
0
4
2
­
2.5
1
0
3.5
3
3
­
1
3
0
1.5
6
T d2
4
0.5
0
2.5
2
0
7
5
0.5
2
1
3
0
4
6
0.5
0.5
4
2.5
0
8
T d3
7
0
0
1
0
0
4
8
0
0
2
0
2
3
9
0
0
0
0
0
3
Table 16: primal and dual variables of the optimal solution of VOS­method for example 4
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
45
==PAGE:55==
t
D1t(Wh)
P 1t(Wh)
P 2t(Wh)
U1t(€)
C1t(€)
C2t(€)
T d1
1
3
1
5
0
0
5
2
0
1
3
14
4
5
3
1
3
0
14
9
7
4
1
1
3
5
2
1
5
2
4
0
13
4
9
T d2
6
3
2
1
4
3
4
7
0
1
5
12
2
3
8
0
1
1
13
9
8
9
4
3
5
7
2
3
10
3
3
4
9
2
3
T d3
11
4
0
3
12
3
7
12
0
2
1
10
6
9
13
3
5
5
1
9
9
14
0
3
0
8
4
4
15
0
5
3
13
7
7
Table 17: Input data for example 5
46
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
==PAGE:56==
On the Efficiency of Energy Markets with Non­Merchant Storage Under Imperfect Foresight
47
==PAGE:57==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk/
