==PAGE:1==
 
DTU Environment  
Department of Environmental Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compara(ve LCA of pump-and-treat remedia(on 
technologies for a PFAS contaminated site 
 
 
 
 
Master of Science (MSc) Thesis 
Louise Desser;ne - s212818 
Start date: 02/01/2023 End date: 02/07/2023  
Credits: 35 ECTS 
 
Supervisors 
Annika Sidelmann Fjordbøge - Olivier Jolliet  
 
DTU Sustain – Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering 
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet  
Bygningstorvet 
Buidling 115 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
 
 
Signature: 
 
 
Date: 01/07/2023 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
2 
Abstract 
 
Per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are iden;ﬁed as so-called forever chemicals, posing 
serious concern due to their toxicity, persistence and challenging removal and destruc;on. 
Remedia;on of PFAS contaminated sites is thus a pressing issue.  
This study builds upon a life cycle assessment (LCA) of a current granular ac;vated carbon (GAC) based 
treatment of inﬁltra;ng PFAS contaminated water collected from the unsaturated zone aLer 
ﬁreﬁgh;ng training exercises.  
Impacts of the current remedia;on are assessed and then compared with those of two other 
technologies, namely anion exchange resin (IEX resin) and sonolysis. Sensi;vity analyses are included 
regarding quan;ty of adsorbent and transport distances. The change in impacts linked to the resin 
eﬃciency compared to that of GAC is examined. High-end scenarios are explored to assess poten;al 
treatment impacts under less environmentally-friendly assump;ons – e.g., a more fossil-based 
electricity mix. Finally, an alterna;ve remedia;on scheme extending the remedia;on to the 
groundwater aquifer is also inves;gated.  
Results show that with respect to non-renewable primary energy and carbon footprint, the 
remedia;on with IEX resin has lower impacts compared to GAC as soon as 1.1 ;me less resin is 
required compared to GAC. Sonolysis is not a viable op;on for full-scale implementa;on due to the 
amount of electricity required. The facility and steel are important contributors to the overall impacts 
of the unsaturated zone remedia;on. Yet, when considering groundwater remedia;on – with a larger 
treated volume – these contribu;ons are reduced and the adsorbents are responsible for a bigger 
share of the impacts. Besides, the carbon footprint per cubic meter water treated is reduced, from 4 
kgCO2e/m3 to 0.5 kgCO2e/m3 for GAC and from 3 kgCO2e/m3 to 0.3 kgCO2e/m3 for IEX resin.  
 
1.Introduc0on 
 
The addi;on of perﬂuoro-octane sulfonate (PFOS) to the Annex B of the Stockholm Conven;on in 
2009, restric;ng its use and produc;on, ini;ated global research more broadly on a wide range of 
PFAS (Horst et al., 2018). PFOS widespread occurrence in water resources is supported by monitoring 
data. Notably, a study across 27 European countries showed that PFOS was detected in 93% of the 
samples collected in streams and rivers (Pancras et al., 2016).  
Their toxicity to humans is increasingly being documented, it has been shown that they can be 
absorbed in human body through oral inges;on (Gagliano et al., 2019) and that the main route of 
human exposure is inges;on of contaminated food and water (Pancras et al., 2016). They are detected 
in human ;ssue and blood serum at concentra;on levels of ng/L (Gagliano et al., 2019). Studies also 
reported that PFOA and PFOS in humans are probably linked to thyroid disease, high cholesterol, 
ulcera;ve coli;s, kidney cancer, tes;cular cancer and pregnancy-induced hypertension (Gagliano et 
al., 2019). The European Food Agency (EFSA) further highlighted the adverse eﬀects of the sum of 
four PFAS – PFOA, PFNA, PFHxS and PFOS (PFAS-4) – on the immune system as shown by decreased 
an;body response to vaccines. The panel concluded that eﬀects on the immune system are cri;cal 
for risk assessment (EFSA CONTAM Panel et al., 2020). In 2021, based on EFSA’s recommenda;ons, 
the Danish Environmental Protec;on Agency (EPA) lowered the criteria for PFAS in drinking water, 
sta;ng that it must not contain more than 2ng/L of the total sum of the PFAS-4. 
It is important to note that short-chain PFAS, that are widely used alterna;ves to long-chain PFAS, are 
generally not included in exis;ng regula;ons. They are assumed to have a lower bioaccumula;ve 
poten;al but they have other proper;es of concern. Notably, their ﬁnal degrada;on products are 
very persistent, rapidly distribute to water resources and are thus a source of contamina;on of 
drinking resources (Brendel et al., 2018). Between 2019 and 2023, the European Chemicals Agency 
(ECHA) iden;ﬁed PFBS, PFHpA and a short-chain PFAS subs;tute to PFOA as substances of very high 
==PAGE:3==
 
3 
concern (SVHC) under REACH Regula;on (Registra;on, Evalua;on, Authoriza;on and Restric;on of 
Chemicals). They are considered as of equivalent concern to carcinogens, mutagens and 
reprotoxicants and persistent, bioaccumula;ve and toxic/very persistent and very bioaccumula;ve 
(PBTs/vPvBs) chemicals (ECHA, 2023). As they pose a threat to human health, regula;ons targe;ng 
speciﬁcally these compounds can be expected in the future. 
 
PFAS contaminated sites can result from various uses and over ;me, PFAS compounds move through 
the soil to contaminate surface and groundwater. As they are soluble compounds, PFAS are mainly 
expected to travel from the contamina;on source in water along the hydrological gradient. 
Bioavailable PFAS can then be taken up by aqua;c biota, terrestrial plants and animals exposed to the 
contaminated water, thus entering the food chain and posing a risk (Heads of EPA Australia and New 
Zealand, 2020).  
 
Therefore, iden;fying contamina;on hotspots and remedia;ng them is a serious challenge. An 
important feature of PFAS is that most conven;onal water and wastewater treatment technologies 
are ineﬀec;ve when applied to them (Horst et al., 2018; Leung et al., 2022). While new remedia;on 
technologies are being developed, treatment of PFAS contaminated water s;ll widely relies upon a 
combina;on of adsorp;on/separa;on technologies with destruc;ve ones. Overall, IEX resin and GAC 
are the most commonly used op;ons in groundwater treatment for PFAS removal (Leung et al., 2022; 
Moeini et al., 2022).  Both require two steps, ﬁrst with the isola;on of PFAS and then the destruc;on 
of the spent adsorbent. Conversely, sonolysis is a quite novel one-step technology that has the 
advantage of not genera;ng any waste. PFAS are directly thermally destroyed and the genera;on of 
hydroxyl radicals ensures the destruc;on of co-contaminants. Yet, it remains at a developing stage 
and requires a high amount of energy. Eﬃciency improvements for larger scale implementa;on seem 
to be a key challenge, par;cularly as degrada;on is increased with increasing power intensity and 
frequency (ITRC, 2021; Cao et al., 2020).  
 
When dealing with contaminated sites, it is important to acknowledge the trade-oﬀs between the 
environmental impacts related to the contamina;on itself and those of the remedia;on ac;vi;es 
conducted at the site. Those impacts will depend on the technology chosen to meet the remedial 
objec;ve. Quan;fying and comparing the impact of poten;al remedia;on technologies is a key step 
in iden;fying the least costly with respect to the environment and human health. Life cycle 
assessment (LCA) is an ISO-standardized tool based on quan;ta;ve data that is well-suited to perform 
such a comparison as it covers a broad range of environmental impacts and takes into account the 
en;re life cycle of the system under study. 
IEX resin is reported to have fewer emissions than GAC except with regard to ozone deple;on (Leung 
et al., 2022; Moeini et al., 2022). The gap becomes clearer with increasing contaminant concentra;on 
as more adsorbents are required and as the GAC produc;on and reac;va;on have higher impacts 
compared to IEX regenerant recycling and end-of-life. Electricity consump;on per cubic meter of 
water treated also increases with increasing PFAS concentra;on. Electricity is mainly used to pump 
the water through the system, but it is also involved in the produc;on and reac;va;on/regenera;on 
processes of the adsorbents. Overall, the contribu;on of electricity genera;on from coal to the 
greenhouse gas emissions is reduced with increasing PFAS concentra;on, as the share of recycling of 
treatment components increases more (Emery et al., 2019). Findings further suggest that IEX resin 
has a higher sustainability index even though GAC is more socially sustainable according to their Social 
Sustainability Evalua;on Matrix (SSEM) and stakeholder’s survey (Moeini et al., 2022).   
The comparison of GAC, IEX resin and bomled water has been explored (Emery et al., 2019) as well as 
that of GAC, a func;onal precipita;on agent (PerﬂuorAd) and direct incinera;on (Maga et al., 2021). 
Boyer et al. (2021) focused on diﬀerent regenera;on scenarios for spent anion exchange resin applied 
to PFAS impacted water, but the use of the resin itself is not compared with any other technology. 
==PAGE:4==
 
4 
LCA has also been performed by Feng et al. (2021) for landﬁll PFAS leachate treatment in China, 
comparing the current onsite treatment with a hypothe;cal oﬀsite one. The onsite scenario includes 
nanoﬁltra;on and reverse osmosis, which is assumed to be eﬃcient against PFOA and PFOS, while 
the oﬀsite scenario relies on a typical wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) that does not monitor 
PFAS removal. The study focuses on the comparison of the environmental, human health and 
economic performances of both scenarios, highligh;ng that more stringent regula;ons on PFAS 
would result in the development of the onsite type of facili;es. Indeed, WWTPs will no longer be able 
to accept landﬁll leachates with high PFAS concentra;ons if they cannot observe the new PFAS 
regula;ons on ground and surface water.  
 
LCA studies focused on PFAS contamina;on thus exist but important gaps in our knowledge remain 
and further studies of such onsite remedia;on could be interes;ng to develop. Besides, those studies 
are generally focused on the most commonly used methods or on speciﬁc stages of PFAS disposal or 
treatment. More novel technologies are not included as most of them are s;ll at a developing stage 
and studied at pilot scale. Yet, some of them such as sonolysis are emphasized as quite promising 
(Horst et al., 2018), thus it is interes;ng to assess the poten;al impacts of its implementa;on. 
Including sonolysis in a LCA can also help iden;fy the main challenges that need to be tackled to 
achieve a large-scale applica;on with the lowest impacts on the environment and human health, as 
well as to quan;fy the extent to which it must be improved. Besides, it is interes;ng to further study 
the most commonly used technologies to bemer grasp and document the range of life cycle impacts 
that may result from their use in remedial ac;ons. Exploring diﬀerent values for several key 
parameters such as IEX resin eﬃciency, pumping rate or transport distances thus seems to be very 
relevant. 
 
To address these needs, this study aims to quan;fy the life cycle impacts on the environment and 
human health of diﬀerent remedia;on scenarios for per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) 
contamina;on. More speciﬁcally, this paper aims to A) es;mate the life cycle impacts of the current 
GAC installa;on for the unsaturated zone remedia;on; B) compare it with those of hypothe;cal IEX 
resin and sonolysis treatments; C) perform scenario and sensi;vity analyses to explore the inﬂuence 
of selected key parameters including the quan;ty of adsorbents, the electricity mix and transport 
distances, and D) to predict the impacts associated with groundwater remedia;on at the site with 
pumping at maximum rate, and compare it with those of the unsaturated zone remedia;on.  
 
2.Method 
 
The study follows the four phases deﬁned by the life cycle assessment framework. The goal and scope 
are ﬁrst deﬁned, followed by the life cycle inventory (LCI). The life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) is 
then performed, leading to the interpreta;on phase. The LCIA is performed with the soLware 
SimaPro and the method ReCiPe H. Amribu;onal LCA is applied with the database Ecoinvent 3 - 
alloca;on, cut-oﬀ by classiﬁca;on – unit.  
Scenario and sensi;vity analyses are included to evaluate the inﬂuence of the quan;ty of adsorbent 
– i.e., GAC and IEX resin –, the electricity mix, transport distances and means of transport. A 
groundwater remedia;on scenario with high pumping rate is also part of the assessment. Finally, 
another LCIA method is also tested and compared to ReCiPe H to check the consistency of the results. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
5 
2.1 Func4onal unit and site background descrip4on 
 
2.1.1 Func)onal Unit  
 
The func;onal unit (FU) - based on the remedia;on goals deﬁned by the administra;ve board of 
Jönköping County - is “Ensure 95% puriﬁca;on of PFOS contamina;on at Jönköping site over 21 years 
with an outgoing annual average water PFOS concentra;on not exceeding 0.045 ug/L”. It is declined 
in two alterna;ves to meet the objec;ves of the study, being applied to A) Unsaturated zone 
remedia;on, and B) Groundwater remedia;on.  
 
2.1.2 Site descrip)on 
 
The site is located near Jönköping airport and is used for ﬁreﬁgh;ng training exercises during which 
ﬁre foam products are used, many of which are PFAS-based. The analysis thus focuses on water that 
is collected from the unsaturated zone aLer such ﬁreﬁgh;ng drills, with a remedia;on goal targeted 
at PFOS. The contaminated water corresponds to the surface runoﬀs of the area that contain PFAS 
released with the ﬁreﬁgh;ng foams and that ﬂow downward to the unsaturated zone. It is collected 
in a 20m3 polyethylene (PE) tank buried under the ground before treated in a pump-and-treat facility 
with GAC. Concentra;on measurements indicate a mean inlet PFOS concentra;on of 19ug/L. The 
amount of water in the tank is monitored and determines the pumping scheme through the 
treatment facility. A simpliﬁed diagram of the facility can be found in appendix A1. The remedia;on 
was set up in an already exis;ng installa;on as urgent ac;on was needed, eﬀec;vely leading to a 
much lower amount of water treated compared to the built-in pumping capacity - that was 
dimensioned for groundwater treatment. Data indicates an average of 49m3 water pumped per 
month, approximately 0.07 m3/hour, while the pump at the site has a 2m3/hour capacity. Plans to 
include groundwater treatment are being considered by the consultants currently handling the site. 
(Niras, 2023)  
It is worth no;ng that the clean-up goal is focused on PFOS even though a range of PFAS including 
shorter-chain PFAS are found at the site. As men;oned in introduc;on, rising concern about the risk 
they pose will presumably lead to new regula;ons. It is likely that the addi;on of shorter-chain PFAS 
in the target chemicals would increase the renewal frequency of adsorbents and poten;ally increase 
the ;me required for sonolysis to become eﬃcient in destroying them. As highlighted by Horst et al. 
(2018) breakthrough can occur at rela;vely low bed volumes when it comes to removal of short-chain 
perﬂuoroalkyl acids by GAC or IEX resin.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
6 
2.2 Environmental impact of the unsaturated zone remedia4on: current GAC 
installa4on and comparison with the IEX resin and sonolysis scenarios 
 
 
System boundary: 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1 Foreground system of the diﬀerent scenarios: a) Adsorbent-based scenarios, b) Sonolysis-
based scenarios 
 
Figure 1 presents the foreground system for the treatment scenarios. Figure 1a corresponds to the 
two technologies based on adsorp;on – GAC and IEX resin – while Figure 1b represents the system 
designed for sonolysis. The main diﬀerences between the two scenarios depicted by Figure 1a are the 
type of adsorbent and the amount of steel required, as tanks used to contain GAC and IEX resin are 
==PAGE:7==
 
7 
diﬀerent. The sonolysis system has fewer similari;es with the other two technologies and mostly 
relies on the use of transducers that require power from generators. Air compressors are required to 
supply air to the reactors and operate the pumps. Steel tanks have a diﬀerent size as well, based on 
the amount of water that can be treated by the number of transducers present in the tank, and 
subsequently the power delivered to it for a given dura;on. The disposal also diﬀers as sonolysis 
directly destroys PFAS, thus disposal is only required for facility related components.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
8 
Table 1. Main inputs inventory for the GAC, IEX resin, sonolysis baseline and high-end unsaturated 
zone remedia;on scenarios, and groundwater remedia;on for the two adsorbent-based scenarios  
 
==PAGE:9==
 
9 
Table 1 presents the inputs inventory for the diﬀerent treatment scenarios under study. Inputs are 
described for each of the baseline cases, for the high-end scenarios as well as for the groundwater 
treatment systems. Processes selected and presented in the table are the best available in the 
Ecoinvent database in SimaPro. 
 
2.2.1 Common features  
 
Modeling of the overall treatment facility is based on a document shared by the consultancy in charge 
of the remedia;on (Niras, 2023). The facility is set up inside a 20-L half container and includes pumps, 
valves, pipes and monitoring devices. The number and volume of the diﬀerent elements is completed 
with data from manufacturers, as indicated in Table 1, to es;mate the weight of each of them. Then, 
the most suitable available processes in the Ecoinvent database are assigned to each of the inputs. 
Apart from the site loca;on, which is known, other loca;ons of relevance for the transporta;on of 
materials are assumed to be the biggest industrial city close to the site for the baseline scenarios, and 
in China and Germany for the high-end scenarios. Distances are then determined on maps and based 
on the most typical commercial routes. Commonly used means of transport for each route are 
iden;ﬁed and the most appropriate processes from the soLware are assigned to each of the 
transporta;on steps. Speciﬁc inputs are adapted to the three treatment methods assessed for the 
pump-and-treat facility as presented in Table 1. It is worth no;ng here that the poten;al temporal 
changes in the eﬃciency of the adsorbents or of the sonolysis are not taken into account in the study. 
As presented in Figure 1, the prepara;on of the site is not included in the system boundaries as no 
data was available and as it is assumed that it would be the same regardless of the technology 
implemented for treatment.  
 
2.2.2 Current GAC treatment    
 
The ﬁrst treatment method corresponds to the current remedia;on with GAC, which ensures 
contaminant removal with two sand ﬁlters followed by two GAC ﬁlters of 1m3 each. The quan;ty of 
adsorbent is determined based on the ongoing opera;ons, assuming that both GAC tanks are 
replaced every six years – equivalent to one tank being replaced every three years – for the baseline 
scenario (Niras, 2023). The weight of the tanks is es;mated based on manufacturers’ data (Table 1, 
A7). The spent GAC is assumed to be incinerated as no process in the Ecoinvent database could 
account for reac;va;on of GAC used for PFAS impacted water.  
 
2.2.3 IEX resin treatment    
 
Assump;ons on the IEX resin eﬃciency compared to GAC are based on the literature. The study of 
Franke et al. (2019) shows that the anion exchange resin has a 1.8-fold greater total removal per liter 
material compared to GAC with a PFOS concentra;on of 0.19ug/L. This is consistent with the 
adsorp;on capaci;es reported by Du et al. (2014), with ranges of [160-229] mgPFOS/g GAC and [210-
2575] mgPFOS/g anion exchange resin. Thus, all IEX resin-based scenarios are adapted from the GAC 
scenarios assuming that half the amount of resin is required compared to GAC. The amount of steel 
required for the treatment facility is adapted as smaller vessels are used for resins compared to GAC. 
It is assumed that the contaminated water runs through the two sand ﬁlters of 1m3 each followed by 
four smaller 0.1m3 tanks containing the resin. The weight of the tanks is es;mated with 
manufacturers’ data (Table 1, A7). Regenera;on of the spent resin is not considered in this study, as 
no process could account for it in the Ecoinvent database. The process used to model the end-of-life 
of the IEX resin corresponds to the disposal of spent anion exchange resin, from potable water 
produc;on. It might underes;mate its real impacts, yet, similar treatment steps would probably be 
applied to the spent resin used to remediate PFAS impacted water - the chosen process includes 
==PAGE:10==
 
10 
disposal steps performed in a municipal solid waste incinerator (MSWI). Also, incinera;on as 
hazardous waste is tested in the high-end scenario, thus encompassing the range of poten;al impacts 
linked to the resin end-of-life. The subsequent diﬀerences in impacts between GAC and IEX resin are 
discussed in sec;ons 3.2.2 and 3.4.2.  
 
2.2.4 Sonolysis treatment  
 
For the sonolysis scenario, three reactors as the one described by Gole et al. (2017) are needed to 
fulﬁll the FU. Most of the elements they men;on are included in the present study, yet some are leL 
out as their descrip;on did not provide enough details and no process from Ecoinvent were iden;ﬁed 
to account for them – e.g., nitrogen gas supply for cooling of the system. Sand ﬁlters are included as 
a ﬁrst step even though not men;oned. They are frequently used to remove suspended solids and 
precipitates from water and thus might contribute to the proper func;oning of sonolysis. In the 
laboratory or pilot scale studies, the treated solu;on is oLen prepared ar;ﬁcially in water without 
signiﬁcant amounts of par;culate mamer and thus ready to be treated. It is important to note here 
that this scenario comes with very large uncertain;es. Scaling up the technology would be much more 
complex than mul;plying the pilot scale resources by a given factor. However, it gives a ﬁrst es;ma;on 
of the impacts of the process and highlights the main challenges for its development.  
 
2.3 Scenario analysis   
 
In order to account for the uncertain;es linked to the assump;ons and choices made, high-end 
scenarios are deﬁned and compared to the baseline results. This analysis puts forth the poten;al 
magnitude of the remedia;on impacts under less environmentally op;mal but realis;c condi;ons. 
Inputs are changed in terms of quan;ty, for the adsorbents and sand ﬁlters. For the GAC-based 
remedia;on, it is assumed that one tank is replaced every year, based on PFAS measurements that 
suggest breakthrough of PFBA aLer a year of treatment (Niras, 2023). The IEX resin scenario is 
subsequently adapted with the same baseline assump;on that half the amount of resin is required 
compared to GAC. The equivalent of one tank of sand is added in the high-end scenarios, assuming 
that one ﬁlter would be replaced during the remedia;on. The electricity mix is switched to that of 
Texas in the United States and the loca;on of material providers is also changed. Similarly, loca;ons 
of disposal facili;es are modiﬁed and processes for disposal are chosen country-speciﬁc accordingly, 
when available in Ecoinvent. Distances of transport are changed as men;oned in sec;on 2.2.1 and 
means of transport as well. Transport by container ships and by bigger trucks are thus included. Train 
is chosen as means of transporta;on to the disposal loca;on, between Sweden and Germany (Table 
1). 
The scenario corresponding to the break-even point – e.g., when the impacts of the remedia;on with 
IEX resin become equivalent to the GAC remedia;on – is inves;gated by varying the amount of resin 
and evalua;ng the resul;ng impacts. The impact of the resin eﬃciency compared to GAC is further 
assessed with the hypothesis that the resin is eight ;mes more eﬃcient – thus 500kg only are required 
for the whole remedia;on (Woodard et al., 2017). The amount of steel required is adapted as fewer 
and smaller vessels are required. Four 0.03m3 tanks are used and manufacturers’ data gives weight 
es;mates.    
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
11 
2.4 Sensi4vity analysis 
 
Basic sensi;vity index calcula;ons are performed for the quan;ty of adsorbents and transport 
distances – both for the baseline and high-end scenarios – by changing those parameters one at a 
;me. Sensi;vity scores calculated for each impact category at midpoint level are classiﬁed between 
low, medium and large sensi;vity when the score is lower than 0.3, between 0.3 and 0.5 and higher 
than 0.5, respec;vely. The amount of GAC is thus changed by 500kg – corresponding to one tank – 
and by 250kg for the resin. With respect to transport in the baseline cases, the distance is increased 
to 650km – corresponding to the distance between the site and Hamburg. For the high-end scenarios, 
sensi;vity to both transport distances by sea and by train are inves;gated. An increase of 10% is 
applied to those distances, one at a ;me – this perturba;on is chosen as a realis;c default value. (A5, 
A6) Finally, a consistency check is performed using the LCIA method TRACI2.1 V1.07 (Canada 2005) 
developed by the U.S. EPA, with impact categories characterized at midpoint level.  
 
2.5 Op4miza4on of the current system  
 
As men;oned above, the pump is currently not operated at its maximum capacity. The measured 
electricity consump;on per volume for pumping is therefore high compared to what it could be with 
an op;mized constant pumping rate matching the amount of water treated monthly. Calcula;ons 
based on manufacturers’ documenta;on suggest that for a constant pumping rate of 1L/min – 
approximately equivalent to the current average of 49m3 water treated per month – the electricity 
consump;on for pumping would be reduced to 6 456 kWh, giving a total electricity consump;on of 
29 397 kWh. This represents a reduc;on of 72% compared to the baseline consump;on of 103 820 
kWh (A2). 
 
2.6 Groundwater remedia4on scenarios  
 
Impacts are assessed considering that the pump is used to its full pumping rate capacity, 
corresponding to the poten;al treatment of groundwater at the site. In order to adapt the two 
adsorbent-based scenarios, changes in inputs are made with regard to the quan;ty of GAC or IEX 
resin and to the electricity consump;on. Grundfos’ data on the pump is used to calculate the 
electricity consump;on from pumping (A2). The mean PFOS groundwater concentra;on is calculated 
with concentra;ons found within a 110m radius around the well exhibi;ng the highest 
measurements. A value of 23ug/L is obtained and combined with the GAC adsorp;on capacity to 
es;mate the new quan;ty of adsorbent required for the remedia;on. The GAC adsorp;on capacity 
is calculated based on equa;ons reported by Ochoa-Herrera et al. (2008) (A3).  
It is worth no;ng that even though the unsaturated zone and groundwater remedia;ons have the 
same end goal and their life cycle impacts are compared in the present study, they do not fulﬁll the 
exact same FU.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
12 
 
3.Results and discussion 
 
3.1 Environmental impact of the unsaturated zone remedia4on: current GAC 
installa4on and comparison with IEX resin and sonolysis scenarios 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig2. Non-renewable primary energy (top) and CO2 equivalent scores (bomom) for the treatment 
technologies in diﬀerent scenarios: a) and d) for the baseline scenarios, b) and e) for the maximum 
IEX resin eﬃciency scenario and the three high-end scenarios, and c) and f) for the groundwater 
remedia;on scenarios 
 
3.1.1 Current GAC treatment  
 
The main contributor to the GAC installa;on carbon footprint is the GAC material itself and its disposal 
represen;ng 42% of the total impact (Fig. 2d). The steel required for the treatment facility is the 
second biggest contributor, accoun;ng for 32% of the overall impact (Fig. 2d). With regard to non-
renewable primary energy, electricity consump;on is responsible for 53% of the total impact, 
followed by GAC – both material and disposal – represen;ng 18% of the total and similarly steel with 
a share of 17% of the overall impact (Fig. 2a). 
The quan;ty of GAC is thus a cri;cal parameter and the renewal frequency of the ﬁlters should be 
op;mized to reduce the remedia;on environmental impact. Eﬃcient monitoring of the treated water 
can help determine the op;mal moment to change the ﬁlters while ensuring proper PFOS removal. 
GAC reac;va;on could also mi;gate its impacts, a hypothesis taken on by Emery et al. (2018). In their 
==PAGE:13==
 
13 
GAC-based treatment system, reac;va;on of the GAC is performed through the applica;on of heat 
and steam that degrade and remove contaminants with a ten percent of carbon mass loss during the 
process. Gagliano et al. (2019) compare diﬀerent types of ac;vated carbon and suggest that 
powdered ac;vated carbon (PAC) has a higher adsorp;on capacity for PFOS compared to GAC. Under 
the same experimental condi;ons, they report an adsorp;on capacity of 535 mg-PFOS/g-PAC 
compared to 390 mg-PFOS/g-GAC. Op;miza;on of the remedia;on to lower its life cycle impacts 
could include the iden;ﬁca;on of a more eﬃcient type of ac;vated carbon, thus reducing the 
quan;ty required per volume treated.  
Results also suggest that the design of the facility is important as the size of the steel tanks will play 
a signiﬁcant role. This is supported by the study of Moeini et al. (2022) on contaminated groundwater 
remedia;on. The environmental and human health impacts of their GAC treatment are mainly 
amributable to stainless steel, being the material used for the tanks. Notably, they report a 95% 
contribu;on of steel on the carcinogenic indicator, which is the one exhibi;ng the biggest impact. 
Thus, the sizing of the tanks could be op;mized or other materials with lower impacts could be 
inves;gated.   
 
 
3.1.2 IEX resin comparison with GAC 
 
Figures 2a, 2d show that GAC and IEX resin perform quite similarly with respect to non-renewable 
primary energy and carbon footprint, with the ﬁrst having impacts 1.1 ;mes and 1.5 ;mes higher, 
respec;vely. The diﬀerence is mainly amributable to the disposal process of the resin compared to 
GAC and to the quan;ty of each adsorbent. The eﬀect of incinera;on of the spent resin on the GAC 
and IEX resin scenario comparison is further discussed in sec;on 3.2.2.  
Those results are found with the assump;on that half the resin is required compared to GAC, which 
is a conserva;ve assump;on with respect to resin eﬃciency values reported in the literature and 
presented in Table 1 and sec;on 2.2.3. The break-even point es;ma;on suggests that as soon as 1.1 
;mes less resin is required compared to GAC, the IEX resin-based remedia;on has lower impacts in 
terms of non-renewable primary energy. Remarkably, the IEX resin-based remedia;on has a lower 
carbon footprint even when the resin is slightly less eﬃcient than GAC, more precisely up un;l 1.3 
;mes more resin is required compared to GAC. (A-Excel) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
14 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 Normalized damage of the three baseline scenarios: a) Normalized scores in log scale, b) 
Processes contribu;ons. For each impact category, the ﬁrst bar corresponds to the GAC scenario, 
the second to the IEX resin scenario and the last one to sonolysis. The areas of protec;on human 
health and ecosystem quality are represented. The abbrevia;on EC in the impact categories names 
stands for ecosystem. Contributors men;oned in the legend correspond to the elements men;oned 
in Table 1. 
 
The results consistency is veriﬁed by using another LCIA method, namely TRACI 2.1 V1.07 (Canada 
2005). Overall, impact scores are in the same range as the ones obtained with ReCiPe H. It is only 
regarding ozone deple;on that some discrepancy can be no;ced. Par;cularly for the sonolysis 
scenario – for which there is a 97% diﬀerence when considering ReCiPe score as the reference 
compared to TRACI result – a diﬀerence of 0.26 kg CFC-11eq. Looking into details, 0.24 kg CFC-11eq 
out of the 0.26 kg CFC-11eq are amributable to the electricity for transducers. Among the substances 
emimed by the electricity process, documenta;on on the two LCIA methods indicates that there is no 
factor for dinitrogen monoxide with TRACI whereas ReCiPe includes a 0.011 kg CFC-11eq/kg factor to 
account for the substance ozone deple;ng capacity. However, this impact category is not the one 
exhibi;ng the highest score, thus conclusions would not be dras;cally diﬀerent.  
==PAGE:15==
 
15 
 
In the following analysis, impact categories men;oned are the ones most aﬀected by the remedia;on. 
GAC scores are taken as references for percentage calcula;ons since it is the ongoing remedia;on. 
Normalized damages are examined and overall suggest that the IEX resin scenario has slightly lower 
impacts. Altogether, the treatment facility appears to be one of the main contributors to both 
scenarios impacts. Reusing components of an old system could therefore be helpful to reduce the 
impact of the remedia;on. Further inves;ga;ons might be required to deﬁne in which context it is 
conceivable – e.g., sizing, safety or cross contamina;on issues might have to be considered. 
 
Human health area of protec;on:  
Fine par,culate ma1er forma,on is the impact category with the biggest diﬀerence, the IEX resin 
scenario having 38% lower impacts compared to GAC. This gap mainly comes from the diﬀerence in 
contribu;ons of the adsorbents, with GAC represen;ng 32% of the impact compared to 10% for the 
resin. It is consistent with the use of hard coal in GAC produc;on, which is not part of the resin 
produc;on. The treatment facility is responsible for 50% and 71% of the impact for the GAC and IEX 
resin scenarios, respec;vely. (Fig. 3a, 3b) 
The IEX resin scenario has 30% lower impact on global warming. Main contributors to the GAC and 
IEX resin scenarios are the same, namely the treatment facility - 39% and 49%, respec;vely -, the 
adsorbent itself – 25% and 18%, respec;vely - and the disposal stage – 25% and 17%, respec;vely. 
(Fig. 3a, 3b) 
For both human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxicity 20% diﬀerence is found in favor of the IEX 
resin remedia;on. The treatment facility is responsible for most of the impact regardless of the 
scenario – 79% and 54% of the impacts for GAC and 87% and 63% of the impacts for IEX resin. (Fig. 
3a, 3b) 
As shown on Figure 3a, the resin only has the highest impact score with respect to stratospheric ozone 
deple,on, which is linked to the use of trichloromethane – responsible for 93% of the total kg CFC-
11eq - in the manufacturing process of the resin. However, Figure 3a also shows that results for this 
category are negligible at normalized endpoint level compared to the others.  
 
Ecosystem quality area of protec;on:  
Impact scores are examined with two decimals for all impact categories and considered signiﬁcant 
when greater than zero. Apart from global warming (terrestrial ecosystem) – for which results are the 
same as under the human health area of protec;on - impact categories signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the 
remedia;on are terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, ozone forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem), freshwater 
eutrophica,on and land use. (Fig. 3a)  
The diﬀerence between the GAC and IEX resin scenarios impact scores is not equal to zero – with two 
decimals – for one impact category only. Indeed, the two scenarios can be dis;nguished for terrestrial 
acidiﬁca,on for which the impact is two ;mes lower with the IEX resin compared to GAC. The 
diﬀerence is linked to the adsorbents as it can clearly be seen that GAC has a bigger share of the 
impact (Fig. 3b) – 41% of the impact is amributable to GAC compared to 14% amributable to the resin. 
Details provided by the soLware on substances emimed by the two adsorbents indicate that more 
nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide are released in the air by GAC compared to the resin. The treatment 
facility is again one of the main contributors – accoun;ng for 40% for the GAC scenario and 63% for 
the IEX resin scenario.  
While the overall impact is quite small, it is interes;ng to note here that electricity is the main driver 
for land use in both cases – 57% for GAC and 64% for the IEX resin. This is explained by the use of 
wood chips burned in boilers to produce heat and subsequently electricity in the Swedish electricity 
mix process of the Ecoinvent database. (Fig 3b) 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
16 
3.1.3 Sonolysis treatment   
 
Figure 3 shows that except for stratospheric ozone deple,on, the electricity required for transducers 
alone makes sonolysis the treatment with the biggest impact for all other categories. Figures 2a, 2d 
show that sand ﬁlters do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the non-renewable primary energy and carbon 
footprint impacts. The choice to include them as a pretreatment step in the study does not mamer 
much compared to the electricity consump;on. In the literature, power densi;es necessary for 
sonolysis to be eﬃcient are reported (Cao et al., 2020) and it seems to be a bomleneck to the 
technology large-scale implementa;on. More research will be needed in the future if a design 
minimizing electricity consump;on is to be found. Calcula;ons on carbon footprint and non-
renewable primary energy indicate that for sonolysis to become comparable with the other two 
technologies, electricity consump;on for transducers should be reduced to approximately 30 000 
kWh – corresponding to a 99% reduc;on compared to the baseline scenario. Thus, sonolysis is 
discarded in the following analyses as it does not represent a realis;c op;on for implementa;on at 
the site under study. This is consistent with Laramay et al. (2020a) that iden;ﬁed the op;mal 
condi;ons for sonolysis implementa;on to be in a horizontal well, with passive capture of the 
contaminated water. They also iden;ﬁed that the technology is best suited in a low hydraulic 
conduc;vity source zone. Laramay et al. (2020b) further showed that their in situ ultrasonic reactor 
technology had lower life cycle impacts and costs compared to their pump-and-treat system when 
both were considered under their respec;ve op;mal condi;ons.   
 
3.2 Scenario analyses 
 
3.2.1 Overall high-end scenarios  
 
The non-renewable primary energy scores in the high-end scenarios are 1.6 ;mes bigger than the 
baseline for GAC and 1.5 ;mes bigger for the IEX resin (Fig. 2a, 2b). The carbon footprint is also 
increased, being 2.9 and 3.2 ;mes larger for the GAC and IEX resin high-end scenarios, respec;vely 
(Fig 2c, 2d). Overall, electricity contributes more to most categories that are signiﬁcantly impacted by 
the remedia;on (Fig. S3a, S3b). The steel and treatment facility shares of impacts generally decrease. 
Indeed, no changes are made with respect to these components for the high-end scenarios except 
for the addi;on of one sand ﬁlter – included in the treatment facility for normalized damages. The 
adsorbent share evolu;on when moving to high-end scenarios shows mixed tendencies. 
Transporta;on mamers more compared to the baseline scenarios but somewhat marginally – i.e., for 
few impact categories as described in the following sec;ons. Changes in impacts are further analyzed 
in the following sec;ons, in rela;on to the corresponding changes in inputs as described in sec;on 
2.3 and reported in Table 1.  
 
3.2.2 Adsorbent amounts and disposal  
 
Overall contribu;on to the high-end case:  
The adsorbent and its disposal contribute more to non-renewable primary energy with GAC and its 
incinera;on accoun;ng for 33% of the total impact compared to 18% in the baseline scenario. 
Similarly, the resin and its disposal represent 24% of the non-renewable primary energy compared to 
11% in the baseline. (Fig. 2b) Conversely, with respect to the carbon footprints and the impact scores 
for global warming, the adsorbent contribu;ons do not dras;cally change. (Fig. 2e, Fig S3b) While 
their quan;ty is increased in the high-end scenarios, thus increasing their absolute contribu;ons to 
those impact categories, the electricity contribu;ons increase more compared to the baseline 
scenarios, as discussed below.  
==PAGE:17==
 
17 
 
Adsorbents amounts:  
The contribu;ons of the adsorbents to the ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on impact in high-end 
scenarios decrease for both GAC and IEX resin compared to the baseline scenarios. It goes down to 
19% in the high-end scenario compared to 32% in the baseline scenario for GAC. For the IEX resin, it 
is reduced from 10% in the baseline scenario to 6% in the high-end scenario. Again, this tendency can 
be explained by the increase of the electricity contribu;ons in that impact category as detailed below. 
GAC remains the main contributor for terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, represen;ng 37% of the total score.  
 
Adsorbents disposal:  
The disposal stage contributes more to global warming for both adsorbents, 1% more for GAC and 
6% more for the resin. (Fig. S3b) As the quan;ty of metals – except steel - plas;cs, electronics are the 
same for both treatments, the higher increase for the IEX resin scenario can be explained by the 
assump;on that the spent resin is incinerated for the high-end scenario only – while the spent GAC 
is assumed to be incinerated for both baseline and high-end scenarios. 
 
It is interes;ng to note that even with this new assump;on for the resin disposal, the non-renewable 
primary energy and carbon footprint scores of the IEX resin scenario remain lower than the scores of 
the GAC scenario. Contribu;ons of the adsorbent incinera;on in those two categories are two ;mes 
higher for GAC compared to the resin. (Fig. 2b, 2e) This is consistent with the hypothesis that more 
GAC is required compared to IEX resin per volume treated. In comparison with the baseline scenarios, 
which include the resin-speciﬁc disposal process, the non-renewable primary energy score for GAC 
incinera;on was 25 ;mes higher than the resin disposal score and 3 ;mes higher for the carbon 
footprint. (Fig. 2a, 2d) 
Complementary calcula;ons are made for the baseline scenarios with the assump;on that the resin 
is also incinerated to ensure that previous conclusions on the GAC and resin comparison would not 
be invalidated by that change. Results show that the non-renewable primary energy score would be 
increased by 1.9% and the carbon footprint by 6% for this alterna;ve IEX resin baseline scenario - 
with the IEX resin baseline scenario described in sec;on 2.2.3 as reference. The GAC incinera;on 
would s;ll contribute 1.8 and 1.5 ;mes more to the non-renewable primary energy and carbon 
footprint scores, respec;vely, compared to the IEX resin incinera;on. Also, the IEX resin overall 
remedia;on would s;ll be preferable with respect to those impacts.  
 
Resin eﬃciency: In the literature, the resin eﬃciency is reported to be up to eight ;mes bemer 
compared to GAC (Woodard et al., 2017) and this hypothesis is examined in this sec;on. The non-
renewable primary energy impact of the IEX resin remedia;on becomes 1.3 ;mes lower than the GAC 
baseline scenario and 1.8 ;mes lower regarding the carbon footprint. (Fig. 2b, 2e) The gap between 
normalized damages of the GAC-based and the IEX resin-based scenarios increases, with 44% 
diﬀerence for both ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on and global warming – compared to 38% and 
30%, respec;vely. As for human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxicity, the diﬀerence goes up to 
23% and 29% respec;vely – compared to 20% as men;oned previously. Under the area of protec;on 
ecosystem quality, results are very similar to the ones analyzed before and the gap with respect to 
terrestrial acidiﬁca,on is increased by 10%. (Fig. S3) Thus, it is important to iden;fy and choose the 
most adequate resin in order to reduce the remedia;on life cycle impacts. Gagliano et al. (2019) 
notably highlights that PFAS removal eﬃciency varies among anion exchange resins, depending on 
the polymer matrix, the resin func;onal group or the porosity of the resin. For instance, large pores 
of microporous resin enable faster diﬀusion of PFOS compared to gel resin. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
18 
 
3.2.3 Electricity mix  
 
Comparing the baseline and high-end scenarios, it is clear that except for non-renewable primary 
energy and land use, electricity becomes one of the main contributors when changing the electricity 
mix to the one of the Texas region in the US (US-TRE).  
With regard to the carbon footprint, electricity accounts for 33% and 42% of the total impact in the 
high-end scenarios with the US electricity mix for the GAC and IEX resin scenarios, respec;vely.  
Compara;vely, it accounts for 8% and 11% of the total impact in the baseline scenarios with the 
Swedish electricity mix for the GAC and IEX resin scenarios, respec;vely. (Fig. 2d,2e)  
Under the human health area of protec;on, the most adversely aﬀected impact categories are the 
same as for the baseline scenarios, namely ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on, global warming, human 
carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxicity. Electricity represents 33% for global warming compared 
to 8% in the baseline and 57% for ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on compared to 7% in the baseline. 
For human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxicity, electricity accounts for 17% and 43% 
compared to 4% and 14% in the baseline, respec;vely. The same overall conclusions can be made for 
the IEX resin treatment, with electricity accoun;ng for 42% and 72% of the impact compared to 11% 
for global warming and ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on, respec;vely, 20% compared to 5% for 
human carcinogenic toxicity and 52% compared to 17% for human non-carcinogenic toxicity. (Fig. S3b)  
Regarding ecosystem quality and with respect to the GAC-based remedia;on, electricity contributes 
to more than half of the impact on freshwater eutrophica,on with 54% of the total impact compared 
to 7% in the baseline scenario and to 20% of the impact for terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, compared to 8% 
in the baseline. Again, ﬁndings are similar for the IEX resin scenarios, with electricity contribu;ng to 
66% of the impact on freshwater eutrophica,on compared to 11% in the baseline scenario and to 
34% of the impact for terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, compared to 13% in the baseline. Thus, focusing on 
environmentally-friendly electricity sources can be an eﬃcient way of reducing the remedia;on 
impacts on those impact categories.   
As men;oned above, only two categories show inverse results. The share of electricity for non-
renewable primary energy lightly decreases in the high-end scenarios (Fig 2a,2b) and more notably, 
its share on land use impact scores greatly decreases - of approximately 40% for both GAC and IEX 
resin scenarios.  (Fig. S3) 
In the Ecoinvent database, the Swedish electricity mix is made of approximately 40% nuclear, 38% 
hydroelectricity, 10% wind while the US-TRE electricity mix is made up of 31% natural gas, 19% lignite, 
17% wind power and 13% heat and power co-genera;on, natural gas. This explains the signiﬁcant 
diﬀerence in results and the bigger carbon footprint of US-based electricity consump;on. It suggests 
that the impact calculated could greatly diﬀer if the remedia;on takes place in another country.  
This is consistent with ﬁndings reported by Emery et al. (2018) on groundwater treatment at an air 
force base located in Ohio, United States. Their results show that the primary source of impacts on 
climate change, human health, acidiﬁca;on, and ecotoxicity is electricity use, both for their GAC and 
IEX groundwater treatments. Electricity contribu;ons presented on Figure S3b fall under the range 
they report – mainly for their highest PFAS concentra;on of 7ug/L and 70ug/L. They also highlight 
that electricity genera;on cons;tutes an easy target for impact reduc;on. Low-impact electricity 
sources such as wind or solar are men;oned as solu;ons able to reduce the human health costs by 
76% to 96% and by 92% to 99% for global warming impacts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
19 
3.2.4 Transport distances and means of transport  
 
Transporta;on starts to signiﬁcantly contribute to some impacts regarding ecosystem quality, both 
for the GAC and IEX resin when considering the high-end scenarios. In the GAC high-end scenario, the 
sum of transport by sea, by 16-32 metric ton truck and by train represents 34% of the total for ozone 
forma,on (human health and terrestrial ecosystem) and 21% of the impact on terrestrial acidiﬁca,on. 
Compara;vely, transporta;on by the 3.5-7.5 metric ton truck in the baseline GAC scenario 
represented 5% and 3% for the same two impact categories. In the IEX resin high-end scenario, the 
three means of transport account for 35% of the total for ozone forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem) and 
24% of the impact on terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, compared to 6% and 4%, respec;vely, for transporta;on 
by the 3.5-7.5 metric ton truck in the baseline case. (Fig. 3b, S3)  
This is due to the increase in transport distances, quan;ty of goods transported and subsequently of 
t.km involved. Indeed, details on emissions from the diﬀerent means of transport suggest that the 
3.5-7.5 metric ton truck chosen in the baseline scenario has the biggest scores per t.km for those 
impact categories. Nitrogen oxides are responsible for most of the impacts for ozone forma,on 
(human health and terrestrial ecosystem) and the truck from the baseline scenarios emits seven, four 
and three ;mes more of that substance than the container ships, train and truck from the high-end 
scenarios, respec;vely. The same is found for terrestrial acidiﬁca,on with higher emissions of both 
sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides for the truck from the baseline scenarios compared to the three 
other means of transport considered in the high-end scenarios. Thus, reducing transport distances as 
well as the weight of goods transported could help minimize the remedia;on impacts on ozone 
forma,on and terrestrial acidiﬁca,on. 
 
3.2.5 Treatment facility  
 
Steel share on the carbon footprint strongly decreases, from 32% and 39% in the baseline scenarios 
to 11% and 12% in the high-end scenarios for the GAC and IEX resin scenarios, respec;vely. (Fig. 2d, 
2e) This is coherent with the assump;on that the same amount of steel will be required while other 
parameters such as quan;ty of adsorbent and transport distances are increased.  
The same tendency is found for the treatment facility share on normalized damage scores. Its shares 
of impacts for the GAC remedia;on decrease, of 25% for global warming, 40% for ﬁne par,culate 
ma1er forma,on and of approximately 30% for both human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic 
toxicity. The same conclusions are found for the IEX resin remedia;on, with the treatment facility 
shares of impacts decreasing of 33% for global warming, of 59% for ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on, 
and of approximately 35% for both human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxicity. (Fig. S3b) 
When it comes to ecosystem quality, global warming (terrestrial ecosystem), terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, 
freshwater eutrophica,on and ozone forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem) are s;ll the most aﬀected 
impact categories, regardless of the adsorbent considered. For the GAC scenario, the treatment 
facility shares on the total scores highly decrease, of 27% for terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, of 39% for 
freshwater eutrophica,on and of 30% for ozone forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem). The same 
reduc;on is obtained between the IEX resin scenarios, with the treatment facility shares decreasing 
of 43% for terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, of 58% for freshwater eutrophica,on and of 37% for ozone 
forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem). (Fig. S3b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
20 
3.3 Sensi4vity analyses 
 
3.3.1 Adsorbent amounts  
 
Sensi;vity calcula;ons on GAC quan;ty in the baseline case highlight that six impact categories show 
medium sensi;vity, namely terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, global warming, ﬁne par,culate ma1er 
forma,on, ozone forma,on and freshwater eutrophica,on. (Table S3) Moving on to the high-end 
scenario, medium sensi;vity is added for stratospheric ozone deple,on, land use and water 
consump,on while ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on shows low sensi;vity. (Table S6) Ozone 
forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem) and terrestrial acidiﬁca,on move to large sensi;vity. Thus, if similar 
LCA studies are to be conducted for this type of remedia;on, it is important to assess the quan;ty of 
GAC as accurately as possible in order to have realis;c impact results. Fewer categories are sensi;ve 
to the quan;ty of resin with only stratospheric ozone deple,on being largely sensi;ve. (Table S4) 
Under high-end scenario condi;ons, water consump,on shows medium sensi;vity. (Table S7) 
 
3.3.2 Transport distances  
 
With respect to transport distances in the baseline cases, calcula;ons show that no impact category 
has signiﬁcant sensi;vity. (Table S5) When it comes to high-end scenarios, medium sensi;vity is found 
for ozone forma,on (human health and terrestrial ecosystem) with respect to sea transporta;on for 
both the GAC and IEX resin scenarios. (Table S8a, S8b) Findings regarding train transport distances 
suggest that no impact category is signiﬁcantly sensi;ve. (Table S9) While distances have been 
es;mated and come with important uncertain;es, the sensi;vity analyses suggest that it is fair to 
assume that the remedia;on impacts would not be dras;cally diﬀerent compared to their ini;al 
values if transport distances were to be changed one at a ;me, and keeping other parameters 
unchanged.  
 
3.4 Groundwater remedia4on scenarios  
 
3.4.1 Overall carbon footprint and non-renewable primary energy comparison of the 
groundwater and unsaturated zone remedia)ons 
 
The remedia;on impact per cubic meter of water treated is strongly decreased when the installa;on 
is used to its full capacity. Clean-up with GAC drops from 96 MJ/m3 to 7 MJ/m3 and from 4 kgCO2e/m3 
to 0.5 kgCO2e/m3. Similarly, the cost of the remedia;on based on IEX resin drops from 85 MJ/m3 to 5 
MJ/m3 and from 3 kgCO2e/m3 to 0.3 kgCO2e/m3. This is observed even though the impacts increase 
in absolute values. Indeed, the non-renewable primary energy impact of groundwater treatment 
compared to the unsaturated zone remedia;on is 2.2 and 1.8 ;mes bigger for the GAC and IEX resin 
scenarios, respec;vely. The carbon footprint is also larger, 3.6 ;mes for GAC and 2.5 ;mes for IEX 
resin.  
 
3.4.2 IEX resin comparison with GAC 
 
Comparing the two technologies with the higher pumping rate, it becomes more evident that the 
resin performs bemer, with more signiﬁcantly lower impacts compared to the baseline unsaturated 
zone treatment scenarios. More speciﬁcally, for groundwater remedia;on the GAC scenario has 1.4 
bigger impact in terms of non-renewable primary energy and 2.1 ;mes bigger impact in terms of CO2e 
compared to the IEX resin scenario – these ra;os were only equal to 1.1 and 1.5 for the unsaturated 
zone treatment. (Fig 2c, 2f) The disposal of the resin accounts for a signiﬁcant share of that diﬀerence, 
==PAGE:21==
 
21 
highligh;ng that speciﬁc processes for the spent resin end-of-life are important in order to minimize 
its impact compared to a more mainstream hazardous waste incinera;on – as discussed in sec;on 
3.2.2. Those processes exist but are not reﬂected in the Ecoinvent database for resin used for PFAS 
removal. Dixit et al. (2021) highlights that given the environmental burden of resin produc;on, 
regenera;on and reuse are desirable from an environmental perspec;ve. Diﬀerent protocols exist 
corresponding to diﬀerent resins, yet their study insists on the fact that knowledge on the safe 
treatment and disposal of the PFAS-laden brine s;ll lacks and that future studies should focus on this 
mamer.  
Normalized damage scores are also increased when full pumping capacity is considered compared to 
the baseline for all impact categories and for both scenarios, yet not to the same extent. The increase 
in relevant impact categories is generally more important in the GAC scenario, namely for ﬁne 
par,culate forma,on, ozone forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem), terrestrial acidiﬁca,on and freshwater 
eutrophica,on for which damage scores are mul;plied by three - and almost four for terrestrial 
acidiﬁca,on – for the GAC scenario while they are increased by a factor two for the IEX resin 
remedia;on. Remarkably, the score for stratospheric ozone deple,on is mul;plied by close to seven 
for the IEX resin scenario while only by two for the GAC scenario. However, impacts in that category 
are not signiﬁcant compared to other categories men;oned above. (Fig. S4) 
 
3.4.3 Adsorbents and treatment facility contribu)ons to impacts 
 
The adsorbent itself becomes responsible for a bigger share of the overall impact, which is coherent 
with the increased consump;on of GAC and IEX resin, as more water is treated. Indeed, PFOS 
concentra;ons in water pumped from the unsaturated zone and groundwater are in the same range, 
being equal to 19ug/L and 23ug/L, respec;vely.  No signiﬁcant dilu;on of the contaminant is observed 
in the surrounding area considered for the groundwater remedia;on, thus more mass of PFOS is 
treated for a given period – in one month and considering that the PFOS concentra;ons remain 
unchanged, 36 ;mes more mass of PFOS is treated in the groundwater remedia;on compared to the 
unsaturated zone remedia;on.  
The GAC accounts for 44% and the IEX resin for 42% of the non-renewable primary energy compared 
to 14% and 11% in the baseline scenarios, respec;vely. The same goes for their end-of-life, accoun;ng 
for 13% and 0.8% compared to 4% and 0.2% respec;vely. (Fig. 2a, 2c) With regard to their carbon 
footprints, GAC and IEX resin both represent 47% compared to 24% and 17%, respec;vely, and their 
disposal accounts for 35% and 20% compared to 18% and 7%, respec;vely. (Fig. 2d, 2f) 
Conversely, the shares of steel and treatment facility on overall impacts greatly decrease. Steel 
contribu;on on non-renewable primary energy decreases from 17% and 16% to 8% and 9% for GAC 
and IEX resin, respec;vely. (Fig. 2a, 2c) The carbon footprint amributable to steel is reduced by 23% 
for both the GAC and IEX resin scenarios. (Fig. 2d, 2f) 
The same can be observed regarding normalized damages. For all the most aﬀected impact 
categories, GAC represents a bigger share while the share of the treatment facility decreases. GAC 
thus accounts for 57% of the global warming score and 72% of ﬁne par,culate ma1er forma,on, 
compared to 25% and 32%, respec;vely. For the same categories, the treatment facility shares go 
down to 13% and 16% compared to 39% and 50%, respec;vely. (Fig. S4b) 
With regard to ecosystem quality, the same analysis is obtained, with GAC represen;ng 78% of the 
impact on terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, compared to 41% in the baseline, 56% for freshwater 
eutrophica,on compared to 22% and 66% for ozone forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem) compared to 
29%. Similar results are found for the IEX resin scenario at full pumping rate. Nonetheless, the resin 
represents a less important share of the impacts for some impact categories, notably for ﬁne 
par,culate ma1er forma,on and terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, for which it accounts for 39% and 48% of 
the total scores – the source of these gaps is discussed in sec;on 3.1.2. (Fig. S4b)  
==PAGE:22==
 
22 
The impact of the remedia;on is thus more directly linked to the actual technology used to remove 
PFOS. The op;miza;on of the choice of adsorbent would be an interes;ng way to reduce the life cycle 
impacts of the remedia;on in terms of non-renewable primary energy, carbon footprint and regarding 
the most aﬀected impact categories presented above.  
 
3.5 Overall implica4ons for the technologies and future work 
 
The present study suggests that the adsorp;on capacity of both GAC and IEX resin towards PFAS is an 
important parameter that should be op;mized. The quan;ty of adsorbent required per volume 
treated could thus be reduced, along with the remedia;on life cycle impacts. Research focusing on 
reac;va;on and regenera;on of PFAS impacted GAC and IEX resin could further decrease those 
impacts if environmentally-friendly protocols are found to be eﬃcient. Besides, future research could 
help iden;fy processes with the lowest impacts for the disposal of spent adsorbent, while s;ll 
mee;ng the safety and eﬃciency requirements.  
The sizing of the tanks would beneﬁt from a reduc;on of the quan;ty of adsorbent too, leading to a 
reduc;on of the impact amributable to the treatment facility. Materials screening is also a lead to ﬁnd 
poten;al subs;tutes for steel that would have lower life cycle impacts on the environment and human 
health. The reuse of some treatment facility components is also an interes;ng avenue that could be 
evaluated further.   
With regard to sonolysis, more accurate assessment would be interes;ng. This would require more 
data on poten;al op;miza;ons of the upscaling.  
Future technology comparison could also include the costs of each scenario, as it is a cri;cal criterion 
that inﬂuences the choice of one method over another one. The impacts of a no ac;on scenario would 
be interes;ng to inves;gate to capture the adverse eﬀects of PFAS at the site and assess the poten;al 
net environmental beneﬁt of the remedia;on (Owsianiak et al., 2013). Upcoming studies could focus 
on collec;ng data on exposure – e.g., area aﬀected, people and ecosystem in the surroundings, 
exposure pathways – to quan;fy the risks linked to the contamina;on.  
Lastly, studies are needed to include other PFAS, notably shorter-chain ones as they seem to be more 
challenging to remove and as their toxicity and poten;al eﬀects are not as documented as they are 
for PFOS. As men;oned, more regula;ons can be expected in the future for those compounds. 
Besides, short-chain PFAS are reported to be intermediate products of longer-chain PFAS degrada;on, 
poin;ng out that their monitoring is a cri;cal issue (Gagliano et al., 2019; Leung et al., 2022).  
Overall, PFAS remedia;on is s;ll a serious challenge and research is crucial to develop more eﬃcient 
and sustainable ways to deal with their pervasive presence in the environment.  
 
4.Conclusion 
 
This study suggests that LCA provides relevant insights into PFOS remedia;on impacts on the 
environment and human health. The current GAC installa;on for the unsaturated zone remedia;on 
has the biggest impacts on global warming (human health and terrestrial ecosystem), ﬁne par,culate 
ma1er forma,on, human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxicity, terrestrial acidiﬁca,on, ozone 
forma,on (terrestrial ecosystem), freshwater eutrophica,on and land use. Impact scores are mainly 
amributable to the GAC material, its disposal and the treatment facility.  
Findings show that the use of IEX resin is overall slightly less harmful compared to GAC, par;cularly if 
the resin eﬃciency and end-of-life are op;mized. Even though sonolysis seems to be an appealing 
process as it is a destruc;ve technology, it is clearly not viable to implement in prac;ce due to the 
amount of electricity it requires. 
The scenario and sensi;vity analyses highlight that the electricity consump;on can become one of 
the main contributors and increase impact scores in the most aﬀected impact categories, depending 
==PAGE:23==
 
23 
on the electricity mix. Results also show that transporta;on impacts on terrestrial acidiﬁca,on and 
ozone forma,on mamer when the remedia;on involves more remote loca;ons for goods 
transporta;on, thus increasing the amount of t.km. Sensi;vity index calcula;ons point out that the 
most aﬀected impact categories are sensi;ve to the quan;ty of GAC. Precise assessment of that 
parameter is therefore required in order to have the most realis;c evalua;on of impacts.  
Finally, results for the groundwater remedia;on scenarios show that the adsorbents become the main 
contributors to the most aﬀected impact categories while the shares of steel and treatment facility 
decrease. Altogether, the IEX resin scenario remains the one with the lowest impacts. Findings also 
suggest that the use of the installa;on to its built-in capacity is key in order to lower the overall impact 
per cubic meter treated compared to the unsaturated zone remedia;on. Thus, accurate sizing of the 
tanks, and choice of pumps adapted to the targeted pumping rate seem to be important 
considera;ons when planning the remedia;on.  
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
I would like to thank my supervisors Annika Sidelmann Fjordbøge and Olivier Jolliet for their 
invaluable support and guidance throughout my master thesis.  
I would also like to thank Søren Dyreborg, Anders G. Christensen and Klaus Weber from Niras for their 
insighxul input and support. I am most grateful for all the resources they provided and ;me they gave 
for this project.  
In addi;on, I would like to thank my family and friends for their love and support during my studies.  
Finally, I am thankful to all the par;cipants in my studies, for their ;me and willingness to share their 
knowledge and experiences.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
24 
References 
 
J. Horst, J. McDonough, I. Ross, M. Dickson, J. Miles, J. Hurst, P. Storch (2018). Water Treatment 
Technologies for PFAS: The Next Genera;on. Groundwater Monitoring Remedia,on 38(2), 13-23. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1111/gwmr.12281 
 
T. Pancras, G. Schrauwen, T. Held, K. Baker, I. Ross, H. Slenders (2016). Environmental fate and eﬀects 
of poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Concawe - Environmental Science for the European 
Reﬁning Industry 
 
E. Gagliano, M. Sgroi, P. P. Falciglia, F. G. A. Vgliasindi, P. Roccaro (2019). Removal of poly- and 
perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from water by adsorp;on: Role of PFAS chain length, eﬀect of 
organic mamer and challenges in adsorbent regenera;on. Water Research 171. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115381 
 
EFSA Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain, D. Schrenk, M. Bignami, L. Bodin, J.K. Chipman, J. 
del Mazo, B. Grasl-Kraupp, C. Hogstrand, L.R. Hoogenboom, J.C. Leblanc, C.S. Nebbia, E. Nielsen, E. 
Ntzani, A. Petersen, S. Sand, C. Vleminckx, H. Wallace, L. Barregård, S. Ceccatelli, J.P. Cravedi, T.I. 
Halldorsson, L.S. Haug, N. Johansson, H.K. Knutsen, M. Rose, A.C. Roudot, H.V. Loveren, G. Vollmer, 
K. Mackay, F. Riolo, T. Schwerdtle. (2020). Risk to human health related to the presence of 
perﬂuoroalkyl substances in food. EFSA Journal 18(9). hmps://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2020.6223 
 
S. Brendel, E. Femer, C. Staude, L. Vierke, A. Biegel-Engler (2018). Short-chain perﬂuoroalkyl acids: 
environmental concerns and a regulatory strategy under REACH. Environmental Sciences Europe 30. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-018-0134-4 
 
ECHA (2023). Per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS), How are PFAS regulated in the EU. 
hmps://echa.europa.eu/hot-topics/perﬂuoroalkyl-chemicals-pfas 
 
Heads of EPA Australia and New Zealand (2020). PFAS Na;onal Environmental Plan Version 2.0. 
hmps://www.environment.gov.au/protec;on/publica;ons/pfas-nemp-2 
 
S.C.E. Leung, P. Shukla, D. Chen, E. ELerkhari, H. An, F. Zare, N. Ghasemi, D. Zhang, N.-T Nguyen, Q. Li 
(2022). Emerging technologies for PFOS/PFOA degrada;on and removal: A review. Science of the 
Total Environment 827. hmp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153669 
 
M. Moeini, K. Modaresahmadi, T. Tran, K.R. Reddy (2022). Sustainability assessment of PFAS 
adsorbents for groundwater remedia;on. Materials Today: Proceedings 60, 2209-2216. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.03.014 
 
ITRC (2021). PFAS Technical and Regulatory Guidance Document, Table 12-1. Liquid technologies – 
Remedia;on and methods comparison. 
 
H. Cao, W. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Liang (2020). Sonochemical degrada;on of poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl 
substances – A review. Ultrasonics – Sonochemistry 69. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2020.105245 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
25 
I. Emery, D. Kempisty, B. Fain, E. Mbonimpa (2019). Evalua;on of treatment op;ons for well water 
contaminated with perﬂuorinated alkyl substances using life cycle assessment. The interna,onal 
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 24, 117-128. hmps://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-018-1499-8 
 
D. Maga, V. Aryan, S. Bruzzano (2021). Environmental Assessment of Various End-of-Life Pathways 
for Trea;ng Per- and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances in Spent Fire-Ex;nguishing Waters. Environmental 
Toxicology and Chemistry 40(3), 947-957. hmps://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4803 
 
T. H. Boyer, A. Ellis, Y. Fang, C. E. Schaefer, C. P. Higgins, T. J. Strathmann (2021). Life cycle 
environmental impacts of regenera;on op;ons for anion exchange resin remedia;on of PFAS 
impacted water. Water Research 207. hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.117798 
 
D. Feng, C. Song, W. Mo (2021). Environmental, human health, and economic implica;ons of landﬁll 
leachate treatment for per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substance removal. Journal of Environmental 
Management 289. hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112558 
 
V. Franke, P. McCleaf, K. Lindegren, L. Ahrens (2019). Eﬃcient removal of per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl 
subtsances (PFASs) in drinking water treatment: nanoﬁltra;on combined with ac;ve carbon or 
anion exchange. Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology 5(11), 1836-1843. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1039/C9EW00286C 
Z. Du, S. Deng, Y. Bei, Q. Huang, B. Wang, J. Huang, G. Yu (2014). Adsorp;on behavior and 
mechanism of perﬂuorinated compounds on various adsorbents – A review. Journal of Hazardous 
Materials 274, 443-454. hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.04.038 
 
V. L. Gole, A. Fishgold, R. Sierra-Alvarez, P. Deymier, M. Keswani (2017). Treatment of 
perﬂuorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) using a large-scale sonochemical reactor. Separa,on and 
Puriﬁca,on Technology 194, 104-110. hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2017.11.009 
 
S. Woodard, J. Berry, B. Newman (2017). Ion exchange resin for PFAS removal and pilot test 
comparison to GAC. Remedia,on 27(3), 19-27. hmps://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21515 
 
V. Ochoa-Herrera, R. Sierra-Alvares (2008). Removal of perﬂuorinated surfactants by sorp;on onto 
granular ac;vated carbon, zeolite and sludge. Chemosphere 72(10), 1588-1593. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.04.029 
 
F. Laramay, M. Crimi (2020a). Theore;cal evalua;on of chemical and physical feasibility of an in situ 
ultrasonic reactor for remedia;on of groundwater contaminated with per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl 
substances. Remedia,on 31(1), 45-58. hmps://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21666 
 
F. Laramay, M. Crimi (2020b). A sustainability assessment of an in situ ultrasonic reactor for 
remedia;on of PFAS-contaminated groundwater. Remedia,on 31(1), 59-72. 
hmps://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21667 
 
F. Dixit, R. Duma, B. Barbeau, P. Berube, M. Mohseni (2021). PFAS removal by ion exchange resins: A 
review. Chemosphere 272. hmps://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.129777 
 
M. Owsianiak, G. Lemming, M. Z. Hauschild, P. L. Bjerg (2013). Assessing Environmental 
Sustainability of Remedia;on Technologies in a Life Cycle Perspec;ve is Not So Easy. Environmental 
Science & Technology 47(3), 1182-1183. hmps://doi.org/10.1021/es305279t 
==PAGE:26==
 
26 
Appendix  
 
A1. Current remedia4on facility simpliﬁed diagram 
 
 
Fig S1. Remedia;on facility simpliﬁed diagram 
Figure S1 presents a simpliﬁed diagram of the current facility for the unsaturated zone remedia;on.  
It has been drawn based on documents shared by the consultants in charge of the site (Niras, 2023).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
27 
A2. Pumping and electricity consump4on calcula4ons  
 
The pump currently used at the site has a capacity of 2m3/hour, corresponding to the SQE 2-50 NE 
Grundfos pump. Data indicate that over 1094 days 14 818 kWh have been consumed at the site, giving 
for 21 years an electricity consump;on of 104 105 kWh (Niras, 2023). The small es;mate diﬀerence 
– of 285 kWh - with the consump;on presented in Table 1 comes from the fact that the dura;on of 
21 years is es;mated as 21 years x 12 months x 30.5 days here, whereas for Table 1 it is es;mated as 
21 years x 365 days. 
 
 
Fig.S2. SQE 2-50 NE pump power as a func;on of ﬂow rate 
Figure S2 presents the power of the pump as a func;on of the pumping ﬂow rate.  
 
From the curve the share of electricity consump;on amributable to the pumping itself can be 
determined as follows.  
P2=f(Q) curve at 0.3m3/hour: power of 0.44 kW and power factor of 1. 
For 21 years: 81 164 kWh approximately 78% of the overall electricity consump;on. 
Electricity consump;on for other general opera;ons: 22 941 kWh.  
The electricity consump;on required for pumping at the maximum rate can then be calculated for 
the groundwater treatment scenario.  
P2=f(Q) curve at 2m3/hour: power of 0.545 kW and power factor of 1 
For 21 years: 100 533 kWh approximately giving a total electricity consump;on of 123 474 kWh. 
 
Smaller constant pumping rate 
Calcula;ons are made to es;mate the electricity consump;on amributable to pumping if a smaller 
pump is used at constant rate instead of the intermiment pumping that is currently performed.  
==PAGE:28==
 
28 
The 48.83m3 of water pumped per month correspond to 0.067m3/hour, giving approximately 
67L/hour or 1L/min.  
The SafeLeaf AI P1M 1L/min pump and its speciﬁca;ons are used for calcula;ons.  
1-Phase 0.035 kW  
For 21 years: 6 456 kWh approximately giving a total electricity consump;on of 29 397 kWh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
29 
A3. Groundwater treatment calcula4ons: GAC adsorp4on capacity 
 
The mean PFOS concentra;on in groundwater is calculated to be 22 899 ng/L from shared data 
from the consultants in charge of the remedia;on. Concentra;ons taken into account are found 
within a 110m radius from the well with the highest PFOS concentra;on.  
 
Isotherm equa;ons for perﬂuorinated compounds from Ochoa-Herrera et al. (2008) are used to 
es;mate GAC’s corresponding adsorp;on capacity. Equa;ons’ constants are speciﬁc to PFOS.  
In the following equa;ons:  
Cs: concentra;on of solu;on in solid phase (mg PFCg-1 sorbent) 
Ce: equilibrium concentra;on of the solute in solu;on (mg PFCl-1) 
PCF: perﬂuorinated  
 
Langmuir isotherm 
Cs = (a.b.Ce)/(1+b.Ce) 
a: maximum achievable surface concentra;on of the solute [mg PFOS / g sorbent] 
b: equilibrium constant for sorp;on reac;on [L / mg PFOS] 
 
Table.S1. Langmuir isotherm’s constants reported by Ochoa-Herrera et al. (2008) for PFOS and 
calculated solid phase concentra;on 
a [mg PFOS / g sorbent] 
b [L / mg PFOS] 
Cs [mg/g GAC] 
196.2 
0.068 
0.31 
211.6 
0.08 
0.39 
236.4 
0.124 
0.67 
-0.245 
-29.71 
0.52 
 
Freundlich isotherm  
Cs =KF.Cen 
KF: Freundlich adsorp;on constant or capacity factor [(mg FPOS / g sorbent) (mg PFAS/L)-n] 
n: Freundlich exponent, measure for sorp;on intensity  
 
Table.S2. Freundlich isotherm’s constants reported by Ochoa-Herrera et al. (2008) for PFOS and 
calculated solid phase concentra;on 
KF 
n 
Cs [mg/g GAC] 
38.5 
0.332 
10.99 
36.7 
0.371 
9.04 
60.9 
0.289 
20.45 
25.9 
1.123 
0.37 
 
The lowest adsorp;on capacity is chosen to have a conserva;ve approach. Thus, it is assumed that 
0.31 mg/g GAC is achievable. With a pumping rate of 2m3/hour, approximately 1099 mg PFOS/day 
are pumped, giving a GAC consump;on of 3.6 kg/day and 27 620 kg for the whole remedia;on.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
30 
A4. Normalized damages and contribu4ons graphs 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.S3 Normalized damages for the GAC and IEX resin baseline, IEX resin maximum eﬃciency and 
GAC and IEX resin high-end scenarios: a) Normalized scores in log scale, b) Processes contribu;ons  
For each impact category, the ﬁve bars correspond to the GAC baseline, the IEX resin baseline, the 
IEX resin maximum eﬃciency, the GAC high-end and the IEX high-end scenarios, respec;vely.  The 
abbrevia;on EC in the impact categories’ names stands for ecosystem. Contributors men;oned in 
the legend correspond to the elements men;oned in Table 1. 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
31 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S4 Normalized damages for the baseline and groundwater treatment scenarios: a) Normalized 
scores in log scale, b) Processes contribu;ons  
For each impact category, the four bars correspond to the GAC baseline, the IEX resin baseline, the 
GAC groundwater treatment and the IEX resin groundwater treatment scenarios, respec;vely.  The 
abbrevia;on EC in the impact categories’ names stands for ecosystem. Contributors men;oned in 
the legend correspond to the elements men;oned in Table 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
32 
A5. Sensi4vity index calcula4ons (Baseline scenarios) 
 
The sensi;vity index is calculated according to the following equa;on: 
!!",$ =
∆$% $%
&
∆'$ '$
&
 
 
Where ak is the default value of the parameter under study, IS is the calculated impact score for ak, 
Δak is the parameter’s change and ΔIS is the change of that score resul;ng from the perturba;on of 
ak.  
 
Table S3. Sensi;vity analysis results for quan;ty of GAC 
 
Table S3 presents the sensi;vity index results when the amount of GAC is increased by 500 kg, 
corresponding to one tank.  
 
Table S4. Sensi;vity analysis results for quan;ty of IEX resin 
 
 
Table S4 presents the sensi;vity index results when the amount of IEX resin is increased by 250 kg. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
33 
Table S5a. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances – GAC scenario 
 
 
Table S5b. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances – IEX resin scenario 
 
 
Table S5c. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances – Sonolysis scenario 
 
Table S5a,b and c present the sensi;vity index results when the transport distances are increased to 
650km, corresponding to the distance between Jönköping and Hamburg for the GAC, IEX resin and 
sonolysis scenarios, respec;vely.  
==PAGE:34==
 
34 
A6. Sensi4vity index calcula4ons (High-end scenarios) 
 
Table S6. Sensi;vity analysis results for quan;ty of GAC in the high-end scenario 
 
 
Table S7. Sensi;vity analysis results for quan;ty of IEX resin in the high-end scenario 
 
 
Table S8a. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances by sea – GAC high-end scenario 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
35 
Table S8b. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances by sea– IEX resin high-end scenario 
 
 
Table S8c. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances by sea – Sonolysis high-end scenario 
 
 
Table.S8.a,b and c present the sensi;vity index results when the transport distances by sea are 
increased by 10% - chosen as a realis;c default perturba;on value.  
 
Table S9a. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances by train – GAC high-end scenario 
==PAGE:36==
 
36 
 
 
Table S9b. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances by train – IEX resin high-end scenario 
 
 
Table S9c. Sensi;vity analysis results for transport distances by train – Sonolysis high-end scenario  
 
 
Table S9a,b and c present the sensi;vity index results when the transport distances by sea are 
increased by 10% - chosen as a realis;c default perturba;on value. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
37 
A7. Manufacturers’ documenta4on  
 
 
Densi&es 
 
-Resin density 
SubsTech: h2ps://www.substech.com/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=weak_anion_exchange_resin 
-Sand 
Ahmed (2023). Silica Sand for Water FiltraKon. Cairo Minerals: h2ps://cairominerals.com/silica-sand-water-
ﬁltraKon/  
-Quartz  
Phillip Technologies: h2ps://www.philliptech.com/knowledgebase/density-quartz-crystal/ 
 
Tanks  
 
-Steel tanks 
Ultraﬁlter: h2ps://www.ultra-ﬁlter.com/ss316v01000-11/tank-1000-l-ss316l-ped--verKcal--11-bar/ 
Cargostore: h2ps://cargostore.com/dnv-half-height-containers/ 
Container Traders : h2ps://containertraders.com.au/shipping-container-dimensions-sizes/20V-half-height 
-PE tank  
Simop: 
h2ps://www.simop.com/media/original/9/4/e/d/94ed68666dc0a1e1fc9b04e9624d2b464afc169a_FR6327.p
df 
-Resin tanks 
Thielmann: h2ps://www.thielmann.com/en/products/small-industrial-containers/asme-pressure-vessels/ion-
exchange-vessels 
 
Pumps and valves  
 
-SQE 2-50 NE  
Grundfos pump: h2ps://product-selecKon.grundfos.com/my/products/sqe-ne/sqe-2-50-ne-
97778404?tab=variant-speciﬁcaKons&pumpsystemid=2084956011 
-AI P1M 1L/min compact peristalKc pump ETL 
SafeLeaf: h2ps://www.safeleaf.ca/product/ai-p1m-1l-min-compact-peristalKc-pump-etl/ 
-Grundfos: h2ps://product-selecKon.grundfos.com/products/ch/ch-2/ch-2-40-43501104?tab=variant-
speciﬁcaKons&pumpsystemid=2045016083 
h2ps://www.lenntech.com/grundfos/SPFAM/8007409/SP-1A-9.html 
-Pompes direct: h2ps://www.pompes-direct.com/accessoire-hydraulique/vanne-robinet/laiton/vanne-a-
sphere-laiton-poignee-bleue-ﬀ-1/52351.html 
-Watson Marlow: h2ps://www.wmVs.com/en/biopharm-products/asepco/sample-valves/sample-valves/ 
-Raptor supplies: 
h2ps://www.raptorsupplies.dk/pd/apollo/30lf00301pr?acc_typ=rp_denmark&campaign_id=11999194264&c
ampaign_network=g&device=c&keyword=&matchtype=&utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&gclid=Cjw
KCAiAxvGfBhB-EiwAMPakqsU4rVqHsjVdipnY23W8Kr11q-Ffr0yfFtno7sEt0B_4GMqylvMfuxoCFEAQAvD_BwE 
-Oshwin: h2ps://www.oshwin.com/l-port-ball-valve.html 
 
Pipes  
 
-Metallic pipes  
Flamco: h2ps://ﬂamcogroup.com/media/ﬁles/documentaKon/doc_exp_dimensionsandweightstubes.pdf 
-PlasKc pipes  
The Engineering Toolbox: h2ps://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/pe-pipe-weights-d_324.html 
 
