==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Machine learning guided de novo design of
cross-reactive α-neurotoxin inhibitors
Vlad Rosca1 and Timothy Patrick Jenkins∗1
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Søltofts Plads, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
June 30, 2023
∗Correspondence: tpaje@dtu.dk
1
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my main supervisor Timothy Patrick Jenkins, who has
always been patient and understanding with me, and without whom this project would not be possible.
Besides involving me in this extremely exciting cutting-edge field of research, he has always inspired and
supported me in taking those steps outside my comfort zone that helped me grow both as a person and
as a researcher. I am also really thankful to Mads Damgaard Pederson, who has spread his excitement
towards protein design field and has assisted me for the most part of this project in understanding and
applying the computational protein design concepts. Many thanks to Thomas Fryer, who has provided
me with a lot of inspirational ideas and helped me stay up to date with the current protein engineering
research. I really enjoyed my time in the Digital Biotechnology Lab especially because I was in a company
of great like-minded students Abril Diosdado, Charlotte Risager, Darian Wolff, Jann Ledergerber, and
Oliver Morell, with whom, along with the ones mentioned above, we shared a great deal of knowledge,
even more laughs, as well as exciting climbing and running challenges.
2
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Snake Venom Toxins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Current Treatments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
de novo protein design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Structure prediction models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Hallucination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.3
Diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.4
In silico evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Methods
11
2.1
Installation of software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Design of the constructs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Procedure for hallucination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Procedure for diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Estimation of cross-reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
15
3.1
Hallucination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Discussion
25
4.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Conclusion
28
A Scripts for automation of RFDesign and RFdiffusion
32
3
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
De novo protein design is a rapidly advancing field that involves the creation of novel proteins from
scratch, using computational optimization and structure prediction techniques, instead of completely
relying on naturally occurring protein structures [1]. The primary objective of de novo protein design is
to create proteins that have specific functional properties such as interaction with specific targets, folding
into desired topologies, and stabilization of specific functional motifs [1][2][3].
For a long time, de novo protein design was a challenging and elusive task due to the lack of accurate
structure prediction tools. Predicting the 3D structure of a protein from its amino acid sequence is a
complex and computationally demanding problem. However, in recent years, the field of structural biology
has been transformed by the development of powerful structure prediction tools such as Alphafold2 [4]
and RosettaFold [5] that predict the structure of a protein with remarkable accuracy.
These breakthroughs have paved the way for the creation of novel de novo protein design tools
like RFDesign and RFDiffusion, which are built on machine learning models called hallucination [3][2]
and diffusion [6], respectively. These tools have demonstrated very promising results when the generated
proteins were tested in vitro, showing they are capable of successfully interacting with target molecules and
exhibiting desired functional properties [3][2][6]. This success highlights the potential of de novo protein
design tools to create tailored proteins for specific needs and applications, including the development of
therapeutics.
Disease areas that either require binders to hard to work with antigens or a large number of different
binders, e.g. mutating indications such as cancer and infectious diseases or animal venoms that comprise
multitudes of similar and dissimilar toxins, could particularly benefit from de novo design approaches.
One example of potential therapeutic applications for de novo proteins is development of next-generation
antivenoms for the patients who suffered from snakebites. Snake venoms contain toxins that vary in
structures and biological activities. Development of broadly-neutralizing binders against snake venom
toxins remains a challenging task due to their small size, complexity and diversity [7]. De novo protein
design offers a more targeted and potentially efficient approach by creating custom proteins designed
specifically to interact with the toxins. This approach can also reduce the costs associated with screening
large numbers of binders and optimization to have higher binding affinity and specificity.
1.1
Snake Venom Toxins
Snakebite envenoming is a neglected tropical disease resulting from injection of snake venom during a
snakebite [8]. Worldwide, it is estimated that around 2 million people are bitten by snakes every year.
Among those, over 100 000 people are killed, and 400 000 people suffer from permanent injuries. Snake
bite envenoming is a major health problem in the tropical and subtropical climates, especially in the
impoverished areas such as Sub-saharan Africa, South to Southeast Asia, Papua New Guinea and Latin
America.
Symptoms of envenoming range from local damage, that can result in permanent sequela, to systemic
effects including neurotoxicity (e.g. respiratory paralysis), cardiotoxicity, bleeding, thrombosis, rhab-
domyolysis. The active components responsible for the toxicity on the snake venoms are snake venom
toxins. Their compositions vary a lot from species to species. Venomous snakes from the family Viperidae
predominantly cause local effects, whereas snakes from the family Elapidae are usually responsible for
neurotoxic manifestations [7]. Snake venom toxins are proteins secreted in the saliva of venomous snake
species. Snake venom toxins are classified by their structures and biological activities into myotoxins,
cytotoxins, and neurotoxins [7].
One example of neurotoxins commonly present in venoms of snakes of the Elapidae family are α-
neurotoxins. α-neurotoxins belong to the superfamily of three-finger toxins that all share a similar fold
reminiscent of three fingers [9]. Symptoms caused by α-neurotoxins include paralysis, respiratory failure
and death. α-neurotoxins are some of the most complicated targets for development of antivenoms due
to their small size and a very high binding affinity towards towards their target: muscle-type nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (nAChR). α-neurotoxins are small globular proteins that consist of three loops
reminiscent of fingers. There are two types of α-neurotoxins: long-chain and short-chain. The short-
chain toxins contain 60–62 amino acids and have four disulfide bonds. The long-chain toxins consist of
66–75 amino acids and contain an extra disulfide bond in the finger two [9].
α-neurotoxins act as competitive antagonists of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. This prevents the
nAChR from opening the ion channel and contracting the muscle connected to the nerve.
Nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors are ligand-gated ion channels that are present on the skeletal muscle cells in
the neuromuscular junctions, as well as throughout the peripheral and central nervous system. In the
4
==PAGE:5==
case of α-neurotoxins, mainly the muscular receptors are affected. For a muscle to contract, a nerve
signal has to activate it. The signal is transmitted to the muscle cell through the release of molecules
of acetylcholine from the neuron into the synaptic cleft of the neuromuscular junction (figure 1). When
the acetylcholine is released, it binds to the nAChR on the muscle cell which activates the receptor and
opens the ion channel. Ion channel opening creates an excitatory post-synaptic potential that leads to
action potential and contraction throughout the muscle. When α-neurotoxins bind to the nAChR, they
prevent acetylcholine from binding to the receptor, and thus make it impossible to open the ion channel.
As a result, the muscles do not contract. In many cases, diaphragm is paralyzed and leads to respiratory
failure and death.
Fig. 1. Acetylcholine (blue) is released from the vesicles of the neuron into the synaptic cleft. It then
binds to the nAChR (green) on the muscle cell and opens the ion channel, leading to muscle action
potential and contraction. Created with BioRender.com.
Acetylcholine receptor consists of five subunits: two alpha subunits (alpha-gamma and alpha-delta),
beta, gamma, and delta. It has been shown that α-neurotoxins bind to two binding sites on nAChR:
between alpha-gamma and gamma subunits and between alpha-delta and delta subunits (figure 2). [10]
In both binding sites, the interaction with the toxin occurs in a similar manner. The binding pocket in
the receptor mainly consists of two loops: loop C on subunit alpha and loop F on subunits gamma and
delta (figure 2), that all three “finger” loops of the toxin interact with [10]. To neutralize the toxic effects
of α-neurotoxins, it is very important to deliver the treatment fast.
Fig. 2. Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor bound to a short-chain neurotoxin. α subunits in yellow, β
in red, γ in light blue, δ in blue; the toxin in light red. a) Top view, b) Side view, c) Close-up look at
the interaction between the toxins and subunits α and δ. The short-chain neurotoxin in light red, and
α-bungarotoxin in light blue [10].
5
==PAGE:6==
1.2
Current Treatments
Currently, the most common treatment against snake envenoming is polyclonal antibodies produced by
immunization of animals [11]. However, there is very limited data for antivenoms that are capable to
neutralize α-neurotoxins [12] and no data on single binders capable of broadly-neutralizing both short
and long chain neurotoxins.
The current way of antivenom production consists of the following stages: (1) production of the
venom; (2) animal immunization; (3) collection of hyperimmune plasma.
First, the snake venom is
produced through mechanical stimulation of venom glands (milking the snake). Afterwards, the venoms
are used to immunize animals such as horses, sheep, goats or llamas. Venoms of one or several snake
species can be used during immunization to create monospecific or polyspecific antivenoms. The venoms
are typically introduced through repeated subcutaneous injections. The last step includes bleeding the
animal and purifying the antivenom immunoglobulins [11]. The animal’s blood is collected over several
consecutive days, the amount being a percentage of the animal’s body weight. The red blood cells from
the collected samples together with a hydration solution are transfused back to prevent anemia and
dehydration. From the collected blood, the immunoglobulins are purified through various protocols that
can include chromatography, enzyme digestion and protein precipitation.
The conventional approach to antivenom production has multiple drawbacks. First, the currently
available antivenoms are derived directly from animal serum. This comes with several consequences: they
contain non-human antibodies that are immunogenic in the human body; they contain all antibodies that
were present in the collected blood that can target many irrelevant antigens, reducing the specificity; all
this leads to adverse reactions that can be harmful to the patient. Second, with every immunization step,
a different set of antibodies are developed leading to batch variability and lack of control of specificity
of the antivenom. Lastly, the process of immunization takes a long time, is expensive and raises ethical
concerns regarding animal sourcing as it requires continuous animal blood supply.
As an alternative to the convenional way of producing antivenoms, display technologies and recom-
binant production are proposed and being researched. Phage display has been shown to be efficient in
selecting antibodies that have affinity to specific snake venom toxins that are used for screening.
Phage display is an established technique used for development of antibodies against various targets. It
allows for the screening and selection of high-affinity antibodies from large libraries of antibody fragments
displayed on the surface of bacteriophages. A bacteriophage library of antibodies is created from the
immunized animal blood samples. This antibody library is used for screening of toxin binders. In the
process called panning, the library is exposed to the toxin of choice, for example by immobilizing the toxin
on a surface. Toxin-specific phages bind to the toxin and non-specific phages can therefore be washed
away. The phages that had sufficient binding affinity to stay through the washing step can be amplified
and used for subsequent round of selection. Several rounds of panning have been shown to improve the
specificity of selected antibodies. Cross-panning can be used to select for broadly-neutralizing antibodies,
i.e. the antibodies that have binding affinity towards multiple toxins [13][14][15]. Thus, recombinant
technologies eliminate many drawbacks of the conventional approach to develop antivenoms. However,
they require an extensive amount of time and investment that has not been provided due to the lack of
attention and consequently finance towards the snake envenomation problem.
A new way of developing anti-toxin binders that is worth considering is de novo protein design.
Latest machine-learning based tools allow for generating proteins with high affinity towards many targets
of choice.
1.3
de novo protein design
One feature that captured our attention was scaffolding functional sites of interest, creating a de novo
protein that contains a known motif from a natural protein. The idea that was tested in this project
was involved mimicking the binding site of the nAChR receptor by scaffolding the parts of each subunit
involved. To do so, the available models of protein design were investigated.
Latest developed methods of de novo protein design are based on generative AI algorithms, and
the most successful ones to date are hallucination and diffusion models. They are based on the earlier
developed deep learning structure prediction models AlphaFold and RosettaFold.
1.3.1
Structure prediction models
AlphaFold is a novel deep neural network model developed by DeepMind that has revolutionized the field
of structural biology by achieving exceptional accuracy in protein structure prediction. Its significance lies
6
==PAGE:7==
in the ability to quickly generate 3D structure of a protein sequence without going through the difficulties
of experimental measurements. AlphaFold, therefore, has the potential to dramatically improve protein
function understanding and transform diverse areas of biological research, such as drug discovery, enzyme
engineering, and elucidating disease mechanisms [4]. The architecture of AlphaFold network consists of
two main parts. In the first part or the trunk of the network, the amino acid sequence is used to find
reference structures and form a multiple sequence alignment. This MSA is used as input to the neural
network block called Evoform that consists of multiple layers, including attention-based mechanisms
to capture long-range dependencies and interactions within the protein sequence. AlphaFold predicts
the distances between pairs of amino acids and the angles between adjacent amino acids in the protein
chain. These predictions are crucial for determining the 3D arrangement of the protein. In the second
part called the structure module, AlphaFold further refines the initial structure prediction using the
predicted distances, angles, and template-based information. This refinement step iteratively optimizes
the predicted structure to align with physical and chemical principles. Finally, AlphaFold assembles the
refined local structures into a complete 3D protein structure. It optimizes the arrangement of different
secondary structure elements, such as helices and sheets, to generate a coherent structure [4].
Along with the structure itself, there are several additional values in the output of AlphaFold that
are important to take into account. pLDDT, or predicted local distance difference test, is a measure
of confidence for each residue.
pLDDT is valuable for evaluating the quality and confidence of the
predicted protein structures at the local level. It provides insights into the precision of the predicted
atomic positions and helps identify regions of the protein structure that are more or less reliable. pLDDT
is an estimation of the lDDT (local distance difference test), that has been developed for calculation
of accuracy of a structure prediction using an experimental structure of another reference protein. The
pLDDT is not directly calculated through the reference structures in AlphaFold, instead the model was
trained to estimate it, hence "predicted" in the name [16][17].
Another measure of accuracy for the predicted structures is pAE or predicted aligned error. This
is an expected position error between the predicted structure and the true structure calculated. It is
calculated for each residue x, y: when the true and the predicted structures are aligned on residue y, the
pAE is the distance error of the residue x. This metric is useful for estimation of accuracy of both intra-
and inter-domain orientations and positions of residues [16][17].
RoseTTAFold is a deep neural network model for structure prediction, developed by Baek et al.
shortly after AlphaFold’s success on CASP14. Its architecture employs the three-track network, where the
information processing is inter-connected in three levels: one-dimensional sequence level, two-dimensional
distance map level and three-dimensional space coordinate level [5]. This includes a "two-track" network
where information flows in parallel along a 1D sequence alignment track and a 2D track that processes
the information in the form of distance matrix. This two-track network shows better performance than
trRosetta, which was the next-best method after AlphaFold2 in CASP14 (Critical Assessment of Structure
Prediction). The method extends to a third track operating in 3D coordinate space. This track provides a
tighter connection between the sequence, residue-residue distances, orientations, and atomic coordinates.
The architecture allows information to flow back and forth between the 1D sequence, 2D distance map,
and 3D coordinates, enabling the network to reason collectively about relationships within and between
sequences, distances, and coordinates. The connection between the tracks is made through attention
mechanisms similar to AlphaFold’s, as well as through making use of the SE3-Transformers. Performance
of RoseTTAFold is nearly as good as of AlphaFold. The outputs include the distance map of the residues,
the pdb file with the predicted structure as well as the confidence scores pLDDT and pAE [5].
1.3.2
Hallucination
Earlier attempts to use generative hallucination algorithms were made for image generation. The goal of
the studies was to verify whether a classification model trained to recognize specific objects on images
has enough information about the objects to be able to generate its own images of the objects. In other
words, how good would a “perfect” representation of the object according to the deep learning model
be? In the study made by Mordvintsev et al. [18], the image recognition models were fed random noise,
and were programmed to amplify the features they could recognize even if the confidence score was low.
With every iteration, the confidence score increased, and the features became more visually recognizable
too. On different iterations, sometimes the animals were identified differently, which led to the chimeric
creatures [18].
Hallucination in the field of protein design refers to the process of de novo protein generation by
maximizing the output probability of folding in the structure prediction tool. The designs created this
way do not correspond to any existing protein, hence the name “hallucination”. Structure prediction tools
7
==PAGE:8==
trRosetta [2] and RosettaFold [5] have been used for hallucination with a fraction of generated proteins
proven to successfully fold into their respective predicted structures. Similarly to image generation, it
was desired to find out whether the structure prediction tools acquire enough data to be able to create a
realistic protein structure. The protein structure prediction tools also have confidence score outputs for
their predictions. In Anishchenko, I., et al. (2021), the hallucination model using trRosetta is described.
trRosetta’s output is a distance map that is afterwards converted into a structure. The distance map can
be “blurry” or “sharp”: the sharper the distance map is, the more likely the predicted structure is to match
the real structure of the input sequence. Here, the process of protein design works on the Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm built upon trRosetta. It starts from a random amino acid sequence
that is fed into the trRosetta model. The first output is a blurry distance map. In the next step, the
MCMC cycle starts with the introduction of a random mutation to the sequence and a new prediction is
made for the mutated sequence. Based on the difference between the distance map with and without the
mutation, the probability that the mutation will be accepted is calculated through MCMC. It has been
shown that after around 40 000 MCMC iterations, the distance maps for the hallucinated sequences were
as sharp as for the natural proteins [2].
Another algorithm that has been used to design protein sequences is gradient backpropagation. It
was build upon the RoseTTAFold model and was called RFDesign [3]. In this case, the goal was to
design multiple sequences that will fold into a desired structure. First, the structure of interest is fed
into the model and is converted into a distance map. The iterative process starts with a random amino
acid sequence that is fed into RoseTTAFold outputting the predicted distance map.
The prediction
is afterwards compared with the desired structure’s distance map through a specifically developed loss
function.
Using backpropagation through the neural network all the way to the input sequence, the
gradient of the loss is calculated. The iteration ends with generation of an updated amino acid sequence
through a step down the gradient. It was shown that this cycle converged after about 25 iterations for
around 100-residue proteins, requiring an average of 2 minutes of GPU time [3].
RFDesign was improved with additional functionality called constrained hallucination, making it
possible to generate a sequence for a particular motif of the input structure, not necessarily for the full
structure, while the rest of amino acids are first hallucinated randomly and then optimized through the
same process of gradient descent. This is a very exciting feature as it potentially allows to scaffold the
functional motifs of choice in a smaller, easily expressible proteins. Thus, the total loss function for the
constrained hallucination included the motif loss LM that scores the accuracy of the functional site in
the design, the hallucination loss LH that scores how well the hallucinated regions of the design encode
a backbone geometry, and the optional auxiliary loss Laux that is specific to the task [3]:
L = wMLM + wHLH + Laux,
where wM, wH are the weights for the losses, and were typically set to wM = wH = 1.
The motif loss was defined as a negative cross-entropy between the reference and predicted residue-
residue geometric feature distributions p(y):
LM = −
X
y∈{d,ω,θ,φ,θT ,φT }




L
X
i=1
L
X
j̸=i
mij log p
 yij = y0
ij


/


L
X
i=1
L
X
j̸=i
mij




where y ∈

d, ω, θ, φ, θT , φT 	
are distances and orientation angles between the residues. The hallucination
loss is defined as the entropy of renormalized network predictions:
LH =
X
y∈{d,ω,θ,φ,θT ,φT }




L
X
i=1
L
X
j̸=i
(1 −mij) H (ˆp (yij))

/


L
X
i=1
L
X
j̸=i
(1 −mij)




where the entropy is defined as H(p) = P
k pk log pk and ˆp(y) = exp(β log p(y))/ P exp(β log p(y))
One of the important auxiliary loss parameters is rep or repulsion that works together with a protein
structure file of the binding partner of the design. It helps avoid clashes with the binding target of the
design. Thus, repulsion loss gets a high value when there is an overlap between the design and its target
[3].
Usage of hallucination model in RFDesign for binder design requires generation of many designs,
typically from 500 to 10 000.
The designs then have to be relaxed and the side-chains need to be
added. Afterwards, the designed sequences are fed into the AlphaFold model for the scoring purposes.
The structure prediction of AlphaFold is then compared to both the designed structural output from
8
==PAGE:9==
RFDesign, as well as to the template structure used to get the contig. Some of the metrics calculated for
each design are: pLDDT, motif RMSD-AF, RMSD-AF-Design. The meaning of these metrics is explained
in the subsection In silico evaluation [3].
1.3.3
Diffusion
The latest kind of generative models that are used in protein design are diffusion models. They work
by adding noise to the training data in multiple steps and learning to reverse this process, essentially
restoring the lost data from noise. Diffusion algorithm was first used in image generation with such
examples as OpenAI’s DALL-E, Google Imagen, Stable Diffusion.
A de novo protein design tool called RFdiffusion was recently published by Baker’s lab. RFdiffusion
was created by retraining and fine-tuning of the pretrained RoseTTAFold structure prediction model.
RFdiffusion takes a set of coordinates and orientation angles as the input and outputs a protein backbone
structure, without taking into account the sequence at any point. In RFdiffusion, the protein structure
backbone is formed from the 3D coordinates of the Cα atoms and the orientation angles of C, Cα, N
atoms that completely define the positioning of each residue in 3D space [6].
The training process works similarly to the other diffusion models, starting with data preparation
by adding the noise to the backbone structures. For each timestep t = 1, 2, 3, ...T, the 3D coordinates
taken from the previous timestep Xt−1 are noised through the Gaussian noise, and the orientation angles
are noised with Brownian noise. Once the training data was complete, the model was trained to reverse
the process of noising. By taking as the input the predicted position for the backbone ˆXt, it had to
predict the set of coordinates and the orientation angles of the previous noising step Xt−1. The training
loss mainly relied on the MSEFrame loss that represents the dissimilarity between a predicted frame
and the original frame in RF diffusion training. It considers the discrepancy in Cα coordinates and the
deviation in the orientation angles. The model follows the same procedure during the generative process
of protein backbone design: starting with the random set of positional input X0, it predicts the next step
of the reverse noising process ˆX1. Using the feature called self-conditioning, it reiterates the procedure
by predicting position ˆXt using the latest prediction ˆXt+1 as the input until t = T, where T is the total
number of timesteps [6].
1.3.4
In silico evaluation
In order to determine which designs are most likely to be successful binders towards their intended
targets, various structural metrics have been developed and researched. Several in silico metrics have
shown potential to be good predictors of in vitro success.
Root mean square deviation (RMSD) is a widely used measure for comparing the structural similarity
between proteins. It quantifies the average distance between corresponding atoms in two protein struc-
tures, providing an overall measure of their structural differences [19][20]. The computation of RMSD
for protein structural comparisons involves selecting a reference and target structure.
The target is
aligned with the reference, ensuring atom correspondence. Distances between aligned atoms are squared,
averaged, and then square rooted to obtain the RMSD value:
RMSD =
rP d2
i
n
where di is the distance between corresponding atoms in the aligned protein structures, and n is the total
number of aligned atom pairs. RMSD quantifies the average structural difference between the proteins,
aiding in tasks like fold recognition, modeling, and understanding structure-function relationships. Lower
RMSD values indicate higher similarity, while higher values suggest greater differences. RMSD can also
be computed on selected regions of the structures. In the case of receptor mimicking, it is reasonable
to compute the similarity of the motif that is mimicked on the template structure and on the de novo
designed structure. This can be achieved by computing motif RMSD. To calculate motif RMSD, the
motifs of interest are identified and extracted from both protein structures. The two motif structures
are then aligned to maximize their structural overlap.
The distances between corresponding atoms
within the motifs are measured, squared, and averaged, in the same way as in the standard RMSD
calculation. Finally, the square root of the mean squared distances is taken to obtain the motif RMSD
value, representing the average structural deviation between the motifs.
pLDDT, which was mentioned above, has shown some of the best results in highlighting designs that
are likely to fold into stable structures and have affinity [3][6][21]. pLDDT is an estimation of the Cα
local-distance difference test (lDDT-Cα) that is commonly used to assess the local accuracy of a predicted
9
==PAGE:10==
protein structure compared to an experimental structure. The lDDT-Cα score is calculated by comparing
the predicted Cα distances to the corresponding experimental Cα distances[22]. It is computed over all
pairs of atoms in the reference structure at a distance closer than a predefined threshold Ro (called
the inclusion radius), and not belonging to the same residue. For residue pairs (i, j) within a protein
structure, the formula to calculate the Cα distance difference (d) between the predicted and experimental
structures is:
d(i, j) = |dpredicted(i, j) −dexperimental(i, j)|
where dpredicted(i, j) represents the predicted Cα distance between residues i and j, and dexperimental(i, j)
represents the experimental Cα distance between residues i and j. The lDDT-Cα score (lDDTCα) for
residue pairs (i, j) can be calculated as:
lDDTCα(i, j) =
1
1 +

d(i,j)
5
12
This formula quantifies the local distance difference between the predicted and experimental Cα
distances. It assigns a score between 0 and 1 to each residue pair, where a score closer to 1 indicates a
smaller distance difference and a better alignment between the predicted and experimental structures.
To obtain the lDDT-Cα score for the entire protein structure, the lDDTCα scores for all residue pairs (i,
j) are aggregated:
lDDTCα =
P
i,j lDDTCα(i, j)
N
where N is the total number of residue pairs in the protein structure.
The pLDDT value is not directly calculated through the reference structures in AlphaFold, instead
the model was trained to estimate it, hence "predicted" in the name. Selection for designs according
to their pLDDT values below 0.8 have been shown to be improve the likelyhood of expression of stable
designs that fold into the predicted structures [3][6][21][16].
Another measure of accuracy for the predicted structures is pAE or predicted aligned error. This
is an expected position error between the predicted structure and the true structure calculated. It is
calculated for each residue x, y: when the true and the predicted structures are aligned on residue y, the
pAE is the distance error of the residue x. This metric is useful for estimation of accuracy of both intra-
and inter-domain orientations and positions of residues. If the relative position of two domains (distinct
regions) within a protein is confidently predicted by AlphaFold, the PAE values for pairs of residues with
one residue in each domain will be low, generally less than 5 Angstroms. This implies that AlphaFold has
accurately captured the spatial relationship between the domains, resulting in more reliable predictions
[16][17][21][6].
Both RoseTTAFold and AlphaFold have the capability to estimate pLDDT (predicted lDDT) and
pAE (predicted aligned error). As a best practice, it is recommended to use the pLDDT and pAE values
of a model that is different from the one used to generate the design. For instance, if a design was
generated using RFdiffusion, which is based on RoseTTAFold, it is advisable to assess the design using
AlphaFold’s metrics.
By leveraging the pLDDT and pAE values from a different model, researchers
can obtain a more comprehensive evaluation of the design’s structural quality and reliability [3][6][21].
Moreover, according to observations, AlphaFold’s ability to predict de novo structures with high accuracy
is affected when there are no homologous protein sequences available. To provide a reference structure,
Bennett, N. R., et al. (2023) made a version of AlphaFold with the feature called initial guess, where
a reference can be uploaded along with the sequences that are predicted. This feature allows users to
provide an input structure of lower resolution or of a homolog, which serves as an initial estimate for
the protein’s structure. By incorporating this initial guess, AlphaFold’s accuracy in predicting de novo
designs of monomer and heteromer structures significantly improved [21].
These metrics, along with the protein design tools RFDesign and RFdiffusion were used in this project
for the binder generation. The following section will describe the specific procedures concerning these
tools that were used for binder generation.
10
==PAGE:11==
2
Methods
2.1
Installation of software
RFDesign was installed according to the instructions in the GitHub repository [23]. Then the PyRosetta,
a necessary dependency, was installed separately into the same conda environment. Afterwards, several
scripts that relax and score the designed structures had to be modified to be able to run on our computer.
First, Miniconda was installed. Then the GitHub repository was cloned, and the conda environment
installed.
Listing 1: RFDesign installation
git
clone
https :// github.com/ RosettaCommons /RFDesign.git
cd
RFDesign
cd envs
conda
env
create -f SE3 -nvidia.yml
conda
activate SE3 -nvidia
cd ../ hallucination /weights/rf_Nov05
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/rfdesign/weights/BFF_last.pt
cd
../../../ inpainting/weights/
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/rfdesign/weights/ BFF_mix_epoch25 .pt
cd ../..
Then PyRosetta was installed in the same conda environment. An academic account was created, and
an installer fitting the python version and the platform was chosen (PyRosetta4.Release.python39.linux
for our case) and downloaded at https://graylab.jhu.edu/download/PyRosetta4/archive/release/ in the
directory of choice. It is then unpacked and installed:
Listing 2: PyRosetta installation
cd /path/to/PyRosetta/installer/
tar -vjxf
PyRosetta -<version >. tar.bz2
cd PyRosetta -<version >/ setup && python
setup.py
install
AlphaFold parameters were downloaded into the specific path:
Listing 3: Download of AlphaFold parameters
mkdir -p /software/mlfold/alphafold -data/alphafold/params
cd /software/mlfold/alphafold -data/alphafold/params
wget
https :// storage.googleapis.com/alphafold/ alphafold_params_2022 -12 -06. tar
tar -xf
alphafold_params_2022 -12 -06. tar
Next, the script RFDesign/scripts/trfold_relax.sh was modified to work without the SLURM
cluster on our computers. The modified code is found in Appendix A.
The design of binders was carried out in accordance with the protocol in the tutorial for SH3 binder
design at RFDesign GitHub repository [23].
RFdiffusion was installed on HPC nodes available at DTU. The instructions outlined in the GitHub
repository of RFdiffusion were used [6][24].
The code available at the Google Colab notebook of
RFdiffusion [25] was mimicked for installation of the ColabDesign that contains the required Protein-
MPNN and AlphaFold models.
First, Miniconda was installed. Then the GitHub repository was cloned, the weights downloaded and
the conda environment installed:
Listing 4: RFdiffusion installation
git
clone
https :// github.com/ RosettaCommons / RFdiffusion .git
cd
RFdiffusion
mkdir
models
&& cd
models
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion /6 f5902ac237024bdd0c176cb93063dc4 /
Base_ckpt.pt
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion / e29311f6f1bf1af907f9ef9f44b8328b /
Complex_base_ckpt .pt
11
==PAGE:12==
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion /60 f09a193fb5e5ccdc4980417708dbab /
Complex_Fold_base_ckpt .pt
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion /74 f51cfb8b440f50d70878e05361d8f0 /
InpaintSeq_ckpt .pt
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion /76 d00716416567174cdb7ca96e208296 /
InpaintSeq_Fold_ckpt .pt
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion /5532 d2e1f3a4738decd58b19d633b3c3 /
ActiveSite_ckpt .pt
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion /12 fc204edeae5b57713c5ad7dcb97d39 /
Base_epoch8_ckpt .pt
conda
env
create -f env/SE3nv.yml
conda
activate
SE3nv
cd env/ SE3Transformer
pip
install
--no -cache -dir -r requirements .txt
python
setup.py
install
cd ../..
pip
install
-e
conda
activate
SE3nv
Afterwards, the ColabDesign was installed:
Listing 5: ColabDesign installation
pip -q install
git+https :// github.com/sokrypton/ ColabDesign .git@v1 .1.1
ln -s /path/to/python3 .*/dist -packages/ colabdesign
colabdesign
mkdir
params
wget
https :// files.ipd.uw.edu/krypton/schedules.zip
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion /6 f5902ac237024bdd0c176cb93063dc4 /
Base_ckpt.pt
wget
http :// files.ipd.uw.edu/pub/ RFdiffusion / e29311f6f1bf1af907f9ef9f44b8328b /
Complex_base_ckpt .pt
wget
https :// storage.googleapis.com/alphafold/ alphafold_params_2022 -12 -06. tar
tar -xf
alphafold_params_2022 -12 -06. tar -C params
touch
params/done.txt
The conda environment always has to be activated prior to usage of the model. The working directory
has to be the one where the folder "params" is located – otherwise AlphaFold will not detect the model
weights. The command which python can be used to get the /path/to/python/. A code that automates
the generation of a custom number of designs through diffusion, generation of sequences for each design
and AlphaFold prediction for each sequence, was added to the Appendix A. The job script used to run
the job with the diffusion on LSF is also added to the Appendix A.
However, some issues with dependencies arose when trying to use the GPU computation power on
the AlphaFold prediction. For this reason, the Google Colab version was used instead.
2.2
Design of the constructs
Two binder constructs were created using the nAChR complex with the ScNTx available in PDB as 7Z14:
a construct that contains the loop C of α subunit (Loop C construct) and a construct that contains both
the loop C of α subunit and the loop F of δ subunit (Two-loop construct). The regions containing the
loops may be referred to as contig regions or contigs.
The region of the receptor chosen for the Loop C construct was amino acid 186 to amino acid 199 of
the α subunit (D186-199 in 7Z14.pdb): HWVYYTCCPDTPYL. On both sides of this contig, additional
residues were generated to form a scaffold (figure 3a).
The Two-loop construct contained the same region with the loop C: amino acid 186 to amino acid 199
of the α subunit (D186-199 in 7Z14.pdb): HWVYYTCCPDTPYL; as well as the region containing the
loop F, i.e. amino acid 164 to amino acid 199 of the δ subunit (C164-185 in 7Z14.pdb): TDTIDGKDYP-
IEWIIIDPEAFT. Additional residues were generated before, in between, and after the contigs to form a
scaffold. (figure 3b) The contigs in the Two-loop construct were inserted in two ways: with the loop C
being closer to the N-terminus and with the loop F being closer to the N-terminus.
12
==PAGE:13==
Fig. 3. Two constructs for the de novo designed binders. The constructs consist of the contigs loop C
(shown in yellow) and loop F (shown in blue) and the residues forming a scaffold (shown in gray). a)
Loop C construct; b) Versions of the Two-loop construct.
2.3
Procedure for hallucination
For the hallucination method, RFDesign software was used. The inputs for each construct are shown
in table 1. The rest of settings were used as recommended in the hallucination tutorial on RFDesign
GitHub. Each design was generated through 600 steps of gradient descent, cysteine was excluded from
possible amino acids for sequence generation, for rep_pdb parameter, a pdb of the ScNTx alone was
used, other parameters: w_rep = 2, rep_sigma = 4.0, w_rog = 1, rog_thresh = 16.
The output from RFDesign contains both a pdb file with the designed structure and a FASTA file with
the sequence. The pdb files of the designs were relaxed by feeding them into the trfold_relax.sh script.
The designs were afterwards rated through the pyrosetta_metrics.py script. The designed sequences
were also fed into the AlphaFold model through the af2_metrics.py script, and the predictions were
used for design evaluation. For a design to be considered successful, the conditions used in the GitHub
tuorial were used: the pLDDT of the AlphaFold prediction of the designed sequence had to be above 80,
and the motif RMSD between the template structure and the AlphaFold prediction (motif RMSD-AF)
to be less than 1.5.
Table 1: Inputs for binder designs through RFDesign.
Construct
Template pdb
Contig
Force_aa
Total length
Number of designs
Loop C
7Z14
D186-199
D187-198
55-100
201
Two-loop
7Z14
D186-199,C164-185
D187-198,C165-184
80-120
241
2.4
Procedure for diffusion
For the diffusion method, RFdiffusion software was used, specifically the version that was made available
through the Google Colab notebook. The diffusion runs were separated in two modes: fixed diffusion
and partial diffusion.
The fixed diffusion method implied the use of the nAChR as template.
The
partial diffusion implied refining the output structures from the fixed diffuion runs, thus using the binder
structure as inputs instead of directly using the receptor structure.
The inputs for each construct are presented in table 2. The number of discrete timesteps (iterations)
was set to the default value of 50. The backbones generated through diffusion were fed into ProteinMPNN
to generate amino acid sequences. For the sequence design, the version of ProteinMPNN included in the
same Google Colab notebook was used with the settings recommended for binder design.
For each
design, eight sequences were generated. All sequences were fed into an AlphaFold model with parameters
initial_guess = True and num_recycles = 3 to evaluate the structures.
The designs were evaluated on two main metrics: pLDDT and pAE of the predicted complex between
the binder and the toxin. To be considered a successful design, it had to have pAE < 5 and pLDDT >
0.9.
Table 2: Inputs for binder designs through RFdiffusion for the fixed diffusion runs.
Construct
Template pdb
Contig
Total length
Number of designs
Loop C
7Z14
40-50/D186-199/40-50:F
94-114
52
Two-loop
7Z14
20-60/C164-185/7-20/D186-199/20-60:F
83-176
24
13
==PAGE:14==
Three best designs for each construct were selected for partial diffusion based on the lowest pAE value
and pLDDT > 0.9. They served as the new input templates for binder generation. The input contigs
for the partial diffusion were selected randomly but the original contig amino acids that contained the
loops interacting with the toxins were kept constant. The number of discrete timesteps (iterations) was
changed to the value of 100.
The backbones generated through diffusion were fed into ProteinMPNN to generate amino acid se-
quences.
For the sequence design, the version of ProteinMPNN included in the same Google Colab
notebook was used with the settings recommended for binder design. For each design, eight sequences
were generated. All sequences were fed into an AlphaFold model with parameters initial_guess = True
and num_recycles = 3 to evaluate the structures.
2.5
Estimation of cross-reactivity
To predict whether the binders designed to interact with short chain neurotoxins may have affinity towards
the long-chain neurotoxins, the AlphaFold model with the initial guess function was used to calculate the
pAE of the interaction. α-bungarotoxin was chosen as a representative of the long-chain neurotoxins.
Since the AlphaFold version containing the initial guess feature was not published separately from
RFdiffusion, it was used through the Google Colab version of RFdiffusion. To do so, each tested design
was docked to α-bungarotoxin in ChimeraX, and saved as a pdb file.
For docking, the complexes between nAChR and α-bungarotoxin (found as 6UWZ in PDB) and
between nAChR and the short-chain α-neurotoxin (found as 7Z14 in PDB) were used. First, the complex
between the binder and the short-chain α-neurotoxin was structurally aligned with 7Z14 through the
toxin’s structure. Afterwards, 6UWZ was aligned with the other structures through the receptor. From
all structures, the designed binder and α-bungarotoxin were isolated and saved into a separate pdb file.
The resulted pdb files were fed into the RFdiffusion Google Colab pipeline, where only one amino acid
(typically the last one) was diffused. In the sequence generation stage, ProteinMPNN was restricted to
inserting only one kind of amino acid – the one that was diffused. For structure prediction in AlphaFold,
initial_guess was set to True, and number of recycles was set to 3, as recommended for binder design.
14
==PAGE:15==
3
Results
To design a binder towards a short-chain α-neurotoxin, the method of scaffolding of a functional site
was used. Thus, two contiguos regions from the binding site of nAChR known to interact with the toxin
were extracted and scaffolded by generating de novo proteins. Specifically, two design approaches were
pursued: 1. loop C construct and 2. two-loop construct. To do so, generative models RFDesign and
RFdiffusion were applied.
Through RFDesign based hallucination, a total of 442 designs were generated, with 201 for the loop
C only and 241 two-loop constructs. The total mean pLDDT value for hallucination runs was 0.56: the
loop C construct had a mean value of 0.63 while the two-loop designs had a lower mean of 0.50 (figure
4). Using RFdiffusion in its fixed mode
In the initial (fixed) diffusion runs a higher number of 608 total designed sequences were generated,
among which 416 loop C constructs and 192 two-loop constructs. The total mean pLDDT value for all
fixed diffusion runs was 0.82 which was higher than for hallucination; the loop C constructs in average
scored pLDDT = 0.86 and the two-loop constructs again had a lower mean pLDDT = 0.74. All loop C
constructs generated through both RFDesign and RFdiffusion combined, scored a mean pLDDT of 0.78,
compared to the total two-loop construct pLDDT mean of 0.61 (figure 4).
Fig. 4. Distributions of pLDDT values obtained in RFDesign runs and RFdiffusion (fixed) runs. HLC
– hallucination run for the loop C construct; HTL – hallucination run for the two-loop construct; DLC
– fixed diffusion run for the loop C construct; DTL – fixed diffusion run for the two-loop construct.
The threshold for an RFdiffusion design to be successful (pLDDT = 0.9) is shown as a blue line. The
threshold for an RFDesign design to be considered successful (pLDDT = 0.8) is shown as an gray line.
3.1
Hallucination
In the RFDesign runs, from 201 loop C constructs generated, only two satisfied both conditions: pLDDT
> 0.80 and motif RMSD-AF < 1.5 (figure 5).
15
==PAGE:16==
Fig. 5. Loop C construct designs generated through hallucination with RFDesign, represented on the
scatter plot with motif RMSD-AF values plotted against pLDDT values. The red data points show the
designs that are considered successful. The horizontal and vertical lines show the thresholds for designs
to be considered successful: motif RMSD-AF < 1.5 and pLDDT > 0.8 respectively.
The three best designs were selected for analysis. They all had pLDDT values over 0.80. Their lengths
ranged from 59 to 85 amino acid long. Designs 2 and 3 satisfied the conditions for success, whereas design
1 did not reach low enough motif RMSD-AF. The designs vary in their fraction of unstructured residues:
design 1 and design 3 have around 26% of residues that are unstructured, whereas design 2 has a higher
fraction of 52%, and it also completely lacks α-helices (table 3).
Table 3: Selected designs from hallucination runs with the loop C construct.
For each design, the
following values are shown in the respective order: pLDDT, motif RMSD-AF, length of the sequence
(number of residues), number of separate α helices, number of β strands, number of residues that are
part of α helices, number of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues that are part of α
helices, percentage of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues that are not part of any
secondary structure (unstructured).
Name
pLDDT
motif RMSD-AF
Len
α helices
β strands
α res
β res
α %
β %
Unstructured %
LoopC_RFDes_1
0.900
2.08
59
1
4
14
29
24%
49%
27%
LoopC_RFDes_2
0.827
0.52
67
0
5
0
32
0%
48%
52%
LoopC_RFDes_3
0.808
1.47
85
2
3
28
35
33%
41%
26%
This was also visually observed in their predicted structures: all designs had a number of loops but
the loops as well as unstructured N- and C-termini in design 2 were longer in proportion to the length
of the whole protein. All designs had a high variation in their scaffolds which can be observed when
they are aligned, whereas the contig region was somewhat conserved as a separate loop connecting two
β-strands (figure 6).
16
==PAGE:17==
Fig. 6. Designs selected from the loop C constructs generated through hallucination with RFDesign.
The contig regions containing the loopC are highlighted with orange. a) Design Two-loop_RFDes_1. b)
Two-loop_RFDes_2. c) Two-loop_RFDes_3.
From 241 designs generated for the two-loop construct, none satisfied the filtering conditions of pLDDT
> 0.8 and motif RMSD-AF <1.5. Two variations of the two-loop construct were tested: with the loop
F contig closer to the N-terminus and with the loop C contig closer to the N-terminus (Figure 7). The
means of the pLDDT values and of the motif RMSD-AF values were compared for the two variations of
the construct. Neither of the metrics had a significant difference between the constructs (table 4). In
the interest of time, the construct variation with the loop F closer to the N-terminus was chosen for the
following experiments.
Table 4: Metrics comparison for the two variations of the two-loop construct: Loop F closer to the
N-terminus (Loop F first) and Loop C closer to the N-terminus (Loop C first). The means of pLDDT
and the motif RMSD-AF values are diplayed for each construct variation. The p-values comparing the
difference of means are also displayed for each metric.
Loop F first
Loop C first
p-value
pLDDT
0.51
0.50
0.18
Motif RMSD-AF (Å)
8.57
8.90
0.06
17
==PAGE:18==
Fig. 7. Two-loop construct designs generated through hallucination with RFDesign, represented on the
scatter plot with motif RMSD-AF values plotted against pLDDT values. The data points are separated
into the designs that have the loop C closer to the N-terminus (yellow) and the designs that have the
loop F closer to the N-terminus (blue). The horizontal and vertical lines show the conditions for designs
to be considered successful: motif RMSD-AF < 1.5 and pLDDT > 0.8 respectively.
Three best two-loop designs were selected for further analysis. Their pLDDT values range from 0.69
to 0.76, their backbones were from 80 to 105 amino acids long, and their motif RMSD-AF values were
4 to 6 times higher than the success threshold. The two-loop designs also have a high variation of their
secondary structure motifs: design 1 and 3 each have just one α-helix but seven β-strands, whereas design
2 has four α-helices and four β-strands. While designs 1 and 3 have equal numbers of α and β motifs,
they have different fractions of the unstructured residues: 58% for design 1 and 24% for design 3 (table
5).
Table 5: Designs selected from the two-loop constructs generated through hallucination with RFDesign.
For each design, the following values are shown in the respective order: pLDDT, motif RMSD-AF, length
of the sequence (number of residues), number of separate α helices, number of β strands, number of
residues that are part of α helices, number of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues
that are part of α helices, percentage of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues that
are not part of any secondary structure (unstructured).
Name
pLDDT
motif RMSD-AF
Len
α helices
β strands
α res
β res
α %
β %
Unstructured %
Two-loop_RFDes_1
0.764
6.67
105
1
7
3
41
3%
39%
58%
Two-loop_RFDes_2
0.707
7.92
80
4
4
27
30
34%
38%
29%
Two-loop_RFDes_3
0.696
9.87
82
1
7
3
59
4%
72%
24%
Similarly, the selected two-loop designs had high variation among scaffolds but two of the designs
(design 2 and design 3) failed to preserve the structures of contig regions. Design 1 had two loops that
were reminiscent of the mimicked contigs. Visually, design 2 did not have the four α-helices, contrary to
the calculation of ChimeraX. The attempt to align the structures was unsuccessful (figure 8).
18
==PAGE:19==
Fig. 8. Designs selected from the two-loop constructs generated through hallucination with RFDesign.
The contig regions containing the loopC and the loop F are highlighted with orange and red colors
respectively. a) Design Two-loop_RFDes_1. b) Two-loop_RFDes_2. c) Two-loop_RFDes_3.
3.2
Diffusion
In the fixed diffusion method, 52 designs with loop C construct were generated, which in turn resulted
in 416 sequences. Among those, 22 designs and 98 sequences were considered successful as they satisfied
the conditions of pAE < 5 and pLDDT > 90 (figure 9).
Fig. 9. Loop C constructs generated through RFdiffusion; a) generated through fixed diffusion repre-
sented on a pAE vs. pLDDT scatter plot; b) generated through partial diffusion represented on a pAE
vs. pLDDT scatter plot; c) generated through fixed diffusion, shown on pLDDT histogram; d) generated
through partial diffusion, shown on pLDDT histograms. Vertical lines show the pAE threshold and the
horizontal lines show the pLDDT threshold.
The best three designs scored pLDDT values around 0.92 and pAE values around 3.0 Å, with the
backbone length ranging from 66 to 77 amino acids.
Similar to the hallucination runs, the designs
possessed the secondary structure motifs: one to two α-helices and four β-sheets each. The fraction of
unstructured residues also varied: designs 1 and 2 had around 23% and design 3 had 41% (table 6). Again,
19
==PAGE:20==
the predicted structures of the selected designs looked different from each other but the contig containing
loop C was conserved. The secondary structure motifs of the scaffold are positioned slightly differently
but a common pattern can be recognized: a β-sheet stabilizing the loop and one to two α-helices at the
termini (figure 10).
Table 6: Selected designs from diffusion runs with Loop C construct. For each design, the following
values are shown in the respective order: pLDDT values, pAE values, length of the sequence (number
of residues), number of separate α helices, number of β strands, number of residues that are part of α
helices, number of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues that are part of α helices,
percentage of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues that are not part of any secondary
structure (unstructured).
Name
pLDDT
pAE
Len
α helices
β strands
α res
β res
α %
β %
Unstructured %
LoopC_RFdiff_fixed_1
0.921
2.99
77
2
4
27
32
35%
42%
23%
LoopC_RFdiff_fixed_2
0.928
3.01
66
1
4
14
36
21%
55%
24%
LoopC_RFdiff_fixed_3
0.923
3.14
66
1
4
12
27
18%
41%
41%
LoopC_RFdiff_partial_1
0.935
2.73
77
2
4
31
31
40%
40%
19%
LoopC_RFdiff_partial_2
0.941
2.76
66
1
4
14
36
21%
55%
24%
LoopC_RFdiff_partial_3
0.937
2.90
66
1
4
14
34
21%
52%
27%
Fig. 10. Loop C constructs generated through fixed diffusion. The ScNTx is shown in gray. The contig
containing the mimicked loop C highlighted with orange. a) Design LoopC_RFdiff_fixed_1. b) Design
LoopC_RFdiff_fixed_2. c) Design LoopC_RFdiff_fixed_3. d) Three designs aligned.
The selected designs were reused as inputs to RFdiffusion in the attempt to improve their scores.
20
==PAGE:21==
Through the partial diffusion, 32 designs were generated that resulted in 256 sequences. 32 designs and
239 sequences satisfied the conditions to be considered successful (figure 9). Therefore, the success rate
of the partial diffusion run with the loop C construct inputs is 100%, meaning that each design had at
least one generated sequence considered successful. For each input design, the best output sequence was
selected based on pLDDT > 0.90 and the lowest pAE. The pAE scores were thus reduced about 0.25
Å for each input design, and the pLDDT values increased by about 0.015. For designs 1 and 2, the
secondary structure parameters almost did not change, while for design 3 the fraction of unstructured
residues decreased by 14% (table 6). Minor changes in predicted structures are visible for designs 1 and
3, where the helices and sheets have changed their positions. However, design 2 looks like there was no
structural change despite scoring higher metrics (figure 11).
Fig. 11.
Loop C constructs generated through partial diffusion compared to their input structures
from the fixed diffusion runs (latter shown in gray). a) Design LoopC_RFdiff_partial_1. b) Design
LoopC_RFdiff_partial_2. c) Design LoopC_RFdiff_partial_3.
In the fixed diffusion runs, 24 designs with the two-loop construct were generated, which in turn
resulted in 192 sequences. Among those, only one design satisfied the success requirements (figure 12).
The three best designs scored pLDDT values ranging from 0.88 to 0.90, and pAE values ranging from 4.45
to 4.89 Å. Their backbones were from 113 to 134 amino acids long and each structure contained three
α-helices and seven to eight β-strands, while the unstructured regions ranged from 33% to 44% (table 7).
The structural variation of scaffolds among the selected two-loop designs was high: the α-helices and the
β-sheets were positioned uniquely in each design, while conserving the contigs well. The loop C contig
and a part of the loop F contig remained visually identical even when the designs were aligned (figure
13).
Two-loop construct design 1 was tested on cross-reactivity by docking it with α-bungarotoxin and
predicting the AlphaFold metrics on their interaction. The resulting pAE value was 3.68 Å and the
pLDDT was 0.92.
The selected two-loop designs were also reused as inputs in the partial diffusion runs. 30 designs were
generated that resulted in 240 sequences, of which 25 designs and 152 sequences qualified as successful
(figure 12). For each input design, the best output sequence was selected based on pLDDT > 0.90 and
the lowest pAE. The pAE scores for designs 1 and 3 were reduced by over 1.0 Å, and for design 2 by
0.8 Å; the pLDDT values increased by about 0.04. For designs 1 and 2, the predicted numbers of α-
helices changed, while the general unstructured/structured residue fractions remained approximately the
same (table 7). Minor structural modifications after the partial diffusion runs were only visible in the
unstructured regions, whereas the α-helices and β-sheet positions did not change (figure 11).
21
==PAGE:22==
Fig. 12. Two-loop constructs generated through RFdiffusion model: a) generated through fixed diffusion
represented on a pAE vs. pLDDT scatter plot; b) generated through partial diffusion represented on a
pAE vs. pLDDT scatter plot; c) generated through fixed diffusion, shown on pLDDT histogram; d)
generated through partial diffusion, shown on pLDDT histograms. Vertical lines show the pAE threshold
and the horizontal lines show the pLDDT threshold.
Table 7: Selected designs from diffusion runs with Two-loop construct. For each design, the following
values are shown in the respective order: pLDDT values, pAE values, length of the sequence (number
of residues), number of separate α helices, number of β strands, number of residues that are part of α
helices, number of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues that are part of α helices,
percentage of residues that are part of β sheets, percentage of residues that are not part of any secondary
structure (unstructured)
Name
pLDDT
pAE
Len
α helices
β strands
α res
β res
α %
β %
Unstructured %
Two-loop_RFdiff_fixed_1
0.904
4.45
134
3
7
33
45
25%
34%
42%
Two-loop_RFdiff_fixed_2
0.896
4.68
113
3
8
31
45
27%
40%
33%
Two-loop_RFdiff_fixed_3
0.885
4.89
124
3
7
30
40
24%
32%
44%
Two-loop_RFdiff_partial_1
0.945
3.31
134
4
7
36
45
27%
34%
40%
Two-loop_RFdiff_partial_2
0.920
3.89
113
2
8
27
47
24%
42%
35%
Two-loop_RFdiff_partial_3
0.940
3.40
124
3
7
30
43
24%
35%
41%
22
==PAGE:23==
Fig. 13.
Two-loop constructs generated through fixed diffusion. The ScNTx is shown in gray. The
contig containing the mimicked loop C is shown in orange; the contig containing the loop F is shown
in red. a) Design Two-loop_RFdiff_fixed_1. b) Design Two-loop_RFdiff_fixed_2. c) Design Two-
loop_RFdiff_fixed_3. d) All designs aligned.
Fig. 14.
Two-loop constructs generated through partial diffusion compared to their input structures
from fixed diffusion runs (latter shown in gray). The contig containing the mimicked loop C is shown
in yellow; the contig containing the loop F is shown in blue. a) Design Two-loop_RFdiff_partial_1. b)
Design Two-loop_RFdiff_partial_2. c) Design Two-loop_RFdiff_partial_3.
Overall, using the RFdiffusion model, 138 designs and 1104 amino acid sequences were generated: 76
designs and 608 sequences in the fixed diffusion step; 62 designs and 496 sequences in the partial diffusion
step. Among those, 80 designs and 490 sequences satisfied the conditions for being considered successful
(Table 8).
23
==PAGE:24==
Table 8: The results for all RFdiffusion experiments. The numbers are shown for each construct (Loop
C and Two-loop), separated into fixed diffusion and partial diffusion methods. The numbers of designs
and sequences that were considered successful as well as the total numbers are displayed. The last rows
show the combined numbers for the two constructs, as well as the combined numbers for both fixed and
partial methods.
Designs
Sequences
LoopC
Fixed
Success
22
98
Total
52
416
Partial
Success
32
239
Total
32
256
Two-loop
Fixed
Success
1
1
Total
24
192
Partial
Success
25
152
Total
30
240
Total
Fixed
Success
23
99
Total
76
608
Partial
Success
57
391
Total
62
496
Total
Success
80
490
Total
138
1104
24
==PAGE:25==
4
Discussion
Long and short chain neurotoxins present a key medical challenge in the treatment of snakebite envenom-
ings, due to their small size, low immunogenicity, and high toxicity. Despite both sub families targeting
the nAChR, to the best of our knowledge there exist no reports of any binder able to neutralise across
both long and short neurotoxins. Thus, in this project we tried to leverage the recent advances in the
field of de novo protein design to create a receptor-mimicking minibinder that should be able to neu-
tralise both toxin sub families, whilst also being cheap and easy to express. The consensus short-chain
α-neurotoxin was selected as the target for binder design due to the precise understanding of its interac-
tion with nAChR. An increasing number of protein design tools are becoming accessible online, however
it can be a challenge to carry out their installation properly to be able to use their full potential.
The first de novo protein design model that we attempted to apply was RFDesign. While the initial
hallucination tests proceeded smoothly, it proved to be more challenging than anticipated. Certain bash
and python scripts required optimization for compatibility with the specific computational environment.
The script trfold_relax.sh that relaxes the output structures and add the missing residue side chains,
was written for the server environment with the SLURM cluster installed, which our setup did not possess.
The other script af2_metrics.py that executes the crucial filtering function of calculating the pLDDT
and motif RMSD-AF of the generated designs, required additional python dependencies that were not
included into the conda environment file SE3-nvidia. When attempted to install them separately, multiple
errors arose, not allowing to run the script. Additional files containing the AlphaFold model parameters
had to be downloaded and placed in a designated path on the computer. However, in the absence of
these files, the error message encountered was non-specific and failed to provide meaningful insights into
the underlying issue. When attempting an alternative installation approach utilizing a Docker container,
likely due to the lack of experience with Docker usage, an error occurred, resulting in the failure of both
installations and a need for a complete restart of the process, leading to a substantial time investment.
Finally, with the assistance of Biolib, successful installation of the model was eventually achieved.
Upon completion of the installation, the first runs for the model were initiated, involving generation
of binders with the loop C construct. Through hallucination, two designs with the loop C construct
were successfully generated, exhibiting metric scores that surpassed the threshold for considered success.
Notably, these designs exhibited a visually plausible appearance, featuring varying scaffolds composed of
β-sheets and α-helices, while preserving the contig loop C structure that has the potential of interaction
with the toxins. While the scaffolds varied from one another, common patterns could be observed: they
had similar means of stabilization of the contig regions by incorporating it in between beta strands, and
adding helices for additional stabilization closer to the termini. In contrast, the designs with the two-
loop construct failed to conserve the original contig structure, which probably reduced their likelihood
of having affinity towards the toxins. That may have been caused by the the small size of their scaffolds
chosen in the parameters. However, it is important to note that the choice of scaffold length may not
be the sole factor responsible. In subsequent RFdiffusion experiments, the sizes of the scaffolds were
increased in the attempt of avoiding this issue.
Furthermore, the two-loop design initially consisted of two variations: one with the loop C closer to the
N-terminus and another with the loop F in closer proximity to the N-terminus. During the hallucination
runs, we sought to test the hypothesis that one of these variations may be more likely to form a stable
scaffold and preserve the contig structures. However, statistical analysis revealed no significant difference
(p-value > 0.05) for either of the metrics, pLDDT or motif RMSD-AF, when comparing the construct
variations. In consideration of time constraints, we opted to proceed with the two-loop construct variation
featuring the loop F in closer proximity to the N-terminus for further experiments utilizing the diffusion
model. However, it would be of interest to evaluate the other variation within the diffusion model, as it
possesses equal potential for binder formation.
Shortly after the successful functioning of RFDesign, the publication of the RFdiffusion code pre-
sented an opportunity to explore its efficacy. Considering the significantly higher success rate of binder
generation associated with the diffusion model, a decision was made to prioritize testing this approach
over completing all experiments solely based on hallucination. Nonetheless, the utilization of RFdiffusion
for generation of multiple designs posed challenges that prolonged the implementation process. During
the installation of RFdiffusion on the high-performance computing clusters of DTU, difficulties were en-
countered in configuring the code to effectively utilize the GPU. Consequently, the computational power
was severely reduced, resulting in unreasonably long waiting times for each design. Despite these ini-
tial setbacks, progress was eventually made when an updated version of the Google Colab notebook for
RFdiffusion was released. This updated version incorporated the essential feature of generating multiple
25
==PAGE:26==
designs concurrently, enabling the successful completion of all planned diffusion runs. Thus, implemeta-
tion on online platforms that allow users to use the software while avoiding the challenges of installation
can greatly improve the reach of the new technology and encourage more researchers to apply it.
The initial diffusion runs also involved the generation of binders with the loop C construct. Unsur-
prisingly, a significantly higher proportion of successful designs was observed among the designs with the
loop C construct generated through fixed diffusion compared to the RFDesign runs, with success rates of
23% and 1%, respectively. This improvement occurred despite the higher threshold for the pLDDT value.
Although the fractions of unstructured residues were similar to the designs generated through hallucina-
tion, a comparative analysis of the 3D predictions revealed that the contig region was more effectively
conserved and aligned in the diffusion runs. Interestingly, the diffusion model was able to generate a high
degree of scaffold variation while still preserving the contig region. This variation is of great significance
for future in vitro testing of large sets of binders, as it enhances the likelihood of identifying designs that
not only fold into the predicted structure but also exhibit high affinity towards the target toxin. In the
subsequent stage of the fixed diffusion runs, generation of two-loop construct designs with high scores
was achieved, including one design that satisfied the pLDDT and pAE conditions for success. Analogous
to the designs with the loop C construct, the secondary structure compositions of the generated scaffolds
exhibited considerable variation, while the contigs encompassing the loops were remarkably conserved.
These findings provide promising indications that the development of a high-affinity broadly-neutralizing
binder targeting the neurotoxins of snake venoms may be within reach.
In binders with both constructs, the process of partial diffusion improved every design used as the
input. Two binders with the two-loop construct that did not achieve a satisfactory score in the fixed
diffusion run, eventually reached metrics high enough to be classified as successful in the partial diffusion
run. However, the visual difference between the structures before and after processing with the partial
diffusion was not always significant or even noticeable. The reason for improved scores could be the minor
tweaks in the structure that were made possible thanks to the additional diffusion timesteps. Perhaps,
using a structure that is already somewhat stable as an input provides the room for final convergence
or for more variation in the structure that happens to work better. As an idea for future experiments,
more iterations of partial diffusion could be executed on the best structures. This may lead to designs
being improved further in case a full convergence of the self-conditioned iterations was not reached, or
alternatively by introducing variation into the scaffolds and reaching a more stable conformation.
The one successful two-loop construct generated through fixed diffusion was tested on the cross-
reactivity by docking it with α-bungarotoxin.
The AlphaFold scores calculated from the prediction
indicated that this design may potentially exhibit the affinity towards both short and long snake venom
neurotoxins. In the following work, it would be extremely interesting to carry out the same procedure
for all two-loop constructs that satisfied the definition of success to find out whether any modifications
in the sequences or structures may influence the cross-reactivity.
To improve the future binder constructs, it could be worth looking into the choice of contig regions for
scaffolding. They were chosen in the very beginning of the project, mostly by trying to incorporate almost
all amino acids of nAChR that were proven to be interacting with the short- and long-chain neurotoxins.
However, upon a closer look at the successful two-loop construct designs, it can be noticed that the
mimicked loop F is mostly unstructured, even though it resembles very well the original structure of
the native receptor. Because it does not contain much secondary structure, it may be worth considering
whether a part of the loop F contig could be removed, thus making it shorter and giving more room for
diffusion of secondary structures. This could potentially improve the stability of the whole binder as well
as the success rate, thus making it easier to generate more and higher-quality candidates for expression.
On the contrary, it is the flexibility of the loop structures that provide antibodies and other natural
binders with the high affinity, and therefore removing a part of the contig may result in worse binders.
Another approach to expand upon this would be to explore alternative peptide sequences that can be
substituted for the loop C in the designs. In a study by Lynagh et al. (2020), various peptides were
examined for their binding affinity and ability to neutralize α-cobratoxin. The most effective peptides
exhibited low micromolar affinity. However, it should be noted that peptides have not been reported
to possess therapeutic effects. Hence, it would be intriguing to utilize these peptide motifs as scaffolds
in future attempts to generate binders. By comparing different peptide motifs with the native loop C
of nAChR, it may be possible to develop binders with enhanced affinity and/or cross-reactivity. This
strategy opens up the potential for improving binder performance by leveraging the unique characteristics
of diverse peptide sequences [26].
After analysing the results generated through RFDesign and RFdiffusion separately, the data from the
two models was also compared to see which performs better. The average pLDDT scores of RFdiffusion
26
==PAGE:27==
designs, as expected, were a lot higher than for RFDesign: 0.82 against 0.53. This means that in average,
AlphaFold predicts the RFDesign binders to be less stable and less likely to fold into the predicted
structure. In the descriptions of the two models, they even had different thresholds for considering a
design successful: for hallucination pLDDT > 0.8 and for diffusion pLDDT > 0.9. The likely reason
for this difference in performance is the way RFDesign model works: by backpropagation through a
structure prediction model, while the RFdiffusion model was designed and fine-tuned to generate and
optimize the structure through the forward pass through the neural network. The other reason for more
poor performance is that RFDesign works by generating an amino acid sequence in the first place, that
is then fed into the structure prediction model, whose output is compared to the desired structure. In
the novel diffusion model, however, the order is reversed: it focuses solely on generating an ultra-realistic
structure, thus having the atom coordinates and angular positions, without considering what sequence
would be able to fold into it. In the next step, the sequence generation is outsourced to another neural
network model ProteinMPNN that was specifically trained for prediction of a stable, soluble sequence
folding into the input structure.
As mentioned earlier, this was not the first attempt to mimic the receptor to neutralize the toxic
effects of neurotoxins. Other investigations have focused on examining soluble counterparts of nAChR
known as nicotinic acetylcholine binding proteins (nAChBPs), which lack the transmembrane domains.
These nAChBPs have been found to exhibit affinities towards α-bungarotoxin and α-cobratoxin in the
low nanomolar range, suggesting their potential for therapeutic applications [27]. However, a significant
challenge in utilizing nAChBPs lies in their considerable size – it has over 1000 amino acids and its
molecular weight is around 122 kDa [28], despite lacking the transmembrane domains. This results in
costly production processes, whereas the designs generated in this study were up to 180 amino acids long,
and therefore should weigh under 20 kDa, making them easier and less expensive to produce. Moreover,
nAChBP was only shown to have affinity towards the long-chain neurotoxins such as α-cobratoxin and
α-bungarotoxin, but not towards the short-chain neurotoxins [29]. Thus, it is not the ideal candidate for
development of a broadly-neutralizing treatment.
Other attempts of mimicking the receptor, similarly, involved de novo design. Thus, Eguchi et al.
(2022) successfully created a de novo binder that demonstrated affinity towards three toxins: α-elapitoxin,
α-cobratoxin, and long neurotoxin 1. However, it did not show affinity towards the other two tested
toxins: α-δ-bungarotoxin-4 and α-bungarotoxin isoform V31. This binder specifically targeted an epitope
responsible for the interaction with nAChR, which aligns with the concept of this project—neutralizing
toxin activity by targeting its epitope. [30] Although this result is promising and utilized a different
protein design model, it is important to note that only one successful binder was mentioned among
approximately 6,000 designs generated. The Kd of the interaction was not reported either. The success
rate is therefore expected to be much lower compared to the RFdiffusion model employed in this project,
and is likely to require many more attempts. In contrast, for RFdiffusion model the in silico success rate
was reported between 10% and 50% depending on the target of the designed binder, and the experimental
success rates were up to 40% for the designs selected for expression [6]. Moreover, only the long-chain
neurotoxins were used in the study [30], which is unlikely to result in a cross-reactive binder working for
both short-chain and long-chain neurotoxins.
4.1
Outlook
One notable aspect is that the definition of in silico success, that is set to the pLDDT and pAE values,
is not a definitive predictor of the binding affinity or neutralization ability. Research has demonstrated
that de novo designs with pAE values below 5 Å have in vitro success rate ranging from 10% to 40%,
meaning they likely do exhibit affinity towards the target protein [6][21]. Therefore, in order to find a
binder that exhibits enough binding affinity, many designs have to be generated and tested in vitro.
However, it is crucial to note that having affinity alone does not immediately imply therapeutic poten-
tial. For a de novo designed binder to have practical therapeutic implications, the binding affinity must
reach sufficiently high levels, typically within the low nanomolar or picomolar ranges. This level of affinity
ensures effective and specific binding to the target toxin, maximizing its potential as a therapeutic agent.
Additional characterization and optimization efforts may be necessary to achieve such high affinity levels.
Moreover, in the case of snake venom toxin binders, the designs have to be tested on the neutralization
capability through tests like patch clamp electrophysiology.
Another important aspect, while achieving high binding affinity is a desirable characteristic, the
issue of immunogenicity must be addressed.
Immunogenicity refers to the potential of the designed
binder to induce an immune response when administered in vivo. This immune response can lead to
27
==PAGE:28==
complications, including reduced efficacy, adverse reactions, or even immune-related adverse events. Thus,
the immunogenicity of the de novo designed binder needs to be carefully assessed and minimized to
maximize its therapeutic utility and minimize potential risks.
However, in spite of many variables that are currently unknown, it is clear that de novo protein design
are bringing a huge potential towards many research areas. First of all, therapeutics because there are
countless diseases that have shown constantly changing epitopes, thus making the immune system less
efficient at resisting them. These diseases include but are not limited to cancer, viruses, AMR infectious
diseases. Other applications for in silico development of proteins could be many industrie that could
benefit from modifications of enzymes to make them more efficient.
5
Conclusion
Recently, many advancements occurred in the field of de novo protein design that made it possible to
computationally design proteins for specific purposes. In this project, the recently developed de novo
protein design tools RFDesign and RFdiffusion were applied for the purpose of creating a therapeutic
broadly-neutralizing binders towards snake venom neurotoxins. Although the tools were developed and
published, their installation on the specific computational environment posed challenges. Thus, imple-
mentations through online platforms like Google Colab and Hugging Face Hub where the tool can be used
without local installation can dramatically increase the availability and number of users, leading to more
research done by others. The RFDesign hallucination model was able to generate several designs that
might have potential as binders but was quickly outcompeted by the latest RFdiffusion model in terms
of higher in silico success rate. Through RFdiffusion, we managed to generate designs that incorporate
the binding regions of nAChR into a de novo scaffolds of small size that are easy and inexpensive to
express. These designs show high in silico scores that indicate potential binding affinity towards both
short and long neurotoxins. Thus, de novo protein design tools have a high potential in development
of therapeutics, e.g. against various disease areas where cross-reactive binders may be helpful such as
cancer and AMR infectious diseases; as well as in sustainability and industries that can benefit from
optimization of enzyme efficacy.
28
==PAGE:29==
References
[1]
Po Ssu Huang, Scott E. Boyken, and David Baker. “The coming of age of de novo protein design”.
In: Nature 2016 537:7620 537.7620 (Sept. 2016), pp. 320–327. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/
nature19946. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature19946.
[2]
Ivan Anishchenko et al. “De novo protein design by deep network hallucination”. In: Nature 2021
600:7889 600.7889 (Dec. 2021), pp. 547–552. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04184-w.
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-04184-w.
[3]
Jue Wang et al. “Scaffolding protein functional sites using deep learning”. In: Science 377.6604 (July
2022), pp. 387–394. issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/SCIENCE.ABN2100/SUPPL{\_}FILE/SCIENCE.
ABN2100{\_}DATA{\_}S1{\_}AND{\_}S2.ZIP. url: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/
science.abn2100.
[4]
John Jumper et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold”. In: Nature 2021
596:7873 596.7873 (July 2021), pp. 583–589. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03819-2.
[5]
Minkyung Baek et al. “Accurate prediction of protein structures and interactions using a three-track
neural network”. In: Science 373.6557 (Aug. 2021), pp. 871–876. issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/
SCIENCE.ABJ8754/SUPPL{\_}FILE/ABJ8754{\_}MDAR{\_}REPRODUCIBILITY{\_}CHECKLIST.PDF.
url: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abj8754.
[6]
Joseph L. Watson et al. “Broadly applicable and accurate protein design by integrating structure
prediction networks and diffusion generative models”. In: bioRxiv (Dec. 2022), p. 2022.12.09.519842.
doi: 10.1101/2022.12.09.519842. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.
12.09.519842v1%20https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.12.09.519842v1.
abstract.
[7]
Giang Thi Tuyet Nguyen et al. “High-throughput proteomics and in vitro functional characterization
of the 26 medically most important elapids and vipers from sub-Saharan Africa”. In: GigaScience
11 (Dec. 2022). issn: 2047217X. doi: 10.1093/GIGASCIENCE/GIAC121. url: https://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/gigascience/giac121.
[8]
José María Gutiérrez et al. “Snakebite envenoming”. In: Nature Reviews Disease Primers 2017
3:1 3.1 (Sept. 2017), pp. 1–21. issn: 2056-676X. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.63. url: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/nrdp201763.
[9]
Pascal Kessler et al. “The three-finger toxin fold: a multifunctional structural scaffold able to mod-
ulate cholinergic functions”. In: Journal of Neurochemistry 142 (Aug. 2017), pp. 7–18. issn: 1471-
4159. doi: 10.1111/JNC.13975. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/
jnc.13975%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jnc.13975%20https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jnc.13975.
[10]
Mieke Nys et al. “The molecular mechanism of snake short-chain α-neurotoxin binding to muscle-
type nicotinic acetylcholine receptors”. In: Nature Communications 2022 13:1 13.1 (Aug. 2022),
pp. 1–12. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32174-7. url: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-022-32174-7.
[11]
Timothy Patrick Jenkins and Andreas Hougaard Laustsen. “Cost of Manufacturing for Recombinant
Snakebite Antivenoms”. In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8 (July 2020), p. 545542.
issn: 22964185. doi: 10.3389/FBIOE.2020.00703/BIBTEX.
[12]
Guillermo de la Rosa et al. “Horse immunization with short-chain consensus α-neurotoxin gener-
ates antibodies against broad spectrum of elapid venomous species”. In: Nature Communications
10.1 (Dec. 2019). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/S41467-019-11639-2. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC6692343/%20/pmc/articles/PMC6692343/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6692343/.
[13]
Shirin Ahmadi et al. “An in vitro methodology for discovering broadly-neutralizing monoclonal
antibodies”. In: Scientific Reports 2020 10:1 10.1 (July 2020), pp. 1–7. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.
1038/s41598-020-67654-7. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-67654-7.
[14]
Anne Ljungars and Andreas H. Laustsen. “Neutralization capacity of recombinant antivenoms based
on monoclonal antibodies and nanobodies”. In: Toxicon 222 (Jan. 2023), p. 106991. issn: 0041-0101.
doi: 10.1016/J.TOXICON.2022.106991.
29
==PAGE:30==
[15]
Andreas H Laustsen et al. “In vivo neutralization of dendrotoxin-mediated neurotoxicity of black
mamba venom by oligoclonal human IgG antibodies”. In: (). doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-06086-4.
url: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/.
[16]
Mihaly Varadi et al. “AlphaFold Protein Structure Database: massively expanding the structural
coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 50.D1
(Jan. 2022), p. D439. issn: 13624962. doi: 10 . 1093 / NAR / GKAB1061. url: /pmc / articles /
PMC8728224/%20/pmc/articles/PMC8728224/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8728224/.
[17]
AlphaFold Protein Structure Database. url: https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/faq.
[18]
Alexander Mordvintsev, Christopher Olah, and Mike Tyka. Inceptionism: Going Deeper into Neural
Networks – Google AI Blog. 2015. url: https://ai.googleblog.com/2015/06/inceptionism-
going-deeper-into-neural.html.
[19]
Martin Mechelke and Michael Habeck. “Robust probabilistic superposition and comparison of pro-
tein structures”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 11.1 (July 2010), pp. 1–13. issn: 14712105. doi: 10.
1186/1471-2105-11-363/TABLES/1. url: https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/1471-2105-11-363.
[20]
Kelly L. Damm and Heather A. Carlson. “Gaussian-Weighted RMSD Superposition of Proteins:
A Structural Comparison for Flexible Proteins and Predicted Protein Structures”. In: Biophysical
Journal 90.12 (June 2006), p. 4558. issn: 00063495. doi: 10.1529/BIOPHYSJ.105.066654. url:
/pmc/articles/PMC1471868/%20/pmc/articles/PMC1471868/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1471868/.
[21]
Nathaniel R. Bennett et al. “Improving de novo protein binder design with deep learning”. In: Nature
Communications 2023 14:1 14.1 (May 2023), pp. 1–9. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-
38328-5. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-023-38328-5.
[22]
Valerio Mariani et al. “lDDT: a local superposition-free score for comparing protein structures
and models using distance difference tests”. In: Bioinformatics 29.21 (Nov. 2013), p. 2722. issn:
13674803. doi: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTT473. url: /pmc/articles/PMC3799472/%20/pmc/
articles/PMC3799472/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3799472/.
[23]
RosettaCommons/RFDesign: Protein hallucination and inpainting with RoseTTAFold. url: https:
//github.com/RosettaCommons/RFDesign.
[24]
RosettaCommons/RFdiffusion: Code for running RFdiffusion. url: https://github.com/RosettaCommons/
RFdiffusion.
[25]
diffusion.ipynb - Colaboratory. url: https://colab.research.google.com/github/sokrypton/
ColabDesign/blob/v1.1.1/rf/examples/diffusion.ipynb.
[26]
Timothy Lynagh et al. “Peptide Inhibitors of the α-Cobratoxin-Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor In-
teraction”. In: Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 63.22 (Nov. 2020), pp. 13709–13718. issn: 15204804.
doi: 10.1021/ACS.JMEDCHEM.0C01202/SUPPL{\_}FILE/JM0C01202{\_}SI{\_}001.PDF. url:
/pmc/articles/PMC7705965/%20/pmc/articles/PMC7705965/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7705965/.
[27]
Thao N.T. Ho, Nikita Abraham, and Richard J. Lewis. “Structure-Function of Neuronal Nicotinic
Acetylcholine Receptor Inhibitors Derived From Natural Toxins”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience
14 (Nov. 2020). issn: 1662453X. doi: 10 . 3389 / FNINS . 2020 . 609005. url: /pmc / articles /
PMC7723979/%20/pmc/articles/PMC7723979/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7723979/.
[28]
Makoto Ihara et al. “Crystal structures of Lymnaea stagnalis AChBP in complex with neonicotinoid
insecticides imidacloprid and clothianidin”. In: Invertebrate Neuroscience 8.2 (June 2008), pp. 71–
81. issn: 13542516. doi: 10.1007/S10158-008-0069-3.
[29]
Yves Bourne et al. “Crystal structure of a Cbtx–AChBP complex reveals essential interactions
between snake α-neurotoxins and nicotinic receptors”. In: The EMBO Journal 24.8 (Apr. 2005),
p. 1512. issn: 02614189. doi: 10.1038/SJ.EMBOJ.7600620. url: /pmc/articles/PMC1142565/
%20/pmc/articles/PMC1142565/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC1142565/.
30
==PAGE:31==
[30]
Raphael R. Eguchi et al. “Deep Generative Design of Epitope-Specific Binding Proteins by Latent
Conformation Optimization”. In: bioRxiv (Dec. 2022), p. 2022.12.22.521698. doi: 10.1101/2022.
12.22.521698. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.12.22.521698v1%
20https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.12.22.521698v1.abstract.
31
==PAGE:32==
A
Scripts for automation of RFDesign and RFdiffusion
Listing 6: Modified script trfold_relax.sh for RFDesign
#!/ bin/bash
#
# Performs
relax on TRFold
structures .
#
# Usage:
#
#
./ trfold_relax .sh FOLDER
# puts on short
queue
#
#
./ trfold_relax .sh FOLDER
backfill
# puts on
backfill
queue
#
# will
relax
all pdb
files in folders , using
restraints
derived
from
matching
# npz files , and
output
relaxed
structures
into a subfolder
called
trf_relax /.
#
DIR="$( cd "$( dirname "${ BASH_SOURCE [0]}" )" &> /dev/null && pwd )"
OPTIND =1
roll="--roll"
while
getopts ":n" opt; do
case
$opt in
n) roll="";;
esac
done
shift $((OPTIND -1))
if [ -z "$2" ]; then
queue=short
else
queue=$2
fi
outdir=$1/trf_relax
mkdir -p $outdir
task_file=‘basename $1 ‘. fold.list
for PDB in $1 /*. pdb; do
f=‘basename
$PDB .pdb ‘
NPZ=‘dirname
$PDB ‘/$f.npz
if [ ! -f $outdir/$f.pdb ]; then
echo "Relaxing
$PDB"
/root/miniconda3/envs/rfdesign -cuda/bin/python3
$DIR/RosettaTR/ trfold_relax .py
$roll -sg 7,3 $NPZ
$PDB
$outdir/$f.pdb
fi
done
cd
$outdir
ct=$(find
../ -maxdepth 1 -name ’*. trb ’ | wc -l)
if [ "$ct" -gt 0 ]; then
ln -sf ../*. trb .
fi
Listing 7: RFdiffusion automation code
# -*- coding: utf -8
-*-
"""
Created
on Mon Apr 10
14:13:55
2023
@author: Vlad
Rosca
"""
import
sys
import
os
import
subprocess
import
pickle
def
contigs_from_trb (design):
filename = design + ".trb"
32
==PAGE:33==
with
open(filename , ’rb’) as f:
data = f.read ()
trb = pickle.loads(data)
contigs_mpnn = " ".join(trb[" sampled_mask "]).split("/0 ")
contigs_mpnn = ":".join( contigs_mpnn )
return
contigs_mpnn
if len(sys.argv) == 1:
output_name = sys.argv [1]
else:
# output_name = "binder9"
raise
ValueError ()
# RFdiffusion
opts
path = f" binder_outputs /{ output_name }"
os.makedirs(path ,exist_ok=True)
output = f" binder_outputs /{ output_name }/{ output_name }"
#path = "/ zhome/ae /8/154054/ RFdiffusion / neurotoxin_binder /" + output
input_pdb = "input_pdb /7Z14.pdb"
contigs = "F1 -60/0
80 -120"
hotspots = "F28 ,F29 ,F31"
iterations = 50
# default = 50
num_designs = 2
# ProteinMPNN
and AF2
opts
copies = 1
num_seqs = 8
# Batch
size is 8 by
default.
num_recycles = 3
# recommended
for
binder
design
rm_aa = ’C’
initial_guess = True
# recommended
for
binder
design
use_multimer = False
contigs_str = "F1 -60:80 -80"
# RFdiffusion
command
rfdiff_opts = ["python3",
"../ scripts/ run_inference .py",
f"inference.input_pdb ={ input_pdb}",
f"diffuser.T={ iterations }",
f"ppi. hotspot_res =[{ hotspots }]",
f"\’contigmap.contigs =[{ contigs }]\’",
f"inference. output_prefix ={ output}",
f"inference.num_designs ={ num_designs }",
"denoiser. noise_scale_ca =0",
"denoiser. noise_scale_frame =0"]
rfdiff_command = " ".join( rfdiff_opts )
# write
log
with
open(f" binder_outputs /{ output_name }/{ output_name } _command_log .txt", "a") as
f_log:
print( rfdiff_command + ’\n’, file=f_log)
# Run
RFdiffusion
command
os.system( rfdiff_command )
# subprocess.run(rfdiff_opts )
# MPNN + AlphaFold
commands
designs = [f"{output}_{i}" for i in range( num_designs )]
# mpnn_af_commands = []
for
design in
designs:
#path = "/ zhome/ae /8/154054/ RFdiffusion / neurotoxin_binder /" + design
contigs_mpnn = contigs_from_trb (design)
mpnn_af_opts = ["python3",
"../../ colabdesign /rf/ designability_test .py",
33
==PAGE:34==
f"--pdb={ design }. pdb",
f"--loc={ design}_mpnn",
f"--contig ={ contigs_mpnn }",
f"--copies ={ copies}",
f"--num_seqs ={ num_seqs}",
f"--num_recycles ={ num_recycles }",
f"--rm_aa ={ rm_aa}"]
if
initial_guess : mpnn_af_opts .append("--initial_guess ")
if
use_multimer : mpnn_af_opts .append("--use_multimer ")
# mpnn_af_commands .append( mpnn_af_opts )
command = ’ ’.join( mpnn_af_opts )
# write
log
with
open(f" binder_outputs /{ output_name }/{ output_name } _command_log .txt", "a") as
f_log:
print(command + ’\n’, file=f_log)
# Run
command
os.system(command)
# subprocess.run(mpnn_af_opts , stdout= subprocess .PIPE)
Listing 8: Job script for running RFdiffusion on LSF
#!/ bin/bash
###
General
options
###
- specify
queue
--
#BSUB -q gpuv100
### -- set the job
Name
--
#BSUB -J RFdiff
### -- ask for
number
of cores (default: 1) --
#BSUB -n 1
### -- Select
the
resources: 1 gpu in
exclusive
process
mode
--
#BSUB -gpu "num =1: mode= exclusive_process "
### -- set
walltime
limit: hh:mm --
maximum
24 hours
for GPU -queues
right
now
#BSUB -W 24:00
# request 5GB of system -memory
#BSUB -R "rusage[mem =5GB]"
#BSUB -u your -email
#BSUB -B
#BSUB -N
#BSUB -o job_output/RFdiff_%J.out
#BSUB -e job_output/RFdiff_%J.err
# Activate
conda
env
source /zhome/ae /8/154054/ miniconda3 /etc/profile.d/conda.sh
conda
activate
SE3nv
python3
--version
# create
the
folder
for
terminal
output
folder_name="job_output"
if [ ! -d " $folder_name " ]; then
mkdir " $folder_name "
fi
# Your
code
goes
here
#python3
../ scripts/ run_inference .py
inference. output_prefix = binder_outputs /binder3/
binder3
inference.input_pdb=input_pdb /7 Z14.pdb ’contigmap.contigs =[F1 -60/0
70 -100] ’ ’ppi. hotspot_res =[F28 ,F29 ,F31]’ inference. num_designs =1
denoiser.
noise_scale_ca =0
denoiser. noise_scale_frame =0
#python3
../../ colabdesign /rf/ designability_test .py --pdb =/ zhome/ae /8/154054/
RFdiffusion/ neurotoxin_binder / binder_outputs /binder3/binder3_0.pdb
--loc =/ zhome/
ae /8/154054/ RFdiffusion/ neurotoxin_binder / binder_outputs /binder3/ binder3_0_mpnn
--contig=F1 -60:70 -100
--copies =1 --num_seqs =1 --num_recycles =3 --rm_aa=C --
initial_guess
python3
commands_rfdiffusion .py batch1
34
