==PAGE:1==
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking
Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis
Patients
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for
Psoriasis Patients
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By Caroline Ankjær Andersen
Supervisor: Jakob Eg Larsen, Associate Professor, Dept. of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science (DTU Compute), Technical University of Denmark
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Anker
Engelunds Vej 1, Building 101A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at Dept. of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science (DTU Compute), Technical University of Denmark, under supervision
of Jakob Eg Larsen, Associate Professor, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Caroline Ankjær Andersen ­ s175201
Signature
Date
ii
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
23/06/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Health­related self­tracking apps have become increasingly popular in recent years and
both healthcare professionals and patients are beginning to see their benefits. However,
there is only a very limited selection of self­tracking apps for managing psoriasis and the
existing apps all seem to fail to meet the users’ needs. This thesis presents the process
of designing a self­tracking tool for psoriasis patients. A User­Centered Design approach
was employed, incorporating quantitative surveys and qualitative interviews to understand
patients’ needs and challenges. A high­fidelity prototype was developed and tested and
findings revealed the importance of certain features, including symptom tracking, treat­
ment reminders, lifestyle management tips, and detailed statistics related to their con­
dition. The findings of this study also highlights elements for future improvements and
refinements.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude for my supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen,
Associate Professor, DTU, for his guidance and encouragement throughout this project.
I would also like to thank Psoriasisforeningen for their great help in reaching out to psori­
asis patients, which made this study possible.
This study could also not have been the same without the participants in the interviews.
Thank you immensely for your always positive and enthusiastic spirits. Your feedback
and motivation meant a lot for the outcome of this project.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends who always supported me and motivated
me to do my best.
iv
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Overview of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Understanding Psoriasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Self­Tracking for Managing Chronic Illnesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Motivation and Abandonment in Self­Tracking Apps
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Stage­Based Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Existing Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
9
3.1
User­Centered Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
User Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Prototyping and Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Final Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Design
11
4.1
Idea Validation and Initial User Insights
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Persona Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Iterative Design and Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
Final Low­fidelity Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.5
High­fidelity Prototype Testing and Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Implementation
27
5.1
Data Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Testing and Analysing User Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Discussion
29
6.1
Limitations and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7
Conclusion
31
Bibliography
33
A Survey on Psoriasis
35
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
v
==PAGE:8==
B Survey on Motivation
46
C Initial research interviews
52
C.1 Interview 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
C.2 Interview 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
C.3 Interview 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
D First Iteration Prototype
68
D.1 Version 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
D.2 Version 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
E
Final interviews
70
E.1 Interview 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
E.2 Interview 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
E.3 Interview 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
E.4 Interview 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
E.5 Interview 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
F
Second iteration screens
110
G Final low­fidelity prototype
111
H PsoCare Download Link
112
vi
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Psoriasis is a chronic autoimmune skin disease that affects around 125 million individuals
worldwide [1]. This condition impacts the daily life of those affected, extending beyond
physical symptoms to psychological and social challenges. Current self­management
strategies vary significantly, ranging from medical treatment to lifestyle changes.
The unique symptoms and triggers experienced by each individual and the many factors
that can influence them, make self­tracking an essential component for effectively man­
aging psoriasis. With the rise in health­related self­tracking applications [2], both health
professionals and patients have started to recognize their potential benefits [3]. The ben­
efits include enhanced patient understanding of their disease, improved communication
with healthcare providers, and more effective self­management of symptoms. However,
these self­tracking tools’ effectiveness hinges on continued user engagement, indicat­
ing the need for a self­tracking tool that effectively meets the users’ needs and thereby
encourages long­term use.
This thesis aims to design an effective self­tracking tool for psoriasis patients that meets
their unique needs. The primary goal is to aid patients in managing their condition, fos­
tering self­reflection, and ultimately enhancing their quality of life.
1.1
Problem Definition
This thesis focuses on the design and development of an MVP of a self­tracking tool for
psoriasis. The research question that this thesis will aim to answer is:
What are the essential features and functionalities of an effective self­tracking tool that
meets the unique needs of psoriasis patients, and how can it be designed to promote
self­reflection and management of their condition?
To address the above problem, the research seeks to answer the following questions:
1. What are the unique needs and challenges faced by psoriasis patients that a self­
tracking tool should address?
2. What features and functionalities are most important in a self­tracking tool to facili­
tate self­reflection and management for psoriasis patients?
3. What are the best methods for eliciting user requirements and feedback from psori­
asis patients during the design and testing process of the self­tracking tool?
4. How can the self­tracking tool be iteratively improved and refined based on user
feedback and evaluation results?
By answering these questions, the research aims to create a user­friendly, effective self­
tracking tool that meets the specific needs of psoriasis patients and supports self­reflection
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
1
==PAGE:10==
and management of their condition.
1.2
Overview of Thesis
The process of designing and developing a self­tracking tool for managing psoriasis is
structured in the following chapters:
Chapter 2 ­ Related Work: This chapter will first present an introduction to psoriasis and
its implications to create an overall understanding of psoriasis. Later, it will delve into the
existing literature on self­tracking for managing chronic illnesses, motivation, and aban­
donment in personal informatics, the stage­based model as well as existing apps for man­
aging psoriasis.
Chapter 3 ­ Methodology: Introduces the methodologies that have been utilized for data
collection and design throughout the design process.
Chapter 4 ­ Design: The design chapter will describe the design process of the self­
tracking tool from initial research to the high­fidelity prototype.
Chapter 5 ­ Implementation: This chapter provides a breif overview of the framework that
was used to implement the high­fidelity prototype as well as some key considerations that
was made when developing a self­tracking tool for psoriasis patients.
Chapter 6 ­ Discussion: Evaluates the results from the iterative design process, delves
into the limitations of the study and discusses potential for future work.
Chapter 7 ­ Conclusion:
2
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
It is estimated, that about 125 million people suffer from psoriasis worldwide [1]. In Den­
mark alone, this is estimated to be more than 200.000 people [4]. Given the prevalence,
this condition can have significant implications for many people globally. In this chapter, I
will delve into the interconnected topics, that have had a role in informing the design and
utility of a self­tracking tool for psoriasis patients.
2.1
Understanding Psoriasis
Psoriasis is a chronic autoimmune disease, which means that it cannot be cured but can
be managed with medical treatment, sun exposure, and several different lifestyle changes.
The symptoms of psoriasis are red, itchy, scaly skin patches that can appear anywhere
on the body and can appear very different depending on the type [5]. Flare­ups may be
triggered by various factors, such as stress, illness, weather, or injury to the skin. Triggers
are unique to each individual, meaning that they can benefit from tracking their symptoms
over time to become aware of their triggers and thereby regulate their symptoms more
effectively [6].
However, psoriasis is much more than a skin disease, as it also puts patients at risk of
many other serious diseases such as diabetes, depression, cardiovascular disease, and
psoriatic arthritis [7] [8]. Furthermore, the often­visible symptoms of the disease can lead
to social stigma, affecting the patient’s self­esteem and social life. These factors often
mean that many patients with psoriasis experience a reduced quality of life [9].
2.2
Self­Tracking for Managing Chronic Illnesses
In recent years, the use of self­tracking applications has increased [10].
These self­
tracking apps are used for a variety of purposes, such as fitness, mood, food, and moni­
toring of blood sugar levels. In addition, there has been an increase in the use of health­
related self­tracking apps [2]. Both patients and healthcare providers believe that self­
monitoring can have positive benefits in managing chronic conditions and their potential
to enhance patients’ understanding of their disease and improve their communication
with their healthcare providers [3]. However, the effectiveness of these apps in promoting
health and managing diseases largely depends on users’ willingness and engagement
[11][12].
Given the complexity of psoriasis and the many factors that can influence its symptoms
and flare­ups, self­monitoring can play a significant role in effectively managing the dis­
ease by promoting self­reflection and discovery.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
3
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Motivation and Abandonment in Self­Tracking Apps
While there is an awareness of the potential benefits of self­tracking apps for managing
chronic conditions such as psoriasis, many users stop using these applications within just
a few months, meaning that users miss out on these potential benefits [13]. This tendency
suggests that users’ needs for these types of apps have yet to be truly fulfilled, pointing to
the importance of identifying and designing users’ goals to ensure long­term engagement
[3].
Attig et al. investigated the reasons for the abandonment of wearable activity trackers.
This study identified the loss of motivation as the primary cause of abandonment. This
study also identified additional contributing factors, including data inaccuracy, privacy con­
cerns, design issues, loss of tracking feasibility, and habit formation. Interestingly, except
for motivation loss, most reasons did not lead to permanent abandonment, meaning that
many users often resume using tracking tools again when their needs arise [13].
To reduce the risk of activity tracker abandonment, Attig et al. suggested the inclusion
of meaningful reminders, personalized feedback, and increased trust in measurements,
achieved by enhancing transparency, customization, and a clear understanding of prob­
lematic usage. Furthermore, the authors emphasized the need for transparency regarding
data sharing to address privacy concerns [13].
This emphasis on user motivation was also reflected in a study by Rapp and Cena (2016),
who studied how users with no prior self­tracking experience interacted with personal
data. These users found data collection burdensome and unrewarding, mainly because
of the lack of guidance on how to interpret the data. To prevent the abandonment of self­
tracking tools for users with little to no experience with self­tracking, the study proposes
seven design strategies including meaningful reminders, giving users control over their
data, fostering community support, reflective user behavior visualization, personalized
reports as well as goals, an opportunity to revisit data, and gamification elements [14].
2.4
Stage­Based Model
To effectively design a self­tracking application for psoriasis patients, it is important to
understand how users interact with these tools. The stage­based model of personal in­
formatics systems developed by Li et al. provides a good basis for understanding and
structuring the self­tracking process to offer the necessary steps that users typically go
through in their self­tracking journey, namely preparation, collection, integration, reflec­
tion, and action [15].
4
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: The Stage­Based Model of personal informatics systems [15]
In the context of psoriasis management, these stages can provide valuable suggestions
for the design to best support the users through the different steps of self­tracking to gain
valuable insights and greater knowledge of their condition to be able to make informed
decisions and form healthy habits.
While this model offers valuable guidance, it has also been criticized for being highly
focused on the action stage. The complexity of psoriasis and the many different factors
that can influence the condition, such as diet, stress, sleep, and medication, might make
it difficult for users to identify any concrete causations. However, the system can be
designed to best support this process by offering guidance and support to hopefully help
the users realize these patterns, so they might eventually be able to turn these insights
into some actionable changes.
2.5
Existing Applications
As of today, there are a few existing applications for tracking psoriasis. In this section,
I will review some of the most prevalent ones, highlighting some of their strengths and
weaknesses.
2.5.1
PsoMentor
PsoMentor is an app for both Android and iOS and was developed in a collaboration be­
tween a company called Daman, Psoriasisforeningen (The Danish Psoriasis Association),
and health­care professionals [16].
This app incorporates gamification elements, such as badges and streaks in an attempt
to motivate users to track their symptoms. Here, the users choose to follow a course of a
duration of 8 weeks to either track their psoriasis, arthritis, treatment or quality of life.
While PsoMentor incorporates a lot of suggestions from prior research in self­tracking
motivation and elements that the users from this study indicated that they wanted, feed­
back from the users indicate that it is not very user­friendly and is very flawed as users
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
5
==PAGE:14==
sometimes are not able to log in. A big downside to this app is that the users are only able
to follow one course at a time, meaning they cannot track treatments, arthritis, symptoms
and quality of life at the same time. This could mean that users might miss out on valuable
insights about their disease. Users are also not able to track each of these elements more
than 8 weeks at a time.
As of the date of writing this, the PsoMentor has been discontinued, as explained on their
webisite.
Figure 2.2: The interface of the PsoMentor app, created in collaboration between Daman
and Psoriasisforeningen
2.5.2
Psoriasis Monitor
Psoriasis Monitor offers features such as daily symptom tracking, treatment reminders,
weather updates, a community feature, taking images of rashes and sharing pdf reports.
However, the interface is very confusing to use and not very user friendly as every feature
requires a lot of navigation to be able to find and the data summaries does not give the
users a very good overview of their symptom development. This app requires a lot of
manual tracking, which is where many users might give up as it takes a lot of time.
6
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: The interface of the Psoriasis Monitor app
2.5.3
Beat Psoriasis (AI Psoriasis App)
Beat Psoriasis differentiates itself by offering AI abilities to evaluate the users symptoms.
However, the AI feature is simply a chat­bot like feature, where the user answers some
questions on their symptoms, which eventually gives the same output as if it had been in
a questionnaire format like the previous apps.
Figure 2.4: The interface of Beat Psoriasis (AI Psoriasis App)
2.5.4
Psoriasis Manager
Psoriasis Manager, just like PsoMentor, incorporates gamification elements such as a
streak to try and motivate users to continue using it. This app requires a lot of manual
tracking to keep up the streak, where the users have to answer multiple long surveys each
day to gain valuable insights.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
7
==PAGE:16==
The app also offers an opportunity to share their data with their doctors, however, this
feature is only available if the doctor has the required software to connect to it. This
means that this feature is only usable for a very limited number of users.
Unlike the other apps that was reviewed, this app is only available for iOS, leaving out a
lot of potential users. The ratings on the app store also indicates room for improvement,
as only 3 users have left ratings and the overall rating is at 2.3.
Figure 2.5: The interface of the Psoriasis Manager app
8
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
This chapter introduces the methods used in this project during the development of a
self­tracking application for psoriasis. First, I will describe the method of the overall design
process and then delve further into the different phases and reasoning behind the methods
used within each phase.
3.1
User­Centered Design
For this project, a User­Centered Design (UCD) approach was chosen because of its
emphasis on specific target users–in this instance, patients with psoriasis. UCD is an
iterative process that continuously incorporates user feedback for both testing and refine­
ment. As seen from existing apps in this field, none of them has yet to be successful in
creating a product that users perceive as valuable to them. This project incorporated a
UCD process that consisted of user research, design, prototyping, and evaluation. In the
following sections, I will be going into greater detail regarding the various methods used
in this process in the following sections.
3.2
User Research
The first important part of a UCD process is conducting user research. This phase is
crucial to any design because it enables the creation of a design that meets users’ needs.
This phase is conducted to gain insight into the users’ needs and expectations, as well as
how they want to use the tool. In this study, I used a mixed­methods approach, combining
both quantitative and qualitative methods.
The quantitative part of the research consisted of an online survey to obtain a wider un­
derstanding of target users. This survey allowed me to reach a larger group of people
faster, thereby gaining a broader perspective of their challenges and needs. The survey
aimed to validate the need for a self­tracking tool for psoriasis patients as well as gain in­
sights into their lived experiences with their condition and their current self­management
strategies, including any tools they might already use.
In addition to the quantitative survey, qualitative interviews were conducted to gain a more
detailed insight into individual users’ experiences and needs. Interviews allow for more
in­depth questions that might arise during conversations, deepening the understanding of
users’ everyday lives with their condition. The interviews focused on validating the need
for the tool, gaining a deeper understanding of the challenges they faced, their specific
needs for managing their condition, and what they think a useful self­tracking tool might
look like.
Combining these methods allowed me to develop a comprehensive understanding of the
target group. The quantitative survey provided a wide perspective on users’ challenges
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
9
==PAGE:18==
and needs, while the qualitative interviews allowed for a more in­depth understanding.
This mixed­method approach ensured a balance in the initial user research, providing a
solid foundation for the ideation and prototyping phases.
3.3
Prototyping and Iteration
The app was designed using an iterative process that continuously incorporated and ad­
justed the design based on the users’ feedback. During this process, both low­ and high­
fidelity prototypes were created.
A low­fidelity prototype was created using Figma, which served as a fast and efficient
way of obtaining valuable user feedback and refining the design without spending a lot of
time and resources. During this phase, the prototype was tested by users during multiple
think­out­loud tests. Think­Out­Loud tests allow the tester to observe both the users’
reactions and hear what they are thinking while they go through the app. This can provide
valuable insights into the usability of an application, as well as what users think about the
experience while going through it. User feedback from the tests was used continuously
to update and refine the design throughout the project.
After the last iteration of refinement of the low­fidelity prototype, a high­fidelity prototype
was developed using Flutter. It was determined that the low­fidelity prototype alone would
not be sufficient to test the feasibility or usability of an app. A high­fidelity prototype pro­
vides a more realistic representation of how the app works. As time was limited for this
project, the high­fidelity prototype represents a Minimal Viable Product (MVP) of the latest
design to give users an idea of the most central features within the app. This prototype
was shared with the users to be installed on their own devices, to be tried out for a period
of two weeks. This allowed me to gather even more meaningful feedback about the users’
experiences and the usability of the app within the context of their everyday lives.
Continuously refining and changing the design from the results of user testing ensures
that the final design will be more aligned with the users’ actual needs. As the time for this
project is fairly limited, a complete design will not be achieved. However, the project aims
to create a design that becomes closer to creating a product that is truly valuable to users
after further iterations and refinements. The development of the design is introduced in a
later section.
3.4
Final Evaluation
In the previous section, it was described that the users tried out the high­fidelity prototype
on their own devices for a two­week period. At the end of this testing period, qualitative
interviews were conducted to evaluate the users’ experiences with the app. The qualita­
tive interviews in this phase allowed me to obtain more detailed feedback from the users
and enabled me to ask follow­up questions as well as more open­ended questions to gain
insights that might not be possible if the users had answered a questionnaire.
10
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:19==
4
Design
This chapter presents the design process of a self­tracking tool for psoriasis called Pso­
Care. The prototype was designed using an iterative process. Each iteration of the de­
sign was tested and validated by the end users. This process led to the creation of a
high­fidelity prototype that was tested on users for a 2­week period to obtain feedback on
how the app performed in their everyday lives. In the following sections, I will elaborate
on each stage of the design process and the feedback and decisions that informed the
design of PsoCare.
4.1
Idea Validation and Initial User Insights
To design an app that truly lives up to the users’ needs, the first step was to validate the
idea of a self­tracking application for managing psoriasis and to better understand the
target users. This step is important to gain insights into how patients manage their illness
daily, their experiences with existing apps, and their interest in such tracking tools.
To achieve this, a survey was distributed on several psoriasis forums on Facebook, includ­
ing Psoriasisforeningens’ Facebook page. The survey included questions about the par­
ticipants’ condition, whether they had any past experience with psoriasis­tracking apps,
the tools they currently use to monitor their symptoms, and any potential concerns about
using an app to track their condition. The full survey and its answers can be found in
Appendix A.
The survey had 84 respondents from different age groups and disease severities. Re­
spondents were asked whether they had any prior experience with self­tracking apps for
psoriasis. Only 5 respondents had prior experience. Among users with no prior experi­
ence with such self­tracking apps, the majority (60 out of 79) expressed interest in such
an app.
Figure 4.1: Interest in an app to help manage psoriasis
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
11
==PAGE:20==
Furthermore, the experiences of users with prior experience using psoriasis­tracking apps
were investigated. Most of these respondents had experience with Psoriasisforeningen’s
own app, PsoMentor, and some had experience with Psoriasis Monitor. However, none of
them currently use any of these apps. Among the reasons for abandonment were difficulty
in getting started, time consumption, confusing usage, and lack of useful outputs. These
insights highlight the importance of creating an app that is intuitive, simple, and meaningful
to the user.
The survey also investigated the tools that the respondents were currently using to man­
age their conditions. This revealed that the majority of respondents (42 out of 79) relied
on their memory to keep track of their symptoms and 38 reported that they did not use
anything. Five of the respondents used their photo library as a visual log, and a few re­
spondents resorted to the calendar and notes function on their phones, indicating that
they had made an attempt at some digital tracking.
Figure 4.2: Current tools users use to manage their illness
These insights revealed that the users primarily relied on very basic tools to manage
their condition, suggesting that a well­designed, specialized app might enhance their self­
tracking process and possibly provide them with some insights that they might not be able
to reveal using these basic tools.
To further understand the respondents’ motivations, they were asked why they wanted an
app to help them manage their condition. It became clear that users struggle to remember
the evolution of their symptoms over time, making it difficult to see patterns and have
valuable conversations with their doctors.
This was further expressed by one of the users in the initial interviews:
”To be able to remember a bit about: ”How bad was it?” or ”How good was it
when I got something else?”. And it could have been smart if it was somewhere
else. (...) Yes, because I write such a small, not diary, but still. Because the
first thing they do when I get a new doctor is, ”Well, what’s the story?”. ”Oh”,
12
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:21==
I think. I forgot to bring that with me today. So it’s by memory sometimes, so
that could be really smart”
The survey also explored the features that the respondents wanted in such an app. From
these responses, a word cloud was created to explore the common themes desired by
the users. This can be observed in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Wordcloud generated from answers to what features they would like in this
app
Suggestions ranged from photo documentation, stress, and diet tracking, to medication
reminders. Many users expressed the desire for a simple logging system for registering
symptoms as well as an overview of the condition to be able to see tendencies in their
flare­ups.
The respondents were also asked whether they had any concerns about using such a
system to manage their condition. Another word cloud was generated from the responses
shown in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Wordcloud generated from answers to what concerns they might have about
this app
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
13
==PAGE:22==
The concerns ranged from fears about data privacy and unauthorized access to overat­
tention to symptoms or monitoring. Some users also expressed concerns about forgetting
to use the app, suggesting the need for daily reminders.
In addition to a survey investigating users’ needs for a psoriasis­tracking app, I also
wanted to investigate what makes a good self­tracking app in general. To achieve this,
I sent out a survey to various forums and social media. The survey revealed that many
users stopped using these tools owing to loss of motivation and burdensome data entries,
similar to the study by Attig et al. [13].
Users who continued using the tools found that ease of use, progress tracking, and good
data summaries were among the main motivational factors. They also stated that they
disliked constant notifications and complex interfaces.
The surveys provided valuable insights into users’ needs for a self­tracking app for man­
aging psoriasis. From this, it became clear that users want a simple and intuitive app that
provides them with an overview of their condition and respects their privacy. Furthermore,
they would like to be able to track their symptoms over time to aid them in their conver­
sations with their doctors. These insights helped to create a good basis for designing an
app that meets the users’ needs.
4.2
Persona Creation
With an understanding of the target users’ needs gathered from the surveys and inter­
views, I created personas to represent these users. Based on these findings, three dif­
ferent personas were created. These personas represent a range of users suffering from
psoriasis with different needs, preferences, and challenges. These personas are shown
in Figure 4.5.
These personas helped me gain a relatable understanding of the target users and guided
design decisions throughout the project. By keeping these in mind, I ensured that the
design catered to a wide variety of user needs and concerns.
14
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:23==
(a) Persona Edith
(b) Persona David
(c) Persona Maria
Figure 4.5: Personas created to represent the end­users
4.3
Iterative Design and Testing
The learnings from the surveys, interviews, and creation of personas laid the foundation
for starting the design process, leading to the iterative design and testing phase. This
approach enabled me to continuously refine the application based on user feedback, en­
suring that I was developing an application that met the users’ needs.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
15
==PAGE:24==
4.3.1
Initial prototype
The first iteration of the low­fidelity prototype focused on one of the primary needs men­
tioned in the surveys and interviews: an overview of their condition. As ”overview” can
be very subjective and hard to define, I created two versions of an overview page, each
showing a different interpretation of what an overview might look like.
Version 1 of the overview screen had a scroll­able list structure with a calendar at the top
of the screen, a section to input your mental state for the day, and a list of the areas where
rashes have been identified, with a button to add a new area when the need arises at the
bottom. Version 2, on the other hand, was much more simplistic, showing a body figure
split into different sections. These sections were used to replicate the areas defined by
the PASI score. The different sections of the body show the status of the areas using
colored circles and emoticons. The two versions of the overview screen are shown in
Figure 4.6.
(a) Version 1
(b) Version 2
Figure 4.6: Two versions of an overview screen
As part of the design process, I conducted extensive research on psoriasis, which led to
the discovery of the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) [17]. This tool, used by
medical professionals to evaluate the severity of psoriasis, seemed particularly relevant
as it could provide me with a method for measuring the severity of the condition. This
measure and its assessments were taken into account when creating the first design to
get an idea of how the rashes could be assessed when registering the symptoms and
16
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:25==
showing them in an overview.
In addition to the overview, the first iteration of the design also included a registration flow
for symptom tracking and a details page that provided statistics on the different areas
and image documentation. These were included to evaluate whether the input methods
to register symptoms and a detailed view of the different areas aligned with users’ needs
and expectations. The two versions of the first prototype can be seen in detail in Appendix
D.
User feedback was collected through think­out­loud tests. To avoid bias in one of the
overview screens, the order in which the prototypes were presented was randomized for
each session. This user feedback provided me with central learnings for further refinement
of the low­fidelity prototype.
Overview and Body Area Selection
Both versions of the prototype highlighted users’ desire for a more detailed way of adding
and visualizing the symptom areas on the body. One user suggested the possibility of
zooming in on specific areas to choose where the rash is located more precisely. As for
the overview, several users expressed a preference for Version 1, as it was more detailed
and gave them more information at a glance.
Symptom Tracking and Measurement
The concept of measuring the affected areas in terms of the ’number of palms’ was con­
fusing for several users, who requested further clarification. However, the visual nature
of the redness selector was very well received, and they appreciated the color­changing
feature that made it very clear what the redness scale corresponded to. The users also
liked the visual feedback of the images of the scale levels to determine the correct score.
In contrast, determining the thickness of the rashes (induration) is challenging for users.
PASI Score and Severity Assessment
In the initial design, I included the PASI score as a method of assessing users’ severity
of their condition. Some users appreciated the ability to assess their psoriasis with this
score, as they were very familiar with it from their many doctor visits. However, most
users did not know the PASI score, and this form of assessment was confusing to them,
suggesting a need to reassess the method of evaluating the severity score.
Emotional and Lifestyle Aspects
Many users liked the ability to address their emotional state by selecting simple smiley
faces in Version 1 of the overview. Users also appreciated the idea of being able to track
multiple lifestyle factors in the app, such as stress, sleep, and activity.
Image Comparison
The image­taking feature was well received; however, one user expressed the need for a
smarter image­taking system. The user suggested an image filter for the camera function
when taking images, outlining the prior photo taken to ensure that the images were taken
in the exact same spot every time for better image comparison.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
17
==PAGE:26==
Sharing and Reminders
The option to share their data with doctors was favored by most users, indicating the
importance of using the data for better and more valuable appointments with their doc­
tors. Additionally, users expressed the significance of having notifications to help them
remember to register for more valuable outputs.
The think­out­loud tests offer valuable insights for further refining the low­fidelity prototype.
The clarified user needs contributed to the ongoing design process to ensure that the
prototype met the users’ expectations and needs for the platform.
4.3.2
Second Iteration
The second iteration of the low­fidelity prototype was revised with a wide range of updates
and features to create a more fully­fletched application. These changes were guided
by user feedback from the think­out­loud tests and desired features uncovered from the
surveys and interviews. An overview of the screens from the prototype can be found in
(Appendix F).
Overview Page and Treatment Registration
The revised overview page retained the core layout of Version 1 of the overview screen
from the previous iteration, as this was the most well­received version by the users. The
mental state input feature that was found valuable by the users was preserved and made
easily accessible from the front page. The list of registered areas was streamlined for
simplicity, while maintaining most key details that users found useful. To make it easier for
the users to update their registrations daily, a recurring prompt allowing users to replicate
the previous day’s registrations, in case nothing had changed from the day before, was
included.
An additional feature added in this iteration was the treatment feature requested by several
users. This feature allowed users to add their treatments to the app and to be reminded
to take them (Figure 4.7). The overview of the treatments was added to the overview
screen to give the users easy access to this feature. The feature also included the ability
to indicate that the treatment has been taken by the press of a button.
18
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:27==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Screenshots of the flow for adding treatment. a) shows adding a name for the
treatment. b) shows adding a reminder schedule for the treatment
Detailed Statistics and Symptom Severity
The details page was revised for more detailed statistics on the symptom severity to offer
a better understanding of how the symptoms evolve over time. The incorporation of the
PASI score was reevaluated, as it caused confusion among several users. As a result,
the PASI score graph was replaced with a simpler graph depicting symptom severity with
a score of low, medium, or high.
Recognizing that some users may prefer weekly over daily usage, an option to display
monthly data was added, ensuring all users received meaningful statistics.
Incorporating some of the feedback from the users on the smarter image­taking function,
I modified the design to fit this desire. The idea behind the image­taking function was; if
the user had already taken one photo of an area on the body, the next time the user was
to take a photo, a filter tracing the previous rash would be shown on top, to guide the user
to take the photo in the exact same place as the previous one. An example of this can be
seen in Figure 4.8.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
19
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Screenshots of the image­taking feature. a) shows how the camera will look
the first time the user takes a photo of an area. b) shows the second time a user takes a
photo with the filter of the old photo
Updated Registration Flow
Addressing user needs for more detailed body part selection, the figure of the body was
updated for the users to choose areas in more detail and a secondary screen was added
for increased precision (Figure 4.9).
Additionally, the ability to register nail psoriasis was introduced, as this is a very common
symptom of psoriasis. As the symptoms manifest differently from the rashes known to
psoriasis [18], this entailed the design of a unique registration flow specifically designed
for this part of the body, and had to capture the characteristics of nail psoriasis, including
discoloration, thickening, and the presence of pits or ridges on the nails.
20
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Screenshots of adding a new body area. a) shows the figure of a body where
the user can select a part of the body. b) shows the detailed selection view for specifying
the area further
Statistics Page
In this iteration, a comprehensive statistics page was added, enabling users to gain in­
sights into the overall condition of their body. As psoriasis is influenced by numerous
factors, statistics related to users’ stress, sleep, and activity levels were included, aimed
at helping users identify potential symptom triggers.
Considering user engagement, it was crucial to avoid overloading the app with manual
data entries, which could lead to abandonment of the app. For this reason, the app was
designed to automatically record stress, sleep, and activity data by connecting to the built­
in health app on the users’ phones (The Health App on iOS and Google Fit on Android). If
the app detected any correlation between these factors and symptom severity, a message
was designed to inform the user of such potential links, aiding their understanding of
symptom triggers.
Information Page
Addressing the need expressed by survey participants for readily available general infor­
mation on psoriasis, an information page was introduced. This page consisted of a range
of psoriasis­related topics, each linking to an article on Psoriasisforeningen’s website. As
a non­medical professional, this decision was taken to ensure users receive accurate and
reliable information, avoiding potential harm from incorrect or misleading content.
The updated design was eventually tested on users in a think­out­loud test to gain in­
sights into user interaction and potential issues with the second iteration of the low­fidelity
prototype.
During the tests, users encountered aspects of the application that could be further re­
fined. The prompt, which asked users if there had been any changes since their last
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
21
==PAGE:30==
registration, caused confusion in several users. For those not registered daily, remem­
bering what they had registered previously posed a challenge.
For some users, the most valuable feature is image taking. These users expressed the
issue of having difficulty finding the feature, as it was placed at the very bottom of the
detail screen, suggesting the need to relocate the feature to a more prominent and intuitive
place.
Despite these issues, testing also received significant positive feedback. Particularly the
visual representation of registered and non­registered areas. This feature allowed them
to easily get an overview of their condition as well as allowed them to easily see which
areas they had already registered for.
4.4
Final Low­fidelity Prototype
Building upon the insights gathered from the second iteration’s think­out­loud tests, the
final low­fidelity prototype was developed. This final update to the design focused on
refining the design based on user feedback, enhancing usability, and improving the overall
user experience.
In this final iteration, several critical additions were integrated into the design. One of
them being the introduction of an onboarding flow. This flow aims to acquaint users with
the app and its features when getting started. Additionally, it addresses the crucial aspect
of data security by providing assurances to the users that their data will be handled with
utmost safety and respect.
Recognizing the importance of regular interactions with the app, I integrated an option
that enables users to set notifications. This feature, consistently highlighted as a core
need by the users, is designed to help them seamlessly incorporate the app into their
daily routines.
The image feature also saw a significant update in this iteration. It now offers a unique
scrolling capability that allows images to scroll over each other for better comparison be­
tween the images. Corresponding symptom severity levels are simultaneously displayed
underneath these images. This approach facilitates a direct visual comparison between
images and symptoms, thus enabling users to track and understand their condition better
over time.
Lastly, based on user feedback, I relocated the image­taking feature to the top of the detail
screen under its own tab. This move is designed to enhance the feature’s visibility and
accessibility, ensuring users can find and utilize it with ease.
A detailed overview of the final low­fidelity prototype can be seen in Appendix G.
4.5
High­fidelity Prototype Testing and Feedback
Building on the foundation of the final design of the low­fidelity prototype, a high­fidelity
prototype was created. The high­fidelity prototype served as a Minimum Viable Product
22
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:31==
(MVP) of this design. For this prototype, several core features were selected for imple­
mentation and testing. These features include the overview screen, registration of symp­
toms, detailed statistics of the different areas, and reminders for users to remember to
register.
By allowing users to test the high­fidelity prototype in their own time for two weeks, I
aimed to gather more authentic feedback. This approach was chosen because users
may interact a little differently with the product when they can use it privately and in the
context of their everyday lives, compared to the more controlled and formal context of a
usability testing session.
After two weeks of testing, follow­up interviews were conducted. The interviews aimed to
gain a better understanding of the users’ experiences with the prototype, the challenges
they might have faced, whether they gained value from it and whether they had any sug­
gestions for improvement.
Overall, the users were very happy with the application, as they felt that it lived up to their
needs and expectations of the system. One participant expressed that she felt that the
system was very user­friendly and that the notifications helped them a lot with remember­
ing to register.
”Der er faktisk meget brugervenlig og... Når der kom sådan en notifikation på,
at man skal huske at udfylde den, så tror jeg det at det virker. Fordi når man
først er inde i den, så virker det bare rigtig godt.”
Another user also added to this, expressing how the notifications were important for them
to remember to register their symptoms.
”Og jeg synes også den funktion, som ligger nede i indstillingerne, hvor jeg
kan få en notifikation. (...) Men jeg synes det er smart at man kan blive mindet
på den. At det er nu. “Husk det nu i dag”. Eller hvad du nu har indstillet den
til. Det synes jeg fungerer rigtig godt. ”
One user even described how the app had provided them with a sense of calm and helped
them put away their worries when registering in the app.
”Så på mig i hvert fald, der virkede det sådan anti­stressende. (...) Fordi det
er ligesom når man tager det der udslæt man har. Det har du styr på, så ligger
det i den app og så skal du ikke tænke videre på det før i morgen. (...) Jeg
synes vitterligt at det havde en psykologisk god effekt, at jeg havde et sted at
gøre af det.”
This underlines the psychological benefits such a system could have for people suffering
from psoriasis. Having a place to register your symptoms and not having to think about it
for the rest of the day helped the user to worry less about their condition.
The user also stated how the app helped them with getting an overview of how their
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
23
==PAGE:32==
condition had evolved during the week and even aided them in recalling the information
in a conversation with their doctors.
”Ja fordi det er jo den man bruger når man så ligesom en gang om ugen siger
jamen: “Hvordan er det egentlig gået i denne her uge?”. (...) Og så brugte jeg
faktisk, fordi jeg var til tjek på reumatologisk afdeling, der kunne jeg så lige gå
ind og tage statistikken (...)”
Participants found the app to be very manageable, even when registering every day, as
it only took a few moments for them. This bodes well for the motivation for sustained use
of the app.
”Ja det er super hurtigt at bruge, så det tager kun, ja, et halvt minut. Og det er
helt fint. Jeg tror ikke, at det skal være mere, for at folk de skal kunne bruge
det sådan.”
The registration flow was also very well received by the users’ and felt intuitive and easy
to use.
”Ja og så måden man registrerer på synes jeg egentlig også er super fin. (...)
Altså når man registrerer, det synes jeg er super intuitivt. Altså det der med
farverne og så bjælken. Det er super intuitivt. (...) Det der med, at der kun
kommer et spørgsmål af gangen og så skal du trykke næste. Det gør det kun
sådan mere spændende på en eller anden måde.”
While users praised several aspects of the app, they also identified areas for improve­
ment. Some users expressed how they couldn’t see themselves using the app every
day, but less. In the current version of the prototype, it was only possible to schedule the
notifications daily or weekly. However, the users expressed that they would like a more
fine­grained system where they can schedule the notifications on certain weekdays.
”Måske ikke hver dag, men måske hvis man kunne stille det til hver anden
dag, så ville det være fint, fordi der er ikke så store forskelle egentlig fra dag
til dag. Det er næsten det samme jeg har rapporteret hver gang.”
Some participants also found certain features difficult to find within the app. One user
described that they had some difficulty with locating the image diary and image function.
”Jeg synes, at når jeg så skulle ind og finde det sted man kunne tage billeder.
Det synes jeg tog tid. Det var svært at komme ind til den der billeddagbog.”.”
As this feature is very important for some users, improving the usability and accessibility
of this feature could enhance the user experience of the app.
Furthermore, the participants identified a few other areas that needed more clarification for
improved usability. One user expressed how the calculation of the severity didn’t work very
well if they didn’t experience any symptoms in some of the categories in the registration
flow.
24
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:33==
”(...) så er der lige pt. 4 områder, som man skal svare på i forbindelse med
registreringen. Det er rødhed, kløen, smerte og skæl. For mit eget vedkom­
mende, jeg har aldrig kløet overhovedet. Så den har bare ligget på nul, hver
eneste gang. Og det var også det, jeg mente i forhold til det her med, at den
vil aldrig komme ud med noget negativt”
Another user felt it difficult to understand how the figure of the person when adding a new
area of psoriasis should be interpreted.
”Det der med at jeg både har en venstre og en højre fod for eksempel, og der
kunne jeg komme til at udfylde den forkerte side. (...) Men når jeg så vælger et
område, der kan jeg godt blive i tvivl, om jeg ser personen forfra eller bagfra.
Og så til venstre, er det det samme som min venstre? Eller ser jeg personen
forfra? Jeg bliver i tvivl, fordi der er en ring omkring kønsorganerne. Og dem
kan man jo normalt set forfra. Og så står vi ikke i samme retning der.”
These identified usability issues are very important to address to improve the app’s overall
user experience.
The participants also suggested several features for further development and improve­
ment.
These included dates on the images for better comparison over time, a body
area header on the registration flow to remember what they are currently registering, and
adding notes and images in continuation of the registration flow.
Finally, the users expressed an overall excitement to continue using the tool to gain some
insights over time about how their condition develops.
”Perfekt. Hvad så? Dør den her om lidt? Så forsvinder den igen? (...) Jeg vil
gerne beholde den. (...) Nå, men jeg glæder mig ikke til at få mere psoriasis,
men jeg ser faktisk frem til at prøve at se, hvad den kan gøre for mig i forhold
til at blive lidt mere bevidst.”
The high­fidelity prototype received positive feedback from users. The users liked the
user­friendly interface and the ability to track their symptoms over time to get a bet­
ter overview of their condition. However, their feedback also highlighted areas for im­
provement, including more fine­grained notification schedules, a better calculation system
for assessing severity, and clearer instructions in regard to body diagram interpretation.
Overall, the high­fidelity prototype showed the potential of meeting the users’ needs and
enhancing their psoriasis management.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
25
==PAGE:34==
26
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:35==
5
Implementation
In this chapter, I delve into the specifics of how the high­fidelity prototype was implemented
as a Minimum Viable Product (MVP). Key considerations that guided this phase were
development platform selection, data storage, user privacy, and strategies for monitoring
app performance and usage patterns.
The high­fidelity prototype was developed using Flutter, a cross­platform framework that
allows developers to develop apps for both iOS and Android using a single codebase. The
advantage of using this framework to build the high­fidelity prototype is that it ensures that
no potential testers are left out of the test phase.
5.1
Data Management
Given the sensitive nature of user data, particularly medical data, a local database solution
was selected. For this purpose, a local database called Hive was adopted. Hive is a fast
and lightweight key­value database that can be used with Flutter. Using a local database
to store the data, I can circumvent potential General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
issues and ensure the highest degree of data privacy for users. Users can be assured
that their data will remain secure on their devices and will never be shared or uploaded
elsewhere.
5.2
Testing and Analysing User Behavior
In a continuous development and improvement journey, it is essential to understand user
behavior and monitor potential crashes. For this purpose, Firebase Crashlytics and An­
alytics were incorporated into the app. Crashlytics can help report crashes in real time,
which allows me to address any issues in the app in detail without the users having to
report them manually, ensuring a continued good user experience. Firebase Analytics
provides valuable insights into users’ app usage and user engagement, enabling me to
make informed decisions to enhance user experience and the overall app experience in
the future.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: Diagram showing the overall structure of the flutter application
28
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:37==
6
Discussion
This chapter discusses and interprets the results obtained in this thesis. It will also explore
the potential for future work and limitations.
This thesis started by identifying a gap in the market of psoriasis tracking applications, as
the existing applications failed to meet users’ needs. Several users expressed that these
apps are often unmanageable and not user­friendly. While existing apps tend to highlight
their collaboration with healthcare professionals, one area they seem to overlook is the
integration of actual user needs and feedback.
The investigation has revealed several important insights into the needs of psoriasis pa­
tients, highlighting the importance of a customized self­tracking tool that can address
these specific needs. The mixed­method approach of utilizing quantitative surveys and
qualitative interviews facilitated a deep understanding of these needs, emphasizing the
importance of incorporating user feedback during the design and development process.
Features and functionalities, such as tracking symptoms, triggers, and treatments, along
with features encouraging self­reflection like daily logs or mood trackers, were highlighted
as significant components for effective self­management of psoriasis. Furthermore, the
tool’s ability to visually represent the logged data for user­friendly trend identification and
understanding is another important facet to promote self­reflection.
The iterative design process involving the development and refinement of low and high­
fidelity prototypes emerged as a powerful approach for creating a tool that aligns closely
with the user’s needs. Each iteration, informed by user feedback, helped refine the tool,
resulting in a design that resonates well with the target user group.
6.1
Limitations and Future Work
This study was not without limitations. A notable limitation is the limited number of partici­
pants during the testing phase. A number of five participants were retained in each round
of testing. This number of participants is a fairly good result, however, there could poten­
tially have been gained even more valuable insight with a broader user base. Moreover,
due to the limited time for the project, there might still be a potential for gaining an even
deeper understanding of the users’ needs and interactions.
While the prototype was generally well received, user feedback also pinpointed some
areas for improvement. Notably, some users felt the need for a more flexible notification
system to better suit their needs and not only be able to set daily or weekly reminders. The
discoverability of certain features, such as the image diary, was another area of concern.
Users would prefer this feature to be an extension of the registration flow, making it an
option to take a photo while registering for the day. Additionally, clarity in interpreting some
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
29
==PAGE:38==
app elements, such as the body figure during psoriasis area registration, surfaced as a
challenge for users.
The prototype, however, offers a solid foundation for future research and development.
Features suggested by participants for further enhancement included timestamped im­
ages for better comparative analysis over time, and a body area header during the reg­
istration flow for easy tracking as well as the ability to track a greater selection of factors
that might influence psoriasis, like the weather, diet, etc.
Additionally, while the tool was designed to meet the unique needs of psoriasis patients,
it is important to acknowledge the diverse range of these needs. Not all identified needs
may be adequately met by the tool, and individual preferences can vary, necessitating
further iterations and refinements to the tool.
As this study has been fairly limited in time, there might be potential areas for future
research, including a longitudinal investigation of the tool’s effectiveness in promoting self­
reflection and understanding of the condition. The integration of machine learning could
also be explored to provide predictive insights and personalized advice to the users based
on their tracked data as well as insights about their rashes based on image recognition.
30
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:39==
7
Conclusion
The findings from this study highlight the importance and impact of a self­tracking tool
for psoriasis that truly meets the users’ needs. The research and user testing confirmed
that the design of an effective self­tracking tool must account for the unique needs and
challenges of psoriasis patients, such as symptom tracking, stress management, lifestyle
adaptations, and medical treatment plans. The insights obtained from the quantitative
surveys and qualitative interviews conducted provided a deep understanding of the pa­
tient’s perspective, underlining the criticality of the inclusion of such feedback throughout
the design and development process.
We determined that the most crucial features of a self­tracking tool for psoriasis patients in­
clude symptom tracking, medication reminders, life management tips, and detailed statis­
tics on their condition. These functionalities are pivotal to not only manage the condition
effectively but also supporting self­reflection, enhancing their understanding of their dis­
ease and its triggers.
The iterative design process allowed me to continuously refine the design by incorporating
user feedback. This user­centered approach proved to be important to design a self­
tracking tool that effectively meets the users’ needs.
However, this study also has some limitations. The limited time for the project and the
small number of participants can mean that I might not have captured all needs and pref­
erences of psoriasis patients. Nevertheless, this study provided a valuable start for creat­
ing a valuable self­tracking tool for people suffering from psoriasis, providing insights into
future improvements and features.
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
31
==PAGE:40==
32
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1]
National Psoriasis Foundation. Get the Facts About Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis.
en. Dec. 2022. URL: https : / / www . psoriasis . org / psoriasis - statistics/ (visited on
06/01/2023).
[2]
Jing Zhao, Becky Freeman, and Mu Li. “Can Mobile Phone Apps Influence Peo­
ple’s Health Behavior Change? An Evidence Review”. EN. In: Journal of Medical
Internet Research 18.11 (Nov. 2016). Company: Journal of Medical Internet Re­
search Distributor: Journal of Medical Internet Research Institution: Journal of Med­
ical Internet Research Label: Journal of Medical Internet Research Publisher: JMIR
Publications Inc., Toronto, Canada, e5692. DOI: 10.2196/jmir.5692. URL: https:
//www.jmir.org/2016/11/e287 (visited on 02/10/2023).
[3]
Jessica Schroeder et al. “Examining Opportunities for Goal­Directed Self­Tracking
to Support Chronic Condition Management”. en. In: Proceedings of the ACM on
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 3.4 (Dec. 2019), pp. 1–
26. ISSN: 2474­9567. DOI: 10.1145/3369809. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
3369809 (visited on 02/12/2023).
[4]
Psoriasis Foreningen. Om os | Psoriasisforeningen. da. URL: https://psoriasis.dk/
om-os (visited on 06/01/2023).
[5]
Psoriasis Foreningen. Symptomer | Psoriasisforeningen. da. URL: https://psoriasis.
dk/psoriasis-hud-led/psoriasis/symptomer (visited on 06/01/2023).
[6]
National Psoriasis Foundation. Psoriasis: Causes & Triggers. en. Dec. 2022. URL:
https://www.psoriasis.org/causes/ (visited on 06/01/2023).
[7]
Netdoktor. Psoriasis er mere end en hudsygdom. da. Aug. 2018. URL: https://
netdoktor.dk/sygdomme/psoriasis/psoriasis-er-mere-end-en-hudsygdom.htm (visited
on 06/01/2023).
[8]
Psoriasis Foreningen. Følgesygdomme | Psoriasisforeningen. da. URL: https://
psoriasis.dk/psoriasis-hud-led/foelgesygdomme (visited on 06/01/2023).
[9]
Yan Zhang and Ciaran Trace. “The quality of health and wellness self￿tracking data:
A consumer perspective”. In: Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology 73 (Oct. 2021). DOI: 10.1002/asi.24591.
[10]
Ramon Llamas, Jitesh Ubrani, and Michael Shirer. IDC Reports Strong Growth
in the Worldwide Wearables Market, Led by Holiday Shipments of Smartwatches,
Wrist Bands, and Ear­Worn Devices. en. Mar. 2019. URL: https://www.businesswire.
com/news/home/20190305005268/en/IDC-Reports-Strong-Growth-in-the-Worldwide-
Wearables-Market-Led-by-Holiday-Shipments-of-Smartwatches-Wrist-Bands-and-Ear-
Worn-Devices (visited on 06/19/2023).
[11]
Martine W. J. Huygens et al. “Self­monitoring of health data by patients with a
chronic disease: does disease controllability matter?” In: BMC Family Practice 18.1
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
33
==PAGE:42==
(Mar. 2017), p. 40. ISSN: 1471­2296. DOI: 10 . 1186 / s12875 - 017 - 0615 - 3. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12875-017-0615-3 (visited on 06/02/2023).
[12]
Saee Hamine et al. “Impact of mHealth chronic disease management on treatment
adherence and patient outcomes: a systematic review”. eng. In: Journal of Medical
Internet Research 17.2 (Feb. 2015), e52. ISSN: 1438­8871. DOI: 10.2196/jmir.3951.
[13]
Christiane Attig and Thomas Franke. “Abandonment of personal quantification: A
review and empirical study investigating reasons for wearable activity tracking attri­
tion”. en. In: Computers in Human Behavior 102 (Jan. 2020), pp. 223–237. ISSN:
0747­5632. DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2019.08.025. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0747563219303127 (visited on 02/12/2023).
[14]
Amon Rapp and Federica Cena. “Personal informatics for everyday life: How users
without prior self­tracking experience engage with personal data”. en. In: Interna­
tional Journal of Human­Computer Studies 94 (Oct. 2016), pp. 1–17. ISSN: 10715819.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2016.05.006. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S107158191630060X (visited on 02/10/2023).
[15]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. A stage­based model of personal informatics
systems. Vol. 1. Journal Abbreviation: Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems ­ Proceedings Pages: 566 Publication Title: Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems ­ Proceedings. Apr. 2010. DOI: 10.1145/1753326.1753409.
[16]
Carsten Sauer Mikkelsen, Lars Werner, and Luit Penninga. “Gamifying Your Psori­
asis Tracking”. en. In: ().
[17]
Mary West. PASI score: Definition and how to calculate. en. June 2021. URL: https:
//www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/pasi-score (visited on 06/22/2023).
[18]
Paula Ludmann. What is nail psoriasis, and how can I treat it? en. Feb. 2023. URL:
https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/psoriasis/treatment/genitals/nails (visited on
06/23/2023).
34
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:43==
A
Survey on Psoriasis
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
35
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Why / why not?
Never really got started
Don't really think it helped me
It took too much time to register every day
It was very confusing to me
It didn’t give me anything useful
What was your overall experience with the app?
Didn't think it was easy to use, gave up using it when I got a reply that that's how it
worked.
Not so relevant to me
It didn’t help me get an overview
.
==PAGE:46==
If yes, why?
Work a lot of hours 14/15 at a time when I travel, an app will definitely help me remember
my days for lubrication and other
Could be good with a concrete tool.
Easy
Better control over aids and food
Easier documentation for the patient, so that a doctor/hospital can see that you are telling
the truth and can receive treatment that matches your needs
It could give a better overview than the pictures I have here and there in my camera roll
Could be nice
Smart with an app when you are in a system that is just confusing..
For explanation to doctors at check-ups
==PAGE:47==
I can't remember the last time I had the same problem
It could be nice when you have to explain to the doctor
Is easier to keep track of agreements etc.
There are often long waiting times at dermatologists, so it would be advantageous to have
an overview of your progress etc. saved somewhere so that you can easily find what you
need to "remember and get said"
For me, it would give a better overview of outbreaks and symptoms in relation to possible
doctor visits and medications. I would definitely use it in the same way as a menses
calendar.
To keep track of information and periods for visits to the doctor
Remember when the symptoms worsen and thus understand what could be causing it
Always good to have an overview, because memory is probably not the safest/realistic
solution...
To make everyday life easier and inform the dermatologist more correctly
Inspiration
Because it's a messy disease
To get a better compliance
I often have questions that I forget if I don't get them written down
This will make it more manageable and structured. Therefore, the consultation with the
doctors will be more profitable
I think it would give me a good overview.
Even if it is mild psoriasis at the moment, it can change. And I also have psoriatic arthritis.
So I can remember it and can show it to my doctor.
Would make it easier when I'm for a check-up at the skin department
It could give an overview
I know which creams and gels work, so I'm never in contact with a dermatologist. But
could be curious about what tricks any breakouts.
It will be exciting.
???
Because I tend to forget that it can get better and on/off is better too
I can never remember when I felt the worst and the best when the doctor asks
Because it could make the symptoms more transparent and provide an overview
==PAGE:48==
As I often forget to keep the treatment straight. An app that can help on that point would
be nice
Haven't thought about it before, but since it has spread, it would have been good to have a
date on when it started and has developed since.
I don't see any harm in having it, but I'm not sure how much I would use it
It will be nice to be able to see which factors have played a role, so that I can better
understand why it breaks out and when it is at its worst.
It might help with an overview of everyday life.
It would be nice to get an overview of which treatments have helped others with the same
symptoms.
It could be nice when you have to have a top-up at the doctor
If it becomes necessary one day, then it must be easy and convenient.
It would be nice to see what/which periods trigger a lot of psoriasis other than winter cold
Going to get arthritis treatment, so would be exciting to see if it has an effect or the
opposite
It would help one with what to avoid/can prevent
It is easier to look at it visually
If no, why not?
I couldn't imagine what the app would do differently tbh since my type of psoriasis is not as
intense as the other types
Won't use it
I don't need to keep track of treatment.
I don't think I know what an app would help with. After all, I know what makes my skin
explode (stress, wrong food, lack of vitamin D).
Have almost nothing left after getting Cryo therapy
Doctors are smarter than an app
I find it redundant
I don't see it making any difference to me.
I don't think I would get to use it in my busy daily life.
Too much work, don't have time
==PAGE:49==
There is no real system in when my rash is worse or better. For example, it is often if a few
days have passed without me having a shower that it is improving
I have kind of given up on treatment, with small children in the house it is a lower priority
It is too difficult and it does not solve my problem with the chronic disease
What am I going to do with it?
I can easily keep track of it myself
Not sure what value this will create
Because Climate Treatment works for me :)
What features would you need / like to see in an app to help you manage your
symptoms and treatments?
?
Don't know maybe photo
Some food/sugar registration. Stress load. A record of the different forms of psoriasis. I
myself suffer from several different types of pso.
A reminder that it is time to use my salve, e.g.
Overview of patterns/connections in symptoms and treatment
Calendar notes - if new = personal calendar that only records dates when new is inserted;
thus an easier overview
that you can put a mark where you have outbreaks.
Stress, illness
Photo archive, note, calendar to remind you of the next date of medication (bio)
Pictures, medicine etc
It would be good to be able to register when the disease was more or less bothersome
Reminders/scheduling
Side effects and stress level
An app
Easy diary but recording condition, photo, treatment, diet
For me, it will primarily be keeping track of appointments and treatment, as I am currently
well medicated.
It could be nice to have symptoms and treatment together in one place instead of only in
==PAGE:50==
memory or on possibly loose notes.
It's a difficult question, perhaps an opportunity to set some reminders to lubricate
yourself/take your medicine and the like.
Diary with tick marks of symptoms
Inspiration for creams/ointments without adrenal cortex hormone or other experiences
without medication
Do not know
No current need
A scale for recording psoriasis
Photo documentation and registration of other symptoms
Something like ticking something and pictures
Treatment reminders. Good advice to optimize the treatment.
Symptom marking, degrees of development, medication management
Reminder daily regarding how much itching and how much help cream/other products are.
Perhaps a weekly reminder with a quick automatic questionnaire asking questions about
"within the last week" ... e.g. 1) "to what degree have you felt stressed?" 2) to what extent
have you felt emotionally pressured? 3) to what extent have you been able to handle the
week's everyday tasks? 4) to what extent have you experienced achieving daily exercise
5) to what extent have you managed to make use of an anti-inflammatory diet? ……..
followed by options such as: “To a great extent”, “to some extent” …. And so still..
So you can somehow track your emotional and physical ability and not the ability -
because it is most often what causes it to either explode or calm down. A weekly reminder
would not take a long time to fill in - but give a feeling when you look back at some kind of
result, what are the fluctuations, and what can you then work more on... i.e. where do you
most often fall in relation to challenges . For example, not getting oiled, not getting the
psoriasis treated, etc.
Product overview and treatment options.
Perhaps an app that can synchronize with other apps regarding diet, for example.
Hints
Daily reminder to check body and psyche
Do not know
Do not know
Itching, burning, how widespread on the body, how much cream, light or medicine and
before, during and after treatments
Function where you can see one's outbursts by, among other things, one's stress level,
==PAGE:51==
mood, diet, energy level, etc
Date registration of outbreak. How treatment has worked (it can be difficult to remember
exactly what effect it has from time to time)
Advice and guidance, for example in the form of a person being available for a chat for a
certain period of time or frequently asked questions with answers, etc. Contact information
Good framework for being able to document with pictures and text to see any
development of psoriasis and a place can track his symptoms and any mood/mental
health
.
I do not know
Not really sure
Oh I don’t know. Maybe something so that I can look up what it means and what I can
do/should do with certain symptoms. And what can possibly make one's psoriasis
suddenly get better or worse. Maybe also some information about where to search where
there are also others with psoriasis so that you can spar and share knowledge with each
other.
Overview
A visual image of the body where you can mark pain/rash
Different suggestions for treatment
Appointments as a doctor, blood tests, medicine etc.
Some box ticking options
Advice and guidance
Form for filling in the degree of outbreak, possibly photo documentation
Images and degree of pain
notes, photo,
Where, when and which trigger
I would perhaps like to have some kind of diary form, as well as calendar form, I would like
a picture file so that you can register and the collection, possibly meal plans or the like so
that you can perhaps find an inflammatory diet
Information about which treatments are possible and how to use them. There are so many
creams, I would like to know which ones you have had the best experience with for PSO
Photo library. Option to note degree/outbreak on a scale or similar. Where from the outside
you can see a development over time.
Possibility of response to uncertainty about treatment / effect of treatment
Reminder to take medicine and vitamin
==PAGE:52==
QR code scan of food, treatments, sleeping time, stress management etc
Something so I can see if it is during certain periods that I have outbreaks of the disease,
or if there are other connections. So something where I get an overview and can compare.
Overview of how I lubricated my skin and for how long. A function that can provide a better
understanding of being able to keep the disease at bay.
For example, measure PASI numbers. Measuring what kind of psoriasis you have. Bear in
mind that there is also psoriatic arthritis that can occur.
A calendar of when to have blood tests etc.
Image option
Gallery, date, medication schedule, menstrual cycle registration, mental state
.
Do you have any concerns about using a symptom tracking app? (Optional)
No
No
Over-attention to symptoms
no
Accessible to unauthorized persons
None
That you have to spend a long time every day writing down symptoms
Personally, all days are very similar to each other, so I can be worried that it pushes the
psyche a bit (in the bad direction
Yes, if there is a leak it could be used for profiling or to the benefit of insurance companies
Monitoring
That I forget to use it. Perhaps a notification every day from the app would be a solution
The only thing would be if you used pictures so that they could not be stolen / hacked and
shared
Not right away.
?
Nah
No, except for personal information.
==PAGE:53==
==PAGE:54==
B
Survey on Motivation
46
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:55==
What motivated you to start using the above mentioned app/apps?
keeping track of progress and moods
Overblik over kalorier, skridt, motion osv - så appen kunne hjælpe mig med at tabe mig,
hvis der var steder jeg ikke var bevidst om at jeg kunne forbedre
I wanted/still want to lose weight, and the easiest way to do this is by tracking calories and
workouts
counting calories
Bc I am sooo bad at remembering stuff and I find the apps very helpful - plus it’s nice to
keep track in case I need to remember something specific
It’s easy to hold it all in one place
Steps of the day and adidas using by cycling for kilometers
Interest
Staying healthy
Weight loss
To get an idea of whether I actually drink enough water and move enough according to the
norm
Drinking too little water. I don't know when my period will come. Is very tired in everyday
life and generally makes too many appointments - stress.
==PAGE:56==
Everyday tasks, mental health
Popped up on my work computer
To start exercise and have something to follow the progress.
Weight loss
See how much exercise I get throughout the day
To get an overview of food/fitness
No answers: Why did you stop using it?
I did not feel motivated
Because I didn't lose weight - also cheated on the calories etc. if it couldn't be scanned
directly
I didn't like counting my calories
I don’t lose my weight now
Lack of motivation
Wasn't interesting enough
Took too much time with food compared to entering everything you eat
==PAGE:57==
No answers: What did you feel like you needed to help you stay motivated to use
it?
If you could scan all things 100p without weighing it etc (feels cumbersome) and if I could
see a real difference using it. Or suggestions for what you could eat in a day with precise
calroes that taste good and are easy/cheap
Nothing
Sometimes yes
Retention
Should be more relevant to me and my health
Easier entry of data
Yes answers: What helps you stay motivated to keep using it?
Ease of use
It’s easy to use and I like to see the statistics over a longer time
Notifications
just know the things i mentioned bevor
progress
Keeping healthy
It's only the pedometer app I use today
I can see progress. The apps don't judge me if I forget for a period of time. I get rewarded
in most apps. Streaks - even though I don't really like it, it works (but it's stressful)
If I still have a goal to improve, then I'll be back.
Pairing with my watch
Desire for weight loss
That I can beat my own record
What did you like most about the app/apps?
Availability
High degree of automatic registration
The design was quite user-friendly
==PAGE:58==
Overview
Nice UI that only focuses on one thing. It seems like apps like this get too eager to do
everything, and it overwhelms me. Would rather have many apps that focus on one thing
and do it well.
Being able to see my progress over time
I used Myfitnesspal to track food at one point, it was cool but time consuming.
Mmh
It is easy
Easy to use and many different purposes/functions
the feeling of doing something, control and overview
simple design
It is in my phone, so it’s convenient
Ease of use
It’s EASY to use (and understand how to use)
Convenience
just know the things i mentioned before
Possibility to insert photos, follow friends
User experience
What did you like least about the app/apps?
No retention to stay motivated
Too difficult to use
Notifications that popped up all the time
It triggers people with eating disorders
Streaks
The amount of manual work, how often you had to go back
Manual tracking of an event was difficult
Wish you could take a picture of the food and it would automatically know how many
calories or how big the portion is
Nothing
==PAGE:59==
-
that I could cheat myself and think it was unmanageable to keep depositing
idk
Forget about them
The appearance of the apps
The price range for the extended version of the apps content
Lack of good free
just know the things i mentioned bevor
nothing
Nothing.
==PAGE:60==
Transcript
Interviewer
Can you start by telling me a little about your daily routines or treatments you follow?
User 1
At first I used creams, but I didn't want to continue with that in the long run. It was simply too
difficult. Then I came up with some pills. And it gave me such side effects as there are: Bad stomach
and fatigue the day after I had taken them. And then today, I get some biological medicine where I
have to inject myself once every 14 days, which has a really good effect on me.
What I think could be interesting in relation to you in relation to the types of treatment, is the
frequency of how often you take treatment of course. Could you somehow relate a little to such an
app, where you saw maybe... Let's just say you had to take some pictures of yourself every week or
something. Well, can you see a difference in the images based on artificial intelligence? Based on
when you actually took your treatment? I don't know, does that make sense? That is, if I have taken.
Let's just say I've been on those pills - it's something called Methotrexate. That's what I take once a
week, where I then took 5 pills at once and felt bad the next day. What does my psoriasis look like... I
don't know... The next day, I took the pills. And what does my psoriasis look like 5 days after I take
the pictures? Is there some form of artificial intelligence or some AI that can then go in and see
where the difference is between the 2 images? And would it be possible to create some artificial
intelligence for this thing called. I don't know if you know of something called PACI? Such a scheme
called that?
Interviewer
No I do not.
User 1
Okay if you search on P-A-S-I score.
Interviewer
P-A-S-I yes.
User 1
Psoriasis Area Severity Index.
It's like an index that doctors use to find out... Yes, an index that doctors use to find out how much
psoriasis you have on your body.
Interviewer
Okay.
User 1
If you go in and press. Yes, sorry, I have something that makes a bit of noise in the background,
because they are in the process of rebuilding out here where I am sitting. At my work.
Interviewer
C
Initial research interviews
C.1
Interview 1
52
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:61==
It's alright. I can't hear it at all.
User 1
Well ok cool it's just me then.
Interviewer
I think there is good. What's it called? Noise Canceling in your headphones.
User 1
But if you go in and look at that PASI score. You can definitely find something where you can find out
what it is and what it is about. But it's like if you have... If you search on it and then click on pictures.
So you can see it's something like this, where you divide the body into different areas, and then you
can give it a score from 1 to 5.
Based on that, could you get some artificial intelligence to look at a picture and then say something
about where it lies on the PASI score? I know it may be far along in your development. It was just to
give some kind of inspiration.
Interviewer
Yes, that's great.
User 1
I don't know if that answered your question?
Interviewer
Yes. And are you currently using anything to keep track of your symptoms and how they are
progressing?
User 1
No I do not. So only that... No, I don't.
No, so you're wondering if I take pictures of myself to compare, I actually don't. But I would like to do
that. But that PsoMentor I think is... So you have to create a user and stuff like that, and then it
doesn't always work and... Yes, so I've been inside it a few times, but I haven't felt it has been so user
friendly. In some way?
I'll just try to see if I can figure it out.
So when I try to log in now, I press continue with Facebook. And then it just says: "App is not active".
Instead of creating a user.
Interviewer
Okay.
User 1
So I don't actually use PsoMentor, but I have it installed.
==PAGE:62==
Then I used the "Imagine" that they have made in the dermatology department in Bispebjerg. I have
used it a little, but I only used it in connection with when I was part of their experiment.
The cool thing about it was actually that there was one... They had made it so that you could sort of
scroll over the pictures. I don't know, maybe you've seen on social media, there are some where they
are.. The thing where if you scrolled over the picture, another one suddenly appeared or something
like that. Or no, how should I explain it? Well, if there has been such a satellite image, then is... Is
something from, let's just say the 1800s, and something from now, then you could sort of scroll back
and forth on the image to see.
Interviewer
You are thinking that this is how you can scroll two images over each other by 'dragging'?
User 1
Yes, so it's 2 pictures that are sort of run over each other so that you can see the difference. So the
picture was taken in the same place, but then you can see the difference. It was really good at that.
Then it was something that I could use the picture I had taken the week before. Then I could use it as
a template when I had to take a new one, so it was as close to being the same as possible. I think that
is something that is insanely important in relation to keeping an eye on your treatment. And of
course it can, even if I'm well treated as I am now and don't have very much, it can still go up and
down a bit. So therefore it can be cool to still document how it looks.
Interviewer
When you have looked at your symptoms, have you experienced any specific things in your everyday
life that could influence it flaring up again?
User 1
Yes yes yes. Alcohol plays a role. So, especially when I haven't been treated well, I've really been able
to see it.
Interviewer
And is it primarily alcohol? Are there other things that you have noticed?
User 1
Winter in general too. But it has a lot to do with the fact that there is not so much sunlight. And then
at the same time there is...
Interviewer
Yes, that it is dry in the air?
User 1
Yes, that does a lot too.
Interviewer
If you were looking for an app to help manage your psoriasis, what features would you look for?
User 1
==PAGE:63==
Well, one of the things I've been thinking about a little bit, that's the thing about being able to
compare different things. In other words, you can compare pictures that you have taken. That is,
from week to week. That's one thing. But that there might also be something scientific about it,
because it might well be that I can sit and look at 2 pictures of myself and then think: "There, I look
good enough. And there, it doesn't look so good." I can see that with the naked eye. But this idea
that the PACI index could be above... That is, if you could do it in some way. Then it could be pretty
wild.
So the thing about being able to identify different things. That is, if, yes, you are the geek here, so
you have to know about it, whether the AI can do it. But that is if the AI can identify which types of
psoriasis you have. And would be able to give an idea of which type of cream would be best to use
for exactly the type of psoriasis you have, right? And could connect all those things just by having to
take a picture, right?
So, just like when you're standing in the supermarket and have to find out whether the wine you're
about to buy and then you go to vivino and scan to see if it's good or bad, right?
So if you can scan yourself and so it can come forward and say: "Well, it will be good for you with a
fat cream." or something or other?
Interviewer
So any recommendations?
User 1
Yes, it will probably require an insane amount of data, but...
Interviewer
And when you used some of these apps, now I know the one you used in relation to a research
experiment. But have you been using PsoMentor regularly?
User 1
No.
Interviewer
Have you used other, not necessarily psoriasis relevant apps, but other types of self-tracking apps? It
could, for example, be able to record calories, steps or water intake.
User 1
I have done that at one point. I think I just used the one that's on my phone, so one called 'Samsung
health'. Which really just counted the number of steps I walked in a day for example.
I think it's very cool to use, because it also came up with some notifications and such and said that
now I just have to remember to go those steps there.
Interviewer
How do you think that experience with it was? Did it help you incorporate a few more steps into your
everyday life?
User 1
==PAGE:64==
So it died down after a while, but they helped me to become more aware of it. So if you got any
notifications about that with whether you have remembered it.
Yes, if you have remembered to take a picture of yourself today. It would definitely be something that
helps because that PsoMentor does. Or I don't actually know if it does. If not I have a user in there.
So I don't think I have. Yes, I may have created one at some point, but I haven't logged into it I can
see. But I remember that it did that "Imagine", which I used in that research experiment. It appeared
there and said that you should remember to take pictures. I don't know, you didn't know it, did you?
Interviewer
No, I don't, but I think I'll have a look at it afterwards if I can find it somewhere.
User 1
Yes, well, that's it. I'll just try to see if I can show you this one. It probably can't get close enough.
Then you can see how it looks. It is the one who is...
Interviewer
The one with the lines or what?
User 1
Yes, exactly, and a little purple line in the middle. It's just there if you need to search for it.
Interviewer
Super thanks.
Was there anything in relation to these apps, both in general with self-tracking apps and these
psoriasis apps, that you would like them to do differently or better?
User 1
Good question. I have to answer something.
Interviewer
It could also be that there is nothing.
User 1
So I think it's cool that you, those where you had to take a few steps and could set a goal for each
day. I think it is very cool that there is some kind of goal. But I can't really tell you what that goal
should be in a self-tracking app for psoriasis.
The goal is for a picture of yourself to be taken every day so you remember to track, right?
It's your headache and not mine hehehe.
Interviewer
Yes exactly.
==PAGE:65==
Are there any concerns that you would have about having a self-tracking app like this to record your
symptoms?
User 1
Yes, I think there would be concerns about, I mean, you might well be discouraged or depressed by it
if it was regressive, you can't say? In other words, you experience a decline in your health and
symptoms. But it is also a good thing, because that is why you track yourself.
Well, that is, all apps that you have to do something with on a regular basis. Well, we know that. It
can be stressful. Just getting notifications on various apps is also stressful at one point or another. So
of course I can be worried about such things.
And then the fact that it's an app that you can use for something yourself. But you still have to
remember that, that is. It may well be technology and that something like AI is good, but in the end
you also have to remember that it's just an app. So of course you still have to see a dermatologist or
leave the outpatient clinic or wherever you are.
Interviewer
Is there anything here at the end that you have thought about or want to add?
User 1
No, then, that in relation to taking pictures and such from within the app. Yes, the important thing is
just to have some kind of data yourself.
And then the thing about dividing it up into different areas, so it shouldn't just be: "take a picture
here" kind of thing. Now in the 'Imagine' app, there you have to enter and register if you took a
picture of your right knee, for example. Or whether you took a photo of the left or right hand. So
then divide it into body parts. In the same way as the PACI score is made for example.
Interviewer
Yeah okay.
User 1
So there is a kind of common thread in that part.
Interviewer
And then I want to ask you at the end, because I'm going to make some kind of prototype. Would you
be interested in trying to test it?
User 1
Yes please.
Interviewer
That would be super cool. It helps a lot with feedback and it's also easier for you, I think, when you
have something more physical to sit and play with, to give feedback.
User 1
==PAGE:66==
Yes exactly and how it works and stuff.
Interviewer
Yes, thank you very much for the help. It was a big help.
User 1
Yes you’re welcome, I hope you can use it for something at least.
Interviewer
At least I can.
User 1
I look forward to hearing from you if there is a prototype.
Interviewer
Yes, that would be great hehe. Thank you very much for that, have a great day.
User 1
Yes you too. Bye.
==PAGE:67==
Transcript
Interviewer
Would you like to start by telling me a little about yourself?
User 2
I got psoriasis 7 years ago. And I've been all the way through the stairs and I'm on the last step. I
assume you know the stairs when you are writing?
Yes, and I am on the last stage and have received biological medicine, the last for almost half a year.
But I have never used such an app or anything for registration. Sometimes I have taken pictures
myself and put them in my… In, you know, a catalogue. And yes, when I had to go and get the last
medicine, they took pictures at the hospital to see if it was bad enough, and it was.
Interviewer
Okay. What kind of treatment? Do you use any creams or take medication?
User 2
No, I get biological medicine.
Interviewer
Biological medicine.
User 2
And yes, it is the last step on the stairs. And I've been through all the others.
Interviewer
And how does it fit into your daily life and stuff? Do you feel affected by your treatment?
User 2
No, it actually isn't. It is so nice. When I stab myself, I think: "Isn't it going to be bad this time?", but it
hasn't been that way yet. The half year I've had it so...
Interviewer
No? That was nice.
User 2
Yes that's nice.
Interviewer
Do you also regularly go to doctors or dermatologists and get checkups?
User 2
You have to. When you have blood tests taken, when you are on this medication.
C.2
Interview 2
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
59
==PAGE:68==
Interviewer
And you talked a little about the fact that once in a while you've taken some pictures, just for the
heck of it and kept track of it yourself?
User 2
To be able to remember a bit about: "How bad was it?" or "How good was it when I got something
else?". And it could have been smart if it was somewhere else.
Interviewer
Yes, so you had a certain place to go and you knew that everything related to it is there?
User 2
Yes, because I write such a small, not diary, but still. Because the first thing they do when I get a new
doctor is, "Well, what's the story?". "Oh", I think, I forgot to bring that with me today. So it's by
memory sometimes, so that could be really smart.
Interviewer
And in the course of your daily life, have you sometimes experienced certain things that have
affected your symptoms a lot with when it flares up and things like that?
User 2
No.
Interviewer
No?
User 2
No. I don't know why... Well, they say it's because it's hereditary, but why you have to be 65 before
you get it, I have no idea. There are no things I can say when I have eaten or when I have done
something. There is nothing. At least I'm lurking.
But I'm also not as systematic as such an app might be. It might make a difference.
Interviewer
Are you used to using apps for anything else?
User 2
I use apps for ordinary household private use. In other words, I am unemployed, so I just use what I
have to use for myself.
Interviewer
Have you tried using some other kinds of apps to track something with steps for example or
something like that?
User 2
Yes I do.
==PAGE:69==
Interviewer
If you had to go looking for an app to help you manage your psoriasis. What functionalities would
you be looking for?
User 2
As I said earlier, I would like something where I could take pictures. So that I could have it all in one
place. I have also always wondered what actually makes it flare up. I can sometimes see some
systems in it. Some people say that psoriasis has a memory. And that is absolutely true. I have 2 spots
on one foot and one spot on the other. Those are the ones I keep an eye on when they arrive.
Because then there is a flare-up, but why it comes, I don't know. But you could then write that down.
When it starts up.
Interviewer
And these other apps you have used, have you used any where you also had to go in and register
something manually? Or is it primarily apps where it registers something in the background?
User 2
No, I can't remember if there is anything where I myself have been inside and installed it. At least I
can't remember what it could have been for.
Interviewer
How do you feel about actively registering something in an app?
User 2
I could imagine that I might not get it done as much if I had to register a lot at a time. If it was just a
few questions I had to answer, then it would probably be easier.
Interviewer
Yes. So if it was minimal what you had to do yourself?
User 2
Exactly. No need to write long dissertations.
Interviewer
And when you have used an app to record your steps, has it also helped you to take more steps and
achieve your goals, or?
User 2
I actually don't know. I don't know if that has had any impact. I can't imagine if I would have done it
anyway.
Interviewer
Would you have any particular concerns about such an app that could record or help you record your
symptoms?
User 2
==PAGE:70==
I can't imagine there should be. There isn't. I don't think there's anything secret in... Yes, who could
have an interest. If there are some who can log in to it, well, then... Well, it's not anyone who can use
it for anything. Other than myself of course.
At least I can't imagine that, what would be the problem?
Interviewer
Is there anything that you would like to add here in the end? Is there anything you could think of? Or
something that you might have experience with, some other apps that you really like?
User 2
So I think it could be smart that it had a history. It may very well be just me that want it. But I think
it's always the hospital that starts by saying: “Well, when did it start? So how was it? And what was it
like when you got that medicine? And how was it then?”. “Oh”, I think. You forget something like
that. It is not. I would like to think that it could.
And then including some dates. When did you start that medication? And when did you end it? And
why did you end it? So that... Such a bit of history. So I didn't have to go and remember it myself.
Interviewer
Will it also help you... So now you are taking biological medicine. But compared to if you were in the
stages before that, where you took some more medicine. Would you benefit from also being able to
register the medication you took in the app? Or?
User 2
Yes. So I think, that is, the whole history. Also when I started with cremes, I guess it was the first, but
yes. I think it should be there.
Because sometimes I just want to go back and see. I have a folder here, right where we are sitting.
But it could be smart that I didn't need all that paper.
And then a place that is accessible to, for example, the hospital. Or at least can pull it out when
you're sitting there.
Interviewer
Well, thank you very much for your time.
User 2
You’re welcome, and you also have... So you have my email but you also have my phone number. If
there should be something right?
Interviewer
Yes. Yes. I do. Exactly. So I will just contact you if I have something that I could use your help with.
User 2
Okay. Have a continued nice day.
Interviewer
Thank you, you too.
==PAGE:71==
User 2
Bye Bye.
Interviewer
Bye.
==PAGE:72==
Transcript
Interviewer
Would you like to start by telling me a little about yourself?
User 3
I am 26 years old and on a daily basis I study at Copenhagen University of Applied Sciences. For
disaster and risk manager.
Interviewer
Can you tell me a little about your treatments? And your daily routine in relation to psoriasis?
User 3
I'm pretty lucky with the kind of psoriasis I have because... Because... I don't know... 5 years ago. I got
diagnosed. I have something called plaque psoriasis. To a very mild degree. And it comes and goes
like that, yes, once in a while. So I just have a cream I have to apply to my scalp when I occasionally
get some small circles or very small rashes where I get a little red and it flakes a little. But I am
affected very mildly. I can also get single round spots on my forearms or a single one on my back, and
otherwise I have a single spot on my ankle where I can sometimes get one.
Interviewer
Do you regularly go to doctors or dermatologists?
User 3
No. Because my psoriasis is so mild that I just have to make sure I get the cream on my scalp myself.
And if I go to a dermatologist, it's just to check that nothing further has happened. I think have been
to the dermatologist... 2 times after I was diagnosed about 5-6 years ago.
Interviewer
How are you currently managing your symptoms?
User 3
I look at my scalp in the mirror. Otherwise, I can see it on the underside of my earlobes, actually.
Yes, I can also get some of these where it starts to peel. So...
Interviewer
So you don't use any tool to register anything?
User 3
No, I look at myself in the mirror. That is it.
Interviewer
Have you experienced anything specific that may be affecting your symptoms? In some direction?
C.3
Interview 3
64
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:73==
User 3
Yes, if I have periods where I get really drunk. Or if I don't sleep very well and then also work-related
stress. That's how it usually is... And just like that in general, if you're very busy and don't have much
free time. Then it usually gets worse. So also when the air is extremely dry. And cold, that doesn't
help either.
For example, if you're on holiday abroad and it's nice and warm and nice and humid, then I'm almost
100% free from it.
Interviewer
Have you ever used some kind of self-tracking tool? Both in relation to psoriasis, but also in relation
to other things, such as food, steps...
User 3
I've only used the health app to check my steps and then once in a while... I've had such self-tracking
apps compared to when you were skiing. To see altitude, speed, calorie intake. That is, how much
weight you lose. It's really mostly some fitness apps and then a golf app that follows my game. And
that's really it. But not someone who has been focused so super much. I've been using, well, Apple's
own health app to track my sleep and my steps. And it's mainly to make sure to keep an eye on
whether I get those between 6 to 8 hours of sleep. And no less.
Interviewer
What made you choose and use such self-tracking apps?
User 3
That they were easily accessible. I think the reason I chose Apple's own health app. This is because it
is so well integrated into the phone, i.e. with your alarm. And you can set this 'go to bed' function
which keeps an eye on whether you experience disturbances or something else during the night. And
also that it generally just always keeps an eye on how many steps you take. It doesn't have something
active to come in and activate. So I might as well look at the app after a week and then see: "Okay,
yesterday I walked so many steps and the day before yesterday I walked so many steps". But it's not
something I have to go in and check. And I don't get any I actually don't get any notifications for it
and that's very nice. It's just always there in the background and then when I need to look at it, it's
there.
And compared to those sports apps, it is mostly in terms of interest. Because it's fun to follow one's
development.
Interviewer
Are there any particular features that you look for in these kinds of apps?
User 3
No not really.
Interviewer
How often do you use such apps?
User 3
==PAGE:74==
That health app, every day. I look at it every day.
Interviewer
And how does it fit into your daily life?
User 3
It is fine. It gives an overview of how many steps I have taken. Both at work and when I'm at school.
Interviewer
Do you think apps like these have helped you achieve your goals?
User 3
At least they have made me more aware of whether I would like to walk those 10,000 steps a day.
It has been very cool that you can see that my average has increased significantly.
So I have become more self-aware about it.
Interviewer
Is there anything you wish these apps did differently or better?
User 3
No not really, it's hard to say. Now, I don't have much experience with something like Lifesum or
something similar, but... I think the most important thing is that they don't take up too much space.
And that you don't, that is, you don't necessarily have to go in and actively register something before
they give you something back.
It is of course difficult to say in relation to such in-depth health-tracking apps, but... As long as it is
not too difficult to register what you want. I feel that is very important.
Interviewer
If only there was such an app available that could help you track your psoriasis symptoms. Which
functions or features would be important to you? What would you need to be able to track?
User 3
Maybe a connection between my sleep and my physical activity. For a period. And then see how my
ear lobes have been compared to how affected they have been. Now let's say I've been sitting still for
a week or I've just been drinking, I don't know how many beers or been to a festival or something.
Then it will be very cool to see if it has gotten worse.
And also maybe that I could see if it got worse when I didn't use my cream and it had gone away. It
could just be very nice to see if you took a picture during a period when things were going well. And
then being able to hold it against, if you don't sleep very much now, if you have an outbreak again.
Now if there was a connection there.
Interviewer
Would you have any concerns about using such an app to track your symptoms?
User 3
==PAGE:75==
No.
Interviewer
Is there anything else you would like to add?
User 3
Nah, not really. It could be a lot of fun to have such an app if it could keep an eye on myself without
having to give it too many inputs. Maybe just that you get such a notification in the morning: "Are
you feeling well? One to 5 like? How does it look?"
So it's kind of like an alarming thing.
Interviewer
Would you like to be contacted about helping to test a prototype?
User 3
Yes please.
Interviewer
Thank you very much for the interview.
User 3
You are welcome.
==PAGE:76==
D
First Iteration Prototype
D.1
Version 1
68
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:77==
D.2
Version 2
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
69
==PAGE:78==
Afskrift
Interviewer
Jamen så vil jeg egentlig bare starte med at høre generelt, hvordan er det gået og hvad du synes om
det?
Bruger
Jamen med appen er det gået fint tænker jeg. Der er faktisk meget brugervenlig og... Når der kom
sådan en notifikation på, at man skal huske at udfylde den, så tror jeg det at det virker. Fordi når man
først er inde i den, så virker det bare rigtig godt.
Interviewer
Og har du benyttet dig af notifikationerne?
Bruger
Ja, dem fandt jeg godt ud af. Men dem skal man i hvert fald bruge, fordi i hvert fald, hvis man er mig,
så glemmer man det. Når man først har været i bad om morgenen og når man har smurt sig, så
glemmer man det faktisk.
Interviewer
Ja, så starter dagen og der går rutine i den.
Bruger
Lige præcis, men når så den der notifikation kommer, så tager du altså lige 3 minutter og lige sætter
dig ned og lige tænke over: “Jamen hvordan er det egentlig i dag, i forhold til i går?” Og det synes jeg
faktisk var rigtig rart.
Interviewer
Og hvordan har det føltes i forhold til tidsforbrug? Har det været for meget?
Bruger
Nej overhovedet ikke. Det er det jeg siger med de der 3 minutter. Det gør lige at du lige mærker efter
i din krop. Hvordan har jeg det egentlig?
Interviewer
Det er godt at høre.
Bruger
Så på mig i hvert fald, der virkede det sådan anti-stressende.
Interviewer
Okay.
Bruger
Fordi det er ligesom når man tager det der udslæt man har. Det har du styr på, så ligger det i den app
og så skal du ikke tænke videre på det før i morgen.
E
Final interviews
E.1
Interview 1
70
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:79==
Interviewer
Ja, det er godt at høre.
Bruger
Sådan virker det psykologisk for mig i hvert fald.
Interviewer
Og hvilke funktioner har du brugt mest i appen?
Bruger
Det mest registreringer og så notifikationerne, fordi jeg gik sådan og lurede på, om jeg skulle have et
eller andet med at jeg skulle huske at smøre det inden jeg gik i seng eller sådan noget. Men så
tænkte jeg, at det får jeg ikke gjort alligevel.
Så det er egentlig mest registreringen jeg har taget, også er jeg gået tilbage og har fulgt med i
registreringerne.
Interviewer
Og har du været inde og se på noget af den der statistik der ligger?
Bruger
Ja fordi det er jo den man bruger når man så ligesom en gang om ugen siger jamen: “Hvordan er det
egentlig gået i denne her uge?”.
Og så brugte jeg faktisk, fordi jeg var til tjek på reumatologisk afdeling, der kunne jeg så lige gå ind og
tage statistikken og sige: “Jamen, hvordan er mit eksem i forhold til, hvordan det plejer at være? Og
er der nogle dage, hvor det klør meget? Gør det mere ondt? Eller har solen hjulpet nu når det er så
varmt?” Det kan jeg så lige se her om det er, så det er blevet bedre af at solen er kommet.
Interviewer
Nå, det var godt. Har du følt at de spørgsmål der har været, har det været de rigtige spørgsmål?
Bruger
Ja, det synes jeg virkelig altså. Det har givet en ro indeni, at der er en der ligesom har overtaget.
Forstår du hvad jeg mener?
Interviewer
Ja det forstår jeg godt.
Bruger
At det er de spørgsmål, som man egentlig går og stiller sig selv, men man ved faktisk ikke hvordan
man skal stille det. Eller hvem gider egentlig at høre på svaret? Fordi det netop er sådan en sygdom,
man går helt alene med. Den er noget ensom, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo.
==PAGE:80==
Bruger
Jeg synes vitterligt at det havde en psykologisk god effekt, at jeg havde et sted at gøre af det.
Interviewer
Det er virkelig godt at høre.
Og synes du, at det har påvirket din viden omkring dig selv og din psoriasis?
Bruger
Jeg ved ikke om det har påvirket min viden. Jeg er rimelig velinformeret om det. Men det er vel også i
kraft af, at Jeg har fået psoriasisgigten oveni, så er man lidt mere informeret. Jeg synes ikke rigtigt at
jeg er blevet klogere af det. Jeg er blevet klogere på mig selv og hvordan det føles for mig.
Interviewer
Det var godt.
Bruger
Og så er jeg blevet klogere på, at det er okay at have det sådan. At det er okay, at det føles, som det
føles. Fordi nu har du et sted at gøre af det. Giver det mening for dig?
Interviewer
Ja det giver rigtig god mening.
Bruger
Det synes jeg, det har været noget af det bedste fordi altså ens mand gider jo ikke at høre mere på,
at du klør det igen.
Interviewer
Nej.
Bruger
Og du kan jo heller ikke sige det til din kollega. At “Øj min eksem den er bare slem”. Altså, det gør du
jo ikke, vel?
Interviewer
Nej. Og man tænker måske ikke lige over, at det kan gøre en lidt træt at gå med det i tankerne i
virkeligheden. Så hvis man lige får det lagt væk, så kan det være at det hjælper lidt.
Bruger
Ja, man bliver lidt træt eller ked af det over det. Og så nu er det plantet der, nu skal jeg ikke tænke
mere over det i dag.
Interviewer
Det er godt. Er der nogen ting du synes var svære at finde eller bruge i appen?
Bruger
==PAGE:81==
Nej, det synes jeg faktisk ikke. Ikke når man er vant til at bruge apps på den måde. Det synes jeg ikke.
Nej.
Interviewer
Det var godt. Levede den op til de forventninger, du havde til hvad den skulle kunne?
Bruger
Ja, det gjorde den. Helt sikkert Caroline.
Interviewer
Det er godt at høre. Var der noget du ikke rigtig brugt? Af det der var?
Bruger
Ja jeg fik jo ikke brugt det hele, men jeg tænker, at hvis man bruger den i længere tid, så kommer
man faktisk godt rundt om det hele, fordi så vil man jo få brug for det på et eller andet tidspunkt.
Eller kunne sige: “Nej, det der kunne gavne mit liv.”
Eller at man i nogle perioder har du brug for det ene og nogle perioder har du brug for det andet.
Interviewer
Fik du også benyttet dig af billede funktionen og sådan noget?
Bruger
Ja den synes jeg, den var en perfekt.
Interviewer
Ja, det var godt. Var der noget du kunne enten tænke dig at tilføje til appen eller noget du kunne
tænke dig at ændre?
Bruger
Tænkte lidt på de der billeder der var, ikke? Altså nogle gange, så har man jo sår på. Hvis man får
kradset hul. At den var der ikke rigtig.
Interviewer
Hvad tænker du på?
Bruger
Jamen altså nogle gange så kan du jo godt kradse hul, når du har sår på eksemet, som så skal
behandles på en anden måde.
Interviewer
Og hvad er det du tænker på der, at du godt kunne tænke dig?
Bruger
Jamen måske en eller anden, at man har kradset hul eller nu er der sår på, eller?
Interviewer
==PAGE:82==
Altså som et spørgsmål tænker du?
Bruger
Ja ja lige præcis, fordi det er nogle åbne sår, dem skal du jo passe på at der ikke går betændelse i.
Interviewer
Okay er der ellers andet du havde tænkt over, som du godt kunne tænke dig?
Bruger
Nej, det var egentlig mest den jeg lige havde tænkt på. Og selvfølgelig fordi jeg så lige havde kradset
hul, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo.
Bruger
Det der også var godt er, at man kan jo godt lige opdage at man lige har en lille plet eksem eller
sådan noget. Og når man så er blevet tvunget til at sidde og og skal se, så tænker man også: “Org,
den der plet, den skulle jeg lige have registreret, så jeg holder øje med den”. Så på den måde kan du
også holde nye udbrud nede.
Interviewer
Okay, det er fedt at høre. Er der ellers nogen tanker eller bekymringer du har gået med?
Bruger
Nej overhovedet ikke. Bekymringerne blev ligesom lagt ind i appen. For sygdommen. Og så blev de
der indtil næste dag jeg åbnede den.
Interviewer
Jamen det er jeg virkelig glad for at høre Charlotte. For jeg har jo gået og tænkt sådan, gad vide om
det egentlig gør en forskel for jer og sådan noget. Men det er rigtig fedt at høre at du synes, at det
har gjort det.
Bruger
Det gjorde i hvert fald for mig psykisk. Det er helt sikkert.
Interviewer
Ja, men så har jeg egentlig ikke rigtig så meget mere. Men det sidste Jeg vil bare sige til dig er, at jeg
lader bare appen køre videre, så hvis du har lyst til at fortsætte med at bruge den for dig selv, så gør
du bare det.
Bruger
Okay det lyder dejligt.
Interviewer
Så rigtig mange tak for din hjælp, det var dejligt, at du havde lyst til at deltage.
==PAGE:83==
Bruger
Jamen, det var så lidt. Alt muligt held og lykke. Det er i orden, vi skrives ved så ikke?
Interviewer
Det gør vi, hej.
==PAGE:84==
Afskrift
Interviewer
Ja, så ville jeg bare høre dig her starte med, hvordan din oplevelse har været med appen? Har du fået
den brugt og sådan noget?
Bruger
Ja, det tror nok. Jeg har i hvert fald registreret sådan 6-7 gange eller sådan noget. Tror jeg. Det har
ikke været hver dag. Jeg har stillet påmindelsen. Den er sådan set OK. Det fungerer udmærket.
Interviewer
Hvordan synes du det har været? Har det givet dig noget af værdi?
Bruger
Måske ikke hver dag, men måske hvis man kunne stille det til hver anden dag, så ville det være fint,
fordi der er ikke så store forskelle egentlig fra dag til dag. Det er næsten det samme jeg har
rapporteret hver gang.
Interviewer
Ja, okay. Så det er ikke nok bare at have dagligt eller ugentligt? Det skal kunne indstilles lidt mere
detaljeret?
Bruger
Ja, hvis det kan lade sig gøre. Det kunne være en god ide. Ellers så, selve betjeningen af den - jeg kan
også hoppe en dag tilbage, hvis jeg gerne vil at registrere... Det har jeg gjort en enkelt gang. Ja, det er
også fint, hvis man har glemt det. Jeg ved ikke, hvor meget mening det egentlig giver, fordi så er det
jo bare for hukommelsens skyld.
Så er det fint, jeg har valgt 3 steder ud til at rapportere. En for hovedbunden og for underben, så det
fungerer da udmærket ud fra det skema der. Jeg har aldrig været tilbage til selve figuren igen. Efter
jeg har valgt dem der.
Interviewer
Ja, så du har bare ligesom kørt videre med de samme områder?
Bruger
Lige præcis, ja.
Interviewer
Har det føltes okay, at du ikke ligesom skulle ind hver gang og vælge områder og sådan noget?
Bruger
Ja, det har været fint nok, fordi det er sjældent, at der kommer nye ting til egentlig.
Interviewer
Ja.
E.2
Interview 2
76
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:85==
Hvad for nogle funktioner har du fået brugt mest?
Bruger
Kun det der oversigtsbillede, der hvor man kan se i dag.
Interviewer
Ja? Har du haft været inde og kigge lidt på statistikkerne og sådan noget?
Bruger
Nej, det har jeg ikke haft tid til. Nej.
Interviewer
Og hvad med, har du haft brugt billede funktionen?
Bruger
Ja, det har jeg.
Interviewer
Har det fungeret, okay?
Bruger
Ja, det er ok. Det fungerer rigtig godt.
Interviewer
Okay, det var godt. Synes du, at billede funktionen er det der giver dig mest værdi, eller er det det at
registrere selve symptomerne?
Bruger
Jeg tror det er mest registreringen.
Interviewer
Ja. Og synes du, at det har været okay tidsforbrug-mæssigt?.
Bruger
Ja det er super hurtigt at bruge, så det tager kun, ja, et halvt minut. Og det er helt fint. Jeg tror ikke,
at det skal være mere, for at folk de skal kunne bruge det sådan.
Interviewer
Ja. Så det har været overskueligt?
Bruger
Ja.
Interviewer
Super, det var godt. Har den været let at navigere rundt i?
Bruger
==PAGE:86==
Nogle gange skal man lige tænke sig om, hvad man skal trykke på for at komme ind i det man gerne
vil. Men ellers så er det OK. Hvis man ellers ved, hvad de der 3 prikker de betyder der, for at komme
videre, så tror jeg at der er OK.
Interviewer
Ja. Var det svært til at starte med, at finde ud af, hvad de der 3 prikker gjorde?
Bruger
Ja, både og. Så prøver jeg bare at trykke på et eller andet og så finder man ud af dét, Der er ikke en
forklaring, men det er jo generelt, at det her med de 3 prikker der, at der ligger noget inde bagved. Så
det tror jeg at det ville være ok for almindelige brugere af en mobiltelefon.
Jeg ved ikke, hvis man kommer lidt op i alderen, så kan det godt være at man ikke lige finder ud af at
man skal trykke på den der.
Interviewer
Ja, så det skal måske være tydeligere eller forklare os lidt mere eller et eller andet?
Bruger
Ja, måske lige at de der 3 prikker der betyder at man kan trykke på den, eller et eller andet.
Interviewer
Okay. Har det været med til at påvirke din rutine lidt omkring psoriasis, eller har den egentlig ikke
ændret på så meget?
Bruger
Jeg har haft så lang tid, at det har ikke ændret på noget.
Interviewer
Nej. Det er det samme eller hvad?
Bruger
Ja.
Interviewer
I den tid du har fået den brugt, har den påvirket din generelle forståelse af din egen psoriasis?
Bruger
Det er også fordi Jeg har haft det så lang tid, så det har den ikke. Altså jeg har jo vidst det hele i
forvejen. Måske lidt med det der rødme, hvor meget eller lidt det er. Det er ikke noget man går og
lægger mærke til sådan til dagligt. At man skal også finde ud af, at det ændrer sig faktisk, men det
tager lang tid, før man kan se, at det ændrer sig.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
==PAGE:87==
Og det har måske noget med skalaen at gøre. At den er for grov. Det ved jeg ikke, men det er svært at
sige andet. Den skala du har på, 5 punkter tror jeg, som man kan vælge imellem. Det tror jeg
egentlig, at den er fin nok. For hvis den bliver mere detaljeret, så tror jeg ikke, at man får noget
videre ud af det. Så det tror jeg passer fint.
Interviewer
Er der nogen funktioner, du slet ikke fik brugt?
Bruger
Ja, det er der sikkert.
Interviewer
Levede den op til de forventninger, du havde til det?
Bruger
Ja ud fra vores snakke, så gør den egentlig det du har sagt, den skulle gøre. Det er rigtig fint.
Interviewer
Super. Var der noget du følte at du manglede af funktionalitet eller synes var unødvendigt for dig?
Bruger
Ikke umiddelbart. Efter man har været inde og vælge de der punkter der på kroppen, som man
koncentrerer sig om, så tror jeg egentlig... Det har været fint. Det har været en fin afgrænsning.
Interviewer
Det var godt. Er der noget du sådan havde tænkt over, at du kunne tænke dig at ændre ved appen
hvis du kunne eller noget du ville tilføje?
Bruger
Med henhold til statistikkerne, ved jeg ikke lige om man kunne... Jeg prøv lige at tjekke om... Nej, set
er egentlig meget overskueligt. Hvor den ligger henne. Og det skal heller ikke være mere til at sige
det, end en ugentlig og månedlig. Så det er egentlig fint nok.
Så kom jeg lige til at se på, at dengang jeg var inde på ugentlig, så stod der ikke noget. Men det er
selvfølgelig fordi jeg kun har registreret i sidste uge. Hvis jeg tjekker ovre på måneden, så kommer
uge 24 også med ind. Så det er sådan set fint nok.
Interviewer
Er der ellers nogle tanker eller bekymringer eller et eller andet du har tænkt på omkring appen?
Bruger
Billeddagbogen... Det ved jeg ikke... Der kunne selvfølgelig komme nogle datoer på og så videre. Men
det er meget godt lige at kunne sammenligne.
Interviewer
Så noget dato på billederne?
==PAGE:88==
Bruger
Ja. Så man lige kan se, om det er blevet bedre eller ringere? Det er meget godt.
Interviewer
Har du noget til sidst, du vil tilføje?
Bruger
Ikke umiddelbart, nej.
Interviewer
Jamen, så tror jeg egentlig, at det var det jeg havde. Og så det eneste jeg lige ville sige til dig her til
sidst, det er, at jeg lader bare appen køre videre. Så hvis du kunne tænke dig at fortsætte med at
bruge den. Hvis du føler at den giver dig en eller anden form for værdi, så gør du bare det.
Bruger
Ja.
Interviewer
Og mange tak for din hjælp og din tid. Det har været rigtig fedt, at du ville være med.
Bruger
Ja, jamen selv tak og held og lykke med projektet.
Interviewer
Mange tak og så må du have en rigtig god aften.
Bruger
Jo tak, i lige måde.
Bruger
Jo tak, hej.
==PAGE:89==
Afskrift
Bruger
Jeg har jo spændt på at fortælle lidt.
Interviewer
Ja? Jamen du starter bare, hvis du vil fortælle.
Bruger
Ja altså jeg har fået brugt appen. Men jeg har ikke brugt den så meget og det er fordi jeg fik ikke de
der notifikationer. Jeg tror at jeg nåede at få en notifikation.
Interviewer
Nå okay.
Bruger
Jeg fik en notifikation den første dag. Jeg havde sat den til at den skulle lave sådan en daglig
påmindelse klokken 17. Men den kom slet ikke.
Interviewer
Nå okay. Det lyder mærkeligt.
Bruger
Ja. Så jeg har registreret måske 3-4 gange tror jeg. Eller sådan noget.
Så Jeg har virkelig manglet de der notifikationer. Og så har jeg bare sådan, jeg har selvfølgelig husket
på, at nu skal jeg lige huske at gøre det.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Men så den har jeg virkelig manglet den der notifikation. Og så, da jeg først åbnede appen, så tænker
jeg, altså en af de ting jeg synes der var en fed feature, det er det der med at man kunne tage
billeder. Men Jeg synes, at når jeg så skulle ind og finde det sted man kunne tage billeder. Det synes
jeg tog tid. Det var svært at komme ind til den der billeddagbog. Så lige på det punkt ville det være
fedt, hvis man, når man rent faktisk registrerer noget. At den så kommer frem og siger: “Vil du også
tilføje et billede?”. For eksempel.
Interviewer
Ja, så i forlængelse af det?
Bruger
Ja, altså på den måde manglede der noget... Kender du det der udtryk der hedder nudging?
Interviewer
E.3
Interview 3
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
81
==PAGE:90==
Ja.
Bruger
Der mangler lidt nudging for den del der. Synes jeg.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Det er lidt sådan nogle erfaringer jeg har gjort mig. For Jeg har ikke oplevet nogen bugs overhovedet,
men jeg ved ikke om det kunne være fordi den selvfølgelig er rimelig begrænset med funktioner
stadigvæk.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Så noget andet jeg sådan er kommet frem til. I forhold til den der billeddagbog. Jeg ved ikke, om du
kan huske at vi snakkede om det der med at man skulle prøve at gøre det sådan, så der var et eller
andet filter, som tvang en til at tage et billede på den samme måde hver gang.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Det var der ikke noget af. Det manglede jeg også.
Interviewer
Ja. Nej, det ville tage mig for lang tid at implementere til denne her version, så det udelod jeg med
vilje. For det er et ret stort arbejde nemlig. Men det er med i mit design, så det er meningen, at det
skal være med på sigt. I den færdige app. Men det er ikke kommet med i denne her version.
Bruger
Okay. Og så prøvede jeg så også at lege lidt med det der med, når du går ind og registrerer nogle ting.
Så prøvede jeg at gøre det sådan lidt forskelligt en gang imellem. Altså så, det der med at det skal
være rødt for eksempel. Altså jeg tvang den til at være rødt. Men jeg synes ikke, at jeg fik så mange
forskelle i det. Hvis jeg for eksempel prøvede på at trykke at det var rødt... Altså jeg skulle trykke på 2
ting, før den kom op og sagde noget negativt. Altså. Jeg skulle for eksempel trykke lidt skæl og at det
kløede, før der kom noget negativt frem. Før den sagde at det var dårligt eller nedadgående. Eller
hvad man siger. Så jeg fik ikke så mange forskelle frem lige på det punkt.
Interviewer
Nej.
Bruger
==PAGE:91==
Jamen så ved ikke om. Jeg kunne ikke lige finde... Men det kan vel også være fordi jeg ikke har
brugt... Okay. Jo. Jeg kan også se, at der selvfølgelig er det der med de forskellige uger og sådan
noget. Men jeg ikke... Som sagt, jeg har ikke fået det brugt så meget.
Interviewer
Altså statistikken eller hvad?
Bruger
Ja præcis. På grund af det med notifikationer. Det kan jeg lige så godt være ærlig og sige. Altså fordi
jeg har bare været dårlig til at huske det, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo, men så længe du har haft brugt den et par gange, så kan du jo sagtens sige, hvad du synes om det.
Bruger
Ja, men altså jeg synes at det er et problem, at der ikke er... Bare det der med de der notifikationer.
En ting jeg godt kan lide, det er når man går ind på de der, så kan du trykke på de der i'er, så du kan
læse om, hvad de forskellige ting kan. Altså de her forskellige symptomer, som man taster ind. At der
står informationer om alt det der med kløe og rødme. Og de forskellige ting der. Det synes jeg var
super fedt.
Interviewer
Okay.
Bruger
Ja og så måden man registrerer på synes jeg egentlig også er super fin. Der kunne jeg så godt bare
savne, at der var lidt mere med hensyn til at den også spørger ind til, om man også vil registrere et
billede. Fordi ja, det tog mig som sagt ret lang tid at finde frem til der, hvor man tastede de der
billeder ind. Eller hvor man tog billederne. Til at starte med, så tænkte jeg sådan: “Hmm er det ikke
en del af appen eller hvordan?”. Så den del kunne jeg godt tænke mig var fremhævet noget mere.
Men det er jo sådan fra mit eget synspunkt.
Og så for eksempel, at når man registrerer, kunne man også have noget nudging frem, hvor der står:
“Vil du tilføje en note?” eller et eller andet.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Altså det det tænker jeg sådan ville være okay nemt at lave faktisk.
Interviewer
Ja, så du kunne godt tænke dig at kunne tilføje en eller anden skøntekst af en eller anden art?
Bruger
Ja præcis. Altså hvor man selv skriver noget tekst for eksempel.
Interviewer
==PAGE:92==
Ja. Og hvordan har du følt at det der spørgeskema, der er. I forhold til tidsforbrug?
Bruger
Har du sendt et spørgeskema med?
Interviewer
Nårh nej. Selve de ting du skal svare på i appen, når du registrerer.
Bruger
Nårh på den måde. Altså når man registrerer, det synes jeg er super intuitivt. Altså det der med
farverne og så bjælken. Det er super intuitivt. Og så det der med, hvis vi går tilbage til det der
nudging. Det der med, at der kun kommer et spørgsmål af gangen og så skal du trykke næste. Det gør
det kun sådan mere spændende på en eller anden måde. Fordi du kan samtidig heller ikke se... Altså
kender du de der spørgeskemaer? Hvor du, hvis du har besvaret et spørgsmål, så står der oppe i
toppen sådan noget med, at nu har du besvaret 10% og sådan et eller andet, ikke? Men her, du ved
ikke hvor langt du er kommet i processen, så derfor så føler man ikke at tiden i det. Hvis det giver
mening?
Interviewer
Ja. Og har det været okay tidsmæssigt at bruge på det? Altså det har ikke føltes for meget?
Bruger
Nej nej på ingen måde. Altså de gange jeg har haft den åben, har jeg bare været sådan: “Så tilføjer
jeg lige lidt der og tilføjer lige lidt der”. Altså jeg har forsøgt at tage 3 forskellige kropsdele. Albue,
højre og venstre. Og den ene af mine hænder. Og det synes jeg ikke tidsmæssigt, har taget særligt
meget tid. Det har gjort i sammenhæng med at jeg har siddet og set en eller anden serie. Så er jeg
lige gået ind og taget et billede.
Interviewer
Er det noget du kan se dig selv fortsætte med?
Bruger
Ja det, jeg ville godt kunne se mig fortsætte med det, men det kræver at de der notifikationer virker.
Interviewer
Ja, at de virker.
Bruger
Ja præcis, fordi jeg er ikke selv en særlig struktureret person i min hverdag. På nogen måde.
Jeg ved for eksempel, at Jeg har min kalender at jeg skal tage noget medicin i dag, så det ved jeg. Hvis
jeg ikke havde det i min kalender, så ville jeg ikke huske det.
Interviewer
Ja, men det undrer mig egentlig også. Men det må jeg lige få kigget på efterfølgende, fordi det undrer
mig egentlig, for der er ikke nogen andre, der har givet udtryk for, at de ikke har fået dem. Så der må
==PAGE:93==
være et eller andet. Det kan være at det er den version af Android du kører, måske? At der er et eller
andet med det. Men det må jeg lige kigge på.
Bruger
Jamen jeg ved det heller ikke. Faktisk lige omkring der da jeg hentede appen, der installerede jeg en
helt ny Android version ned på min telefon. Noget der hedder et eller andet, minimalist phone, eller
sådan noget. Jeg ved ikke om det er noget du kender?
Interviewer
Nej, det gør jeg ikke.
Bruger
Okay. Det er sådan noget, hvor der slet ikke er nogen ikoner på min telefon. Så alle mine apps det er
bare en lang liste. For at jeg ikke bliver fristet af for meget telefontid. Jeg ved ikke om det kan have
noget med det at gøre?
Interviewer
Det kan det måske godt, men det må jeg lige kigge på og se, om jeg kan finde frem til.
Bruger
Men det burde jo ikke være noget, der skulle blokere for det tænker jeg, fordi jeg er gået ind der ved
notifikationer, og jeg har prøvet at tage dem af og på flere gange med den der lille slider der, som
man gør det med. Hvilket også er super nemt at gøre i øvrigt.
Ellers, som jeg også har sagt, jeg kunne godt tænke mig at bruge et andet interval end daglig
registrering.
Interviewer
Sådan lidt mere finkæmmet, så man kan vælge ugedage eller hvordan?
Bruger
Ja eksempelvis. Ja eller ugenumre. For eksempel.
Interviewer
Så hvor tit tror du at du ville registrere? Tror du ville registrere en gang om ugen eller mindre end
det?
Bruger
Det ville være en gang om ugen, fordi det er det jeg har. Altså det er jo næsten det jeg formået at
gøre de her dage her.
Jeg kan se at jeg har registreret noget den 3. juni og så har jeg registreret igen onsdag den 7. Og så
igen om lørdagen.
Interviewer
Og er der noget, der har føltes besværligt at bruge?
Bruger
==PAGE:94==
Ikke udover det der med at gå ind og kunne se den der billeddagbog. Så en anden ting, der virker lidt
irriterende, det er at for at gå ind og se status omkring det jeg nu har registreret. Eksempelvis albue
venstre. Så for at jeg kan gå ind og se statistikkerne, det jeg har registreret, så skal jeg gå ind og
trykke på de 3 prikker. Men hvis jeg bare trykker på selve albuen, så tvinger den mig til at registrere.
Så trykker du på krydset og så siger den: “Er du sikker på, at du vil lukke? Dette vil annullere din
nuværende registrering”. Så siger jeg bare ja til det. Der ville jeg gerne have, at når jeg trykkede på
“albue venstre”, som denne her jeg prøver at trykke på. Så vil jeg gerne have, at den kommer ind på
den side, som jeg skal finde frem til med de 3 prikker. Giver det mening?
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Altså der er 2 knapper ved siden af hinanden, som for mig at se, burde... Så burde der, der hvor der
står “albue venstre”, altså det vil sige på venstre side af boksen, altså top venstre af boksen. Når jeg
trykker der, så vil jeg umiddelbart tro, at jeg kom ind på den side, som de 3 prikker aktiverer.
Interviewer
Ja okay, så du vil gerne have at når du klikker på teksten oppe i Venstre hjørne, og så kommer du ind
til den side med statistikker?
Bruger
Ja ja præcis. Det var det der sådan giver mening for mig i hvert fald.
Interviewer
Og føles det okay, at når du klikker på alt andet på kortet, så kommer du ind i registreringen, eller er
det også forvirrende?
Bruger
Nå ja, det er det. Fordi det er jo ikke altid, men det er jo for mit eget vedkommende, at jeg ville jo
ikke registrere dagligt. Så ja, det synes jeg er irriterende. Men på en eller anden måde samtidig, er
det jo også god nudging. Men det er bare om der bare kunne være en lille knap, der hed:
“Registrerer” eller et eller andet. Men det kan også være det ville tage for meget tekst.
Interviewer
Ja, det kan jeg jo lige overveje. Har den på nogen måde påvirket dine forståelse af din psoriasis?
Bruger
Det har påvirket mig i den forstand, at jeg faktisk godt kan se et mønster i... Når jeg har brugt den der
billeddagbog, for at se om der var nogen forandringer. Det synes jeg var det mest interessante og er
også det jeg helst ville bruge. Og der har jeg godt kunne se nogle klare forandringer faktisk, i mine
registreringer.
Interviewer
Ja okay.
Bruger
==PAGE:95==
Og der kan jeg se, altså i forhold til det jeg har fortalt dig, at jeg tager det her medicin engang hver
14. dag. Og der kan jeg se når jeg er tættest på at skulle tage min medicin. Der er min psoriasis
værre.
Interviewer
Okay. Ja, så i slutningen af den periode?
Bruger
Ja, i slutningen. Ja eksempelvis, så skal jeg tage min medicin i dag, og hvis jeg nu lige for sjov går ind
og registrerer nu, det kunne jo være ret sjovt at gøre det. Når jeg alligevel har dig igennem. Så tager
jeg bare lige et billede, og så sammenligner jeg. For det var nogen af de ting, jeg ville bruge den til
eksempelvis.
Kan du egentlig se de billeder, som er blevet taget?
Interviewer
Nej nej det kan jeg ikke. Det er som jeg også skrev i det der onboarding flow, at det er en lokal
database, så jeg får ingenting fra jer. Alt ligger lokalt på jeres telefon.
Bruger
Ja ja ja. Men det det synes jeg er noget af det mest interessante. Og så kan jeg se, altså for eksempel
så ved jeg, at denne her uge har være super hektisk for mig også. Og det er en af de grunde til, at jeg
gerne vil kunne skrive noter på. Her ville jeg gerne kunne have skrevet en note med, at jeg
eksempelvis har hjulpet min mor med at flytte hele weekenden og i sidste uge har jeg haft en lidt
dårlig uge på arbejdet. Og har ikke lige været i det bedste humør. Fordi det kan jeg se, når jeg
sammenligner de billeder her, i forhold til dem jeg har registreret tidligere i testperioden.
Interviewer
Ja okay.
Bruger
Og det var det, som jeg ville bruge sådan en app her til. Altså at bruge det som sådan en slags
dagbog. Fordi man også mener at psoriasis det også er med til at påvirke humøret, ikke? Eller at
humøret er med til at påvirke psoriasissen. Eller begge dele.
Interviewer
Ja, Jeg tror det bliver sådan lidt en ond cirkel på en eller anden måde, at det påvirker hinanden.
Bruger
Ja, præcis. Det er derfor jeg godt kunne tænke mig at have sådan noget med også. Det er nok en af
de ting jeg har prøvet og at bruge lidt til at sammenligne billederne og så tænke over, hvordan Jeg
har haft det i den periode. Og det kan jeg jo så tydeligt se nu. Et, at jeg har været en lille smugle
stresset her den sidste uges tid, og så at jeg skal tage min medicin i dag. Så det har faktisk gjort noget
for mig, synes jeg.
Interviewer
Ja? Var der noget tidspunkt, hvor du følte, at appen ikke blev levede op til dine forventninger?
==PAGE:96==
Bruger
Ja altså, men det synes jeg jo har fortalt lidt om, ikke?
Interviewer
Ja, i forhold til billederne?
Bruger
Ja i forhold til billederne, og så at det tog mig lang tid at finde frem til de her billeder. Så jeg kunne
godt tænke mig, at de de billeder, at det var en del af registreringen.
Interviewer
Ja okay.
Bruger
Fordi så nudger du folk til at tage billeder. Der skal jo så nok være en “Nej” knap til det. Fordi Det kan
jo godt være, at der er nogle, der ikke har lyst til det.
Interviewer
Ja, så det skal være et valg man tager? Om man vil eller ej?
Bruger
Ja ja præcis. Nu ved jeg ikke, hvordan de andre du har haft igennem, hvad de har synes om det. Om
de er vilde med at tage billeder eller hvordan?
Interviewer
Jeg har en erfaring om, at det er meget forskelligt. Nogle synes, at selve registreringen er det, der
giver dem mest værdi, og andre synes at det er billederne.
Bruger
Ja og i forhold til det, så er der lige pt. 4 områder, som man skal svare på i forbindelse med
registreringen. Det er rødhed, kløen, smerte og skæl. For mit eget vedkommende, jeg har aldrig kløet
overhovedet. Så den har bare ligget på nul, hver eneste gang. Og det var også det, jeg mente i
forhold til det her med, at den vil aldrig komme ud med noget negativt, medmindre at jeg skriver
meget skæl. For eksempel, ikke?
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Så den vil altid, fordi det stort set kun er skæl jeg har - okay rødhed har jeg jo så nok også - men jeg
har hverken smerte eller kløe, for eksempel. Så vil altid være for lille, men hvis jeg så sætter, det ved
jeg ikke... Rødhed til 1 og skæl til 2. Så vil den jo stadigvæk havne forholdsvis lavt, fordi jeg siger at jeg
ikke har nogen smerter eller kløe. Og så kan. Det godt ende ud i og måske se lidt misvisende ud i
statistikken ud fra mine behov, hvis det giver mening?
Interviewer
==PAGE:97==
Ja det giver god mening.
Bruger
Ja det er selvfølgelig sindssygt svært, at finde ud af en god algoritme til det. Men hvis men på en eller
anden måde kan sætte nogle personlige præferencer på, hvad man gerne selv vil måle, ikke? Fordi
jeg vil stadig gerne måle både skæl og rødhed. Og så måske også have muligheden for at sætte de
andre på, hvis jeg finder det aktuelt.
Interviewer
Ja så måske at man på en eller anden måde kan customize det man bliver spurgt om i virkeligheden?
Bruger
Ja, det må det vel være.
Interviewer
Nu har vi talt lidt om det, der du gerne vil have med - billede filtret og sådan noget - Men er der
andre ting, du har gået og tænkt over af funktioner du godt kunne tænke dig?
Bruger
Altså udover den med de der noter der – jeg ved så ikke lige hvordan man skulle have de der noter
ind. Det har jeg lidt svært ved at sige...
Interviewer
Ja, jeg tænker at det kunne være en del af registrerings-flowet også, i virkeligheden. At du til sidst
måske bliver spurgt, om du vil tilføje nogle noter, og så kan du vælge at gøre det eller ej.
Bruger
Ja ja ja. Og så det der med at - det ved jeg ikke om du måske har skrevet ned - det der med, at man
gjorde det på ugebasis i stedet, men det kan jeg jo faktisk se, at du har forsøgt at lave. Der er jo det
der inde under statistikken, der kan jeg vælge imellem månedlig og ugentlig.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Det ville jeg jo så gerne have på symptom eller på registrerings-basis. Men det ville jo så være det
samme, hvis jeg valgte at registrere en gang om ugen. Så ville jeg stadig kunne se det på statistikken.
Så det tror jeg ikke går.
Ja, jeg er ked af, jeg kan ikke rigtig komme i tanke om noget andet, som jeg gerne vil have ind.
Interviewer
Nej, det er så fint. Du har givet masser af ideer allerede.
Bruger
Okay, nå men, det er jeg glad for. Fordi så tænkte jeg på, om man så kunne... Så var der selvfølgelig
det der med en vejr funktion agtig. Om det kunne komme ind i, på en eller anden måde?
==PAGE:98==
Interviewer
Du kunne godt tænke dig at se hvordan vejret er på den pågældende dag, eller hvordan?
Bruger
Ja, jeg ved ikke om du kan huske, at vi snakkede lidt om det der med, at ens symptomer kan være
værre om vinteren end om sommeren?
Interviewer
Jo, jeg har godt erfaring med det selv også fra mit eget skæleksem og sådan noget. At vejret påvirker
det helt vildt.
Bruger
Ja præcis. Jeg tror vi snakkede om sådan noget med luftfugtighed og vinden, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo lige præcis.
Bruger
At det godt kan spille ind. så det der med at der godt kunne komme sådan en meddelelse. Altså man
kunne sætte nogle grænser. Altså ligesom at du har din vejrapp på telefonen, for eksempel, ikke? Så
står der et eller andet med at der kommer regn i dag eller sådan noget. Så kunne der jo være en eller
anden boks, hvor man eksempelvis kan sætte nogle grænser. Ja altså, hvis luftfugtigheden var på vej
over 50 for eksempel. Så kom den frem med en eller anden meddelelse og sagde: "Luftfugtigheden
er sådan og sådan og sådan”. Ligesom du har de der skalaer med om den er moderat eller svær, ikke?
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Så man måske bare er opmærksom på, at det er noget der kan påvirke.
Interviewer
Ja. Er der ellers andet du har gået og tænkt over?
Bruger
Nej, så tænkte jeg på om, hvis du nu for eksempel registrerer et eller andet. At du har sindssygt
meget skæl eller et eller andet. Eller du registrerer, at du har meget smerte. At den så kom frem og
sagde, at: “Du kan prøve med det her præparat” eller sådan noget. Men det er også farligt at gøre.
Fordi så skal du have læger og sådan noget ind over.
Interviewer
Ja. Så skal man ihvertfald passe meget på, hvad man råder til. Det ville så nok være en mere forsigtig
nudging, ligesom jeg havde i mit design, hvor den ville sige til dig, hvis der var en mulig sammenhæng
imellem noget.
Bruger
==PAGE:99==
Det synes jeg også lød super spændende. Fordi så kan man nogle gange have et facit til, hvorfor man
måske lige føler sig lidt nede. Eller et eller andet, ikke? Så kan man bare gå ind og se på den app der.
Det vil jeg selvfølgelig også rigtig gerne have, men jeg tænker at det du spørger mig om, er om jeg
havde noget nyt til det?
Interviewer
Ja eller bare noget du har gået og tænkt over. Nogle bekymringer du har haft omkring appen eller
nogle ekstra kommentarer du lige kan komme i tanke om her til sidst.
Bruger
Nej, ikke ud over det som jeg har snakket om tidligere.
Interviewer
Jamen så har jeg faktisk ikke rigtig mere, men det var virkelig godt at høre, at du føler, at den har
givet dig noget i hvert fald. Og det var også fedt med de ting, du har haft tænkt over og ændringer jeg
kan lave til appen, så den kan blive give jer endnu mere værdi.
Bruger
Ja, altså jeg synes absolut at den har givet værdi for mig. Men ja, den ville sikkert give mere værdi,
hvis notifikationerne de virkede på min telefon.
Interviewer
Ja Det kan jeg godt forstå.
Bruger
Men det lyder som et lokalt problem, hvis der ikke er andre der har oplevet det.
Interviewer
Ja, jeg har godt nok primært iOS brugere, men jeg har også en enkelt anden Android bruger, der også
har brugt den og hun har ikke haft problemer, så vidt jeg kunne forstå. Så Det kan godt være noget
med versionen. Nogle gange kan Android versionerne godt drille lidt. Men det må jeg lige få kigget
på.
Men ellers så det eneste jeg lige vil sige til dig det er, at jeg lader bare appen køre videre. Så hvis du
har lyst til at fortsætte med at bruge den for dig selv, så gør du bare det.
Bruger
Du må jo lige sige til, hvis du gerne vil have den ud på et tidspunkt og du gerne vil præsentere den for
nogen. For jeg er jo frivillig i Psoriasisforeningen. Så jeg snakker også med en del derude og står også
for at lave nogle arrangementer en gang i mellem, hvor der kommer en masse medlemmer.
Interviewer
Okay, ja, fedt.
Bruger
==PAGE:100==
Så hvis du godt kunne tænke dig at komme ud og præsentere den. Bare lige og vise den til nogle
patienter og hvordan den sådan lige fungerer og se, om de også kunne bruge den. Og ellers er jeg
selvfølgelig også frisk på at teste videre på den.
Interviewer
Ja? Fedt. Og så må du må have en rigtig god aften.
Bruger
I lige måde.
Interviewer
Jo tak, hej.
==PAGE:101==
Afskrift
Interviewer
Jamen så vil jeg egentlig bare høre dig om hvordan det er gået og hvad du har syntes?
Bruger
Altså jeg har sat den til at den skal sige til mig en gang om dagen, at jeg skal skrive det. Men det der
har været sådan lidt kedeligt for mig, det har jo bare været click, click, click, for jeg havde ikke noget
vel? Altså så på den måde kan man sige, så har jeg taget nogle billeder, men så har jeg også bare kun
taget 2 billeder, fordi så har jeg tænkt sådan lidt: “Jamen det er jo det samme billede jeg tager lige i
øjeblikket”, ikke? Så på den måde har jeg mere skulle forestille mig det. Vil jeg sige, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo.
Bruger
Umiddelbart så virker tingene som de skal altså. Men så har jeg haft sådan nogle tanker om, at den
er jo super enkel. Men det er der sikkert en god grund til. Du kan nok ikke sidde og lave et eller andet
kæmpe projekt.
Men Jeg synes det kunne være meget spændende, hvis der var nogle flere ting i den. Men det ved
jeg ikke om er noget du interesseret i at vide noget om?
Interviewer
Jo, meget gerne.
Bruger
Nå, men jeg tænker bare på at psoriasis jo et eller andet sted også er en sygdom, der bygger på stress
og kost og alkohol og medicin og motion og alt muligt ikke? Altså så hvis du kunne tænke dig at gøre
noget mere ud af den... Jeg gik faktisk ind, da jeg snakkede med dig dengang og kiggede på nogle
amerikanske også, som jo bare var HUGE simpelthen, ikke? Altså der var bare virkelig mange ting,
ikke?
Men der kom jeg til at tænke på, at man kunne jo godt lave sådan noget med hvor tit laver man
motion om ugen? For eksempel. Går man en tur? Hvad har du spist? Hvad spiste du i weekenden?
Hvorfor flipper det ud om onsdagen? Har du været på druk? Havde jeg nær sagt, ikke? Eller jeg ved
faktisk, at der er nogen. Jeg drikker ikke særlig meget selv, faktisk næsten ikke, men jeg ved at der er
nogen der får det, når de har drukket meget, tror jeg og sådan nogle ting, ikke? Fordi det kunne jo
gøre en klog på hvad fanden det er jeg skal lade være med og hvad skal jeg gøre mere af?
Måske også noget med, hvis man spiser sundt, så kunne det jo blive sådan en slags dagbog over:
“Hvad sker der? Nu har jeg prøvet at spise sundt i en måned”. Og så kunne man følge nogle billeder
og sådan noget, ikke?
Altså fordi havde det nu været fra efteråret til op mod jul, så tror jeg virkelig at på 14 dages mæssigt,
at man ville kunne sige at det bare bliver bare værre og værre, ikke?
Interviewer
E.4
Interview 4
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
93
==PAGE:102==
Ja.
Bruger
Og så kunne man måske også skrive sådan noget med, hvad man bruger af medicin eksempelvis.
Jamen det det var nok mest det. Altså man kunne også have sådan en der hedder: “Hvordan har du
det?”. Eksempelvis, ikke? Altså er du stresset? Er du ked af det? Er du et eller andet, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo.
Bruger
Så man virkelig vil kunne registrere sig mere og mere ind på: “Hvad er det der gør at din psoriasis
bliver bedre? Hvad er det, der gør at den bliver dårligere?”.
Jeg tror faktisk godt. Jeg har ikke engang selv eksperimenteret vildt meget med det, men jeg kan jo
se, at hvis man har det godt psykisk, eller jeg er ikke så opmærksom på det der med mad, men jeg er
også ret sikker på, at det har en vis virkning, ikke?
Jeg har nemlig aldrig prøvet sådan rigtigt at, du ved, bare at sige grøn, grøn, grøn, grøn grøn. Lad mig
prøve at se, hvordan det virker på mig, vel? Jeg har selvfølgelig prøvet at spise sundere i nogle andre
situationer. Der synes jeg sgu ikke rigtig at jeg har kunne se forskel. I virkeligheden har jeg mere haft
det sådan, hvis man var nyforelsket eller sådan noget. Så kunne man næsten se, at det mentalt kan
have betydning også.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Man kunne også have sådan noget som: “Hvor meget har du sovet?” For eksempel, ikke? Jeg er
enormt slem til ikke at sove nok. Jeg burde nok sove mere end jeg gør, ikke? Det er jo også noget der
er oppe i tiden. Det der med at søvn har meget mere betydning end man måske i virkeligheden er
klar over, ikke? Så man kunne putte en masse af sådan nogle små ting ind, som jeg tror i sidste ende
har betydning for, hvordan ens psoriasis i virkeligheden ser ud, ikke?
Interviewer
Jeg er glad for, at det er de ting du nævner, fordi mange af de ting har jeg faktisk tænkt over i mit
design. Det er ikke nået med i denne her version af prototypen, for det ville kræve meget tid at lave.
Bruger
Ja selvfølgelig. Og det er også det jeg tænker på. Den er også meget enkel, ikke? Men Jeg tror i
virkeligheden mere, at man skal sige: “Ej ikke så meget, vel?”. Fordi man kan virkelig finde mange
ting, som i virkeligheden kan have indflydelse. Ikke kun på psoriasis, men også på mange andre
sygdomme også i virkeligheden.
Interviewer
Jo og det kan også være meget individuelt, hvad der helt præcist påvirker ens psoriasis og sådan
noget. Det er også noget af det der gør psoriasis til sådan en svær sygdom.
==PAGE:103==
Bruger
Ja, jeg ved at min hudlæge altid, hvis det ser rigtig slemt ud, så kan hun sige sådan: "Har du haft
halsbetændelse her på det sidste?”. Så er der et eller andet med at hvis man også har sådan noget,
så kan det have enormt meget betydning for, hvordan psoriasissen opfører sig og sådan noget, ikke?
Hvis du har en infektion, for eksempel, og sådan noget, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo, den er jo påvirket meget af immunforsvaret.
Bruger
Ekstremt meget, ikke? Ja, jeg tror nok at - så vidt Jeg har ladet mig fortælle - at immunforsvaret er
hele tiden på overarbejde, i virkeligheden. Når man har psoriasis, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo lige præcis.
Bruger
Så det mest de tanker jeg har gjort mig. Altså du har sikkert lavet den der hedder: “Nu skal jeg lave en
app og skal op til eksamen” og så videre. Og det bliver mere sådan, så viser man det og så forestiller
man sig, hvad det så kunne, ikke? Men hvis du sådan ville prøve at gøre det kommercielt, altså på en
eller anden måde sige: “Vil i købe den?” eller sådan noget, ikke? Altså hvis du snakker om det der
med psoriasisforeningen, så tror jeg det kunne være fedt, hvis man også kunne sådan nogle ting. Jeg
tror ikke, at der er noget på dansk. Jeg prøvede faktisk dengang vi havde snakket sammen første gang
at kigge lidt på, hvad der var. Der er ikke noget på dansk.
Interviewer
Der var psoriasisforeningens egen, men den har de faktisk taget af igen. Men det var den eneste
danske app der var.
Bruger
Okay.
Ja og den amerikanske jeg så, den er sådan rimelig svær synes jeg. Altså der tænkte jeg bare: “Ah, det
kan jeg sgu ikke helt”. Jeg tror den var sådan helt ude i blodtype og næsten helt derude ikke? Altså så
var det bare sådan: “Okay, så bliver det for bredt” synes jeg, ikke?
Så sidder jeg og tænker på - jeg er jo i Israel nu. Så så jeg faktisk lige - jeg er medlem af sådan nogle
grupper på Facebook omkring Israel, ikke? Og så var der nogle der skrev: “Kan i ikke være med til at
skrive noget?”. Fordi de er meget strenge rundt omkring i regionerne omkring at det koster 30000,
tror jeg, at komme til Israel i en måned, ikke? Og af en eller anden grund, så kan man så sige: “Nå
men det koster noget”. Man glemmer, at det koster 7000 om dagen, minimum, at ligge. på
sygehuset. Det vil sige, at 4 sygehus-dage er det samme som 30 dage i Israel, ikke?
Men det der ville man jo også kunne tage en masse billeder og se, hvor grimt det så ud da man kom
derned. Og så se når man kom hjem, at det var helt væk. Og så måske også: “Hvor lang tid holder
det i virkeligheden?”, ikke?
Interviewer
==PAGE:104==
Jo.
Bruger
Det kunne man også bruge som, argumentation måske over for regioner omkring: “Prøv at se hvor
stor en effekt det i virkeligheden har”, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo.
Bruger
Men det er sådan helt for mig selv at jeg tænker på det, ikke? Og så dem der er så heldige at komme
derned, Ikke? Fordi at ellers så får man jo sådan noget kraftig medicin, som mange får det dårligt af.
Jeg kan ikke lige huske hvad det hedder. Jo, det hedder methotrexat. Som er noget rigtigt... Jeg har
aldrig ville have det.
Og Jeg tror nok, at hvis man skal få biologisk medicin, som jeg både har set nogen det virker på og
nogle der bare fik det over hele kroppen. Det er også sådan lidt, tør man det så? Og så skal du have
taget methotrexat, for sådan er reglerne, ikke?
Interviewer
Ja, der er de der trin.
Bruger
Ja. Dem jeg kender, der har taget methotrexat - det er sådan noget med ondt i hovedet og kvalme, og
de får det så skidt - det har jeg ikke lyst til.
Interviewer
Det kan jeg godt forstå.
Bruger
Solen. Den er god.
Så det er sådan de tanker jeg egentlig har gået og gjort mig. Sådan i al almindelighed.
Den er super enkel og meget, meget let og bruge, ikke? Det der har været lidt ærgerligt for mig, det
er, at der ikke rigtigt har været noget.
Interviewer
Men det er jo kun ærgerligt i forhold til test af appen kan man sige. Det er jo ikke ærgerligt for dig
selv.
Bruger
Nej, det er rigtigt nok, men så havde jeg måske været endnu mere begejstret, eller hvad man skal
sige. Fordi jeg virkelig havde kunne se forskellen, ikke? Det har der ikke rigtig været. Men jeg har
forestillet mig det.
Interviewer
==PAGE:105==
Ja. Af de funktioner der er der nu, er der noget du ville ændre på, hvis du kunne det? Eller ville have
anderledes?
Bruger
Jeg tror, men jeg ved det ikke. Fordi jeg havde bare tænkt på noget med at, jeg tror der er noget der
hedder ben, ikke?
Interviewer
Der hedder hvad?
Bruger
Ben, for eksempel. Underben.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
På en eller anden måde kunne jeg godt tænke mig at man sådan lidt mere specifikt, måske kunne
sige: “Hvilke områder af benene eller underbenene? Jeg har for eksempel enormt meget på siderne
af benene. Og så kunne man måske sige, hvor mange procent eller sådan et eller andet.
Det er sådan lidt svært, hvis man skal fotografere hele vejen rundt om benet og sådan noget, ikke?
Forstår du hvad jeg mener med det?
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Og så ved jeg ikke. Nej, du kan sikkert ikke få den måde, man måler PACI-tal på. Det kunne faktisk
være meget interessant, hvis man kunne det. I virkeligheden, ikke?
Interviewer
Ja, jeg havde det lidt med i mit design til at starte med, men der var ret mange der ikke vidste hvad
det var og hvad det betød. Så jeg endte med at fjerne det.
Bruger
Ja, men det er det alle hudlægerne går efter.
Interviewer
Ja, det ved jeg godt.
Bruger
Det er noget med at man skal over 15, for eksempel, før de overhovedet begynder at tænke på, om
man skal til Israel og sådan noget, ikke?
Men jeg tror faktisk, at PACI-tallet er procent af kroppen.
Interviewer
==PAGE:106==
Det er en beregning der både tager hvor meget af kroppen der er dækket, og så regner den det ud i
også i forhold til, hvor svær grad af eksem du har på de forskellige områder af kroppen.
Bruger
OK, jeg troede faktisk, det var sådan noget med 15 procent af kroppen eller sådan noget. Det er det
ikke.
Interviewer
Det er det også. Men den tager også henhold til, hvor slem din eksem er i det område og sådan
noget.
Bruger
Ja, det er klart. Okay.
Nu spørger jeg dig om noget, jeg ikke ved. Og det er måske pinligt, men jeg spørger. Har du negle
med i den her?
Interviewer
Nej, det har jeg ikke. Det nåede jeg ikke at få med.
Bruger
Det skal du have. Fordi der er virkelig mange, der lider af neglepsoriasis. Har du også hovedbunden
med? Det har jeg så ikke fået set.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Ja, fordi det er der også virkelig mange der har. Det havde jeg faktisk i starten. Og så blev jeg klippet
skaldet, du. Og jeg har været skaldet lige siden og har aldrig haft psoriasis i håret siden.
Interviewer
Nej, okay.
Bruger
Og det er nok fordi der kommer lys og sådan noget, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo.
Jamen, jeg tror faktisk at vi har været meget godt rundt om det hele nu, egentlig. Ja.
Bruger
Perfekt. Hvad så? Dør den her om lidt? Så forsvinder den igen?
Interviewer
Det var faktisk det sidste jeg lige ville sige til dig. Det gør den ikke. Jeg lader den køre videre.
==PAGE:107==
Bruger
Jeg vil gerne beholde den.
Interviewer
Ja? Jeg lader den bare køre videre og så kan du bare bruge den videre, hvis du har lyst.
Bruger
Det er jeg glad for at høre. Tror ud ikke at du kunne sælge den til nogen? Eller på en eller anden
måde få nogen til at være interesseret i det?
Interviewer
Jo, det kan jeg nok godt. Men i første omgang, så bliver det bare mit fritidsprojekt.
Bruger
Det er helt klart.
Interviewer
Og så giver det også noget motivation, når jeg kan mærke, at det giver noget værdi for nogen. At det
gør en forskel.
Bruger
Ja selvfølgelig. Det er sådan lidt julemand. Det er det jo et eller andet sted.
Nå, men jeg glæder mig ikke til at få mere psoriasis, men jeg ser faktisk frem til at prøve at se, hvad
den kan gøre for mig i forhold til at blive lidt mere bevidst. Fordi i virkeligheden handler det jo netop
om at gøre dig bevidst om noget, ikke? Plus at det selvfølgelig også handler om ens sygdom. Men det
kan også være, at man kan blive bevidst om noget om kost og alt det der, som jeg har tænkt over.
Du snakkede om, at den også kunne blive brugt til at kunne skrive den ud. Er det er det noget, du har
overvejet?
Interviewer
Ja, lige præcis. Det er også noget jeg har med i designet, som heller ikke er kommet med i den her
app. Men ja, den skal på sigt kunne lave en PDF af den, så du kan sende den til din læge.
Bruger
Nej, det var det du sagde, ja. Det er rigtigt ja.
Interviewer
Men ja, så appen kører bare videre. Så du kan bare blive ved med at bruge den, hvis du har lyst.
Bruger
Ja, perfekt. Mange gange held og lykke med det.
Interviewer
Jo tak og mange tak for hjælpen.
==PAGE:108==
Bruger
Ja, det var sørme så lidt. Kan du have det så rigtig godt?
Interviewer
I lige måde og rigtig god aften.
Bruger
Ja i lige måde. Hej.
Interviewer
Hej.
==PAGE:109==
Afskrift
Interviewer
Til at starte med vil jeg høre dig, hvordan har det været at bruge appen?
Bruger
Yes. Jeg skal lige sige, at jeg har ikke prøvet at registrere for alle områderne fordi jeg regner med at
det er det samme jeg kommer igennem, hvis jeg registrerer for f.eks. ansigt og armhule. Så hvis bare
man i virkeligheden har testet den ene af dem, man har prøvet det der så er de alle sammen ens, går
jeg ud fra?
Interviewer
Lige præcis.
Bruger
Og så har jeg noget med, når Jeg har registreret område. Går ind på den for eksempel ansigt. Så
kommer min mand lige ind og skal sige noget, og så tænker jeg, “Hvad var det nu, jeg var i gang med
at registrere?”. Kan det stå øverst?
Nu trykker jeg lige ind på den. Jeg ved ikke, er min aktiv stadigvæk? Det tror jeg.
Interviewer
Ja, det skulle det gerne være.
Bruger
Ja, når jeg går ind og trykker på ansigt, så kunne jeg godt tænke mig, at der stod øverst. Altså der
hvor der står: “Hvor rødt er dit eksem?”. Som det første spørgsmål, ikke? Hvis der stadigvæk stod
ansigt deroppe i toppen.
Interviewer
Ja, så man kan se hvad det er du er inde på?
Bruger
Ja. For ellers så, når der sådan lige kommer en forbi eller man lige har taget og haft blikket et andet
sted, så tænker man: “Hvad var det nu lige du var i gang med?”
Interviewer
Okay.
Bruger
Ja det det manglede jeg. Og så manglede jeg også en dato på fotos. Men der er jeg lidt I tvivl. Jo, jeg
mangler en dato på foto, men jeg kan jo så se, hvis det er den uge, hvor jeg er i. Så vil jeg kunne se,
hvad uge dag det er. Om det er en tirsdag. For eksempel, ikke? Men hvis nu jeg går tilbage på måned,
så kan jeg jo bare se, at det er et eller andet sted der. Forstår du det? Hvad det er jeg siger?
Interviewer
E.5
Interview 5
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
101
==PAGE:110==
Kan du lige prøve at gentage det? Så jeg lige er sikker på, at jeg forstår?
Bruger
Altså jeg mangler en dato på de fotos jeg lægger ind, synes jeg.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Ja, for ligesom at kunne j udviklingen på fotos også. Hvis jeg benytter mig af det.
Interviewer
Ja okay, på den måde. Det er en god pointe.
Bruger
Ja altså det kan du jo bare gøre som du selv synes bagefter, men det synes jeg at jeg manglede.
Ja, og så tænker jeg... Det der, når man går ind i overblik. Er det det, det hedder? Nu skal jeg lige
prøve at gå ud af denne her. Annuller. Ja, så går jeg ind i for eksempel... Nu står jeg på måned. Så går
jeg i uge 23 og det kan godt være, at hvis man er på arbejdsmarkedet, så ved man at i uge 23 der lå
de og de datoer. Eller det var i den og den måned. Det gør det ikke i mit hoved. Men jeg tænker, at du
måske skal bruge rigtig meget, hvis både skal have ugenummer og datoer og måned og sådan noget,
ikke? Jeg skulle selv finde ud af - så måtte jeg jo gå i kalenderen og finde ud af: “23 hvad var det for
nogle datoer?”. Hvor jeg skulle gå tilbage og kigge.
Interviewer
Ja, det kan jeg godt se.
Bruger
Ja og så tænker jeg... Er rigtigt? Nu har jeg jo sådan ligget og kørt lidt frem og tilbage på det - at det
er rigtigt, at jeg kan enten vælge at se en uge? Eller en måned?.Og Jeg kan ikke gå længere tilbage?
Jeg kan ikke få det mere detaljeret? Hvis jeg nu, for eksempel uge 23. Nej, det var måske ikke sidste
uge? Der kan du bare høre, det går ikke så godt. Men hvis vi nu siger, at det var i uge 23 eller et eller
andet. Så ville jeg ikke kunne se hvilken ugedag det er? Men det er måske også... Ja, det kan du
vurdere.
For mig, fordi jeg lige nu efter min blindtarmsbetændelse er fuldstændig - det skifter fra dag til dag
og er helt sindssygt. Så har jeg haft brug for de der.
Interviewer
Ja, okay.
Bruger
Men jeg ved ikke om det er usædvanligt.
Interviewer
Så du kunne godt have brug for noget endnu mere detaljeret information i datoer med hvordan
forløbet er?
==PAGE:111==
Bruger
Ja, når jeg går i overblik.
Interviewer
Okay.
Og så vil jeg høre dig, i forhold til oplevelsen med appen. Synes du er det, der har været med i appen
- altså nu er alle features jo ikke kommet med i denne her version. Men det der har været med - føler
du, at det er noget du har kunnet bruge til noget?
Bruger
Ja ja ja, det synes jeg. Og jeg synes også den funktion, som ligger nede i indstillingerne, hvor jeg kan
få en notifikation. Den har jeg også... Ja - ikke fordi jeg har brugt den konsekvent. Fordi jeg har det
med at registrere før. Men jeg synes det er smart at man kan blive mindet på den. At det er nu. “Husk
det nu i dag”. Eller hvad du nu har indstillet den til. Det synes jeg fungerer rigtig godt.
Interviewer
Ja? Det er jeg glad for at høre.
Bruger
Men jeg synes det er rigtigt. Den er brugbar.
Der er dog... Nu kunne du høre, at jeg registrerer tit tidligt om morgenen, eller jeg står tit tidligt op.
Og der har datoerne ikke været fremme altid. Det skrev jeg en dag i en bemærkning, men så kom den
op lidt efter.
Interviewer
Ja okay.
Bruger
Men der er nogle gange, hvor den ikke har været der om morgenen, når jeg står op. Og jeg tænker på
nogle gange, så er det er sådan at man følger amerikansk tid. Jeg ved ikke, om du har brugt et system
der eksisterede, men nogle gange når ting er amerikansk tid, så kan det være lige 6 timer eller 8
timer forsinket.
Interviewer
Ja, det kan måske godt være, at datoerne oppe i toppen ikke er sat til at køre efter universaltid. Så
det kan godt være, at det er derfor, at der ikke er den ikke er dukket op om morgenen. Så det er i
hvert fald noget som skal fikses.
Bruger
Det var det jeg tænkte.
Interviewer
Hvilke funktioner har du brugt mest?
Bruger
==PAGE:112==
Altså Jeg har brugt øh... Hvad tænker du på? Altså Jeg har brugt registreringerne mest. Og så har jeg
jo ikke fået så meget overblik, som det kunne give mig. Altså, hvis det nu havde kørt en måned for
eksempel ikke? Så ville jeg have kunnet se noget mere. Men jeg har brugt registreringerne.
Interviewer
Okay.
Synes du at det var let for dig at navigere rundt i appen?
Bruger
Ja, det synes jeg faktisk. Specielt første gang. Fordi der bruger man noget mere energi og så tænker
man: “Det kan jeg godt huske næste gang”, og så kunne jeg ikke huske hvor de lå henne. Så på den
måde, så... Ja, det var nemt at komme ind i. Og hvis man bruger det dagligt eller en gang om ugen,
eller hvor tit man nu registrerer, så tænker jeg at så er det meget simpelt. Man kan tænke sig frem til
det tænker jeg.
Dog har du en pil. En rød og grøn pil som går op og ned. Det har jeg simpelthen ikke fundet ud af
hvad de handler om.
Interviewer
Det er godt du siger det fordi så er det noget jeg skal tænke over, så i forhold til videre design.
Bruger
Ja der skal være en eller anden signatur. Og så går den faktisk ind i den tekst, hvor der står: “Ingen log
i dag”. Og når du så har en pil på, som i det her tilfælde jeg sidder og kigger på. Den her rød og går
nedad. Så står der bare: “Ingen log I" og så forsvinder resten af teksten. Så der er noget der går ind
over hinanden, sådan rent visuelt.
Interviewer
Okay, det må jeg lige få kigget på.
Er der nogen måder hvor du føler at appen har påvirket din rutine i forhold til psoriasis eller?
Bruger
Nej, jeg tror ikke at du kan bruge mig som eksempel lige nu, fordi den er helt agurk lige nu. Så på den
måde tænker jeg ikke at jeg... Jeg fortalte dig, at jeg fik blev opereret for blindtarmsbetændelse og
den der infektion har gjort, at alt er gået helt agurk med min psoriasis. Så jeg har ikke kunnet sige, at
det er som det plejer, og nu kan jeg se en udvikling. For på den måde har det ikke været brugbart,
men det er en speciel situation, tænker jeg. Men jeg er helt sikker på, at hvis det havde været før det.
Inden det her blev helt galt, så ville den have været god for mig og følge. Og nu har jeg jo gået og
taget lidt billeder og skrevet lidt ned. Det har jeg haft gjort selv indtil nu, når jeg har fået ny medicin
og sådan noget. Dem ville jeg jo bare kunne putte ind der.
Interviewer
Er der nogle ting du synes var svære at bruge eller svære at forstå?
Bruger
==PAGE:113==
Nej, det synes jeg egentlig ikke. Altså jeg synes den var rimelig tilgængelig. Det synes jeg faktisk den
var. Jeg var måske lidt... Men det var så mig selv, der sov lidt i timen. Det der med at jeg både har en
venstre og en højre fod for eksempel, og der kunne jeg komme til at udfylde den forkerte side. Men
det vil man jo kun gøre én gang.
Interviewer
Ah ja. I den prototype jeg testede på jer tidligere, der havde jeg faktisk fået lavet sådan nogle labels
med højre og venstre på figuren af kroppen. Men det har jeg ikke fået med ind i den der prototype.
Så det tænker jeg bliver en opdatering på et tidspunkt. Så kan det måske blive mere tydeligt, hvilken
side der er den højre eller venstre.
Bruger
Og så er det vel også fordi, den person som man ser. Som man trykker ind på, hvor man vil registrere
for i dag. Den er jeg lidt i tvivl om, om den skal ses forfra eller bagfra.
Interviewer
Ja.
Bruger
Det er nok derfor, at jeg har rodet rundt i højre og venstre.
Interviewer
Ja. Tror du at det ville have hjulpet dig, hvis der havde været de her bogstaver for højre og venstre
over personen?
Bruger
Jamen nu skal jeg lige se engang. Jeg skal lige ned i bunden her, fordi der står tryk for nyt område.
Der får jeg jo en person. Jeg får, hvor jeg kan vælge et område, ikke? Men når jeg så vælger et
område, der kan jeg godt blive i tvivl, om jeg ser personen forfra eller bagfra. Og så til venstre, er det
det samme som min venstre? Eller ser jeg personen forfra? Jeg bliver i tvivl, fordi der er en ring
omkring kønsorganerne. Og dem kan man jo normalt set forfra. Og så står vi ikke i samme retning
der.
Interviewer
Ja, jeg kan godt se hvad du mener. Det er noget der må gøres tydeligere.
Var der nogle funktioner, du ikke fik brugt, som måske var unødvendige for dig?
Bruger
Nej, altså der var nogle områder, som jeg ikke havde brug for. Men én af dem tror jeg alligevel, at jeg
har været inde lige at prøve.
Og så er jeg lidt i tvivl om, for øvrigt, når nu jeg kan hente et billede fra mit eget billede fotoalbum.
Interviewer
Ja?
Bruger
==PAGE:114==
Når jeg så lægger den over og siger, at jeg skal hente et fra mit fotoalbum. Næste gang jeg går ind på
den side, hvor jeg har hentet et billede fra mit fotoalbum, så ligger albummet der stadigvæk. Er det
kun på min, at den gør det eller?
Interviewer
Nej, det er fordi den tager en kopi af billedet fra dit fotoalbum og så gemmer den billedet i dens egen
lokale database. Så selv, hvis du slettede billedet i dit eget fotoalbum, så ville det stadig ligge i appen.
Bruger
Ja, vil mit fotoalbum også ligge i appen? Til næste gang jeg vil have et?
Interviewer
Nej, den ligger kun enkelte billeder ind, så den gemmer ikke dit fotoalbum. Dit fotoalbum og appen
er uafhængige af hinanden.
Bruger
Ja fordi det sad jeg og prøvede på. Og så slettede jeg simpelthen fotoalbummet, fordi jeg var i tvivl
om, om det lå der lige pludselig. Men det er jo selvfølgelig lige meget, når det kun er ens egen. men
Det var så fordi det her var var din prototype, at jeg tænkte, at jeg hellere måtte gå ind og slette det.
Men det kan være, at du finder ud af det.
Interviewer
Er der noget du tænker du ville ændre på app’en, hvis der var noget du kunne ændre på?
Bruger
Altså, nu har jeg jo brugt den på en iPad. Og det har jeg ene og alene gjort, fordi det var større. Det er
det måske i virkeligheden ikke, fordi jeg fandt ud af, at jeg ikke kunne lave den større.
Det er lidt småt synes jeg. Men det vil det jo altid være, når det er på en telefon.
Interviewer
Ja, så du kunne godt tænke dig at den også kunne bruges på en iPad? Så du kan få det i et større
perspektiv?
Bruger
Ja, så jeg kunne få noget større. Ja.
Jeg kan jo godt se, at når jeg lægger min telefon ved siden af, så er det jo stort set den samme
størrelse. Altså den der ligger på min iPad er samme størrelse som min telefonskærm. Ja, jeg kunne
godt tænke mig noget større.
Men jeg skal lige høre engang, hvis nu man laver en større en, så vil man jo stadigvæk bruge den
samme app, som så kører sammen på telefonen og iPad, ikke? Så kan man jo bare vælge, hvor man
vil bruge den, ikke?
Interviewer
Jo, man kan sådan set bare lave en version af den, som har fuldstændig de samme funktionalitet,
men som er lavet til det større perspektiv af en iPad.
==PAGE:115==
Bruger
Jamen, det vil være den samme, ikke? Så altså for mit vedkommende ville det jo sige, at jeg havde
begge. Jeg havde den liggende begge steder. Hvis jeg registrerer det ene sted, så vil den også være
registreret det andet sted, ikke?
Interviewer
Nårh på den måde. Som den er sat op nu, vil det faktisk ikke kunne lade sig gøre.
Bruger
Nej, det tænkte jeg godt. Men på sigt, tænker jeg. Når du arbejder videre på den. Så kunne du måske
overveje det.
Interviewer
Ja, det er en god pointe at kunne have mulighed for have den b flere forskellige devices. Så man
kunne synkronisere imellem dem. Det kan jeg godt se. Det ville i hvert fald være noget til
videreudvikling.
Er der nogle funktioner du ville ønske den havde, som den ikke har endnu?
Bruger
Altså ikke andet end det der jeg sagde med en overskrift. Og det er jo ikke som sådan en ny funktion.
Det er bare, ja.
Interviewer
Ja, noget ekstra.
Bruger
Ja.
Interviewer
Og det med datoer på billederne?
Bruger
Ja
Interviewer
Har du ellers nogle tanker, bekymringer eller noget andet du tænker?
Bruger
Næ, det har jeg faktisk ikke. Jeg er ikke bekymret, i hvert fald.
Interviewer
Det var godt.
Bruger
Og jeg har ikke fundet nogen geniale tanker jeg kan fortælle dig, desværre.
==PAGE:116==
Interviewer
Nej?
Men det er godt at høre, at du føler at det rent faktisk har været noget du kunne bruge til noget og
du føler, at den har givet dig en eller anden form for værdi.
Bruger
Ja, men det synes jeg.
Interviewer
Og ja, det sidste jeg ville sige til dig er, at du kan sagtens bare fortsætte med at bruge appen, hvis du
har lyst. For jeg lader den bare køre videre. Så hvis det er noget du føler for, så gør du bare det.
Bruger
Ja okay, jamen så kan jeg jo sidde og fjerne alt min leg og så prøve at bruge den helt rigtigt.
Interviewer
Ja, det kan du sagtens.
Bruger
Ja okay.
Interviewer
Og du skriver endelig bare til mig, hvis der er et eller andet. Nogle problemer eller sådan noget, som
jeg eventuelt kunne fikse eller noget du kommer i tanke om, at du godt kunne tænke dig i app’en.
Bruger
Ja, det vil jeg gøre.
Interviewer
Og ja mange tak for din tid, det var rigtig fint, at du ville være med.
Bruger
Ja velbekomme. Du må have held og lykke med det.
Interviewer
Jo tak og mange tak for din hjælp.
Bruger
Så er jeg spændt på at se om der kommer en autoriseret app på et tidspunkt, hvor jeg kan gå ind og
lægge den ned, eller hvad hedder det? Downloade den.
Interviewer
Ja, det håber jeg meget på. Jeg tænker også, at der vil komme nogle opdateringer i den app du har
nu, når jeg får noget tid til at opdatere den i min fritid. Så vil du få besked om det i testflight, hvor du
har hentet app’en, at der ligger en opdatering.
==PAGE:117==
Bruger
Ja, men så vil jeg holde øje med det.
Interviewer
Super, rigtig mange tak. Så må du have en fortsat god weekend.
Bruger
I lige måde. Og held og lykke med din eksamen.
Interviewer
Jo tak.
Bruger
Godt hej igen.
==PAGE:118==
F
Second iteration screens
110
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:119==
G
Final low­fidelity prototype
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
111
==PAGE:120==
H
PsoCare Download Link
This section provides a link to download the high­fidelity prototype for both iOS and An­
droid.
iOS: https://testflight.apple.com/join/tJuEpV8T
Android: https://appdistribution.firebase.dev/i/1e1390a267cfd74e
112
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
==PAGE:121==
UX Design and Prototyping of a Self­tracking Tool to Support Self­reflection for Psoriasis Patients
113
==PAGE:122==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Building 101A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
