==PAGE:1==
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
modeling
the
landscape
of
energy
sectors
in Poland
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
modeling the landscape of energy sectors in Poland
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Jędrzej Grzegorz Wójcik
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Technology, Man-
agement and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Jędrzej Grzegorz Wójcik - s213044
Signature
Date
ii
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
22 / 06 / 2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Energy transition planning is an immensely important process. The aim of planning is to
bring the economy to a place where it will be climate-neutral, while maintaining energy
security and sovereignty, an appropriate pace of change and taking into account its social
aspects. Therefore, an analysis of the vulnerability of the Polish electricity generation sys-
tem to selected energy transition paths was carried out, taking into account the European
Union’s climate policy, the changing situation in the technological and economic fields.
Also of particular importance in the modelling was Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine
and the energy crisis, which changed the trajectory of the transition. The model used in
the analysis was the Barmorel - linear programming optimisation bottom-up model. The
scenario-based analysis made it possible to recommend accelerating the energy transi-
tion, by increasing the use of wind and solar power potential, and confirmed the rationale
for developing Poland’s nuclear programme, recommending that it be accelerated. It also
identified ways to improve the model in the future.
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen, for his guidance,
curiosity and support over the past few months. His interest in the results of my study has
encouraged me greatly throughout the research process, and for our weekly meetings,
valuable input and help in steering this study in new and promising directions.
iv
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Climat Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
European and Polish Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Energy Mix of Poland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Major Governmental Plans and Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Extension of European Energy Market Towards Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Energy Crisis of 2020s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Motivation
11
3.1
Planning of Polish Energy Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Studies on Modelling of Polish Energy System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Methodology
17
4.1
Integrated Energy System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Balmorel Energy System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Modelling
23
5.1
Assumptions update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Scenario Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Discussion
39
6.1
Results Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2
Modelling Decisions Taken and Model Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.3
Potential Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7
Conclusions
45
Bibliography
49
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Poland is the country with one of the highest emissions per unit of electricity consumption
and the country with one of the highest shares of hard coal and lignite use in Europe.
This is due to the fact that there are very large resources of these fossil fuels and a very
developed value chain in the sectors around coal mining and exploitation. This means
that the energy transition will be extremely difficult and costly, thus should be carried out
in a socially just and attentive way, as hundreds of thousands of people, many regions
and companies rely on these sectors.
However, this transition should take place as quickly as possible, if only because of the
ongoing climate change caused by human emissions of greenhouse gases. In addition to
the environmental aspect, the legal aspects also matter. In the European Union’s Climate
Law there is a binding target for the community’s economies to achieve climate neutrality
by mid-century. Geopolitical aspirations are also important for the pace and manner of
the transition, in the form of the need to become independent of fossil fuel supplies from
the Russian Federation, a country conducting a brutal and unlawful aggression against
Ukraine and behaving hostile also towards other European countries. In the economic
context, however, the economic transition is influenced not only by fuel prices, which have
risen significantly during the 2021/22 energy crisis, but also by the price of CO2 emission
allowances in the EU ETS, as a result of the EU’s climate targets.
This thesis seeks to answer the question of whether and how energy transition analy-
ses should be conducted using optimisation models. The state of current knowledge on
the subject in the country, the level of sophistication of existing scientific research and
governmental analyses are examined.
Next, 7 different transformation scenarios are modelled in the Balmorel model to answer
the question of the sensitivity of the Polish energy sector to transformation decisions.
Finally, recommendations are made to decision-makers on the direction of the Energy
Transition, and suggestions are made for further analysis of the issue.
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
Outlining the political, geopolitical, legal, social or economic background is crucial when
analysing the energy transition. During the transition process, however, decisions have to
be taken that can significantly alter the situation for any of the aspects mentioned above.
Hence, it is important to take stakeholders’ views into account when making these deci-
sions.
When it comes to environmental aspects, the discovery in recent decades that human
activity is significantly responsible for climate change has led to very profound changes in
the energy planning of the future, with the aim of completely abandoning the use of fossil
fuels within half a century, even though they have dominated and continue to dominate
many of the world’s economies. The environmental aspects were, however, translated
into legal aspects in the European Union, which set the year 2050 as the year of achieving
climate neutrality. This goal was included in climate law [1]. Hence, recent years have
been a turning point for many sectors due to the accelerating transition.
However, geopolitical aspects also play a big role. One of the most significant turning point
was in 2022, when the Russian Federation, one of the European Union’s main suppliers of
energy resources, launched a brutal full-scale invasion of neighbouring Ukraine. Prior to
the war, EU countries imported 155 billion cubic metres (bcm) of natural gas from Russia
(about 45% of total imports), about 108 million tonnes of crude oil (Russia being the largest
supplier) and the largest supplier of petroleum products (about 91 million tonnes), and
even coal (51 million tonnes), again being the supplier of almost half of this fuel to the EU
[2]. There was therefore a need to quickly abandon these supplies and reorganise energy
transition plans so that they did not rely on the resources from the east. That shock also
led to faster decarbonisation and diversification of fuel suppliers.
Next, in Poland political aspects play a very big role when it comes to energy planning.
Examples include the government’s plans to build the first nuclear power plants, as well
as the introduction of strong incentives for the construction of offshore wind farms and
household photovoltaics installations and obstacles to the construction of onshore wind
farms, that completly froze the sectore for a few years.
As can be seen from the examples above, various aspects can influence the energy tran-
sition, with some events or decisions often being a turning point for a particular technology
or sector. Hence, the most important aspects should be investigated before starting to
model energy systems.
2.1
Climat Change
There is a scientific consensus on the primary causes of global warming, with a major
agreement that human activities, specifically the one connected with the emission of car-
bon dioxide, are the leading contributor to the rise in the Earth’s average temperature [3] -
global warming. This is evidenced by the rapid increase in carbon dioxide concentrations
in the atmosphere, which has almost doubled compared to historical levels over the last
800,000 years. And since the acceleration of the fossil revolution, the average tempera-
ture has been steadily rising, and in 2022 it was 0.89°C above the pre-industrial level, as
presented in the Figure 2.1.
To address the anthropogenic causes of global warming, 196 countries agreed at COP21
in Paris in December 2015 to take preventive action by signing the first legally binding
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Global land-ocean temperature index (temperature anomalies) [4].
international treaty on climate change, the Paris Agreement [5]. The agreement estab-
lished a common goal of limiting temperature anomalies to below 2 degrees Celsius and,
in the best-case scenario, 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels. The
treaty outlined a plan for countries to reach their emission peaks as soon as possible and
achieve climate neutrality by 2050, serving as a starting point for building development
strategies, energy policies, and energy and climate plans.
To achieve these targets, various financial mechanisms, legal frameworks, and social
movements have been emerging to drive the energy-intensive sectors, including district
heating, to make significant changes to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and operate
sustainably. Hence, one of the indicators for the model’s scenarios may be precisely the
cumulative carbon dioxide emissions. Assuming that climate neutrality is achieved by
2050 in all scenarios (as discussed in the next chapter), this will be an indicator of the
best-case scenario from a climate perspective.
2.2
European and Polish Policies
2.2.1
European Climate Law
The European Climate Law is a pioneering piece of legislation in the EU that aims to reg-
ulate the goal of achieving climate neutrality by mid-century, as outlined in the European
Green Deal. Its purpose is to ensure that all future legislation aligns with this objective
and takes steps towards achieving it. Every sector of the economy and society will need
to make reasonable efforts to work towards this goal. This EU-level law is binding and re-
quires all participants in the European market to work towards a net reduction in emissions
over the next 30 years [6].
This law is binding and has long-term targets that can be changed during its lifetime.
Hence, it leaves no illusions, this law will have an impact on the transformation of the
economy and will directly or indirectly push their decarbonisation. This means that the
model assumptions should include this law, in the form of having zero emissions in 2050
or other scenarios can be analysed that will allow the model to select mainly clean sources
closer to the 50’.
4
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:13==
2.2.2
Polish Power Market
The capacity market entered into force in Poland after 2020 to prevent the emergence of a
deficit in the required level of capacity available in the electricity system. This deficit may
arise as a result of the increasing share of sources with a near-zero cost of generation,
subsidised sources, or those with priority of feeding energy into the grid. This means that
problems may arise in maintaining power units, which are fully controllable sources of
energy, ready to take up work at times of shortage of energy from other sources [7].
The capacity market in Poland consists of subsidies for sources that have won auctions for
capacity availability in a given year. However, from 1 July 2025, public support for power
plants emitting more than 550 gCO2/kWh (and 350 g/kW/year) [8], i.e. mainly coal-fired
power plants, will not be allowed.
Emerging analyses say that after the regulation changes, the share of coal will decline: 8
GW can be expected to disappear in 2025 (ending power contracts will be non-renewable),
and another 6 GW may disappear by 2030 (when 5-year contracts concluded before 2025
will cease to apply), and finally in 2035 (end of 15-year contracts for new units) [9].
The inclusion of a power market in Poland under the rules outlined above may be a major
challenge, but should not be overlooked. Hence, simplified ’unplanned’ coal unit decom-
missioning resulting from exiting the capacity market should be taken into account.
2.3
Energy Mix of Poland
Poland is one of the countries with one of the highest emissivities from the energy sector,
averaging at 708 kg/MWh for the end user [10]. This is due to the very high share of coal
and lignite sources in electricity generation, reaching 70% in 2022 Figure 2.2, being one
of the highest shares in the EU, what can be seen at Figure 2.3 [11].
Figure 2.2: Share of sources in electricity generation (for 2023 data only until mid-May)
[Eurostat].
This is due to the fact that, historically, Poland’s energy sector has relied mainly on coal
sources due to its highly developed mining sector. Thousands of people are still employed
in extractive sectors other than around the extraction and use of fossil fuels, forcing this to
be taken into account when leading the energy transition. However, this does not mean
that the coal or lignite sector is in full health. Many of the current coal units are older
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Share of fossile fules electricity production in the EU countries.) [ENTSO-E].
than 40 years and have a high failure rate [12], some of the lignite units will have to be
decommissioned as the lignite beds run out, and others (new ones) have other major
technical problems [13].
Figure 2.4: Installed capacity for electricity generation in Poland [ENTSO-E].
Figure 2.4 presents the capacity installed in the power industry. It is noticeable that only in
6
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:15==
the last few years has there been a more rapid development of renewables. Photovoltaics,
in particular, is growing rapidly, but much of this success is due not to the development of
large-scale installations, but to rooftop prosumer installations. As far as the wind sector
is concerned, there are currently only onshore wind farms in Poland. The initial dynamic
development of these sources, however, was abruptly halted in 2016 by the so-called
10H law, which prohibited the construction of wind turbines at a distance of less than 10
times the height of the tower. This change effectively slowed down the development of
new farms to almost nothing and lasted until 2023, when an amendment to this law took
place. The 10H provision was replaced by a radius of 700 metres, which unlocked some
new developments.
2.3.1
Coal Sectors
Due to Poland’s very rich hard coal and lignite deposits, it has historically been very im-
portant for the development of certain regions of the country (mainly Silesia in the south
of the country) and energy-intensive sectors such as power generation, heating and met-
allurgy. Even in 2021, the output of hard coal in Poland was many times higher than in
other countries, amounting to nearly 53 million tonnes (while the record output was 200
million tonnes in 1979 and another 100 million tonnes in 2000), and the output of lignite
ranked 3rd (after Germany and Turkey), as can be seen in the Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Coal and lignite production and imports in Europe [14].
This is associated with very high employment directly in the mining sectors, as can be
seen from the Figure 2.6. In March 2023, this employment stood at pon ad 75,000 people,
whereas a decade ago the figure was over 115,000 people. However, it is worth noting that
the number of employees in downstream sectors can also reach many tens of thousands.
One could mention such sectors as the manufacture and servicing of equipment for mines,
transport, coal combustion in power plants, heating plants or steelworks and coking plants,
or the sectors manufacturing and servicing equipment in these facilities, and many others.
Taking the above into account, the transformation or coal exit in Poland cannot be carried
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: Employment in hard coal mining in Poland - March 2023 [15].
out without taking into account the sectors linked to hard coal and lignite. This transfor-
mation must take place in a prudent and equitable manner in order to give these regions,
sectors and communities a chance to transform and to benefit from the new opportunities
offered by the development of other energy technologies.
2.4
Major Governmental Plans and Strategies
Energy systems modelling should be carried out taking into account already existing long-
term plans and strategies of the country. Often, energy policy plans involve multi-gigawatt
projects, which can often be the backbone of a country’s energy transition, and because of
significant political push, they cannot be abandoned. There are such projects on the Pol-
ish market, mainly concerning the development of the nuclear power sector from scratch
and the offshore wind sector, which will redefine development in these areas.
2.4.1
Nuclear Energy Programme
According to the Polish Nuclear Power Programme [16] and the Energy Policy of Poland
until 2040 [17], 6-9 GW are to be built in Poland, which will be built gradually between
2033 and 2043 in locations in northern and central Poland. The programme assumes the
construction of Generation III(+) multiscale nuclear reactors, arguing the need to develop
nuclear energy on the grounds of energy security (diversification of the direction of primary
energy supply and of the fuel base in the power industry), environmental (anticipated
sharp decrease in greenhouse gas emissions and the need to meet the conditions of
the European Green Deal) and economics (development of nuclear power will lead to a
reduction in the unit cost of energy).
2.4.2
Off-Shore Wind Farms Programme
Poland’s Energy Policy until 2040 indicates that the installed capacity of offshore wind
farms will reach 5.9 GW by 2030, and up to 11 GW in 2040, to be built in the Polish ex-
clusive economic zone [17]. For this reason, a Contracts for Difference (CfD) auction has
been announced for up to 5.9 GW of capacity from these sources to guarantee the finan-
cial stability of these investments [18]. However, a draft amendment to the Renewable
Energy Act is currently underway, which could increase the level of installed capacity by
8
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:17==
2030 from 5.9 to 12 GW [19, 20]. This means that the planned capacities in offshore wind
farms will reach a significant share in Poland’s energy mix. However, the technical po-
tential lying in the Polish Baltic Sea could reach 33 GW [21], the full exploitation of which
would completely change the Polish energy landscape.
2.5
Extension of European Energy Market Towards Ukraine
A common European electricity market, based on market coupling, allows the pooling
of offers to buy and sell electricity from different EU (and non-EU) countries. According
to the theoretical model, the removal of barriers related to cross-border (and cross-zonal)
transmission limits, will lead to an equalisation of prices across the area and a reduction in
electricity prices [22]. Given the great importance given to the integration of the markets of
European countries in the context of the construction of a common market, energy union
and the significant increase in renewable energy sources, it is important to mention the
developments taking place in Central and Eastern Europe.
In 2022, the process of connecting Ukraine and Moldova to the European electricity mark
began. The process began after Ukraine’s (and Moldova’s) electricity system had previ-
ously been disconnected from the systems of neighbouring Russia and Belarus on the day
the Russian invasion began, and switched to island operation to prepare the ground for
rapid to sync up with the European Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO-
E) [23]. This occurred on 16 March, when, in an emergency, these networks were syn-
chronised [24]. The next steps will be the integration of both countries into the common
European market.
The connection of the Ukrainian electricity system, which is one of the largest on the Eu-
ropean continent with electricity production (154 TWh in 2019 [25]) comparable to that
of neighbouring Poland (164 TWh in 2019 [26]), could significantly change the situation
in the region. Hence, it should be taken into account in future power system modelling.
However, due to the occupation of part of the territory and intensive attacks by the Rus-
sian Federation on critical infrastructure and industry in Ukraine, energy production has
almost halved. As of March 2023, only 28% of thermal power plants and CHP plants
remained available (5 out of 16 GW), while the biggest nuclear power plant in Europe
(Zaporizka NPP) is still under occupation and all thermal and larged hydropower plants
were attacked or attacked and damaged. On top of that 44% of high voltage transforming
stations were also damaged [27, 28]. Hence, electricity export from Ukraine have been
temporarily ceased during the winter/spring of 2022/23 [29, 30], were restored with even
larger capacities (new HVAC line Chmielnicka NPP with polish station).
2.6
Energy Crisis of 2020s
In 2021 and 2022, there was a significant shift in the European energy markets. This
was mainly due to a crisis that began in 2021, which was caused by a range of factors
stacked on top of each other, such as abnormal weather conditions, delayed maintenance
of energy infrastructure (mainly due to the recent pandemic), and the rapid economic
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. However, the crisis was further intensified
by the Russian Federation’s deliberate reduction of natural gas supplies to Europe [32],
which preceded the country’s aggression against Ukraine [33].
As a result, the European energy markets were destabilized, leading to an increase in
prices due to supply constraints caused by economic sanctions and embargoes on Russia
(a country recognized as a state sponsor of terrorism [34]), sabotage on European energy
infrastructure [35], and other actions aimed at destabilizing the energy markets in Europe
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
9
==PAGE:18==
[36, 37, 38]. This has resulted in significantly higher electricity prices than in previous
years. Thus, there has been a surge in demand in Europe for energy produced from
sources other than Eastern fossil fuels (mainly natural gas, which is supposed to play a
big role in the European energy transition).
The effects of these events can be observed on existing market quotations and forecasts
for gas and electricity prices, where a significant long-term increase in these prices is
expected, as can be seen in the Figure 2.7. Given the scale of this crisis and changes in
the markets, an update of fuel costs should be carried out when building the model.
Figure 2.7: Wholesale power prices in the European Union [39].
10
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:19==
3
Motivation
3.1
Planning of Polish Energy Transition
Strategies for the development of energy and other related sectors are being carried out
as part of work on a document called the Energy Policy of Poland. According to the ex-
isting Energy Law [40], the minister responsible for energy is responsible for drafting the
country’s energy policy with a view to ensuring energy security, increasing the compet-
itiveness and energy efficiency of the economy, as well as protecting the environment,
including the climate. The document should, in particular, contain a diagnosis of the sit-
uation in the energy sector, should indicate priority directions for the state’s activities in
this area, and should include a forecast part for a period of no less than 10 years.
In February 2021, the current version of the document appeared, outlining the assump-
tions and the underlying development path for the energy sector in Poland. The policy is
based on three pillars: I fair transition, II zero-emission energy system, and III good air
quality. Strategic projects are also mentioned, among which one can find the develop-
ment of Polish nuclear energy or offshore wind energy. It shows the energy mix seen in
the Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Forecast net capacity of electricity generation sources by technology in
PEP2040 [17].
3.1.1
Problems of Polish Energy Policy till 2040
However, both in the assumptions for the project and in the project itself, information and
values appear that make one doubt the sense of the analyses carried out and force one to
reflect on the relevance of carrying out similar analyses and strategies over assumptions
that deviate significantly from reality.
1. The price forecast for CO2 emitting allowances adopted in the study is around
22 EURO2020/tonne in 2025 and around 41 EURO2020/tonne in 2040, at a time
when other market forecasts assumed values several tens of per cent higher.
However, the situation in the EEX market turned out to be opposed to the assump-
tions made in PEP40. The allowance price rose from €25/tonne in 2020 to €80
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
11
==PAGE:20==
and €85/tonne in 2021 and 2022 respectively, until it finally reached €100/tonne in
February 2023. The costs of producing electricity from fossil fuels will be signifi-
cantly higher than originally expected. This may mean that the economic and legal
environment being prepared for the Polish market will be significantly out of step
with reality, thus creating many unexpected problems.
Figure 3.2: EU ETS scenarios forecast and realisation.
2. Underestimation of the potential for PV installation development
PEP40 assumes that PV installed capacity will reach about 5-7 GW in 2030 and
about 10-16 GW in 2040. What was not foreseen, however, was that there would
even be a leapfrogging of these installed capacities in the early 2020s, reaching
around 12 GW by the end of 2022 (ENTSO-E), ahead of its development by almost
20 years.
3. Underestimation of the potential for onshore wind farm development
The situation is similar for onshore wind farms. There, PEP40 assumes that the
capacity of these sources will be 9-10 GW and will be constant between 2020 and
2040. Here, reality has again diverged from the plans. The installed capacity in 2020
was around 6 GW and increased to 8.3 GW by the end of 2022. In addition, this
increase occurred when Poland had a very restrictive law on the construction of new
wind farms, in which turbines could not be built closer than 10 times the height of their
tower (the so-called 10H law). However, changes are currently under discussion that
will liberalise this law, allowing new sources to be built 500 or 700 metres from the
nearest development. This change will open the way for the construction of approx.
7 to 22 GW [41] (depending on the distance adopted).
Both the assumptions made and the forecasts of results differ significantly from those we
see in reality. On the one hand, mistakes were made in adopting over-optimistic forecasts
of, for example, the price of CO2 emission allowances (which are of great importance
for sources based on fossil fuels). These mistakes were compounded by events that
were observed in reality, i.e. the large increase (much higher than even the pessimistic
forecasts) in EU ETS allowance prices, the significant increase in fuel prices, especially
for natural gas (which was to play a large role in the energy transition), or the much faster
12
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:21==
than thought development of renewable fossil sources, i.e. PV installations and wind
farms.
This means that the current Polish Energy Policy 2040 is outdated; moreover, it con-
tained, in part, outdated assumptions on the day of publication. As a result of erroneous
forecasting and understanding of markets and policies, laws, plans and strategies or large
strategic projects may emerge that will work in a sub-optimal way or that will be discon-
tinued or bring a loss (for example stopping the construction of a 1 GW coal-fired power
plant in Ostrołęka and a loss of PLN 1.35 billion in 2020 as an effect of wrong strategic
planning in previous years [42]).
3.1.2
Update to Polish Energy Policy till 2040
A little over a year later, in March 2022, the key assumptions for the update of Poland’s En-
ergy Policy until 2040 appeared [43], in which special attention was paid to energy security
through the diversification of supplies and increasing the country’s energy independence.
For this reason, the fourth pillar of the policy, energy sovereignty, i.e. independence of
the national economy from imports of fossil fuels mainly from the Russian Federation, will
appear in the updated version of the document. In addition, the changes mentioned are:
• Increasing technological diversification and expansion of capacities based on do-
mestic sources
• Further development of renewable energy sources (to achieve about half of produc-
tion from RES by 2040),
• Improving energy efficiency,
• Further diversification of supply and provision of alternatives to hydrocarbons,
• Adapting investment decisions in gas-fired generation capacity to fuel availability
(e.g. by foregoing new gas-fired sources by increasing the utilisation of existing
coal-fired ones),
• Utilisation of coal-fired units (increasing the use of units in situations of national
energy security risk and continuing to keep these units operational, as well as the
use of clean coal technologies),
• Implementation of nuclear energy,
• Development of grids and energy storage,
• Negotiating changes to EU regulations (with a view to extending the operation of
conventional generation sources without incurring additional costs as a result of
climate policy).
It can be noted that the assumptions for updating the energy policy are relatively con-
servative, which is due to the significant increase in the importance of energy security
and sovereignty, in the context of geopolitical changes. However, the strategy adopted
by the Polish authorities may not turn out to be optimal, even taking into account its re-
vised objectives. Hence, this analysis should also take into account the level of fossil fuel
consumption, as one of the key performance indicators of the scenario.
3.2
Studies on Modelling of Polish Energy System
An analysis of scientific papers on the topic of modelling the Polish energy system has
been carried out, which will identify the most commonly used models, and targets for
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
13
==PAGE:22==
modelling energy-intensive sectors in Poland and allow a diagnosis of shortcomings in
this area.
In the study ”Polish energy transition 2040: Energy mix optimization using grey wolf op-
timizer” [44] Grey Wolf Optimizer model was used to search for the optimal production
mix to provide electricity and heat sub-supply. The model was calibrated on 2017 data
using the EnergyPLAN tool, incorporating model parameters to get rid of deviations. A
sensitivity analysis was also carried out based on the change in the cost of renewables.
The optimiser looked for a scenario with minimum costs of the energy mix in 2040.
The study ’Polish energy policy 2050 - An Instrument to develop a Diversified and sus-
tainable electricity generation mix in coal-based energy system’ [45] analyses only the
electricity aspect of the sector (excluding heat), using the author’s model, the results of
which were also used by the Ministry of Economy to develop the Polish Energy Policy.
This analysis attempts to find the optimum energy mix in 2050, and analyses scenarios
that differed in the presence of the Polish nuclear programme, the level of costs from CO2
emissions and the level of implementation of new technologies. There is also criticism of
the model authors towards the strategic PEP documents.
The following analysis entitled ”Energy mix optimisation - A case study for Poland” [46],
which refers to the model used and developed by the Chancellery of the Prime Minister
of the Republic of Poland. This cases uses DAS, taking into account both the balance
of energy and power or dispatchable of power in terms of times regimes. The model
includes calculation in 1-year time slot. The single point of view is to minimise costs from
the perspective of the ’central planner’, as can be seen when considering costs associated
with mining, e.g. CAPEX of mines. This also ignores problems with the electricity grid or
electricity market in the model. The scenario analysis looked at differences in the cost of
natural gas, the level of RES or the level of CO2 reduction.
Finally, an analysis entitled ”Modelling of power reserves and RES in optimisation of the
Polish energy mix” [47] highlights the importance of short-term planning (hourly analy-
sis) in long-term analyses of the energy mix to take into account power system flexibility
requirements, hence the MILP model was used. The objective function was cost minimi-
sation.
Summarising the analysis of selected studies relating to the modelling of Poland’s energy
transition, it can be seen that in many analyses the issue of sectors other than the electric-
ity generation sector and sometimes the heat generation sector is overlooked. This fails
to capture the sector coupling, i.e. the interdependence of the transport, industry and heat
sectors in the energy transition, especially in the context of electrification of these sectors.
There is also sometimes a lack of consideration of the problems of transmission networks
and their investment costs, or the construction of the electricity market. The energy trans-
formation of Poland’s neighbours and their impact on the Polish energy market, due to the
presence of cross-border connections and participation in the common market, is also not
taken into account. Only occasionally are annual seasonal variations and hourly average
power balancing taken into account, which is particularly important with the emergence
of a large number of uncontrollable renewable energy sources.
This means that there is still considerable room for action and the creation of richer models
and more extensive analyses of the Polish energy sector.
14
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:23==
3.3
Research Question
In conclusion, it can be said that the decisions that are currently being taken are crucial
to the path of the energy transition. The importance of these decisions is immense, given
the promises, commitments and declarations that have been made at international level
and that have become law with regard to achieving climate neutrality. The nature of in-
vestments in the energy sector, i.e. their preparation time of a few to several years, their
operating time of 20 (such as a photovoltaic installation) to more than 50 years (such as
nuclear power plants), the amount of investment involved or the impact they will have on
the environment makes the choice of the right path for the transition very important. It is
safe to say that we are now at the most important moment for the energy sector since its
inception, as we will change it forever through regulation and investment decisions.
However, all this is happening in extremely uncertain times. On the one hand, we have
the challenges of the energy crisis, which has dramatically changed the market for fuels
and other raw materials needed by the energy sector. On the other hand, there are a
number of political decisions restricting the construction or operation of wind power plants
in Poland or nuclear power plants in Germany and vice versa, as well as the expansion
of the European market to include Ukraine, Moldova and possibly other countries in the
future. There are also questions about the pace of the energy transition and its fairness
for regions whose economies currently rely heavily on the extraction, processing or use
of fossil fuels.
In the author’s opinion, possible plans for the transition of the electricity sector should
already be analysed today in order to meet the goals set for this energy transition. How-
ever, the analyses undertaken to date have often failed to take any of these aspects into
account or have been based on assumptions that are not applicable in reality. This is
why it is so important to know the potential transition path today, in order to be able to
prepare the appropriate financial or legal machanisms, to start investment processes, or
to prepare the ground for a fair transformation of the mining sectors. Taking the above
into account, the decision was taken to conduct a study:
+RZ PLJKW WKH 3ROLVK HOHFWULFLW\ VHFWRU WUDQVLWLRQ WRZDUGV FOLPDWH QHXWUDOLW\ E\ "
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:25==
4
Methodology
4.1
Integrated Energy System Model
In order to analyse Poland’s energy transition under different assumptions, the integrated
energy systems model will be applied appropriately. The model should take into account
the influences of the different sectors on the supply and demand side. Often actors can
both consume and produce energy, but these activities happen at different times.
In recent years, there has been an increase in the dependence of sectors on each other
such that, for example:
• The district heating sector has so far only been responsible for producing heat or
heat and electricity in cogeneration. The electrification of this sector will increase
overall electricity consumption. In addition, the district heating system will be able to
cooperate with the electricity system by taking potential surpluses in clean electricity
production and storing them as heat, in daily as well as seasonal storage.
• the sector of individual consumers of electricity will change into that of prosumers
or flexo-consumers. Electricity will not only be able to be produced in domestic PV
installations and both consumed on-site and sent to the grid. This sector will also
be able to play a balancing role, by storing energy in domestic electricity storage
facilities or by shifting load from peak hours, thus better matching the renewable
energy production profile.
• electrification of the transport sector will also lead to a significant increase in elec-
tricity demand and may also bring the benefits of load shifting or energy storage,
• finally, the presence of industry and heavy transport, which will be able to use e-fuels
produced also from potential surplus electricity, also influencing demand.
Market coupling is something equally important in the Integrated Energy System Model.
In Europe, there is a common electricity market that, through interconnectors between
countries, allows electricity to be traded. The returns and volumes of such transmission
depend on the price level in the various zones and on the capacity of such interconnectors.
Because sector coupling and market coupling are so important, a model taking this into
account should be used for further analyses.
4.2
Balmorel Energy System Model
Balmorel is a flexible and versatile model that is used to analyze the electricity and com-
bined heat and power sectors, having the possibility to include EV and industry sectors as
well. It can be used for both long-term planning and short-term operational analysis. The
model is based on linear programming optimization and is developed in a specific mod-
elling language - GAMS. The source code for Balmorel is available under open-source
conditions, making it possible for users to modify the model to meet their specific needs.
This makes Balmorel an ideal tool for analyzing various aspects of the energy system.
Balmorel is a bottom-up model with a lot of detail on single units of production in many
countries and with a set of assumptions for new types of technology. With the integrated
energy system approach, interactions and synergies between different sectors or actors
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
17
==PAGE:26==
are modelled. It is an optimisation model that allows both investment and system oper-
ation to be optimised. The objective function is the sum of the investment and operating
costs of the entire system. It is a partial equilibrium model that represents both demand
and supply but also indicates price [48].
Therefore, it was Balmorel that was chosen to conduct this analysis. A big benefit is its
openness and transparency, its grasp of the issue of sectoral mergers, the rich amount of
additions and database resources, the large geography and the bottom-up approach that
is suitable for this type of analysis.
4.2.1
Time Handlinga
Due to the complexity of the model and the hardware constraints associated with the
available computing power and limited time to run the analysis, some simplifications are
used in the models. This trade-off should be made when considering the purpose of a
given analysis, e.g. for balancing market work it is worthwhile to run simulations at an
hourly (or lower) resolution over a short period, but when examining a given technology
mix over decades, one can limit oneself to examining only representative periods of the
year.
As the analysis in question examines energy transition issues, it was decided to apply
such simplifications. The model analyses time points:
• every 5 years, over the years 2025-2045 (2025, 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045),
• a given year every 10 weeks, which in Balmorel are called seasons (S02, S12, S22,
S32, S42),
• a given season is analysed every 3rd hour during the first day of the week (T001,
T004, T007, T010, T013, T016, T019, T022).
This means that 40 points in time are analysed in each year under study, looking for the
optimum for the entire duration of the study.
4.2.2
Geography Handlinga
The Balmorel model contains assumptions for many European countries. Many of them
are in the Single Day-ahead Coupling (SDAC) group, which means they have a common
electricity market. However, some countries are in this market, but their model does not
yet exist in the Balmorel database. It can all be seen in the Figure 4.1
As Balmorel is a model developed by the research community, the level of detail in the
models for different countries varies, depending on the validity and scope, of the research
conducted using Balmorel. So far, analyses published on Researchgate have mainly
focused on Scandinavian countries, the Baltic States or Germany, which may mean that
the model assumptions for other countries, including Poland, may have a lower level of
detail, the validity or local variation, which can translate into unrealistic results.
A preliminary analysis of 3 model variants differing in the size of the geographical domain
was therefore carried out with a simplified time domain (only season S22; for every 5th
year between 2025 and 2045). Based on the results of cross-border transmissions to
and from Poland, it was assessed which of the variants would best correspond to the
assumptions of the following analysis.
Variants of geographical domain size, i.e. presence of neighbouring countries, understood
as energy systems with direct connection to the Polish power system:
• V1: Poland onlt (as an island),
18
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: Map including countries whose models are included in Balmorel, countries
with an integrated Single Day-ahead Coupling (SDAC) electricity market, and countries
about to join the European Energy Market.
• V2: W1 + direct neighbours (Germany, Czech Republic Lithuania, Sweden);
• V3: W2 + neighbouring neighbours (Latvia, Finland, Norway, Denmark, Belgium,
the Netherlands, France, Switzerland, Austria).
Some of the countries subject to the above criteria were not included in the model:
Belarus and Russia - there is no direct connection between these countries to the Polish
electricity system; moreover, the connections between these countries and Ukraine have
been severed; energy trade between Russia and Finland has been discontinued and the
volume of energy trade between Russia and the Baltic States has been reduced (as shown
on Figure 4.2), which is also expected to lead to a complete discontinuation of these
activities in the future,
Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, Moldova, Ukraine - the energy systems of these coun-
tries are not modelled in Balmorel.
Figure 4.3 results of the pre-analysis show the balance of electricity imports to Poland
depending on the variant. The results are compared with the actual balance, which in
2022 is 1.68 TWh (with electricity production of 178.8 TWh) [49].
It can be noted that the model overestimates net energy imports by a significant degree
(by an order of magnitude), even for the year 2025, which should be close to the situation
in 2022. Such a large import is because the cost of electricity generation under the given
assumptions is much lower in neighbouring countries than in Poland, probably due to
the disregard of certain parameters slowing down the energy transition in neighbouring
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: Overview of electricity transmission (net imports) with Russia and Belarus.
countries. A discussion of the tendency of the model to present overly optimistic results
will be carried out later in the paper.
Figure 4.3: Overview of net imports by scenario and year.
Due to such large differences in the model results and the existing risk of presenting an
unrealistic development model presented on Figure 4.3, it was decided to continue the
analysis of the Polish system with the exclusion of the neighbouring countries. While net
electricity imports are currently just under 1%, the model predicts a significant increase in
this ratio. Such an arrangement would not be acceptable to either the transmission system
operator or the Polish government, due to the need to preserve energy sovereignty.
20
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:29==
4.2.3
Model Setup and Addons
This analysis was cranked out on the March 2022 version of Belmorel 4.03 of Balbase4
[50], which, like previous versions, has investment optimisation capabilities, one differ-
ence being that the optimisation is carried out over a period longer than one year, which
was also the premise of this work [51].
Given the characteristics of the analysis, which is to analyse the transformation of the
power and heat sector over a multi-year time horizon, and taking into account other eco-
nomic sectors and the effect of the coupling sector, the model was set up as follows:
• ELECTRICITY:
– Permit investments in generation and storage capacity: YES (from 2025),
– Permit investments in transmission capacity: YES (from 2030),
– Technology decommissioning: YES (but NO for units in Poland; but an ex-
ogenous decision on decommissioning of exogenous units added on per unit
basis)
• HEAT and INDUSTRY:
– Permit heat transmission between areas: YES (a requirement for the Industry
add-on; heat transmission between areas not allowed),
– Include individual users’ data in the optimization: YES
– Include industry data in the optimization: YES,
• TRANSPORT:
– Include transport data in the optimization: YES (for the hydrogen demand),
• HYDROGEN:
– Allows investments in hydrogen transport: YES (from 2030)
However, some additive capabilities were not used in the model, due to both the relevancy
of their presence in this analysis and the additional dispatch required to set them up,
without much impact on the results and conclusions of the analysis.
• EV add-on whose impact would only be observed through an increase in electricity
demand. However, this effect can be neglected as the model does not take into
account energy exports from the Ukrainian side, due to the absence of this country
in the model. These effects should cancel each other out.
• CCS add-on is also not available, as emissions are not a main indicator from the
analysis, and also due to the complexity of the topic.
• Offshore grids add-on, due to the non-inclusion of other countries in this analysis.
• Balancing market add-on, due to the multi-year horizon of the analysis, less impor-
tance is given to temporary imbalance effects.
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:31==
5
Modelling
5.1
Assumptions update
As the analysis in question concerns Polish energy systems, an effort was made to update
the Balmorel resource base and assumptions with the latest information, increase the
resolution of the available data or impose additional constraints on the model, adapting it
to Polish conditions.
5.1.1
Electricity demand update
Electricity demand is one of the most important parameters determining the results of the
model, by selecting the capacity of new investments. In the current version of the Bal-
morel assumptions for Poland, a constant demand of 145 TWh was assumed (including
individual, industrial and other consumption, but without EVs or additional heat pumps).
This value has been updated with the forecasts of the Polish Distribution System Oper-
ator PSE [52] from November 2022. These show an increase in baseline demand from
158 TWh in 2021 to 186 TWh in 2040, presented at Figure 5.1. The report also shows
a projection of additional consumption due to the growth of electric vehicles, heat pumps
or hydrogen, but these projections are not used, as the additional demand in these areas
will be captured by the Balmorel model.
Figure 5.1: Comparison of electricity demand forecasts from the current version of the
Balmorel assumptions and TSO forecasts.
5.1.2
Exogenous production capacities update
The next step was to update the available capacities currently available and those planned,
based on the database updated in January 2023 [53]. The existing capacity database in
place to date for Poland was presented at Figure 5.2. By custom when using it, the
decommissioning addon was included, which retired unprofitable sources from the op-
eration, which, due to their parameters, was already happening in the first period of the
analysis. However, preliminary analyses noted that this simplification does not corre-
spond to Polish conditions. On the one hand, Poland’s energy stability and security is
currently still largely based on existing thermal sources. Nowadays, at times of high pro-
duction from wind and solar with reduced demand, TSO opts for curtailment of these
renewable sources [54]. Moreover, the curtailment of coal sources in Poland has to be
carefully planned and spread over many years, due to the large mining employment of
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
23
==PAGE:32==
75,000 people [55] and also the many thousands of people employed by the power indus-
try. In addition, it is worth noting that capacities for some technologies differ from actual
capacities, especially for PV installations or coal sources.
Figure 5.2: Installed capacity for Poland in the existing Balmorel set of assumptions.
Figure 5.3: Updated installed capacity for Poland.
The updated database presented at Figure 5.3 shows the current forecast of available
system capacity. Using this database, the decommissioning addon for these sources has
been turned off, relying only on decisions made by the user. The assumptions made for
modelling the power plant base are as follows:
Assumptions for coal, lignite and natural gas sources:
For some sources, the year of their retirement is known and this date has been used. In
the absence of this information, the last year of operation has been taken as the year of
the expiry of the power contract. In the absence of this information, the last year is the
last major overhaul year + 10 years, and in the absence of this information the commis-
sioning date + 40 years. In addition, it was assumed that all coal and lignite units would
be decommissioned by the end of 2050.
The most recent installed capacity data are from late 2022/early 2023, and for this reason,
these values have been assumed for 2022. As the first year of analysis is 2025, it has
been assumed that between 2023 and 2025 the installed capacity of these sources will
grow by 2 GW per year for onshore wind sources and 3 GW per year for solar sources
respectively, based on current trends. In addition, it was assumed that wind sources have
24
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:33==
a lifetime of 25 years and solar sources 20 years so they are observed to decline in the
2040s on the graph. For offshore wind sources, it was decided to only model the frontage
of projects that have already been awarded differential contracts, with a capacity of 5.9
GW.
Assumptions regarding nuclear sources:
The start of the Polish nuclear programme is a political decision and the burden and re-
sponsibility for its progress lies on the shoulders of the state. It has therefore been as-
sumed that the first unit of 1.5GW out of the promised 6-9GW is assumed certain and that
it will appear in 2033 as an endogenous investment. The maximum growth rate is set at
500 MW per year.
Assumptions regarding other sources:
Existing capacities of hydroelectric and biomass power plants have been assumed here
and these capacities have not been corrected.
5.1.3
Assumptions for New (Endogenous) Capacities
Due to the relatively good economic performance of renewables in Balmorel, the simpli-
fications used or also the presence of mechanisms such as the cost of CO2 emissions
pushing out fossil fuel sources, the model tends to expand renewables too rapidly. For
this reason, it was necessary to apply some constraints to make the model capabilities
more realistic.
In the autoreffig:MaxPot, the maximum installed capacity values that onshore wind farms
and photovoltaic installations can achieve are presented. For onshore wind farms, the
maximum potential for a constant annual capacity increment is assumed to be 2 GW, for
PV installations it is 3 GW. The methods for arriving at the size of these limits are de-
scribed in the report [56]. In addition, the development of onshore wind farms has been
limited to a level of approximately 15.6 GW based on the analysis of [41], due to the dis-
tance restrictions introduced in Poland related to new investments.
In addition, the potential for offshore wind development has been identified at 33 GW in
the Polish Exclusive Economic Zone in the Baltic [21].
Figure 5.4: Potential to be developed by the model for onshore wind farms and PV plants.
5.1.4
Fossil Fuel Consumption Requirements
As mentioned, several tens of thousands of people work in the coal mining sector in
Poland. Often, the economies of entire regions are based on the mining and energy
sector. For this reason, the energy transition in Poland must be carried out thoughtfully
and with a certain limited speed, giving time for society, the economy and the regions to
adapt to the new conditions. For this reason, the model enforces the management of a
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
25
==PAGE:34==
certain minimum amount of coal. This value has been determined, based on simplified
projections and trends in hard coal mining [57] and lignite [58], as a minimum of 50% of
this volume, as presented on Figure 5.5. In addition, it is assumed that half of the ex-
tracted coal is used for purposes other than electricity generation. This makes it possible
for the model to propose a faster transition than trends indicate, while still maintaining a
certain amount of extraction.
Figure 5.5: The black box indicates the expected hard coal consumption in power gener-
ation, the solid line indicates the minimum value, and the dashed line is the business-as-
usual value.
Figure 5.6: The brown box indicates the expected lignite consumption in power genera-
tion, the solid line indicates the minimum value, and the dashed line is the business-as-
usual value.
A similar strategy was used to force minimal consumption of natural gas. Based on fore-
casts of natural gas use for energy purposes [59], it was also assumed that at least 50%
of these plans would have to be consumed. Here, the necessity of consumption can be
attributed to signed long-term contracts for the extraction and supply of this fuel. The
minimum consumption restriction only lasts until 2045. The values are presented in the
Figure 5.7.
5.1.5
Update of Energy Generation Costs
Fossile fuels
A very important point is the update of energy generation costs, in the form of fuel costs
26
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.7: The grey box indicates the expected natural gas consumption in power gen-
eration, the solid line indicates the minimum value, the dashed line the business-as-usual
value.
and emission costs. The energy crises of 2021 and 2022 will forever be part of energy
history, due to the speed and rapidity of market changes.
Figure 5.8: Historical data showing natural gas prices at the European Hub (TTF) in EUR
per MWh.
Fluctuations in the price of natural gas are particularly important for the energy industry,
as it is most often used by peak power plants (by closing the merit order they often shape
prices in the day-ahead market) and because the fuel is seen as crucial in the energy
transition. In recent months, there has been a surge presented in the Figure 5.9, after
which the price fell and reached 30 EUR/MWh mid June 2023. These changes have put
into doubt the currently accepted model of development based on natural gas and the
carrying out of re-analyses of the development of gas prices in the future.
Emission Trading System
Another important factor with a major impact on the future of the energy transition is the
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.9: Cost of fuels used in the simulation based on prognosis [60, 61]. Dotted lines
show historic data for natural gas [62] and coal [63].
cost of carbon emissions under the EU ETS. At present, the ETS mainly covers energy-
intensive and carbon-intensive sectors such as power generation, industry, heating and
aviation. However, as the European Union has committed to achieving climate neutrality
by mid-century, it is anticipated that the scheme will be modernised in the future, taking
into account other emitting sectors. As the horizon of this analysis extends to 2050, it was
assumed that the future ETS would also include emissions from construction and road
transport. Allowance prices under this assumption are presented at Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: CO2 allowance price projection used in the model in the scenario including
the scheme for buildings and road transport (EU ETS+BRT (buildings and road transport))
[64].
5.2
Scenario Analysis
5.2.1
Scenario introduction based on research question
The scenario for the following analysis was developed based on the research question
posed earlier, which reads: How might decisions taken today affect the shape of the
Polish energy sector in the future. On this basis, 4 analyses have been derived to answer
different questions, ranging from the impact of restrictions on offshore wind farms to the
nuclear energy development strategy and the approach to moving away from fossil fuels,
28
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:37==
Analysis name
Scenario name
Describtion
Reference
Base
Maximum onshore wind potential at 15.6 GW.
First 1.5 GW nuclear reactor in 2023
(then the maximum growth rate set at 0.5 GW/year).
The impact of fossil fuels support
Fossil-
Minimum use of coal, lignite and natural gas 50% lower
than in the Base scenario.
Fossil+
Minimum use of coal and natural gas 50% higher
than in the Base scenario.
The impact of significantly increased
efforts towards climate neutrality
Green
Increased growth rates of 50% for wind (up to 3 GW/year),
solar (up to 4.5 GW/year) and nuclear (up to 0.75 GW/year).
Increase in maximum onshore wind potential by 25%
compared to Onshore+ scenario (up to 40 GW)
and for offshore wind by 25% (up to 40 GW).
Partial relaxation of fossil minimal use requirements;
minimal use of fossil fuels 50% lower than in the Base scenario.
No minimum requirements in 2040 and 2045.
The impact of nuclear energy
Nuclear-
The ban of nuclear energy.
Nuclear+
Doubling the maximum gworth rate for nuclear
(up to 1 GW/year).
The impact of support for onshore wind
Onshore+
Doubling the maximum potential of onshore wind
(up to 31 GW).
Doubling the maximum growth rate for wind
(up to 4 GW/year).
Table 5.1: Scenarios analysed on the basis of the research question.
in the context of employment in this area, gathered in Table 5.1. What all the scenarios
have in common is that the direction of the transition is being taken today, and for the
years to come, only the direction set early on is followed.
Base scenario (Base) is a business-as-usual scenario but relaxed by a minimum level
of fossil fuel use at 50% of the assumed plan/forecast. The nuclear programme is main-
tained, but onshore wind power remains stalled (700 m rule applies), with support, how-
ever, for the offshore nuclear programme. Coal and lignite extraction is still somewhat
artificially maintained to allow for the gradual transformation of these regions, as is the
consumption of natural gas, possibly as a result of long-term contracts for the supply of
this fuel or the inertia effect in this area associated with the emergence of more facilities
producing electricity or heat from this fuel.
The effect of wind restrictions analysis (Onshore+) looks at the size of the onshore
wind energy sector. There has been a discussion in Poland for many years about curbing
the tech, originally in 2016 its development was virtually halted. In 2023, there was a
discussion about liberalising this law and allowing farms to be built within 500 or 700
metres of the nearest buildings. The more liberal scenario (i.e. 500 metres) is tested in
this option, which gives the potential of ca. 31 GW [41], comparing to ca. 16 GW for the
700 m scenario .
The effect of nuclear energy analysis (Nuclear- and Nuclear+) concerns the size of the
nuclear power sector. Currently, the preparatory work for the Polish nuclear programme
is at an advanced level and there is a high level of determination in this area. Hence,
the analysis also examines the option of accelerating and scaling up this programme. In
addition, a total ban on the use of this technology is also analysed, due to possible strong
pressure from countries that oppose this technology, e.g. Germany.
The effect of fossil fuels support analysis (Fossil- and Fossil+) looks at the pace of
transition away from fossil fuels due to the need to reorganise economic sectors and
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
29
==PAGE:38==
regions of the country that have relied heavily on the mining or use of these fuels. A
scenario was tested in which consumption minima are at half the level of those for the
baseline scenario, and at half the level while moving away from the minima 5 years faster.
Significantly increased efforts towards climate neutrality analysis (Green) is the
most relaxed scenario in terms of the use of fossil sources, or the blunt and potential
use of renewables. However, the constraints are still retained. The option assumes a sig-
nificant increase in energy transition work in a number of areas, i.e. wind, solar or nuclear
power.
5.2.2
Scenarios Result Analysis
Once the calculations for all scenarios had been carried out, the results were brought
together in one place so that the impact of changes in assumptions on the results could
be compared between scenarios. On the Table 5.2 values are presented for:
• total CAPEX investment costs,
• total CO2 emissions, which can be taken as a climate indicator,
• average values of electricity prices for all years, which can be taken as a social
indicator of what costs will be passed on to society,
• the sum of all costs (CAPEX, OPEX, emission charges), which can be taken as an
economic indicator of how much the energy transition will cost for the state as a
whole.
The lowest values for each category are highlighted with bolding and surrounded by a
box; the second-best values are only underlined.
Table 5.2: Summary of the results of all scenarios. The value in the bold cell and bold
show the best value, the underlined value indicates the second-best option.
Table 5.3: Relative difference in values to the Base option. The value in the bold cell and
bold show the best value, the underlined value indicates the second-best option.
The Fossil+ scenario has the lowest investment costs at 24 bEUR, due to the greater
possibility to use existing capacity installed in coal and gas sources, operating typically in
30
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:39==
the baseload. This means that significantly fewer new sources have to be built. However,
for the same reason, this option has the highest emissions (65% higher in total than in the
Green scenario) and the highest total costs, mainly due to fuel purchase costs and CO2
allowance costs. This means that despite having the second lowest electricity prices,
Poland’s economy will bear the highest cost, which will also indirectly translate into the
wealth of society. The Green scenario, on the other hand, has the lowest emissions and
the lowest costs of all, while maintaining low average electricity prices. All of this is made
possible by the highest capital expenditure, which, however, is only 23% higher than the
CAPEX in the Base scenario. This may be due to the fact that there is a significant
amount of new renewable and nuclear capacity being built, which, however, allows for
lower emissions as well as costs. The Onshore+ scenario, on the other hand, has the
lowest average electricity costs, with still very high emissions and overall costs. This may
be due to the fact that relaxing the restrictions on wind power has allowed new capacity
to come online to produce cheap electricity, but at the same time still retains a lot of
fossil sources in the energy mix, which generate high emissions and overall costs. An
in-depth analysis of the scenarios and the reasons behind these results will be possible
thanks to the detailed graphs available below, which show, among other things, installed
capacity, electricity production or emissions or electricity costs by year or variant, as well
as a sample year of operation for one of the scenarios.
Figure 5.11: Installed power plant capacity by fuel/energy source for all scenarios for
selected years. Figures for 2022 are actual data.
Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12 show the installed capacity of the power plants and the elec-
tricity produced by the scenario and for the selected years. The actual data for 2022 is
also presented as the first bar, [49]. Through this comparison, it can be seen that the
Base scenario for 2025 differs only slightly from the situation in 2022, indicating that the
model setup is valid and close to reality.
However, it is worth noting the Figure 5.13 which shows the difference in electricity pro-
duction relative to the Base scenario. Due to the fact that only baseload consumption is
an exogenous assumption and the increase in consumption resulting from the emergence
of P2X is endogenous, there may be differences in total production. Hence, the electric-
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.12: Annual electricity production by fuel/source for all scenarios for selected
years. Figures for 2022 are actual data.
Figure 5.13: Prediction of the differences in electricity production for different scenarios
compared to the Base scenario.
ity used for heating or hydrogen production is presented at Figure 5.14. In this graph,
one can observe the difference between the options in the electrification of the different
sectors.
In the Fossil- scenario, we can observe a reduction in energy production from coal and
lignite to natural gas and biofuels. This happens despite a relaxation of the minimum con-
sumption requirements not only for hard coal and lignite but also for natural gas. This is all
happening with a minimal reduction in total electricity production. Based on these results,
it can be concluded that: the use of natural gas for electricity generation is preferred over
the use of coal or lignite. However, it is worth adding that the process of moving away
32
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.14: Electricity consumption by P2X devices.
from coal should be accompanied by a process of restructuring the regions and sectors
based on coal.
In the Fossil+ scenario, forcing the use of more coal and lignite has led to the displacement
of clean energy sources, i.e. biofuel sources and offshore wind farms, with a minimal
increase in the production of onshore farms. In this scenario, however, minimal production
growth is observed in the 2030s or 40s. The conclusion is therefore that: the need for
greater use of fossil fuels comes at the expense of renewable energy production.
Scenario Green is exceptional, due to the relaxation of the model for the introduction of
new clean sources and a faster phase-out of fossil fuel-based sources. One notices a
significant increase in wind and solar energy production, with an increase in electricity
production overall. In the last year of analysis, this variant has the highest level of elec-
tricity use on P2X for the 40s and ranks second for the preceding years. This indicates
the presence of large volumes of low-cost electricity displacing other energy sources in
other areas - electrification is taking place. It can therefore be concluded that: the relax-
ation of development constraints for renewables translates into a significant increase in
renewables and the pushing of coal sources out of the energy mix, without the need for
additional (relative to the Base scenario) gas sources to appear, as must have happened
in the Fossil- scenario. Also, nuclear power plays not the largest role in decarbonisation
or electrification of sectors, but has a positive effect on the energy transition and should
be retained.
The Nuclear- and Nuclear+ scenarios have completely opposite effects on the energy
mix between them. With the construction of additional nuclear sources, there is a sig-
nificant increase in electricity production, but this energy does not replace energy from
other sources, but is mainly additional energy that allows the electrification of other sec-
tors using P2X. The situation is exactly the opposite for a scenario with a nuclear ban.
The conclusion is that: the emergence of new nuclear capacity might be a driving force
for the electrification of other sectors.
In the Onshore+ scenario, a significant increase in the production of electricity from wind
and electricity, in general, is observed, due to the relaxation of the assumptions for wind
power, with a similar effect to the Nuclear+ scenario. It is also observed that biofuel or
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
33
==PAGE:42==
offshore wind or nuclear energy is being pushed out of the energy mix, probably due to
the economic conditions of onshore farms. A conclusion is similar to that of the paragraph
above can therefore be drawn that the emergence of new onshore wind capacity will be
a driving force for the electrification of other sectors and reduce the use of other fuels.
Figure 5.15: Endogenously installed power plant capacity by fuel/energy source for all
scenarios.
Figure 5.15 shows only new investments, i.e. those proposed by the model (exogenous).
It can be seen that the coal sources being phased out are being replaced by other ther-
mal sources, such as nuclear or gas-fired power plants, and the size of these capacities
oscillates between 3 and 11 GW depending on the year and scenario. It can be con-
cluded that: stable and dispatchable coal-fired sources must be replaced by other ther-
mal sources of this type. They also provide stability in the operation of the energy system
and are preferred by the TSO, this aspect, however, is not taken into account by the
model. In addition, it can be noted that the ban on nuclear power plants will result in more
emission-intensive gas-fired units.
Figure 5.16 presents annual carbon emissions for different scenarios and Figure 5.17
presents total emissions between 2025 and 2045. It is not a surprise that as the assump-
tions for renewables and fossil sources relax, annual emissions fall due to the arrival
of new investments. The greater the relaxation, as in the Green, Fossil- or Onshore+
scenario, the lower the emissions. However, when forcing more fossil fuel-fired sources
or banning nuclear power, emissions are significantly higher. Analysing the impact of
the assumptions on emissions, the following conclusions can be drawn: as the share of
renewables and nuclear sources increases, CO2 emissions from power generation de-
crease. The Green scenario looks as much as 37% better than the reference scenario
and almost half as good as the most conservative scenario - Fossil+.
Figure 5.18 present the distribution of electricity prices by year and scenario. The graph
shows the average prices for a given year, in addition, for 2022, the average real price
on the day-ahead market for Poland is presented, which due to the energy crisis was 167
EUR/MWh. In the first years of the analysis, the lowest prices are observed for the sce-
nario with the highest electricity production from coal and lignite in existing power plants.
This is due to the still relatively low cost of CO2 emission allowances. However, this situ-
ation changes after 2030, where the Onshore+ scenario takes the lead. In the 2030s and
34
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.16: Annual emissions for the energy sector for all scenarios.
Figure 5.17: Total emissions assuming linear decreases between the years of analysis
and the percentage difference between the Base and extreme scenarios.
2040s, however, the scenarios in which renewables or nuclear sources play a greater role
are the best. In addition, it is worth noting that too slow or limited development of any of
these sources leads to significant price increases, which happens in the Base-, Nuclear-
and Fossil- scenarios. Looking from a societal perspective, i.e. from the perspective of
the average price to be paid by electricity consumers, a statement can be made that: in-
creasing the rate of development and the amount of installed capacity of renewables and
nuclear sources has a positive impact on electricity prices; however, constraints on the
development of any of the above technologies could lead to the opposite situation.
In the Figure 5.19, it is possible to observe the distribution of prices in a given year de-
pending on the scenario. This allows for a better understanding of the distribution of prices
in a given year, depending on the energy mix. A rule of thumb can be observed that in
scenarios where the share of renewables is higher, i.e. Fossil-, Onshore+ and above all
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.18: Average annual electricity price for each scenario.
Figure 5.19: Electricity price statistics for each scenario.
Green, prices are distributed much more widely. In addition, from 2035 onwards, inciden-
tal price peaks of up to 450 EUR/MWh are also observed, which probably occur at times
of low wind or PV generation. However, such market signals can have a positive impact
on the energy mix, allowing balancing systems to develop, i.e. battery storage, P2X, etc.
To observe the results of the model up close, a graph for the Green scenario is presented
at Figure 5.20, averaging the seasons to one representative hour. In this way, it is pos-
sible to observe, among other things, the performance of photovoltaic installations and
their impact on other energy sectors. It can be seen how, in the first years of the analysis,
photovoltaic sources push coal sources out of the merit order. This causes a significant
price reduction, which is, however, only clearly visible from 2030 onwards. In addition,
it is observed that during the morning and afternoon peak hours, when there is a short-
age of PV capacity, coal sources increase their capacity significantly, raising prices as
well. However, the situation in the second half of the ’30s and beyond looks somewhat
different. Nuclear power plants with hydro and biofuels became the new primary source.
36
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.20: Electricity production by fuel/source for the Green scenario (5 seasons av-
eraged by each hour).
Gas sources now play a stabilising role, being switched on mainly during periods of power
scarcity, as nuclear sources are not as flexible as other fossil thermal sources. The dom-
inant role, however, is played by wind sources, mainly offshore wind, which produce very
large volumes of relatively stable energy (capacity factor being slightly more than 50%).
The production profile in the later years of the analysis also differs considerably from that
in the early years, not least because of the large proportion of solar-dependent installa-
tions. In addition, the average production increases significantly in the later years. This
may be due to the electrification of other sectors and the possibility of shifting energy
demand peaks to better respond to the price signal.
5.3
Recommendations
This section will summarise the results and conclusions of the variant analysis described
above. In addition, recommendations will be made on their basis, being a synthesis of
these results. In the end, the above analyses functioned as sensitivity analyses of the
Polish energy transition to the changes introduced, hence the final result should include
the best elements encountered along the way.
To summarise the findings, the following recommendations can be made:
• natural gas should be used as a transition fuel to replace decommissioned thermal
sources, i.e. coal and lignite; these sources should, however, be built with care and
in sufficient quantity, because as new sources they will remain in the system for
several decades, still being a CO2 emitter,
• hence, the Polish nuclear power programme should be accelerated and expanded
to allow for the construction of fewer new gas-fired sources, and to provide emission-
free electricity for decades to come,
• baseload thermal sources should form the backbone of the electricity system, sup-
plying energy in a continuous and controllable manner, in addition to performing the
function of frequency stabilisation for TSO,
• sources based on hard coal and lignite should be phased out as soon as possible
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
37
==PAGE:46==
due to their high costs and emissions; this process should, however, be carried out
with great caution in terms of energy security (replacing old units with new thermal
units and large-scale renewable sources) and the fairness of the transition (i.e. aim-
ing at reallocation of workers in the mining and conventional energy sectors, as well
as the transformation of companies and economies in the mining regions),
• at the same time, steps should be taken to accelerate the growth of renewables (in
particular offshore and onshore wind farms) and nuclear capacity and to increase the
potential for their use; this can be greatly influenced by the significant development
of distribution and transmission networks, which are already bottlenecks.
The above conclusions of the sensitivity analysis should be used to create more detailed
models in order to select the optimal state by means of a comparative analysis of the
options.
38
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:47==
6
Discussion
6.1
Results Quality
In order to validate the modelling results, a comparison was made with the results of the
analysis of the think-tank Instrat [65], as well as with official plans and strategies prepared
by the Polish government (NECP - National Energy and Climate Plan from 2017 [66] and
PEP40 - Energy Policy of Poland (or Polish Energy Policy) until 2040 [17] from 2021
and preconsultation version from June 2023 [67]). The results of the comparison are
presented at Figure 6.1 for generaction capacities in GW and at Figure 6.2 for anual
energy production. The results of other analyses or scientific studies are not presented
in the graph, as they would present an unflattering picture due to the large changes in
recent years.
Figure 6.1: Comparison of installed generation capacities of modelling results and gov-
ernmental strategies (NECP and PEP40) and third-party analysis (Instrat).
In the chart, you can see the installed capacity at the end of 2022, as well as the results
of other analyses. It is worth noting the results of the official PEP40 and NECP analyses,
in which the next year’s installed capacity is forecast to be significantly less than what is
already available today.
For onshore wind farms, it can be noted that the latest version of the PEP40 strategy
assumes no further increases in installed capacity, maintaining the 10 GW level through-
out the analysis period. As for offshore wind farms, the NECP does not include them at
all throughout the analysis period, and PEP40 assumes smaller values in 2030 than the
differential contract auction assumes by that year. The increase in solar PV installations
came as a surprise to both government analyses. The 12 GW of capacity that currently
exists is not assumed by PEP40 until 2035, while the NECP even assumes a value many
times lower in 2040 than it is today. As far as natural gas is concerned, PEP40 proposes
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.2: Comparison of electricity production of modelling results and governmental
strategies (NECP and PEP40) and third-party analysis (Instrat).
faster increases in natural gas capacity than the earlier NECP strategy. Moreover, these
analyses project 2-3 times less installed capacity than other third-party analyses.
When comparing the official government analyses to the installed capacity in 2022, as
well as to other analyses (such as the Instrat analysis), these analyses in no way cor-
respond to reality and their small age, they even differ diametrically from the actual rate
of development of the energy sector. Hence, in the author’s opinion, comparing them to
modelling results is unjustified.
However, the situation is different when modelling the Warsaw-based energy think-tank
Instrat for 2025-2030. Here it can be noted that the installed capacity values are very
similar to the Base variant. This may be due to the validity of the assumptions used, such
as the cost of fuels or CO2 emission allowances, or similar organisations related to the
rate of new investment development.
When it comes to the summary of annual electricity production per Figure 6.2 one can see
a difference in the total volume of electricity production between the government analy-
ses and the modelling result. This is due to the fact that the NECP and PEP40 scenarios
probably treated the electricity generation sector as a silo, without considering the trans-
formation of other sectors (sector coupling or electrification of other sectors was not taken
into account). This makes the government’s scenarios fail to present a complete picture
of the transformation, as electrification will be a big part of it in the future.
It can be concluded that the Base and Green scenarios (as well as the other scenarios)
have been modelled correctly. Their energy mix is similar to the other model. However,
the modelling results should not be compared to existing government plans, due to their
non-relevant and outdated nature.
In June 2023, moments before the publication of this analysis, a pre-consultation on the
update of the strategic documents (NECP/PEP2040) was launched, taking into account
40
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:49==
the change in the political and economic situation after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine [67]. It
notes a significant increase in the importance of renewable and nuclear technologies, and
a faster phasing out of fossil fuels. However, this is a document prepared with experts from
the Ministry of Climate and Environment, and the final version, after taking into account
the comments of the consultation or the effects of compromises within the ruling coalition,
may take a more conservative view.
6.2
Modelling Decisions Taken and Model Limitation
During model development, many decisions have to be made based on the initial model
results in order to calibrate the model in an appropriate way. The purpose of calibration
is, by updating certain assumptions or adding requirements and restrictions to the model,
to discretise existing market, legal or social mechanisms that determine energy devel-
opment. These assumptions may be based on third-party analyses, which undertake to
describe and analyse the issues in much more detail. These could be, for example, anal-
yses relating to fuel or property rights prices, investment and operating costs, technology
development, performance and availability, or social and political issues such as the just
transition of mining regions.
6.2.1
Geography
One of the decisions that were taken to calibrate the model was to limit the analysis to
only Poland without neighbouring countries, i.e. to treat the country as an island.
This is due to the fact that many of the requirements or constraints only applied to Poland,
as it was the main area of analysis. Due to limited time and resources, the updating and
realisation of other countries, i.e. calibration, was not undertaken. For this reason, the
model treated neighbouring countries too optimistically, with the energy transition pro-
ceeding much faster there, resulting in electricity imports to Poland reaching almost 100
per cent of the country’s energy consumption, with imports of less than 1 per cent in 2022.
Such a scenario is, however, unrealistic, hence only Poland was left in the model for the
purposes of this analysis.
However, it is recommended in further analyses to similarly calibrate and realise models
for other countries.
6.2.2
Restrictions on Production and New Investments
Another decision was to limit the rate of construction of new wind, solar and wind power
installations, and to enforce the use of a minimum amount of fossil fuels.
The first aspect resulted from the need to discount the capacity to supply components to
the country but also the capacity to connect this capacity to the transmission and distribu-
tion networks. However, this restriction was implemented nationwide and was constant
over time. Hence, it would have been advisable to increase the detail of this constraint,
adding at least a time or location domain, based on analyses of the supply potential chain
and electric grid development plans.
The second aspect was the need to discretise the social aspect, i.e. the fair transition of
regions based on coal and lignite combustion, as well as the issues related to long-term
natural gas supply contracts. Here, in order to improve the quality of the assumptions,
there should be a thorough analysis of the profitability of each mine and of each long-term
natural gas supply contract. In addition, there should be a qualitative analysis of the issue
of the transformation of post-mining regions.
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
41
==PAGE:50==
6.2.3
Existing Power Plants Modelling
An important step in the above model was to build a power plant base for Poland from
scratch, due to its high inaccuracy in relation to the real situation. The new base has a
resolution of one power plant unit. The characteristic parameters were selected from ex-
isting standard models. Such a procedure made it possible to capture the characteristics
of the operation of coal-fired units, such as the time and costs involved in shutting down
the unit, and the rate of power change. These parameters are of particular importance
when modelling systems involving unstable renewable energy sources and failing to take
them into account will lead to an overly optimistic, and at the same time untrue, model of
system operation.
In further steps, it is recommended to replace the default power plant unit models with
detailed models based on real data. This will allow analyses to be carried out with unit-
by-unit accuracy to answer the question of which units should be phased out more quickly.
A similar procedure is recommended for heat-generating sources.
6.2.4
Distribution and Transmission Grid
An important aspect that has been neglected in the modelling of the energy transition is
the issues of transmission and distribution networks and the costs of their remodelling
and energy lossess. This means that capacity issues between regions of the country are
not taken into account, and the difference in increased investment and operating costs is
externalised beyond the objective function. This means that the final picture may be com-
pletely different and that the best scenario may not be the one currently indicated. The
externalisation of these costs can support scenarios where large capacities are concen-
trated in one place (e.g. several tens of GW of offshore wind and nuclear capacity by the
Baltic Sea) or scenarios with large volumes of non-controllable renewable wind or solar
capacity, as shown by the System Costs Figure 6.3. You can see from it that a large part
of the costs for PV installations, and a certain part for wind sources, are system costs.
This means that they are not taken into account in the model, and in fact these costs
are included in the transmission tariffs. In both cases, these scenarios require increased
electricity transmission both within the country and with neighbouring countries to be able
to maintain the stability of the electricity system.
Another aspect is the impossibility of creating overhead lines between two non-adjacent
areas, which is planned, for example, by TSO in Poland, where the northern and southern
parts of the country are to be connected by an HVDC line [69]. Direct lines between
Ukraine or Northern Scandinavia or France and Central Europe would also be theoretically
possible.
The lack of consideration of transmission aspects in the model by treating the market
zones as copper plates in a way handicaps the model because it does not take into ac-
count energy security issues and network limits. Hence, it is recommended that these
aspects should be included in the model in a different way, for example by introducing
virtual zones or by including network costs in the operating costs of the different power
plant types as well.
6.3
Potential Improvements
The above analysis was designed to answer the question of how decisions taken today on
the direction and strategy of the energy sector’s development will affect its future course.
In other words, a sensitivity analysis of the Polish energy sector was examined. The an-
swers found will further allow scenarios to be modelled, which may already give a more
accurate indication of the direction of the sector’s development. However, by modelling a
42
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.3: Summary of total costs of electricity generation [68].
scenario that could later become the country’s energy policy, based on which new regu-
lations, investment programmes and other plans or strategies for other sectors would be
developed. Therefore, when building a more detailed model in further analysis, in addition
to the suggestions and recommendations already mentioned above, the following should
additionally be taken into account:
6.3.1
Neighbouring Countries Model
As mentioned earlier, when conducting analyses also for neighbouring countries, the qual-
ity of the model for these countries should be at a similar level as for the targeted country.
At the same time, it is the model of many countries connected in the European Energy
Market, rather than treating a country as an island, that allows for the closest approxima-
tion to the reality of the problem. This is particularly important with the emergence of new
renewables and new cross-border connections, which are key to the smooth operation of
the European system of the future.
Hence, a detailed model of neighbouring countries, in particular Germany and the Czech
Republic, is recommended. As mentioned earlier, it would be necessary to take into ac-
count constraints in these countries, such as those related to the construction of new
sources (grid or market constraints).
In addition, a very important step would be to create a post-war model of the Ukrainian
electricity system in Balmorel. This system is characterised by a very large installed ca-
pacity of clean hydro and nuclear sources. In addition, due to the hostilities, a large part of
Ukrainian industry has already been destroyed or been located in occupied areas since
2014. This means that by the time these areas are recovered and the industry is re-
built, Ukraine could become a significant exporter of electricity to Europe, thanks to the
integration of the European and Ukrainian electricity systems.
6.3.2
Virtual Zones Model on Polish Electricity Market
Depending on the decisions taken on Poland’s energy transition and its pace, power plants
in the south of the country can be expected to shut down, due to coal running out in the
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
43
==PAGE:52==
mines, and new capacities will appear in the northern part of the country in the form of
offshore wind farms on the Baltic Sea and a large wind power plant also on the coast. At
the same time, the Polish industry is located in the south of the country. It can be noted
that there is a certain geographical mismatch between demand and supply, a problem that
also exists in the German electricity system [70]. This can cause significant problems with
the transmission and distribution of power through the system.
Figure 6.4: Bidding zones are areas in Europe in which a single (wholesale) electricity
market price applies [71].
One way to solve this problem in a market context, or to solve this problem through ap-
propriate planning of system upgrades, would be to divide one market zone into multiple
zones, in a similar way to zones in Italy, Sweden or Norway, shown on Figure 6.4. This
would capture imbalances in demand and supply in the form of price differences between
sectors. In addition, it would capture the investment costs of the transmission and also
distribution networks connecting these zones. The smaller these virtual zones are, the
more the costs of the transmission networks can be captured.
6.3.3
District Heating Areas Model
Poland has one of the largest district heating sectors in Europe with an ordered capacity
of 35 GW and a length of district heating networks of 22,000 km in 2021 [72]. Nearly 400
TWh of heat were sold that year. This means that there is great potential in the coupling
sector, i.e. in the cooperation of the electricity and district heating systems with each
other. The district heating system can, for example, perform grid and price stabilisation
functions through energy storage and power-to-heat facilities.
It is therefore recommended that the largest district heating areas in Poland in particular
be modelled in more detail, as well as the simplified medium and small-scale sources
that would be developed by the model. This would allow, for the first time, the question
of how to develop these two sectors together to be answered, as this topic has been
customarily overlooked in government strategies. Moreover, the district heating sector
does not yet exist and is not due to be adopted until the end of 2023 with a multi-year
delay [73]. However, given the poor quality and relevancy of the strategy for the energy
sector and the treatment of analysing simulations, there is a need to create such a model
and to undertake such analyses.
44
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:53==
7
Conclusions
This work analysed scenarios for the energy transition in Poland, and answered the re-
search question:
+RZ PLJKW WKH 3ROLVK HOHFWULFLW\ VHFWRU WUDQVLWLRQ WRZDUGV FOLPDWH QHXWUDOLW\ E\ "
The work was carried out because there is a great need for this type of qualitative sectoral
analysis for Poland. Existing strategies, such as the Polish Energy Policy until 2040 or
the National Energy and Climate Plan, despite their recent publication, do not address
many of the challenges facing the energy sectors. Moreover, they are often based on
assumptions that differ from the current economic and political situation in the European
Union. There is also little scientific research in this area and existing studies do not cover
all relevant aspects.
In addition, it is worth noting that the need for energy transition analyses is particularly
necessary at the moment, due to the significant changes in economic, political or climatic
aspects resulting from Russia’s attack on Ukraine, the energy crisis indirectly resulting
from it and the need to rethink use of natural gas as a transition fuel, and the necessity
to increase efforts to reduce CO2 emissions, as shown by the recent IPCC report - AR6
[74]. Having that in mind, however, the Polish energy transition must be carried out with
particular caution, due to the huge coal sector and the number of people, companies or
regions dependent on it. This is all the more reason why analyses of this type should
be carried out in order to reconcile the local aspects of the transformation, with its global
need to be carried out in a fast, efficient and fair manner.
Therefore, integrated energy system modelling of the Polish energy sector was performed
using the Balbase4 model in Balmorel version 4.03 from March 2022. It is a bottom-up
open-source optimisation model built in the GAMS language, which, in addition to the
electricity sector, also considers the heat generation, transport and industry sectors, that
were also included in the simulation. Only representative hours per year were analysed,
after which the results were normalised to the year. The years of analysis were every fifth
year from 2025 to 2045. Poland was portrayed as an island (no electricity exchange with
neighbours), as the initial analyses for the extended geography gave unrealistic results
due to the different quality of assumptions and limitations for other countries. Making
the Polish model more realistic, and not refining other models in the same key, led to a
situation where net energy imports into the country would be orders of magnitude higher
than predicted. The Polish electricity sector model was updated with assumptions such as
electricity demand, installed capacity for electricity production, maximum annual growth
of wind/solar installations, minimum use of coal, lignite and natural gas, EU ETS CO2
allowance prices fuel prices.
The scenarios were designed to respond to four questions on: the effects of non-market
retention of fossil sources; the effects of a significant acceleration of the transition, the
effects of the nuclear programme; the effects of onshore wind farms on the country’s
energy transition. The seven scenarios allowed for a sensitivity analysis of the Polish
electricity system, and recommendations for policy makers and suggestions for further
research.
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
45
==PAGE:54==
The analysis of the scenario results allowed the scientific question to be answered:
Based on a comparative analysis of the results of the modelled scenarios, suggestions
can be made as to how the Polish electricity sector can move towards climate neutrality
by 2050.
Natural gas should be used as a transition fuel, meaning that it will fill the production gap
left by retiring coal-fired units. A few GW of new capacity may be necessary due to the
decommissioning of old coal sources, lignite sources that have been depleted, or sources
whose contracts on the capacity market expire and it becomes unfeasible to remain on
the market.
The nuclear programme, aimed at building the first Polish nuclear power plants, should be
continued. However, it is recommended that the timetable be accelerated and the capacity
of the planned units be increased. Such action, combined with the significant development
of renewable sources, will not only achieve significantly lower overall emissions, but will
also keep the overall cost of such a transformation low. What is more, a scenario with
a high proportion of nuclear and renewable sources would accelerate and increase the
electrification of other sectors of the economy, thereby achieving climate neutrality more
rapidly. However, it should be investigated whether the geopolitical risks for this type of
power plant can be mitigated.
Baseload thermal sources will form the backbone of the electricity system, as storage
systems are not currently developed enough, which does not preclude having a system
with a significant amount of renewables in the future. Coal and lignite sources should be
phased out with great care for those involved in these sectors, but the process should take
place as quickly as possible. The results show that keeping coal sources in the energy
mix for a long time reduces the CAPEX of the transformation and keeps energy prices
relatively low, but that its total costs and total emissions are significantly higher. Taking
more than one aspect into account makes it possible to firmly reject scenarios involving a
late phase-out of fossil fuels.
In addition, a number of measures should be taken to increase the share of renewable
sources, such as offshore and onshore wind farms, and PV installations. These sources
can account for as much as three quarters of total electricity consumption by classic con-
sumers, but also by electrified sectors such as heating and industry.
In summary, regardless of the exact final scenario adopted for the Polish electricity sec-
tor to reach climate neutrality, certain rules can be found. Taking into account economic,
political, social, climate or technical aspects, the scale and pace of construction of new
clean energy generation sources (PV, onshore and offshore wind, nucelar, others) should
increase in Poland, with simultaneous phasing out of fossil fuel-based sources (especially
those highly emitting and imported). Decarbonisation of the electricity generation sector,
will entail the decarbonisation of other sectors through electrification, thus achieving cli-
mate neutrality for the whole economy.
What’s more, a comparative analysis of the modelling scenarios with the government
scenarios highlighted the shortcomings of the official strategies. Which may have resulted
from not taking into account the latest political, economic and environmental aspects, or
analysing the energy system as a silo, without taking into account external influences.
However, the latest moodels of analytical institutions and even the latest draft of PEP40
(version for pre-consultation) show a similar picture to the results of the modelling, which
allows the conclusion that it was carried out correctly.
46
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:55==
In further discussions of the model itself, it was argued that the model should be reduced
in some aspects in order for the model to show a close to reality picture, or that simplifi-
cations should be applied. Finally, actions and corrections were proposed that could be
implemented when conducting further analyses. The model should be enriched with new
assumptions for European countries, and larger countries in the region with potential im-
pact, i.e. Ukraine, should be introduced. Capturing the problematic nature of the national
distribution network could be done by implementing virtual zones in the country. Larger
district heating areas in the country should also be modelled, due to the expansion of
the district heating sector in poland and its great importance in the potential merging of
sectors.
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
European Climate Law. en. URL: https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/european-
green-deal/european-climate-law_en (visited on 06/01/2023).
[2]
Szymon Kardaś. Conscious uncoupling: Europeans’ Russian gas challenge in 2023
– European Council on Foreign Relations. en-GB. Feb. 2023. URL: https://ecfr.eu/
article/conscious- uncoupling- europeans- russian- gas- challenge- in- 2023/ (visited on
02/26/2023).
[3]
John Cook et al. “Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of consensus estimates
on human-caused global warming”. In: Environmental Research Letters 11.4 (Apr.
2016), p. 048002. ISSN: 1748-9326. DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002. URL:
https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748- 9326/11/4/048002 (visited on
02/26/2023).
[4]
NASA Global Climate Change. Global Surface Temperature | NASA Global Climate
Change. URL: https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/global-temperature (visited on
06/01/2023).
[5]
The Paris Agreement | UNFCCC. URL: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-
paris-agreement (visited on 02/26/2023).
[6]
European Comission. European Climate Law. en. URL: https://climate.ec.europa.
eu/eu-action/european-green-deal/european-climate-law_en (visited on 02/26/2023).
[7]
Ministerstwo Klimatu i Środowiska. Rynek mocy. pl-PL. URL: https://www.gov.pl/
web/klimat/o-ministerstwie-programy-i-projekty-rynek-mocy (visited on 02/26/2023).
[8]
PARLAMENT EUROPEJSKI I RADA UNII EUROPEJSKIEJ. Rozporządzenie Par-
lamentu Europejskiego i Rady (UE) 2019/943 z dnia 5 czerwca 2019 r. w sprawie
rynku wewnętrznego energii elektrycznej (wersja przekształcona), Dz.Urz. UE L
158/54, 14.6.2019. pl.
[9]
Forum Energii. Po 2025 r. węgiel będzie wychodził z polskiego systemu energety-
cznego falami. pl. URL: http://www.forum-energii.eu/pl/blog/luka-weglowa-2025
(visited on 02/26/2023).
[10]
KOBiZE. WSKAŹNIKI EMISYJNOŚCI CO2, SO2, NOx, CO i pyłu całkowitego DLA
ENERGII ELEKTRYCZNEJ na podstawie informacji zawartych w Krajowej bazie o
emisjach gazów cieplarnianych i innych substancji za 2021 rok. pl. Tech. rep. URL:
https://www.kobize.pl/ (visited on 05/19/2023).
[11]
How is EU electricity produced and sold? en. May 2023. URL: https : / / www .
consilium.europa.eu/en/infographics/how-is-eu-electricity-produced-and-sold/ (visited
on 06/16/2023).
[12]
Marcin Dusiło. Bloki 200 MW - na emeryturę czy do pracy? - Forum Energii. pl. 2022.
URL: http://www.forum-energii.eu/pl/blog/bloki-200-mw (visited on 05/19/2023).
[13]
Wojciech Jakóbik. Kolejne problemy nowego bloku węglowego Elektrowni Jaworzno
- BiznesAlert.pl. 2022. URL: https://biznesalert.pl/kolejne-problemy-nowego-bloku-
weglowego-elektrowni-jaworzno/# (visited on 05/19/2023).
[14]
EURACOAL statistics. en. Sept. 2014. URL: https://euracoal.eu/info/euracoal-eu-
statistics/ (visited on 05/28/2023).
[15]
Wojciech Przedlacki. COAL BRIEF POLAND BY ENERGY.INSTRAT.PL - March
2023 - Instrat. URL: https://instrat.pl/en/coal-brief-poland-by-energy-instrat-pl-
march-2023/ (visited on 05/28/2023).
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
49
==PAGE:58==
[16]
RADA MINISTRÓW. Uchwała nr 141 Rady Ministrów z dnia 2 października 2020 r.
w sprawie aktualizacji programu wieloletniego pod nazwą ”Program polskiej ener-
getyki jądrowej”. Feb. 2020. URL: https://isap.sejm.gov.pl/isap.nsf/DocDetails.xsp?
id=WMP20200000946 (visited on 02/24/2023).
[17]
Polityka energetyczna Polski do 2040 r. - Ministerstwo Klimatu i Środowiska - Portal
Gov.pl. pl-PL. URL: https://www.gov.pl/web/klimat/polityka-energetyczna-polski
(visited on 06/01/2023).
[18]
Rozporządzenie Ministra Klimatu i Środowiska z dnia 30 marca 2021 r. w sprawie
ceny maksymalnej za energię elektryczną wytworzoną w morskiej farmie wiatrowej
i wprowadzoną do sieci w złotych za 1 MWh, będącej podstawą rozliczenia prawa
do pokrycia ujemnego salda. URL: https://isap.sejm.gov.pl/isap.nsf/DocDetails.xsp?
id=WDU20210000587 (visited on 02/24/2023).
[19]
Projekt ustawy o zmianie ustawy o odnawialnych źródłach energii oraz niektórych
innych ustaw - Kancelaria Prezesa Rady Ministrów - Portal Gov.pl. pl-PL. URL:
https://www.gov.pl/web/premier/projekt-ustawy-o-zmianie-ustawy-o-odnawialnych-
zrodlach-energii-oraz-niektorych-innych-ustaw7 (visited on 02/24/2023).
[20]
Nie 5, a 12 GW. Będzie więcej offshore wind w Polsce? pl-PL. Section: Aktualności.
Jan. 2023. URL: https://globenergia.pl/nie-5-a-12-gw-bedzie-wiecej-offshore-wind-
w-polsce/ (visited on 02/24/2023).
[21]
dbereza. Nowy potencjał Bałtyku: 33 GW mocy i 20 nowych obszarów pod MFW
(RAPORT). pl-PL. Section: Aktualności. Nov. 2022. URL: http://psew.pl/nowy-
potencjal-baltyku-33-gw-mocy-i-20-nowych-obszarow-pod-mfw-raport/ (visited on
05/28/2023).
[22]
WysokieNapiecie.pl. Wspólny rynek energii elektrycznej w Europie. Miejsce Polski i
rola Towarowej Giełdy Energii. Wyzwania dla polskiego rynku. Tech. rep. Jan. 2018.
[23]
AMERICA HERNANDEZ. Kyiv seeks immediate connection to Western electricity
grid – POLITICO. URL: https://www.politico.eu/article/ukraine- moldova- seeks-
connection-to-eu-electricity-grid/ (visited on 02/24/2023).
[24]
Further progress on integrating Ukraine and Moldova into European electricity mar-
ket. en. URL: https://commission.europa.eu/news/further- progress- integrating-
ukraine - and - moldova - european - electricity - market - 2022 - 06 - 08 _ en (visited on
02/23/2023).
[25]
Ukraine’s Power System: Peace and War - Forum Energii. en. URL: http://www.
forum-energii.eu/en/blog/system-elektroenergetyczny-ukrainy (visited on 02/24/2023).
[26]
Energy Transition in Poland - Forum Energii. en. URL: http://forum-energii.eu/en/
polska-transformacja-energetyczna (visited on 02/24/2023).
[27]
International Energy Charter. Ukrainian energy sector evaluation and damage as-
sessment - VI. Tech. rep. Mar. 2023. URL: https://www.energycharter.org/fileadmin/
DocumentsMedia/Occasional/2023_01_24_UA_sectoral_evaluation_and_damage_
assessment_Version_VI.pdf.
[28]
The World Bank. Ukraine Energy Damage Assessment | United Nations Develop-
ment Programme. en. URL: https://www.undp.org/ukraine/publications/ukraine-
energy-damage-assessment (visited on 06/01/2023).
[29]
Ukraine Real-Time Electricity Data Explorer – Data Tools. en-GB. URL: https://
www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-tools/ukraine-real-time-electricity-data-explorer
(visited on 02/24/2023).
[30]
Reuters. “Ukrainian energy ministry halts electricity exports due to Russian missile
strikes”. en. In: Reuters (Oct. 2022). URL: https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/
ukrainian-energy-ministry-halts-energy-exports-due-russian-missile-strikes-2022-10-
10/ (visited on 02/24/2023).
50
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:59==
[31]
IEA. Global Energy Crisis – Topics - IEA. URL: https://www.iea.org/topics/global-
energy-crisis (visited on 02/23/2023).
[32]
Vladimir Soldatkin. “Russia’s Gazprom has no Europe gas exports planned in Febru-
ary via Yamal pipeline”. en. In: Reuters (Jan. 2022). URL: https://www.reuters.com/
business/energy/yamal-gas-pipeline-flows-still-heading-eastward-germany-poland-
2022-01-17/ (visited on 02/23/2023).
[33]
‘Unprovoked and unjustified:’ World reacts to attack on Ukraine – EURACTIV.com.
URL: https://www.euractiv.com/section/global- europe/news/unprovoked- and-
unjustified-world-reacts-to-attack-on-ukraine/ (visited on 02/23/2023).
[34]
European Parliament declares Russia to be a state sponsor of terrorism | News |
European Parliament. en. Nov. 2022. URL: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/
en/press-room/20221118IPR55707/european-parliament-declares-russia-to-be-a-state-
sponsor-of-terrorism (visited on 02/23/2023).
[35]
Joanna Plucinska. “Nord Stream gas ’sabotage’: who’s being blamed and why?”
en. In: Reuters (Oct. 2022). URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/qa-nord-
stream-gas-sabotage-whos-being-blamed-why-2022-09-30/ (visited on 02/23/2023).
[36]
Madeline Chambers and Christoph Steitz. “Nord Stream 1 gas supply cut aimed
at sowing uncertainty, Germany warns”. en. In: Reuters (June 2022). URL: https:
//www.reuters.com/business/energy/german-minister-accuses-russia-finding-excuse-
cut-nord-stream-1-gas-2022-06-15/ (visited on 02/23/2023).
[37]
Christoph Steitz and Nina Chestney. “Russia cuts gas flows further as Europe urges
energy saving”. en. In: Reuters (July 2022). URL: https://www.reuters.com/business/
energy/physical-flows-through-nord-stream-1-pipeline-dip-2022-07-27/ (visited on
02/23/2023).
[38]
Reuters. “Gazprom CEO says gas price cap would lead to supply halt”. en. In:
Reuters (Oct. 2022). URL: https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/gazprom-
ceo-says-gas-price-cap-would-lead-supply-halt-2022-10-16/ (visited on 02/23/2023).
[39]
Markus Schülde, Xavier Veillard, and Alexander Weiss. Themes shaping future of
European power market | McKinsey. URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/
electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/four-themes-shaping-the-future-of-the-
stormy-european-power-market#/ (visited on 05/28/2023).
[40]
“Ustawa z dnia 10 kwietnia 1997 r. - Prawo energetyczne.” pl. In: ().
[41]
PSEW. 700 metrów w ustawie wiatrakowej: mała poprawka – drastyczne zmiany
(ANALIZA). pl-PL. Section: Aktualności. Jan. 2023. URL: http : / / psew . pl / 700 -
metrow-w-ustawie-wiatrakowej-mala-poprawka-drastyczne-zmiany-analiza/ (visited
on 02/27/2023).
[42]
”Elektrownia na miarę naszych czasów”. Miliardy utopione w Ostrołęce. Zeznania
i dokumenty obciążają establishment PiS. pl. 200. URL: https://wiadomosci.onet.
pl/warszawa/miliardy-utopione-w-ostrolece-zeznania-i-dokumenty-obciazaja-elite-
pis/fww9wfr (visited on 03/01/2023).
[43]
Założenia do aktualizacji Polityki energetycznej Polski do 2040 r. z marca 2022 r. -
Ministerstwo Klimatu i Środowiska - Portal Gov.pl. pl-PL. URL: https://www.gov.pl/
web/klimat/zalozenia-do-aktualizacji-polityki-energetycznej-polski-do-2040-r (visited
on 02/27/2023).
[44]
Damian Hasterok et al. “Polish Energy Transition 2040: Energy Mix Optimization
Using Grey Wolf Optimizer”. en. In: Energies 14.2 (Jan. 2021), p. 501. ISSN: 1996-
1073. DOI: 10.3390/en14020501. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/2/501
(visited on 03/01/2023).
[45]
Michal Wierzbowski, Izabela Filipiak, and Wojciech Lyzwa. “Polish energy policy
2050 – An instrument to develop a diversified and sustainable electricity generation
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
51
==PAGE:60==
mix in coal-based energy system”. en. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views 74 (July 2017), pp. 51–70. ISSN: 13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.02.046.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364032117302617 (visited on
03/01/2023).
[46]
Michal Wierzbowski. “Energy mix optimisation &#x2014; Case study for Poland”. In:
11th International Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM14). Krakow,
Poland: IEEE, May 2014, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978-1-4799-6095-8. DOI: 10.1109/EEM.
2014 . 6861274. URL: http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / document / 6861274/ (visited on
03/01/2023).
[47]
Wojciech Lyzwa, Jakub Przybylski, and Michal Wierzbowski. “Modeling of power
reserves and RES in optimization of Polish energy mix”. In: 2015 12th International
Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM). Lisbon, Portugal: IEEE, May
2015, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978-1-4673-6692-2. DOI: 10.1109/EEM.2015.7216644. URL:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7216644/ (visited on 03/01/2023).
[48]
Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen. “Modelling of future integrated energy systems
and the potential role of renewable gas”. PhD thesis. 2020.
[49]
Marcin Dusiło. Energy transition in Poland | 2023 edition. en. URL: https://www.
forum-energii.eu/en/analizy/transformacja-2023 (visited on 04/21/2023).
[50]
Balmorel. original-date: 2017-07-06T15:22:21Z. Feb. 2023. URL: https://github.
com/balmorelcommunity/Balmorel (visited on 04/22/2023).
[51]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source energy system model”. en. In: Energy
Strategy Reviews 20 (Apr. 2018), pp. 26–34. ISSN: 2211-467X. DOI: 10 . 1016 /
j . esr . 2018 . 01 . 003. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2211467X18300038 (visited on 04/22/2023).
[52]
PSE. Plan rozwoju w zakresie zaspokojenia obecnego i przyszłego zapotrzebowa-
nia na energię elektryczną na lata 2023-2032. Nov. 2022. URL: https://www.pse.
pl/documents/20182/291785a3-7832-4cb6-a5ae-971d29024b82.
[53]
Zuzanna Charkowska et al. Database of thermal power plants and combined heat-
and-power plants in Poland. 2022. URL: https://energy.instrat.pl/power_plants.
[54]
PSE poleciły wyłączanie OZE. Podaż energii większa od popytu o 3 GW. pl. URL:
https://www.wnp.pl/energetyka/pse-polecily-wylaczanie-oze-podaz-energii-wieksza-
od-popytu-o-3-gw,702420.html (visited on 04/27/2023).
[55]
Stan zatrudnienia | Polski Rynek Węgla - Agencja Rozwoju Przemysłu S.A. URL:
https://polskirynekwegla.pl/raport-dynamiczny/stan-zatrudnienia (visited on 04/27/2023).
[56]
Patryk Kubiczek and Michał Smoleń. Polski nie stać na średnie ambicje Oszczęd-
ności dzięki szybkiemu rozwojowi OZE do 2030 r. Tech. rep. Mar. 2023. URL: https:
//instrat.pl/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Instrat-Policy-Paper-03-2023-Polski-nie-
stac-na-srednie-ambicje.pdf.
[57]
Polska. Skutki sięgają daleko | Heinrich Böll Stiftung | Biuro Regionalne Europa
Centralna; Polska, Warszawa. pl. URL: https://pl.boell.org/pl/2016/06/21/polska-
skutki-siegaja-daleko (visited on 04/28/2023).
[58]
Miranda Ptak, Mateusz Sikora, and Zbigniew Kasztelewicz. “Brown coal as an op-
timal energy raw material for Poland”. In: Zeszyty Naukowe Instytutu Gospodarki
Surowcami Mineralnymi Polskiej Akademii Nauk; 2018; Nr 106; 61-84 (2018). Pub-
lisher: Instytut Gospodarki Surowcami Mineralnymi Polskiej Akademii Nauk. ISSN:
2080-0819. URL: https://journals.pan.pl/dlibra/publication/124403/edition/108558
(visited on 05/18/2023).
[59]
Krajowe Plany Rozwoju. pl. URL: http://www.gaz- system.pl:8080/pl/system-
przesylowy/rozwoj- systemu- przesylowego/krajowe- plany- rozwoju.html (visited on
04/28/2023).
52
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:61==
[60]
Forum Energii. Energetyka w Bełchatowie po węglu brunatnym. Scenariusze bez-
piecznej i efektywnej kosztowo transformacji. Tech. rep. Oct. 2022. URL: https://
assets.bbhub.io/professional/sites/24/BNEF-Energy-in-Belchatow-After-Lignite_
FINAL_Polish.pdf.
[61]
International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2022. Tech. rep. Nov. 2022.
URL: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/830fe099-5530-48f2-a7c1-11f35d510983/
WorldEnergyOutlook2022.pdf.
[62]
Dutch TTF Natural Gas Futures | ICE. URL: https://www.theice.com/products/
27996665/Dutch-TTF-Gas-Futures/data?marketId=5564180 (visited on 04/30/2023).
[63]
Indeks PSCMI 1 - kolejna publikacja w dniu 4 maja | Polski Rynek Węgla - Agencja
Rozwoju Przemysłu S.A. URL: https://polskirynekwegla.pl/indeks-pscmi-1-kolejna-
publikacja-w-dniu-4-maja (visited on 04/30/2023).
[64]
Maciej Pyrka, Robert Jeszke, and Jakub Boratyński. “Changing the scope of the EU
ETS. Institute of Environmental Protection - National Research Institute / National
Centre for Emissions Management (KOBiZE), Warsaw”. en. In: (2023).
[65]
Polski nie stać na średnie ambicje. pl-PL. URL: https://instrat.pl/pypsa-marzec-
2023/ (visited on 05/26/2023).
[66]
Krajowy plan na rzecz energii i klimatu na lata 2021-2030 - Ministerstwo Klimatu i
Środowiska - Portal Gov.pl. pl-PL. URL: https://www.gov.pl/web/klimat/krajowy-
plan-na-rzecz-energii-i-klimatu (visited on 05/26/2023).
[67]
Prekonsultacje w zakresie aktualizacji dokumentów strategicznych – KPEiK/PEP2040
- Ministerstwo Klimatu i Środowiska - Portal Gov.pl. pl-PL. URL: https://www.gov.
pl/web/klimat/prekonsultacje- w- zkresie- aktualizacji- dokumentow- strategicznych-
kpeikpep2040 (visited on 06/17/2023).
[68]
Paweł Gajda et al. “Energetyka Jądrowa dla Polski”. pl. In: (Nov. 2020). URL: https:
//www.sobieski.org.pl/wp-content/uploads/ENERGETYKA_JADROWA_E-BOOK.
pdf.
[69]
Polskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne. Plan Rozwoju Systemu Przesyłowego do 2032
roku uzgodniony z Prezesem URE - Aktualności - PSE. URL: https://www.pse.
pl / biuro - prasowe / aktualnosci/ - /asset _ publisher / fwWgbbtxcZUt / content / plan -
rozwoju-systemu-przesylowego-do-2032-roku-uzgodniony-z-prezesem-ure?safeargs=
696e686572697452656469726563743d66616c73652672656469726563743d687474707325334125324625
(visited on 05/31/2023).
[70]
The German electricity grid: notoriously swamped? en-US. Mar. 2018. URL: https:
//energytransition.org/2018/03/the-german-electricity-grid-notoriously-swamped/
(visited on 05/31/2023).
[71]
Q&A: Making the EU’s electricity market fit for a climate-neutral future. en. Mar.
2023. URL: https://www.cleanenergywire.org/factsheets/qa-eu-electricity-market-
reform (visited on 05/31/2023).
[72]
Urząd Regulacji Energetyki. Energetyka cieplna w liczbach 2021. pl. Dec. 2022.
URL: https://www.ure.gov.pl/pl/cieplo/energetyka-cieplna-w-l/10763,2021.html
(visited on 05/31/2023).
[73]
Projek uchwały Rady Ministrów w sprawie przyjęcia Strategii dla ciepłownictwa do
2030 r. z perspektywą do 2040 r. - Kancelaria Prezesa Rady Ministrów - Portal
Gov.pl. pl-PL. URL: https : / / www . gov . pl / web / premier / projek - uchwaly - rady -
ministrow-w-sprawie-przyjecia-strategii-dla-cieplownictwa-do-2030-r-z-perspektywa-
do-2040-r2 (visited on 05/31/2023).
[74]
IPCC — Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/
(visited on 06/17/2023).
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Analysis of energy transition scenarios
for the Polish electricity sector
==PAGE:63==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.man.dtu.dk
