==PAGE:1==
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop
based on shadowgraphy
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Ruijie Ren
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at both the Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science and Department of Chemistry, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Ruijie Ren - s210203
Signature
Date
ii
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Volumetric 3D printing holds immense potential for various industries, offering advantages
like enhanced printing speeds, better structural integrity, and the ability to create intricate
geometries. However, optimizing the projection patterns for such printing techniques re-
mains a challenge due to the complexity of the involved physical processes. This thesis
introduces a novel learning-based approach to automate and streamline the optimization
of projection patterns in volumetric 3D printing. We leverage deep learning and shadowg-
raphy to map shadowgrams to the desired projection patterns in a data-driven manner,
incorporating the physical printing process within the learning process. Our approach em-
ploys a learning-based feedback loop to modify projection patterns based on simulated
shadowgrams. We provide comprehensive experimental results and ablation studies to
evaluate our approach, demonstrating its effectiveness through qualitative results and a
proof of concept. Our work marks a significant step towards harnessing the full potential
of tomographic 3D printing and opens up new avenues for research in this field.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I am filled with profound gratitude as I pen down my acknowledgements for the completion
of my master thesis. This endeavor was indeed an interdepartmental effort, and I cannot
express enough my appreciation to everyone involved from the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science and the Department of Chemistry.
I would like to express my deep and sincere gratitude to my main supervisor, Prof. Jeppe
Revall Frisvad. His wisdom, knowledge, and commitment to the highest standards in-
spired and motivated me. My special thanks are extended to my co-supervisors, Prof.
Yi Yang and Prof. Vedrana Andersen Dahl, whose insightful criticism and brilliant ideas
were invaluable. Their support and encouragement played a important role in shaping my
work.
Further, I would like to extend my deepest thanks to my external supervisor, Prof. Edgar
Simo-Serra. Our insightful discussions have been truly enlightening, and his kindness
and helpfulness have significantly eased my journey. His continual support helped me
maintain focus, and I am grateful for his role in this academic venture.
Additionally, I want to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the team in the chemistry
lab, especially Hossein Safari Mozajin, Bin Wang and Weichao Sun. They have been
tremendously helpful in gathering datasets and in explaining the basic concepts in the
chemistry aspect of my work. Their expertise and willingness to help have greatly assisted
my understanding and interpretation of the results.
Finally, I am eternally grateful for my parents, whose unconditional support and faith in
me have been my strength throughout this journey. Their encouragement in times of
struggle and their joy in times of success have motivated me to reach this milestone. This
accomplishment is as much theirs as it is mine, and I dedicate it to them.
In conclusion, I want to express my gratitude to all who directly or indirectly played a part
in my journey. Thank you for shaping my academic voyage and allowing me to grow both
professionally and personally.
iv
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Tomographic 3D Printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Projection Pattern Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Shadowgram-guided Feedback Loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Related Work
11
4
Reconstruction Challenges
13
4.1
Neural Radiance Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
IoR Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Challenges and Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5
Methodology
17
5.1
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Learning-based Feedback Loop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.3
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.4
Objective Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.5
Simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.6
Input Space Domain Adaptation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.7
Ablation Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.8
Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Experimental Results
33
6.1
Learning-based Feedback Loop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7
Conclusions
45
Bibliography
47
A Appendix
49
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Tomographic 3D printing has been a hotbed of research and innovation due to its trans-
formative potential in fields like engineering, medicine, and product design. It overcomes
many of the limitations associated with traditional layer-based 3D printing techniques, of-
fering faster printing speeds, superior structural integrity, and the ability to create more
complex geometries. However, optimizing the projection patterns in volumetric 3D printing
remains a significant challenge, especially given the complexity of the physical process
involved. The current methods often involve computationally intensive simulations and
manual intervention, slowing down the overall process and hindering widespread adop-
tion of this technology. This study is motivated by the need to address this gap.
In this thesis, we present a novel, learning-based approach that leverages the power of
deep learning and shadowgraphy to streamline and automate the optimization of projec-
tion patterns in volumetric 3D printing. Our method focuses on simplifying the optimiza-
tion process by mapping shadowgrams to the desired projection patterns in a data-driven
manner while incorporating the physical printing process.
After introducing the Background (Sec. 2) and Challenges (Sec. 4) for tomographic 3D
printing. We begin by detailing our proposed learning-based feedback loop based on
shadowgraphy in the Methodology section (Sec. 5). Here, we outline the architecture
of our model and the key techniques employed, such as data augmentation, adversarial
training, and procrustes alignment. We then describe how we utilize the Covariance Ma-
trix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) to minimize the gap between simulated and
observed shadowgrams as a input space domain adaptation technique.
Following this, in Experimental Results section (Sec. 6), we perform an in-depth analysis
of our approach. Through a series of ablation studies, we evaluate the impact of data
augmentation, adversarial loss, and alignment on the model’s performance. We also
investigate the influence of the number of datasets used and the choice of generator
architecture. Moreover, we provide visual results to illustrate our model’s effectiveness.
We demonstrate how our method can adapt to complex geometries, such as the human
head, which have not been seen in the training data. We then provide a proof of concept
analysis that supports our claim of the model learning to map across different levels of
smoothness.
We conclude the thesis by summarizing our findings and discussing the implications of
our study. We also highlight potential areas for future work to further refine our approach
and extend its application.
By developing a learning-based method to optimize projection patterns in volumetric 3D
printing, our goal is to contribute a powerful tool that can boost the efficiency, speed, and
versatility of this exciting technology. We believe our work will catalyze further research
and innovation in this field and bring us closer to realizing the full potential of volumetric
3D printing.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This section endeavors to provide a comprehensive understanding of the underlying prin-
ciples and technicalities of tomographic 3D printing. It serves as the basis for the subse-
quent research and discussions, encompassing an exploration of the technological intri-
cacies of the said printing technology, its evolution, and its present limitations.
2.1
Tomographic 3D Printing
Over the past decade, additive manufacturing (AM) has revolutionized the way we create
products, permeating numerous sectors, from the production of aerospace components
[1] to the crafting of patient-specific medical devices [2, 3], and even the bioprinting of
tissues [4]. Traditional AM approaches have predominantly relied on a sequential layer-
by-layer process, necessitating the use of supporting structures or a printing bed. This
methodological requirement places constraints on the geometric freedom of the resulting
print and can limit the creativity and functionality of the end product [5].
However, the advent of Tomographic 3D Printing, also known as Tomographic Vat Pho-
topolymerization (TVP), has dramatically widened the possibilities within the AM realm.
TVP diverges from traditional layer-by-layer AM methods by enabling the simultaneous
irradiation of an entire volume of photosensitive resin, thereby significantly enhancing the
degree of printing freedom. In the TVP process, a cylindrical vat filled with photosensitive
resin rotates while being exposed to computed projection patterns of light. This exposure
results in the solidification of the resin into the desired 3-dimensional object.
The pioneering efforts of Brett et al. [6] signified a major breakthrough in this sphere
with the inception of the first Computed Axial Lithography (CAL) system. This innovative
approach took advantage of volumetric additive manufacturing principles, employing a
rotational stage and a digital light processor–based (DLP) projector. The ensuing setup
radiated light with the capability of curing photopolymer materials, thereby enabling the
fabrication of high-resolution 3D structures in a matter of seconds, a remarkable achieve-
ment beyond the reach of traditional AM techniques.
TVP, as demonstrated in Fig. 2.1, can be perceived as the reverse process of Computed
Tomography (CT) [7], a technique widely implemented in modern healthcare settings.
While CT is designed to digitally replicate a 3D physical object from a series of 2D projec-
tions, TVP’s objective is to materialize a pre-defined digital model by harnessing computed
light projection patterns.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Contrast between CT and TVP. (a). The digitalization process for Computed
Tomography (CT), (b). The materialization process for Tomographic Vat Photopolymer-
ization (TVP).
2.2
Projection Pattern Generation
In tomographic 3D printing, the process commences with a 3D model stored in a common
format such as STL (Stereolithography). This format conveys crucial geometric details
necessary for the printing process through the utilization of triangular facets known as
a mesh. The intricacies of the mesh, defined by vertices and corresponding normals,
provide an interpretable method for representing complex shapes. These models are
sliced into a series of 2D cross-sectional images, which are processed using the Radon
transform to produce the light projection patterns required for printing.
Consider a single two-dimensional slice of the object at height δz. The projection can be
obtained by performing a Radon transform of a function P(θ, d) in the Euclidean plane R2,
as illustrated in Fig. 2.2:
P(θ, d) =
∫
AA′ f(x, y)ds,
(2.1)
where the ray AA′ is euqal to x cos θ + y sin θ = d, ds is the differential along the path
length s and f(x, y) denoteos the density of the object at point (x, y).
Figure 2.2: Demonstration of slicing using Radon Transform.
By Applying radon transform to multiple slices δz, the projection at angle θ can be obtained.
4
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:13==
The overarching aim of the tomographic projection algorithm is to discover projection pat-
terns that can faithfully reproduce the intended 3D geometry. Nevertheless, the appli-
cation of the Radon transform in isolation often falls short in delivering optimal printing
quality. As a response to this challenge, innovative approaches such as the Filtering
Method and Iterative Pattern Optimization have been proposed to enhance the fidelity of
the 3D printouts.
2.2.1
Filtered Projection Method
Image blurring resulting from simple back projection is a significant challenge in tomo-
graphic image reconstruction. This issue primarily arises from the inherent methodology
of the back projection process.
In the process of back projection, the projection data are diffused or dispersed back
through the original object space. Each point within this space is attributed the value
associated with the line integral along the direction of projection. This operation is system-
atically performed across all projection angles, manifesting itself as a form of ”averaging”
or ”smoothing” operation. The inherent nature of this operation yields a smearing effect,
ultimately leading to blurring of the 3D digital model which indicates the light projection
pattern by using radon transform need to be modified.
To mitigate this effect, various methods are employed, most commonly involving the appli-
cation of filters to the projections prior to back projection. One of the commonly used filters
for this purpose is the Ram-Lak filter [8], which is a high-pass filter and has proven highly
effective in the correction of the blurring effect encountered in simple back projection.
Upon fixing the angle θ, and combining all the transformed slices from the top to the bottom
of the 3D object, the modified light pattern at θ is generated.
With a synchronized rotation and projection system, these light patterns are emitted onto
a vat of photopolymer resin and start the solidifying the photoresponsive material.
2.2.2
Iterative Pattern Optimization
In recent times, the advancements in computational power have enabled the creation
of iterative reconstruction optimization techniques that can address some of the noise
associated with multi-detector computed tomography [9].
Iterative reconstruction optimization techniques begin by performing a Radon transform
on the original 3D digital model, yielding a naive projection pattern. This pattern serves
as an initial forward projection in the process of iterative optimization. It is significant to
note that this initial forward projection merely serves as a starting point and might not
necessarily capture the intricacies of the 3D model accurately.
Recognizing that the naive projection pattern may not be sufficient for creating high-fidelity
prints, the next step in the process involves detailed print simulations that take into account
various physical properties of the materials involved. For instance, the nonlinear response
of the photopolymer precursor to light exposure, beam attenuation, and variations in resin
viscosity are all factors that can influence the final printed structure. By simulating these
factors and adjusting the projection patterns accordingly, the process ensures that the
subsequent back projection would yield an accurate 3D digital model.
Once the modified projection patterns are obtained, a back projection is performed to
transform the 2D data into a 3D digital model. This generated model is then compared
with the original target 3D model. It’s likely that the back-projected model won’t match the
target perfectly on the first iteration.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
5
==PAGE:14==
Hence, the next critical step involves assessing the difference between the target 3D
model and the back-projected model. This difference, a representation of the error in
the model, is then forward projected to generate a difference projection pattern. This
difference projection pattern serves as a critical feedback loop, capturing the errors in the
back projection process.
The difference projection pattern is then added to the current projection pattern. In essence,
this action is a correction step, compensating for the deficiencies in the naive projection
pattern based on the error identified in the back projection. Following this correction, the
entire process is repeated, commencing with a new back projection.
This iterative cycle is continued until the projection pattern generates a 3D digital model
closely resembling the original target model, indicating that the projection pattern is now
optimized. Thus, through several iterative steps, the technique refines the projection pat-
tern, enhancing the overall accuracy and quality of the final printed object.
The iterative reconstruction optimization process is illustrated in Fig. 2.3.
6
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Flow chart of iterative reconstruction optimization method [9].
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2.3
Limitations and Challenges
While current methodologies used in tomographic projection pattern generation offer cer-
tain levels of effectiveness, they are constrained by specific limitations and challenges.
The Filtered Back Projection method is prized for its computational efficiency, facilitated
by the use of a high-pass filter. However, it is burdened with practical restrictions. A
primary issue is its potential to generate negative intensity values, which is not practical
for real-world printing [10]. Moreover, this method falls short in thoroughly considering
crucial aspects of real-world physics simulations, such as the nonlinear response of the
polymer precursor and the light reflection phenomena instigated by changes in the Index
of Refraction (IoR).
In contrast, the Iterative Pattern Optimization method seeks to include the intricate physics
of 3D printing within the pattern generation process. Nevertheless, it is faced with its
unique set of challenges. A significant concern is its high demand for computational re-
sources, the method necessitates a sequential updating process from top to bottom of the
geometry, resulting in time-consuming iterations. Moreover, this method may introduce
slicing artifacts due to the isolated optimization of each slice, potentially degrading the
overall print quality. The inherent complexities involved in 3D printing physics further add
to the challenge of accurate modeling.
A shared limitation of both methods is their operation under an open-loop system for the
design of projection patterns. Although the Iterative Pattern Optimization method inte-
grates a greater level of detailed printing physics, its outputs are solely reliant on simula-
tion results. Consequently, both methods omit real-time observation and feedback from
the actual printing process. This lack of a feedback mechanism is a severe deficiency, as
it precludes dynamic adjustments in response to real-time anomalies or errors during the
printing process.
2.3
Shadowgram-guided Feedback Loop
Shadowgraphy, also known as shadowgram imaging, is a technique traditionally em-
ployed in fluid dynamics and optical studies. Its fundamental principle lies in the analysis
of shadows cast in inhomogeneous transparent media, revealing variations in the media’s
refractive index.
To elucidate its operation, consider a scenario where a beam of parallel light rays prop-
agates through a homogenous medium, culminating at a screen. In such a situation, the
contrast, defined by (I−I0)/I0, where I is the observed intensity and I0 is the initial in-
tensity, is zero. This is because the light intensity on the screen is uniform and equals
I0.
However, if an inhomogeneous transparent medium, like a candle flame, is placed within
the light beam’s path, the situation changes. This medium introduces refractive index
variations that deflect the light rays. As a result, the relative light intensity observed on
the projection screen diverges from zero. Areas of differing intensities manifest, creating
’shadows’ that denote the medium’s inhomogeneity (see Fig. 2.4).
8
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Underpinning principles of shadowgraphy. The left side depicts light rays
traversing through a homogenous medium, while the right side showcases their passage
through a medium possessing refractive index gradients, leading to their deflection [11].
Within the context of tomographic 3D printing, shadowgraphy imaging captures these
shadows or variations in light intensity to monitor changes in the refractive index during
the photopolymer resin’s curing process. Hence, this technique provides a vital tool for
observing and understanding the ongoing transformations within the resin during the 3D
printing process.
To enhance the accuracy of tomographic printing, it is imperative to monitor the printing
progress continuously. Unlike the works mentioned in Sec. 2.1, where the process of
printing may be deemed as an open-loop control system, recent works focus on leveraging
the observed shadowgram to form a feedback loop and modify light pattern [5].
As illustrated in Fig. 2.5, a camera was positioned at a 90-degree angle relative to the
direction of visible light projecting. It surveys the resin space to generate shadowgrams
of the components being printed, thereby providing real-time observation of the printing
status.
Approaches from [5] leverage the observed shadowgram to identify which parts of the
model have formed at each time point by subtracting the background from the current
observed image and the initial stage image. These observed shadowgrams are used to
regulate the intensity of the corresponding light patterns, thereby mitigating excessive ir-
radiation on solidified sections or insufficient exposure in areas that necessitate prolonged
curing.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: Experimental setup of two-light tomographic 3D printing with an observation
system [10]. Note that, in this project, we only use the visible projector.
The incorporation of a camera into the tomographic 3D printing system has facilitated the
use of shadowgraphy imaging, a novel technique to monitor changes in refractive index
during the printing process. The primary advantage of this method lies in its ability to
provide real-time feedback, thereby enabling the dynamic modification of light patterns
employed in the polymerization process. However, the approach presented in [5] is con-
strained by its presumption of rectilinear light propagation, which is inaccurate due to the
varying index of refraction (IoR) of the printed constituents over time. However, it very
challenging to do a reconstruction of IoR, the challenges associated with IoR reconstruc-
tion will be discussed in detail in Sec. 4.
10
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:19==
3
Related Work
Over the past decade, 3D printing technology has drastically evolved, with tomographic
3D printing standing out as a transformative technique. Different from conventional layer-
by-layer 3D printing, tomographic printing enables the entire structure to be formed simul-
taneously [12, 13].
This volumetric approach offers impressive advantages, including high-speed production,
fewer support requirements, and the ability to create intricate structures inaccessible to
traditional techniques. It has opened doors for myriad applications across sectors, ranging
from healthcare and aerospace to automotive and consumer goods.
Brett et al. [6] made significant strides with the development of the first Computed Axial
Lithography (CAL) system, which harnessed the principles of volumetric additive manu-
facturing. This technique utilized a rotational stage and a digital light processor–based
(DLP) projector that emitted visible light to cure photopolymer materials, resulting in high-
resolution 3D objects in a matter of seconds.
Following this, authors from [9] demonstrate the use of wavelength-sensitive photoresins
in a TVP setup. Their approach uses both visible and UV light sources simultaneously,
offering an unprecedented level of control over internal mechanical property gradients.
This work provides a novel strategy for spatially controlling the stiffness of materials in
light-based volumetric additive manufacturing.
The researchers in [14] exploited the substantial increase in light scattering during pho-
toresin gelation to conduct real-time 3D imaging of prints during TVP. They utilized tomo-
graphic imaging of the light scattering density within the build volume to create 3D models
of the cured objects. However, this technique need a modification of chemistry to increase
the scattering phenomenon.
These works tried different experiment setup and developed techniques to generate bet-
ter projection patterns for the printing quality. However, all these works only consider
the open-loop for projection pattern generation, without considering the real-time printing
status.
Recent research in the realm of tomographic 3D printing has recognized the potential of
integrating feedback mechanisms to improve the printing process. Among these mecha-
nisms, shadowgraphy has emerged as a promising candidate to provide real-time feed-
back during the printing process [5]. Shadowgraphy, traditionally used to visualize vari-
ations in the refractive index, provides real-time feedback during the printing process,
enabling corrections and adjustments to be made.
In [5], the authors utilized the observed shadowgram to modulate the polymerization
speed for different geometric components of the object being printed. They achieved
this by selectively increasing or decreasing the light projection patterns, influencing the
rate at which the photosensitive resin solidified.
However, this work is limited by relying on a basic level of modification to the projection
patterns, not taking into full account the intricate details of the printing process. Further-
more, it assumes rectilinear light propagation which is not accurate due to the varying
index of refraction (IoR) of the printed constituents over time.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
11
==PAGE:20==
In our work, we take a more comprehensive and physics-driven approach to address
these challenges. We propose a data-driven method designed to model the complex
relationship between the light projection pattern and the resulting shadowgram.
In addition, our methodology significantly benefits from the integration of simulated shad-
owgrams. These simulated representations serve as ideal benchmarks, reflecting the
scenario wherein the target model is prefectly printed. By transforming these simulated
shadowgrams back into light projection patterns, we can guide the printing process to
achieve a more precise and faithful replication of the intended 3D model. This approach
provides a proactive measure to ensure the highest possible adherence to the design
specifications of the original 3D digital model.
12
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:21==
4
Reconstruction Challenges
In this section, we introduce an approach for reconstructing the Index of Refraction (IoR)
for Tomographic Vat Photopolymerization (TVP) and discuss the challenges associated
with this method.
4.1
Neural Radiance Field
In recent years, a breakthrough technique known as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has
gained considerable attention due to its remarkable success in Novel View Synthesis.
Developed by Mildenhall et al. [15], this technique exhibits a unique ability to generate
novel views from multiple-view observed 2D images and corresponding camera poses. It
accomplishes this by encoding the geometry and appearance of the scene in a volumetric
opacity representation through a multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
As shown in Fig. 4.1, the NeRF model is set up to take 3D coordinates as input, repre-
sented as a position along the camera ray and the viewing direction. This data is pro-
cessed through an MLP, which outputs the volume density and RGB color at that point.
The volume density, or opacity, indicates how much light is blocked or absorbed at a par-
ticular point, while the RGB color denotes the color of the light emitted or scattered at that
location.
The key innovation of NeRF lies in its rendering process, which is differentiable. This im-
plies that changes in the network parameters, corresponding to changes in the scene rep-
resentation, can be directly related to changes in the rendered image. Consequently, the
model can be optimized to minimize the difference between the rendered and observed
images using standard gradient-based optimization techniques like Adam [16] and SGD
[17].
Figure 4.1: An overview of neural radiance field scene representation and differentiable
rendering procedure [15].
However, it’s important to note that NeRF operates under certain assumptions. Specif-
ically, it assumes that light follows a straight path through the scene, which is the case
in air or vacuum, but not necessarily in other media. In the context of tomographic 3D
printing, this assumption may not hold due to the refractive index variations within the
photopolymer resin.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
13
==PAGE:22==
Our investigation focuses on the challenge of handling these scenarios, which is essential
in reconstructing IoR for TVP. In the upcoming sections, we will delve deeper into this issue
and suggest viable methods to overcome these obstacles.
4.2
IoR Reconstruction
Our approach to the reconstruction of the index of refraction (IoR) is fundamentally in-
spired by the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) model, but with crucial modifications to
suit the unique nature of our problem. Notably, we adapt NeRF from operating under
a perspective projection model, which is typical in visual perception, to a homographic
projection model, more suited to our context of tomographic 3D printing.
A perspective projection is based on the projection of 3D objects onto a 2D plane along
lines that converge to a single point (the camera focal point). This is the typical setup for
most imaging scenarios, including those of the original NeRF model. In contrast, a homo-
graphic projection preserves the parallel nature of light rays, which is more representative
of the light propagation in our case.
In Fig. 4.2, we demonstrate an initial trial involving a transparent Lego brick positioned
within the resin cylinder. We captured shadowgrams and conducted background sub-
traction to prepare the images for further analysis. Using these processed images, we
optimized our modified 5D NeRF field. We employed the Marching Cubes algorithm [18] to
transform the output from this optimization into a 3D model that predicts the brick’s geom-
etry. As the Lego brick is composed of a homogeneous material, the resulting geometric
reconstruction reveals the unvarying Index of Refraction (IoR) intrinsic to the material.
However, as can be observed from Fig. 4.2, the resulting reconstruction still contains
several artifacts. This issue can be attributed to the fact that our current NeRF-based
approach does not accurately model the bending of light due to variations in the refractive
index. Thus, our initial experiment demonstrates both the promise and the challenges of
our approach. It serves as a proof of concept, showing that IoR can be estimated from
shadowgrams, while also highlighting the need for more sophisticated models that can
account for the complexities of light propagation in media with varying IoR.
Figure 4.2: The reconstruction of the Lego model.
4.3
Challenges and Future Work
While we have made promising strides towards IoR reconstruction using shadowgrams,
several challenges persist. These primarily revolve around accommodating the space and
time-varying nature of IoR, which we will explore in detail, along with potential approaches
for future work.
Space-varying IoR: As the photosensitive resin undergoes the curing process, the in-
dex of refraction varies spatially, leading to changes in the paths of light rays. However,
14
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:23==
prior work, such as NeRF, operates under the assumption of a homogenous volume and
straight ray paths. NeReF [19] made a step towards addressing this by recovering depth
and normal of a flat fluid surface for a single refraction event using Snell’s law. Fur-
thermore, recent work [20] has proposed a novel sampling technique based on Eikonal
Rendering that can handle multiple sample points along a curved path, albeit under the
assumption of piecewise-constant IoR. As a future direction, we could consider repre-
senting the space-varying IoR as an eikonal field, inspired by the work of Bemana et al.
[21].
Time-varying IoR: Besides spatial variations, we also have to account for the dynamic
nature of the IoR, as the curing of the resin, which correlates with the absorption of light
intensity, is a time-dependent process. Recent work such as D-NeRF [22], and Nerfie [23]
have extended the capabilities of NeRF to accommodate dynamic scenes, introducing a
learned deformation field that maps coordinates from each input image into a canonical
template coordinate space. However, these deformation-based approaches face chal-
lenges when modeling changes in topology, which necessitate discontinuities in the de-
formation field. A potential direction for future work could be to draw inspiration from
HyperNeRF [24], proposing a 5D radiance field to encode each individual input image as
a slice through a higher-dimensional ambient surface.
Upon successful reconstruction of the IoR from the observed shadowgrams, one can
extract the geometry of the printed object using techniques such as the Marching Cube
algorithm. The light pattern can then be optimized through comparisons between the
reconstructed geometry and the target object’s 3D model. Additionally, by exploring the
relationship between the IoR, the conversion rate of the photosensitive resin, and the dose
of light through chemistry experiments, a forward rendering simulator can be developed to
emulate the IoR. Such a simulator could prove instrumental in assessing the effectiveness
of the proposed method and its potential for practical implementation.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:25==
5
Methodology
In this chapter, we begin by formally defining our problem, which is to devise a learning-
based feedback loop for modifying the projection pattern to enhance printing quality. We
will then detail the model we propose and the simulator that we leverage to adjust the
projection pattern.
5.1
Problem Formulation
Let Pθ denote a H ×W projection pattern corresponding to the rotation angle θ for a given
geometry Ω. Throughout the printing process, the projection patterns are continuously
updated in synchrony with the rotation of the tube which is filled with photosensitive liquid.
Obsearved shadowgraphy images, denoted as Sr
θ which are in real domain, are constantly
captured by a camera positioned at a 90-degree angle from the projector. The shadow-
gram Sr
θ can be considered as a function of the projection pattern Pθ and the printing
physics that includes the light propagation through the material, the absorption of energy
by the liquid, and the resulting changes in the index of refraction (IoR).
We can denote the printing physics as a function M that transforms the projection pattern
into the shadowgram M : Pθ −→Sr
θ. When the projector is turned on, the photosensitive
liquid absorbs energy, if the absorbed energy reaches a certain threshold, the liquid start
polarization, changing the IoR significantly. After sometime, the liquid reaches a stable
phase, when the IoR can be considered consistent. Our goal for this project is to learn
the inverse of the mapping M−1 : Sr
θ −→Pθ and then utilize the simulated shadowgram
Ss
θ which is in a synthetic domain to obtain a modified projection pattern P⋆
θ. Note that, to
reduce the gap between simulated and observed shaodwgram Ss
θ and Sr
θ, we designed
a input-space domain adaptation mechanism to generate ˆSs
θ which is the optimized sim-
ulated shadowgram.
5.1.1
Experiment Setup
As depicted in Fig. 5.1, we established an observation system to capture shadowgrams.
The camera is positioned at a 90-degree angle relative to the DLP modulator. We use
multiple mirrors and filtering lenses to optimize the visualization of shadowgrams.
When light travels from air to the resin, it will refract due to the circular shape of the tube.
To mitigate this, we employ an index-matching liquid bath. This ensures that the light
first enters the container perpendicularly before reaching the tube. Since the index of
refraction (IoR) of the index-matching liquid and the resin are identical, the light path will
not deviate as it travels from the bath to the tube.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5.1: Experiment setup.
5.2
Learning-based Feedback Loop
Fig. 5.2 demonstrates an overview of the feedback control loop based on shadowgraphy.
In this project, we propose a novel data-driven method to encapsulate the complex phys-
ical and chemical processes involved in 3D printing and develop a method for modifying
the projection pattern. Our pattern modification deviates from previous work, which of-
ten rely on manually designed update schemes, such as filtered projection method and
iterative pattern optimization method. Instead, our pattern modification is informed by a
shadowgram simulator, allowing for projection pattern adjustments based on simulated
shadowgram modifications. Given the challenge of mapping the full process while the
IoR changes significantly in a short timeframe, our focus is on the final stage of printing,
when the IoR can be considered temporally constant.
Figure 5.2: Overview of the feedback control loop based on shadowgraphy.
The architecture of our approach is depicted in Fig. 5.3, composed of two primary compo-
nents: a projection pattern generation module located on the top branch and a simulator-
guided pattern modification module on the bottom branch.
18
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:27==
For the projection pattern generation module, it processes an input observed shadow-
gram, denoted as Sr
θ, sourced from the real domain. Leveraging the prowess of a ResNet
Generator [25], this module meticulously maps each pixel in the input shadowgram Sr
θ into
a corresponding pixel in the projection pattern, represented as Pθ. To achieve an accurate
and precise mapping, the training process adheres to the principles of adversarial training
[26], implementing a two-step minimax optimization method. Here, the updates between
the ResNet and the patch discriminators [27] are alternated. The generator is honed to
outsmart the discriminator, and concurrently, the discriminator is trained to distinguish
more effectively between authentic and generated images.
The bottom branch hosts the second module, which is the pattern modification module.
This module uses a simulator to produce a modified shadowgram, Ss
θ, in the synthetic
domain, which is then passed through the learned mapping M−1 to obtain the modified
projection pattern, denoted as P⋆
θ. It’s worth noting that due to the variation in the IoR for
the simulator, the simulated pattern Ss
θ may visually differ from the observed shadowgram
Sr
θ. To minimize this domain gap between the synthetically simulated shadowgram and
the real-world observed shadowgram, we incorporate an input space domain adaptation
technique. This results in the generation of an optimized simulated shadowgram, ˆSs
θ,
bearing more resemblance to its real-world counterparts. Utilizing this real-world learned
mapping, we then ascertain the modified pattern P⋆
θ.
Figure 5.3: Our approach for tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on
shadowgraphy. It comprises two modules: an adversary-guided ResNet generator to
learn the mapping from shadowgram to projection pattern (top branch), and a pattern
modification module (bottom branch) that employs a Domain Adaptation (DA) technique
to minimize the gap between the simulated domain and the real-world domain.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
19
==PAGE:28==
5.3
Dataset
In this section, we detail the dataset used in our work and discuss the preprocessing
techniques employed to prepare the data.
5.3.1
Real Dataset
Our real-world dataset consists of recordings from several 3D printing processes, which
used the patterns generated with the iterative pattern modification method introduced in
Sec. 2.2.2. The generation of projection patterns for a target geometry approximately
takes 10 hours, with the printing process itself taking around 1 minute to complete. We
gathered data from 15 pairs of videos of these printing processes. Given our focus on the
final printing stage, where the IoR can be considered constant, we manually aligned the
initial frame of the shadowgram and the projection pattern. Following this, we sampled
images from these videos in synchronization with the frame rate. We utilized 11 pairs of
videos (2,817 images) for training and 4 pairs of videos (550 images) for evaluation. It
is noteworthy that to simplify the learning of the mapping, we aligned the shadowgram
Ss
θ with the projection pattern Pθ−90◦since the camera is set to 90 degree of the DLP
modulator.
5.3.2
Pre-process: Procrustes Alignment
The data for our study was gathered through a series of real-world experiments in tomo-
graphic 3D printing, conducted by a specialized chemistry team. As part of the process,
the team manually adjusted the projection pattern to ensure that the light was projected
correctly within the tube. This manual adjustment, however, led to a misalignment be-
tween the saved projection pattern and the corresponding shadowgram. Additionally, to
better prevent the polymerized part from rotating or shifting during the printing process,
the team introduced a certain degree of rotation to the projection patterns.
Consequently, before employing these paired images of shadowgrams and correspond-
ing projection patterns in training the ResNet model, we recognized the need for a critical
pre-processing step: Procrustes alignment. This shape analysis framework scales, trans-
lates, and rotates the images to align them consistently. Procrustes alignment allows the
normalization of image sizes and orientations, ensuring that the network learns from a
consistent set of images and avoids learning irrelevant variations.
Procrustes alignment [28] is particularly useful in statistical shape analysis, where the
aim is to remove differences in translation, rotation, and scaling. For our purposes, this
methodology was instrumental in ensuring accurate alignment of the shadowgram and
the projection pattern.
Selecting key features using techniques such as ORB [29] or SIFT [30], as shown in
Fig. 5.4, proves to be inefficient due to the modality difference between the shadowgram
and the projection pattern. These automatic key feature selection methods fail to capture
the inherent structural and textural differences between these two domains, leading to
unsatisfactory alignment.
20
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.4: Attempt at key point correspondence using ORB.
Given these challenges, we resort to a more manual approach for aligning the images.
Specifically, we hand-picked key feature points on each image, identifying characteristic
aspects such as edge transitions, texture variations, and unique patterns. By explicitly
designating these points, we established a correspondence between the similar features
on different images, thereby providing a robust guidance for the alignment process.
This manual approach, although time-consuming, ensures a more accurate alignment of
corresponding features across different images (see Fig. 5.5). By bypassing the limita-
tions of the automatic key feature selection algorithms, we are able to successfully align
and match the shadowgrams and projection patterns, setting the stage for further analysis
and processing.
Figure 5.5: Key point selection.
Given two sets of corresponding landmark points, denoted as p1 ∈R2 and p2 ∈R2,
our goal is to achieve a Procrustes alignment, which involves translation, scaling, and
rotation operations for p2. Since the specifics of these transformations are already ascer-
tained by our chemistry team, we do not need to employ a 6 degrees of freedom (DOF)
affine transformation that would include shearing. The sequence of operations for the
Procrustes alignment includes the following steps:
1. The set points p1 and p2 are centralized around the origin by subtracting the mean
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
21
==PAGE:30==
coordinates of each set.
pc
1 = p1 −µ1,
pc
2 = p2 −µ2
(5.1)
where µ1 and µ2 are the mean of p1 and p2, respectively.
2. The scale factors along the x-axis and y-axis are calculated independently, derived
from the ratio of the Euclidean norms of the centered points. Denoted as scalex and
scaley, these are computed as:
scalex = ||pc
1||x
||pc
2||x
,
scaley = ||pc
1||y
||pc
2||y
(5.2)
3. We calculate the cross-covariance matrix, Σ, which represents the correlation be-
tween the point sets, as follows:
Σ = (pc
1)T pc
2
(5.3)
4. Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) was performed on the correlation matrix to
obtain the left singular vectors u, singular values s, and right singular vectors (vT ).
u, s, vT = SVD(Σ)
(5.4)
5. The rotation matrix, R is calculated as the dot product of the transposed right singular
vectors v and the transposed left singular vectors uT .
R = u · vT
(5.5)
6. The points in p2 were aligned by applying the calculated scaling factors and rota-
tion matrix. We first performed element-wise multiplication of the centered p2 with
the scaling factors, followed by matrix multiplication with the rotation matrix. The
centered points were then translated back to their original positions.
paligned
2
= (pc
2 ∗[scalex, scaley]) · R + µ1
(5.6)
Applying this transformation to all of the points in the projection pattern image, we
can get an aligned projection pattern.
22
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:31==
The resulting aligned image is shown in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Result of Procrustes alignment: (a) projection pattern, (b) Observed shadow-
gram, (c) projection pattern with Procrustes alignment.
This Procrustes alignment procedure effectively aligns the projection pattern with the
observed shadowgram, removing differences in translation, rotation, and scaling. The
aligned images can then be used for the mapping M−1 : Sr
θ −→Pθ. More examples of
aligned image pairs are illustrated in Fig. 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Example of aligned image pairs. Left: Shadogram, right: projection pattern.
5.3.3
Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is a well-established strategy to synthetically expand the training set
and thereby improve model performance, particularly when the amount of available train-
ing data is limited. In our case, given the constraints on data collection and the inherent
variability of the 3D printing process, we resorted to a series of robust data augmentation
techniques to enrich the dataset. These methods were chosen to generate meaningful
variations and increase the diversity of the training data while preserving the core char-
acteristics of the original data.
The implemented data augmentation techniques include the following:
1. Horizontal Random Flipping: We randomly flipped the images along the horizontal
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
23
==PAGE:32==
axis. This technique not only doubles the size of our dataset, but also introduces a
form of spatial invariance, allowing the model to recognize and generalize patterns
regardless of their orientation.
2. Random Padding and Cropping: To introduce further spatial variance, we ran-
domly padded and subsequently cropped the images. This process changes the
location of the objects within the image, creating a sort of synthetic translation. By
forcing the model to encounter objects in different positions within the image, we
encourage the model to generalize its learned patterns irrespective of their position
in the image space.
3. Gaussian Noise Injection: Finally, to mimic real-world imperfections and inconsis-
tencies such as sensor noise and to train the model to be robust against such noise,
we added different levels of Gaussian noise to the images. This method, inspired by
the noise modeling in diffusion models [31], adds an element of randomness that not
only diversifies the dataset but also trains the model to identify and ignore irrelevant
variations.
Each of these techniques contributes to creating a more diverse, representative, and ro-
bust dataset. They promote the generalization of learned patterns, and ensure that the
model can handle a variety of situations, including unexpected or noisy inputs. Therefore,
even with a limited amount of original data, we can train a robust and effective model for
shadowgram projection pattern mapping in tomographic 3D printing.
5.3.4
Evaluation
Given the complexity and physical consequences of tomographic 3D printing, a com-
prehensive evaluation of the trained model is necessary to ensure its effectiveness and
robustness. Consequently, we have established a robust evaluation protocol that allows
us to assess the model performance from multiple perspectives.
The model evaluation consists of several components:
1. Dataset Splitting: To commence, a subset of the dataset was set aside to form
a validation set. This data separation approach ensures the model is tested on
unseen data, providing an unbiased evaluation of its generalization capability. The
validation data is entirely excluded from the training process.
2. Mean Squared Error (MSE): The first metric we used for quantitative evaluation is
Mean Squared Error (MSE). This metric measures the average squared difference
between the model’s predictions and the actual projection patterns. A smaller MSE
corresponds to closer alignment between predicted and actual patterns, indicating
a higher accuracy of the trained model.
3. Visual Quality Assessment: Given the visual nature of the task, we also evaluate
the visual quality of the printed 3D objects. This assessment is a qualitative measure
of how well the printed object matches the target geometry, considering factors such
as the level of detail, surface roughness, and structural accuracy.
4. Flip Evaluation: In order to ensure robustness of the evaluation, we introduced a
flip evaluation strategy. This involves flipping the test images before feeding them
into the model and then flipping the predictions back to their original orientation
before evaluation. If the model’s performance remains consistent during flip eval-
uation, it indicates that the model has effectively learned the mapping and is not
merely memorizing the training data.
24
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:33==
5. Multi-Scale Evaluation: Given the complex nature of tomographic 3D printing,
where both global structures and fine details are important, we also perform a multi-
scale evaluation. This process involves evaluating the model’s performance at var-
ious scales, assessing its ability to accurately reproduce both the overall shape of
the object and the finer details. The model’s predictions are compared with the
ground truth at multiple scales, providing a more comprehensive understanding of
its performance.
Through this multifaceted evaluation protocol, we ensure that the trained model is capa-
ble of accurately predicting projection patterns in tomographic 3D printing under various
scenarios, offering a reliable tool for this complex task.
5.4
Objective Functions
The objective function we employed for training our ResNet model was constructed as a
weighted combination of the L1 loss and the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) loss.
Specifically, the overall objective function, denoted as L, can be expressed as follows:
L = LL1 + λLGAN
(5.7)
where λ is a hyperparameter used to control the relative importance of the L1 loss LL1
and the GAN loss LGAN.
5.4.1
L1 Loss
The L1 loss, LL1, measures the mean absolute error between the predicted projection
patterns, denoted as Ppred
θ
, and the ground truth projection patterns, denoted as Ptrue
θ
. It
can be computed using the following formula:
LL1 = 1
N
N
∑
θ=1
|Ppred
θ
−Ptrue
θ
|
(5.8)
where N is the total number of pixels in an image. This loss function encourages the
model to produce outputs that closely match the ground truth projection patterns in terms
of intensity and shape, thereby achieving a pixel-wise similarity.
5.4.2
GAN Loss
The GAN loss, LGAN, constitutes the main component of the adversarial training frame-
work. This loss involves a discriminator network, D, and our generator network, G (the
ResNet model). The objective of the discriminator is to distinguish between the real pro-
jection patterns and the ones generated by the ResNet model, while the ResNet model
tries to fool the discriminator by generating increasingly realistic projection patterns. This
competition drives the generator to produce images that not only closely approximate the
actual projection patterns but also adhere to the underlying data distribution.
The GAN loss can be formulated as follows:
LGAN = EPθ∼pdata(Pθ)[log D(Pθ)] + ESr
θ∼pdata(Sr
θ)[log(1 −D(G(Sr
θ)))]
(5.9)
where Sr
θ represents the input shadowgrams, Pθ represents the projection patterns, pdata(Sr
θ)
and pdata(Pθ) are the data distributions of Sr
θ and Sθ respectively.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
25
==PAGE:34==
The combined LL1 + λLGAN loss forms a powerful objective function that not only en-
sures pixel-wise accuracy but also promotes the production of high-quality and realistic
projection patterns.
5.5
Simulator
To facilitate the effective modification of the projection pattern once the mapping M−1 :
Sr
θ −→Pθ is learned, we have developed an advanced simulator that can generate shad-
owgrams by emulating the tomographic 3D printing process. This simulator hinges on the
application of modern computer graphics techniques to replicate the integral aspects of
the printing process, thereby creating an enabling environment for testing and validating
the projection patterns.
5.5.1
Shadowgram Generation
One of the simulator’s primary capabilities is the generation of shadowgrams by setting
different Index of Refraction (IoR) values. The process harnesses Snell’s Law to model
how light refracts as it travels through different mediums, with distinct IoR values. Specifi-
cally, Snell’s Law states that the ratio of the sines of the angles of incidence and refraction
is equivalent to the ratio of the velocities of light in the two different media, and is mathe-
matically represented as:
n1 sin β1 = n2 sin β2
(5.10)
where n1 and n2 are the indices of refraction for the two media, and β1 and β2 are the
angles of incidence and refraction, respectively.
The current version of our simulator assumes a spatially constant IoR, a condition that
corresponds to a perfectly printed object in a real-world printing process. Consequently,
we aim to identify the optimal projection patterns based on the perfect shadowgram gen-
erated under these conditions.
5.5.2
Projection Pattern Generation
In addition to shadowgram generation, the simulator can also create projection patterns
by radon transform in Eq. 2.1.
This generated projection pattern serves as a critical input in our proof of concept experi-
ments, which will be further discussed in the following section.
5.6
Input Space Domain Adaptation
To bridge the gap between the synthetic domain of simulated shadowgrams and the real
domain of observed shadowgrams, we seek to fine-tune the Index of Refraction (IoR)
value within our simulator. To achieve this, we adopt a pre-trained ImageNet [32] model
to compute the perceptual difference between the simulated and observed images, which
acts as a measure of the difference in the images’ representation space.
5.6.1
Perceptual Loss
When comparing images, perceptual loss is a more effective metric than L1 or L2 norm.
It captures the overall visual similarity, which is especially beneficial in cases where the
simulated and observed shadowgrams are not perfectly aligned. Precise pixel-wise com-
parisons are not ideal in these scenarios, as they do not provide meaningful results.
Perceptual loss can be mathematically defined as:
26
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:35==
Lperceptual(Sr
θ, Ss
θ) =
L
∑
l=1
wl||Φl(Sr
θ) −Φl(Ss
θ)||2
2
(5.11)
where Φl(·) is the feature map obtained by the lth layer of a pre-trained network, Sr
θ and
Ss
θ are the shadowgrams from real and synthetic domain to be compared, and wl is the
weight assigned to the lth layer’s contribution.
5.6.2
Simulator as a Black-box Function
Given that our simulator operates on complex computer graphics techniques, some as-
pects of its design, such as ray tracing, are not differentiable. Ray tracing is a rendering
technique used to generate an image by tracing the path of light and simulating its inter-
actions with virtual objects. The nature of this process, involving discrete decisions (like
whether a ray hits an object or not) and maximum operations (like choosing the closest in-
tersection point), does not lend itself to standard gradient-based optimization techniques.
Thus, treating our simulator as a black-box function, we leverage non-gradient-based op-
timization methods.
5.6.3
Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES)
CMA-ES employs a technique of finding the minimal value of an objective function f :
Rn →R. This is achieved by creating λ samples xi from a normal distribution N(m, C)
characterized by a mean m and a covariance C that are successively calculated. Each
sample undergoes evaluation and ranking according to their respective function values.
The mean m and covariance matrix C are adjusted using the top µ samples with the goal of
increasing the likelihood of obtaining future samples that are closer to favorable samples.
An overview of the various components of the algorithm is provided in the following section
(refer to algorithm 1).
Algorithm 1 CMA-ES overview
1: Initialize problem parameters
2: while Termination criteria not met do
3:
Sampling
4:
Evaluation
5:
Selection and recombination
6:
Adaptation
7: end while
8: Return solution
Sampling. Each generation g of the CMA-ES starts by sampling a new population. The
individuals x(g+1)
i
with i ∈{1, ..., λ} are sampled according to Eq. 5.12.
x(g+1)
i
∼m(g) + σ(g)N(0, C(g))
(5.12)
where
∼denotes the same distribution on the left and right side.
N(0, C(g)) is a multivariate normal distribution with zero mean and covariance matrix
C(g). It holds m(g) + σ(g)N(0, C(g)) ∼(N(m(g), (σ(g))2C(g)).
x(g+1)
i
∈Rn denotes the i-th individual from generation g + 1.
m(g) ∈Rn denotes the mean value of the search distribution at generation g.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
27
==PAGE:36==
σ(g) ∈R>0 is the standard deviation which is considered as step-size at generation g.
C(g) ∈Rn×n denotes the covariance matrix at generation g.
λ ≥2 is the population size for each generation.
Evaluation. The objection function f to be optimized is evaluated at each obtained in-
dividuals x(g+1)
i
from Eq. 5.12. Then we define x(g+1)
i:λ
as the i-th best individual out of
x(g+1)
i
, · · · , x(g+1)
λ
. The index i : λ denotes the index of the i-th ranked individual that
f(x(g+1)
1:λ
) ≤f(x(g+1)
2:λ
) ≤· · · ≤f(x(g+1)
λ:λ
).
In this project, we utilized the Perceptual loss described defined in Eq. 5.11 as the objective
function.
Selection and recombination. We choose the µ best points to update the mean m(g+1) via
m(g+1) =
µ
∑
i=1
wix(g+1)
i:λ
(5.13)
where ∑µ
i=1 wi = 1 and w1 ≥w2 ≥· · · ≥wµ > 0. The choosing of weights wi is to adjust
the impact of the new individual such that favorable individuals have a greater impact on
the new mean.
Adaptation. A core aspect of the CMA-ES approach is the alteration of the covariance ma-
trix. This is to enhance the likelihood of generating samples that are proximate to advan-
tageous ones from past iterations. This adjustment of the covariance matrix is achieved
through the combination of rank-µ and rank-1 updates.
The rank-µ update benefits from the diversity of the best solutions in the current gener-
ation, while the rank-1 update helps the search to follow promising directions identified
over the longer-term history of the search process.
First, we consider rank-µ update by using the µ best fitted individuals [33], via
C(g+1) = (1 −cµ)C(g) + cµ
µ
∑
i=1
wiy(g+1)
i:λ
(y(g+1)
i:λ
)T ,
(5.14)
where y(g+1)
i:λ
= (x(g+1)
i
−m(g))/σ(g), cµ is the learning rate and wi is the weight parameter
similar to Eq. 5.13.
Then, a rank-1 update is applied based on the evoluation path [34]. By setting µ = 1 for
Eq. 5.13, we get
C(g+1) = (1 −c1)C(g) + c1y(g+1)
1:λ
(y(g+1)
1:λ
)T ,
where c1 is the learning rate.
Given that y(g+1)
i:λ
= (x(g+1)
i
−m(g))/σ(g) and yyT = −y(−y)T , the sign of the steps be-
comes inconsequential for the covariance matrix’s modification. To reincorporate the sign
information, we fabricate an evolution path, denoted as pc. This path incorporates histori-
cal information to capture long-term trends in the search space [35]. Starting with p(0)
c
= 0,
we have
p(g+1)
c
= (1 −cc)p(g)
c
+
√
cc(2 −cc)µeff
m(g+1) −m(g)
cmσ(g)
,
where µeff is the effective sample size to normalize p(g+1)
c
and cc is the learning rate. For
cc = µeff = 1, the evolution path reduces to the most recent change of the mean.
28
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:37==
Then we have the rank-1 update via
C(g+1) = (1 −c1)C(g) + c1p(g+1)
c
(p(g+1)
c
)T .
(5.15)
By combining both rank-µ (Eq. 5.14) and rank-1 (Eq. 5.15) update, we can update the
covariance matrix C by
C(g+1) = (1 −c1 −cµ)C(g) + c1p(g+1)
c
(p(g+1)
c
)T
+ cµ
µ
∑
i=1
wiy(g+1)
i:λ
(y(g+1)
i:λ
)T
(5.16)
To control the overall scale of the distribution, the update of step-size σ is introduced via
σ(g+1) = σ(g)exp(cσ
dσ
( ||p(g+1)
σ
||
E||N(0, I)|| −1)),
(5.17)
where
p(g+1)
σ
= (1 −cσ)p(g)
σ
+
√
cσ(2 −cσ)µeff(C(g))−1
2 m(g+1) −m(g)
σ(g)
,
and cσ is the learning rate, dσ is the damping factor. We suggest to refer to [34] for more
details.
By applying CMA-ES, we can progressively adapt the IoR within our simulator to align the
simulated shadowgrams with the observed ones more closely.
5.7
Ablation Study
Ablation studies serve as an essential step in understanding the individual contributions
of different components within our proposed framework. In this study, we conduct an
ablation study to analyze the roles of various aspects of our methodology, including the
architecture of the generator, data augmentation strategies, the use of adversarial GAN
loss, and the application of Procrustes data alignment.
5.7.1
Generator Architecture
We initially focus on the generator’s architecture. We explore four different structures:
1. A single block ResNet structure serves as our baseline, where the output is defined
as y = x + CNN(x).
2. A modified single block ResNet structure, where the output is given by y = CNN(x)+
wx + b. Here, wx refers to a 1x1 convolution operation applied to the input.
3. A U-Net [36] structure, a popular architecture in various image-to-image translation
tasks.
4. A full ResNet structure, extending beyond the single-block baseline to encapsulate
deeper, more complex feature representations.
5.7.2
Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is known to improve the model’s generalization capability, particularly
when dealing with limited datasets. To assess the importance of this strategy, we conduct
an experiment where data augmentation is omitted from the training process.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
29
==PAGE:38==
5.7.3
Adversarial GAN Loss
The adversarial GAN loss has been introduced to encourage the generation of more re-
alistic light patterns. By creating an experiment that omits the GAN loss, we evaluate the
contribution of this adversarial setup to the overall performance of our model.
5.7.4
Procrustes Data Alignment
Procrustes data alignment has been used to standardize the size and orientation of the
images in our dataset. To understand the impact of this pre-processing step, we conduct
an experiment without applying Procrustes alignment.
5.7.5
Dataset Size
Lastly, the size of the training dataset can significantly affect the performance of deep
learning models. To examine this factor, we test how varying the number of training in-
stances influences the model’s results.
Through this comprehensive ablation study, we aim to gain a better understanding of our
model’s functionality and identify potential areas for further refinement or simplification.
5.8
Proof of Concept
Our study, owing to its inherent complexities, presents several limitations which demand
careful attention. The most notable of these constraints is the restricted size of the dataset
at our disposal. Given the intricate nature of the physical processes we are modeling, we
anticipate the necessity for a substantial dataset to learn the comprehensive mapping
accurately. However, the acquisition of such a large dataset is challenging.
Furthermore, another considerable obstacle lies in achieving precise alignment between
image pairs. This task becomes significantly complex considering the continuous rotation
inherent in the tomographic 3D printing process, coupled with its dynamic nature. These
factors introduce a degree of inconsistency in capturing the transitional states, thereby
making alignment a non-trivial task.
Such limitations, along with others, may potentially influence the effectiveness and accu-
racy of the solution we propose.
Nevertheless, we remain dedicated to validating the effectiveness and feasibility of our
feedback loop, which is grounded in shadowgraphy-guided technology. To that end, we
have designed an additional experiment that serves as a proof-of-concept demonstra-
tion. This experiment is constructed on a foundation of fully simulated data, which affords
us greater control and precision in validating our approach. Through these controlled
simulations, we strive to get crucial insights and evidence to support the application of
shadowgraphy-guided feedback control in tomographic 3D printing. In effect, this experi-
ment is set to substantiate our assertion that despite the aforementioned challenges, our
methodology remains robust and capable of contributing valuable advancements to the
field of tomographic 3D printing.
5.8.1
3D Geometry Re-meshing
In the context of our proof of concept, the technique of 3D geometry re-meshing plays a
pivotal role.
We employed Remesh Modifier from Blender [37] to carry out the re-meshing process.
The Blender Remesh Modifier is a powerful tool for remeshing 3D models, allowing for
a more uniform distribution of vertices across the surface of the model. It operates by
constructing a new mesh from the input geometry after constructing a voxel grid over the
input mesh and populating the grid with the mesh data. Each voxel either contains a
30
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:39==
portion of the mesh or doesn’t, resulting in a binary occupancy grid. The size of these
voxels is determined by the ’Octree Depth’ setting that a higher Octree Depth results in
smaller voxels and thus a higher resolution grid.
In this context, we opted for the ”Smooth” mode of the Remesh Modifier. The Smooth
mode interpolates the surface data between the voxel grid points, creating a smooth result.
By adjusting the ’Smooth’ parameter in the Remesh Modifier settings we get three level
of smoothed geometry as illustrated in Fig. 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Smooth of geometry.
From left to right: non-smoothed mesh (Level 0),
smoothed mesh (Level 1), extra-smoothed mesh (Level 2).
Then, we leverage the simulator to generate shadowgraphy images and corresponding
projection patterns of a 3D geometric model at three distinct levels of smoothing as illus-
trated in Fig. 5.9.
Our objective is to train a network to learn the mapping from a shadowgraphy image (input)
to a corresponding projection pattern (output). Notably, the input shadowgraphy image is
always subjected to a higher level of smoothing compared to the projection pattern. This
approach enables us to learn the intricacies of the mapping process and the sharpness
of the given shadowgraphy images.
Adopting distinct levels of smoothness for the input and output simulates a real-world
printing scenario, as the printed material often lacks the sharpness of the target model. A
partial solution to this problem can be achieved by intensifying the edges of the projection
patterns. However, this approach does not fully address the issue and can only lead to
slightly modified projection pattern.
Instead, our proposed method in Sec. 5.2 aims to learn the mapping from the actual ob-
served shadowgraphy image to the projection pattern. After this mapping is learned, we
apply the mapping to the simulated shadowgraphy image to modify the projection pat-
tern. This approach could potentially account for the complexities inherent in the physical
printing process and yield an optimized projection pattern.
However, despite the promise of this method, it presents challenges that necessitate fur-
ther proof of concept. For instance, after learning the mapping using level 3 smoothed
shadowgraphy images and level 2 smoothed patterns, we test the application of level 2
smoothed shadowgraphy images. We then observe if this can be effectively translated
into a level 1 smoothed pattern.
If successful, this outcome would imply that our feedback control loop could deliver en-
hanced performance, provided we address the challenges inherent in the process. Thus,
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
31
==PAGE:40==
this approach would underscore the potential of our method to not only cope with but also
optimize the nuanced complexities of tomographic 3D printing.
Figure 5.9: Top: simulated projection pattern, Bottom: simulated shadowgram. From left
to right: non-simplified mesh, simplified mesh, extra-simplified mesh.
5.8.2
Dataset
An essential step to form our dataset is to normalize the 3D geometry into a unit sphere,
mirroring the real-world printing scenarios where the printing volume is often defined within
a confined circular area. The normalization process involves scaling the 3D model’s di-
mensions such that it fits within a unit sphere. This ensures that our dataset represents
objects that could realistically be printed using tomographic 3D printing technology.
Our dataset comprises 60 distinct 3D models. We allocated 50 of these models (16,274
images) for training our network, ensuring that it learns a broad array of geometries and
the associated mappings. The remaining 10 models (3,240 images) are reserved for
testing the network’s performance. These test models serve as a measure of how well
our network generalizes its learning to new, unseen data, reflecting its potential efficacy
in real-world tomographic 3D printing scenarios.
32
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:41==
6
Experimental Results
This section elaborates on the outcomes of the various objectives and experiments de-
signed throughout the project.
6.1
Learning-based Feedback Loop
6.1.1
Primary Results
The effectiveness of our proposed method in establishing a precise mapping, denoted as
M−1 : Sr
θ −→Pθ, is verified via an in-depth performance evaluation. The objective is to
assess how well our model is able to generate the projection patterns using shadowgram
inputs from both real and synthetic domains. These patterns are previously unseen by
the model during the training process, thereby providing a reliable indicator of the model’s
generalization capability. The results of this evaluation are presented in Table. 6.1.
Table 6.1: Primary outcomes of the learning-based feedback loop.
Input Domain
Real Shadowgram Sr
θ
Synthetic Shadowgram Ss
θ
Optimized Synthetic Shadowgram ˆSs
θ
MSE (↓)
0.084
0.1527
0.1203
When we fed shadowgrams Sr
θ sourced from the real domain into our model, we achieved
a mean square error (MSE) of 0.084. This low error rate signifies the model’s strong
generalization ability, given its accuracy in predicting the correct light patterns from real-
world shadowgrams.
In contrast, when we introduced synthetic shadowgrams Ss
θ as inputs to the model, the
resultant MSE was significantly higher, measured at 0.1527. This increase in error il-
lustrates the pronounced domain gap existing between the synthetic and real domains.
In simpler terms, the model, as trained, struggles to effectively translate the knowledge
learned from real shadowgrams to the synthetic counterparts.
To bridge this domain gap, we employed the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution
Strategy (CMA-ES) to optimize the Index of Refraction (IoR) value within our simulator.
As a result, we generated an optimized synthetic shadowgram, denoted as ˆSs
θ. By feed-
ing this optimized synthetic shadowgram into our model, we observed a reduced MSE of
0.1203. This denotes a 21.2% improvement in reducing the domain gap, signifying the
effectiveness of our IoR optimization strategy.
6.1.2
Ablation Study
To assess the performance and robustness of our model comprehensively, we performed
an ablation study. This analysis helps analyze the contribution of different components
within the full model. The components we focused on include data augmentation, ad-
versarial GAN loss, and Procrustes data alignment. We measured the impact of each
component by observing the changes in model performance when a given component
was omitted. The results of this ablation study are summarized in Table 6.2.
According to the results, the most significant performance decrease of 30.3% was ob-
served when Procrustes alignment was omitted. In a non-aligned dataset scenario, the
model struggles to distinguish whether to predict a smaller or larger pattern, leading to
confusion and poor performance. This result reinforces the complexity of our project,
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 6.2: Ablation study of the proposed method.
Model
Full model
w/o Adversary
w/o Alignment
w/o Augmentation
MSE (↓)
0.084
0.098 (-14.3%)
0.1206 (-30.3%)
0.1008 (-16.7%)
particularly when handling objects subject to rotation and movement during the printing
process.
The performance dropped by 14.3% when the model was trained without adversarial loss.
Since the alignment between the shadowgram and the projection pattern is never perfect,
using only L1 loss for training does not facilitate optimal learning. Moreover, the adversar-
ial training scheme promotes more realistic output, thus contributing positively to model
performance.
When we removed data augmentation, the performance dropped by 16.7%, indicating
the importance of robust augmentation, especially when dealing with a relatively small
dataset.
To enhance our understanding of the results, we also visualized the MSE error for different
epochs in Fig. 6.1. It is noteworthy that the model without alignment exhibits significant
fluctuations and convergence difficulty, owing to the network’s confusion arising from dis-
alignment. The model without augmentation achieves the best performance during the
early epochs but tends to overfit quickly. The models without adversarial loss and the full
model converge well, with the full model consistently outperforming the ablated model.
Figure 6.1: Visualization of MSE evaluations across different epochs. The full model is
illustrated in blue, the model without adversarial loss in orange, the model without align-
ment in green, and the model without augmentation in red. The best epoch for each model
is highlighted with a red dot on its respective curve. To best view the plot, we don’t show
the curve for model without alignment and without augmentation after 100 epoch since
they are overfitted.
34
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:43==
Additionally, we conducted an ablation study to explore the influence of the dataset size
on our data-driven method. As one might expect, the results indicate that a larger dataset
facilitates more accurate learning of the mapping function. The related results are outlined
in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Ablation study of dataset size.
Number of dataset
1
4
8
11
MSE (↓)
0.2134
0.1372
0.1126
0.084
Furthermore, we investigated the impact of the generator’s architecture on the model’s
performance. The generator architectures evaluated were a convolutional neural network
(CNN) with identity mapping (CNN(x) + x), a CNN with a learnable mapping (CNN(x) + wx
+ b), a U-Net architecture, and a ResNet architecture. The results, presented in Table 6.4,
underscore the superior performance of the ResNet architecture, evidenced by the lowest
MSE.
Table 6.4: Ablation study of generator architecture.
Generator
CNN(x) + x
CNN(x) + wx + b
U-Net
ResNet
MSE (↓)
0.228
0.157
0.103
0.084
These analyses reiterate the importance of an ample dataset size and an appropriate
generator architecture in achieving the best performance. They offer critical insights into
enhancing the effectiveness of our proposed solution in real-world applications.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
35
==PAGE:44==
6.1.3
Qualitative Result
In this section, we illustrated some qualitative results to provide a more tangible under-
standing of our study’s effectiveness.
Figure 6.2 provides a visual representation of the results obtained by different generator
architectures. We observe that the simplistic residual learning form, CNN(x) + x, results
in noticeable artifacts in the mapping, which can be alleviated by enhancing the network’s
capacity with CNN(x) + wx + b, where wx is a 1x1 convolutional net. However, the output
from these two methods is still overly dependent on the input, as evidenced by the artifacts
present when feeding synthetic domain input data into the network. A sharper and more
realistic learned projection pattern is obtained using ResNet, indicating a more efficient
learning of the mapping.
Figure 6.2: Visualization of results from different generator architectures. (a) Input shad-
owgram x, (b) CNN(x) + x, (c) CNN(x) + wx + b, (d) ResNet.
36
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:45==
For the input-space domain adaptation, we can note that application of CMA-ES optimiza-
tion to the IoR value renders the structure of the projection pattern for the 6x6 lattice and
egg becomes more distinguishable. For example the optimized projection pattern of the
lattice in Figure 6.3 has clear views of the holes. And the bottom plate of the optimized
projection for the egg in Fig. 6.4 is more distinguishable.
It’s worth noting that while the egg model was a part of the training set, the lattice model
was not. Visually comparing the two, we find that the optimized egg, using the simulated
projection pattern, is closer to the reference projection pattern. This suggests that the
network tends to yield better results for geometries that it has been exposed to during the
training phase. This point will be further explored in the proof-of-concept section.
Figure 6.3: Visualization of Input Space Domain Adaptation using perceptual loss for the
6x6 lattice. The upper row shows the shadowgram fed into the learned network, and the
lower row shows the transformed projection pattern.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 6.4: Visualization of Input Space Domain Adaptation using perceptual loss for the
egg. The upper row shows the shadowgram fed into the learned network, and the lower
row shows the transformed projection pattern.
The optimization process under the CMA-ES method, as illustrated by A.1 and A.2 in
Appendix, manifests successful convergence over multiple generations. Additionally, the
perceptual error observed for the lattice is notably larger than that of the egg, which is
corroborated by visual inspection of the differences between the optimized shadowgram
and the reference observed shadowgram. This reveals a less satisfactory similarity for
the lattice when compared to the observation. Such evidence implies certain limitations
inherent to the simulator. In future works, one of our aims would be to adopt a more
precise simulator to address these limitations.
To further evaluate the quality of our modified projection pattern, we introduced the David
head which has a highly complex geometry to the simulator. It’s important to note that our
training dataset did not contain any human-related geometry. We compared the results
with the models printed using projection patterns generated by the iterative projection
optimization method. As seen in Figure 6.5, while the model produced by our method is
not as refined as the one created using the iterative method, it’s still comparable. Although
our model has less sharp features (evident when comparing the hair of both models),
some notable features such as the nose and lips are recognizable. Considering the novel
nature of this project and the limited dataset used, achieving comparable results is quite
promising.
38
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.5: Real-world printing results. A: The printed geometry using projection patterns
generated by the iterative projection optimization method. B: The printed geometry using
the projection pattern generated by our proposed approach.
Our results so far demonstrate generalization ability and comparable performance, but to
better validate the efficacy of our learning-based feedback loop based on shadowgraphy,
we conducted further experiments.
6.2
Proof of Concept
This section showcases a proof of concept for our proposed approach. Here, we continue
to address the mapping of shadowgram to projection pattern with the objective of inferring
improved projection patterns associated with superior shadowgrams. We follow the same
method delineated in Sec. 5.2, but conduct the experiment on a fully simulated dataset.
Consequently, we do not encounter issues related to image misalignment or domain gap.
To validate that our generator G effectively learned the transformation from a higher level
of smoothness to a lower one, we input the shadowgram Sk from level k into the network.
The output, denoted as G(Sk), represents the projection pattern that the network has
mapped from the shadowgram. Subsequently, we measure the discrepancy between
G(Sk) and the projection patterns Pk and Pk−1 respectively. If the Mean Squared Er-
ror (MSE) between G(Sk) and Pk−1 is less than the MSE between G(Sk) and Pk (i.e.,
MSE(G(Sk), Pk−1) < MSE(G(Sk), Pk)), it implies that the network has indeed acquired
the transformation from a higher level of smoothness to a lower one.
For the purpose of validation, we establish two sets of data: ’Known Data’ and ’Unknown
Data’. ’Known Data’ comprise 50 models used during the training process, while ’Un-
known Data’ consist of models entirely excluded from the training phase. It’s important to
note that only the Level 2 Shadowgram S2 and Level 1 Projection Pattern P1 were utilized
during training.
The validation was conducted on both ’Known’ and ’Unknown’ data sets. The result-
ing MSEs are displayed in Table.6.5. The training data (Known Data) reveal a smaller
MSE(G(S2), P1), as expected, since this data was used to train the mapping. The ob-
servation that MSE(G(S2), P1) < MSE(G(S2), P2) confirms that the training set indeed
learned the mapping from a higher level of smoothness to a lower one.
For data not used in training but with models seen during training, evaluation errors are
smaller than those of unknown data, indicating that the model performs better with fa-
miliar models.
For both Known and Unknown data, we find that MSE(G(S1), P0) <
MSE(G(S1), P1), implying that the predicted projection pattern from the Level 1 shad-
owgram aligns closer to the Level 0 projection pattern, rather than the Level 1 projection
pattern. This supports our claim that our learned mapping can enhance sharpness.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
39
==PAGE:48==
Table 6.5: Evaluation results of different pairs. Each pair maps the shadowgram to the
projection pattern, with the level indicating the level of smoothness. Level 0 denotes non-
smoothed geometry, Level 2 signifies smoothed geometry, and Level 3 refers to extra-
smoothed geometry. The known data denote the dataset known for the training process
while unknown data were completely untouched and excluded from the training phase.
MSE (↓)
MSE(G(S2), P1)
MSE(G(S2), P2)
MSE(G(S1), P0)
MSE(G(S1), P1)
Known Data
0.00440
0.00464
0.00496
0.00518
Unknown Data
0.01583
0.01319
0.00841
0.00100
However, it’s interesting to note that for Unknown data, we find that MSE(G(S2), P1) >
MSE(G(S2), P2), suggesting the predicted pattern aligns more with the same level of pro-
jection pattern. This could be attributed to the loss of too much information due to the
substantial smoothness when using Blender, which prevents the generation of higher-
level sharpness results. This aligns with our rationale for using the final stage of printing
when the IoR is nearly constant. Utilizing the early stages of printing may present difficul-
ties in mapping due to the shadowgram’s lack of information.
Our training and testing processes are visually illustrated in Fig.6.6 and Fig.6.7. The
trajectory of the curves underscores that the model has indeed mastered the mapping
task. These results align well with the observations derived from our tabled data.
Figure 6.6: Visualization of the MSE evaluation across different epochs for the known
dataset.The red dot denotes the best model.
40
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.7: Visualization of the MSE evaluation across different epochs for the unknown
dataset. The red dot denotes the best model.
The similar error trends across epochs indicate a consistent learning of the mapping func-
tion by the model. Notably, the green line representing MSE(G(S1), P0) for the unknown
dataset demonstrates the lowest error among all, suggesting the robustness of our pro-
posed method when presented with a well-aligned dataset of significant size and without
domain disparities.
With respect to the unknown data, it is worth noting that each successive epoch sees an
enhancement in the model’s performance. This highlights the model’s capacity for further
convergence towards better outcomes. Nonetheless, the present level of performance is
convincingly sufficient for validating the concept.
To further validate that our mapping sharpens the edges of the shadowgram, we visu-
alized the simulated smoothed and extra-smoothed projection patterns, along with their
difference map for an unknown data (Fig. 6.8). From the difference map, it is evident that
the smoothed projection pattern features sharper edges compared to the extra-smoothed
projection pattern.
Figure 6.8: Visualization of Smoothed projection pattern, Extra-smoothed projection pat-
tern, and the difference map. This example utilizes Unknown Data.
Subsequently, we depicted the predicted projection pattern using extra-smoothed shad-
owgram, the extra-smoothed projection pattern, and their difference (Fig. 6.9). This vi-
sualization confirmed that the projection pattern generated by our method has sharper
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
41
==PAGE:50==
edges, especially observable on the horse’s legs, tails, aligning with the difference results
above.
Figure 6.9: Visualization of predicted projection pattern using Extra-smoothed Shadow-
gram, extra-smoothed projection pattern, and the difference map. This example utilizes
Unknown Data.
Let’s now turn our attention to the visualization of the known data depicted in Fig.6.10.
The difference map demonstrates smaller values in comparison to the unknown data, as
displayed in Fig.6.9. This suggests that the known data, despite not being directly involved
in the training process, fits the learned mapping more effectively.
Figure 6.10: Visualization of predicted projection pattern using Smoothed Shadowgram,
none-smoothed projection pattern, and the difference map. This example utilizes Known
Data.
Finally, to gauge the model’s performance and its generalizability, we assess the Mean
Squared Error (MSE) across a full rotation of a single object, both for a model that was a
part of the training set (known data), and one that was not (unknown data). This assess-
ment comprises the analysis of numerous images captured across a 360-degree rotation.
The objective is to predict the level of sharpness across the rotation, thus offering insights
into whether our method could be potentially prone to overfitting on specific objects, and
how well it generalizes to unseen objects when it comes to processing full rotation videos
necessary for a print.
As shown in Fig.6.11, the deviation in the error curves is small for both known and un-
42
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:51==
known samples across the 360-degree rotation. This suggests that our method holds
promise in its ability to generalize to unseen objects and not just overfit to specific ones
seen during training.
Furthermore, an interesting observation can be made regarding the ”symmetry” of the
error curves with respect to the midpoint of the figure. This symmetry arises due to the
rotation of the model beyond 180 degrees, which effectively results in a almost flipped
version of the shadowgram. Thus, the analysis of the error pattern across the rotation
cycle highlights not only the robustness of our approach, but also underscores the inher-
ent symmetrical properties of the 3D model rotation and its corresponding shadowgram
representation.
Figure 6.11: Visualization of the MSE error for an unknown sample and a known sample
across a 360-degree rotation.
In conclusion, our proof of concept effectively demonstrates the model’s capability to learn
mappings across differing levels of smoothness. This finding substantiates the theoretical
soundness of our proposed method and illustrates its potential in practical applications.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:53==
7
Conclusions
In this study, we proposed a novel learning-based approach to tackle the challenging
task of optimizing projection patterns in volumetric 3D printing. We leveraged the power
of deep learning and shadowgraphy to map the shadowgram to the desired projection
pattern, thus streamlining the complex and time-consuming process.
Our method’s fundamental strength lies in its data-driven nature and the consideration of
the physical printing process. We integrated these elements into a novel feedback loop
based on shadowgraphy, which can capture the physical transformation process during
printing and harness this information to optimize the projection patterns.
Through extensive quantitative and qualitative analyses, we demonstrated that our method
offers promising generalization abilities. While the results were comparable to current
state-of-the-art methods, it is important to note that our method accomplishes this with
less computational complexity and time.
Our ablation study also shed light on how the quantity of data and choice of generator
architecture significantly impact the Mean Squared Error (MSE), with ResNet providing the
best performance. Visualizations of different generator architectures further highlighted
how using ResNet, in conjunction with our proposed method, resulted in clear and realistic
projection patterns.
In real-world testing with complex geometries like the human head, our approach yielded
results that were competitive with existing methods. These results serve as strong evi-
dence of the practical potential of our method in tackling complex geometries, a critical
requirement in volumetric 3D printing applications.
Finally, our proof of concept successfully showcased that our method could learn the
mapping across different levels of smoothness. The visualizations supported this finding
by displaying sharpened edges in the generated projection patterns.
While our research has made a significant contribution, we recognize that there is room
for further exploration. Future work may include expanding the diversity and quantity of
data and investigating more advanced deep learning architectures and training strategies.
Nevertheless, we believe our approach marks an essential step towards fully automated
and optimized volumetric 3D printing.
To conclude, our proposed learning-based method, by efficiently mapping shadowgrams
to projection patterns, holds great potential in revolutionizing the process of volumetric 3D
printing. Through its excellent generalization abilities and the power to handle complex
geometries, it sets the stage for future exploration in this exciting field.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
John H Martin et al. “3D printing of high-strength aluminium alloys”. In: Nature
549.7672 (2017), pp. 365–369.
[2]
Xiaojian Wang et al. “Topological design and additive manufacturing of porous met-
als for bone scaffolds and orthopaedic implants: A review”. In: Biomaterials 83
(2016), pp. 127–141.
[3]
Aishwarya Bhargav et al. “Applications of additive manufacturing in dentistry: A re-
view”. In: Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B: Applied Biomaterials
106.5 (2018), pp. 2058–2064.
[4]
Sean V Murphy and Anthony Atala. “3D bioprinting of tissues and organs”. In: Nature
biotechnology 32.8 (2014), pp. 773–785.
[5]
Damien Loterie, Paul Delrot, and Christophe Moser. “High-resolution tomographic
volumetric additive manufacturing”. In: Nature communications 11.1 (2020), p. 852.
[6]
Brett E Kelly et al. “Volumetric additive manufacturing via tomographic reconstruc-
tion”. In: Science 363.6431 (2019), pp. 1075–1079.
[7]
Thorsten M Buzug. “Computed tomography”. In: Springer handbook of medical
technology. Springer, 2011, pp. 311–342.
[8]
Omer Demirkaya. “Reduction of noise and image artifacts in computed tomogra-
phy by nonlinear filtration of projection images”. In: Medical Imaging 2001: Image
Processing. Vol. 4322. SPIE. 2001, pp. 917–923.
[9]
Bin Wang et al. “Stiffness control in dual color tomographic volumetric 3D printing”.
In: Nature Communications 13.1 (2022), p. 367.
[10]
Bin Wang et al. “Creating negative illumination for tomographic 3D printing via binary
photoinhibition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13941 (2023).
[11]
Grégoire De Izarra and Charles De Izarra. “Quantitative shadowgraphy made easy”.
In: European journal of physics 33.6 (2012), p. 1821.
[12]
Lisa Jiaying Tan, Wei Zhu, and Kun Zhou. “Recent progress on polymer materi-
als for additive manufacturing”. In: Advanced Functional Materials 30.43 (2020),
p. 2003062.
[13]
Indrasen Bhattacharya, Joseph Toombs, and Hayden Taylor. “High fidelity volumet-
ric additive manufacturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing 47 (2021), p. 102299.
[14]
Antony Orth et al. “On-the-fly 3D metrology of volumetric additive manufacturing”.
In: Additive Manufacturing 56 (2022), p. 102869.
[15]
Ben Mildenhall et al. “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis”. In: Communications of the ACM 65.1 (2021), pp. 99–106.
[16]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[17]
Sebastian Ruder. “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04747 (2016).
[18]
William E Lorensen and Harvey E Cline. “Marching cubes: A high resolution 3D
surface construction algorithm”. In: Seminal graphics: pioneering efforts that shaped
the field. 1998, pp. 347–353.
[19]
Ziyu Wang et al. “NeReF: Neural Refractive Field for Fluid Surface Reconstruction
and Implicit Representation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04130 (2022).
[20]
Jen-I Pan et al. “Sampling Neural Radiance Fields for Refractive Objects”. In: SIG-
GRAPH Asia 2022 Technical Communications. 2022, pp. 1–4.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
47
==PAGE:56==
[21]
Mojtaba Bemana et al. “Eikonal fields for refractive novel-view synthesis”. In: ACM
SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings. 2022, pp. 1–9.
[22]
Albert Pumarola et al. “D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for dynamic scenes”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion. 2021, pp. 10318–10327.
[23]
Keunhong Park et al. “Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2021, pp. 5865–
5874.
[24]
Keunhong Park et al. “Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for topolog-
ically varying neural radiance fields”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13228 (2021).
[25]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[26]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial nets”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 27 (2014).
[27]
Phillip Isola et al. “Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks”.
In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2017.
[28]
Peter H Schönemann. “A generalized solution of the orthogonal procrustes prob-
lem”. In: Psychometrika 31.1 (1966), pp. 1–10.
[29]
Ethan Rublee et al. “ORB: An efficient alternative to SIFT or SURF”. In: 2011 Inter-
national conference on computer vision. Ieee. 2011, pp. 2564–2571.
[30]
David G Lowe. “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints”. In: Inter-
national journal of computer vision 60 (2004), pp. 91–110.
[31]
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. “Diffusion models beat gans on image syn-
thesis”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), pp. 8780–
8794.
[32]
Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database”. In: 2009 IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009, pp. 248–255.
[33]
Nikolaus Hansen, Sibylle D. Müller, and Petros Koumoutsakos. “Reducing the Time
Complexity of the Derandomized Evolution Strategy with Covariance Matrix Adap-
tation (CMA-ES)”. In: Evolutionary Computation 11.1 (2003), pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.
1162/106365603321828970.
[34]
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. “Completely Derandomized Self-Adaptation
in Evolution Strategies”. In: Evolutionary Computation 9.2 (2001), pp. 159–195.
DOI: 10.1162/106365601750190398.
[35]
N. Hansen and A. Ostermeier. “Adapting arbitrary normal mutation distributions in
evolution strategies: the covariance matrix adaptation”. In: Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Evolutionary Computation. 1996, pp. 312–317. DOI:
10.1109/ICEC.1996.542381.
[36]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation”. In: International Conference on Medi-
cal image computing and computer-assisted intervention. Springer. 2015, pp. 234–
241.
[37]
Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and rendering package. Blender
Foundation. Stichting Blender Foundation, Amsterdam, 2018. URL: http://www.
blender.org.
48
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Visualization of the objective function for 6x6 lattice data using CMA-ES.
Figure A.2: Visualization of objective function of egg data using CMA-ES.
Tomographic 3D printing with a feedback loop based on shadowgraphy
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
