==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Neural network constrained gas flow 
optimization model
Valdemar Søgaard
DTU Wind-M-0654
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0654 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Jalal Kazempour
Samuel Chevalier
Yannick Marcus Werner
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Authors:
Valdemar Søgaard
Title:
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization 
model
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the increasing penetration of renewable energy sources, the integration of gas and power
systems is becoming more prominent. However, optimizing the gas network poses challenges
due to the non-linear Weymouth equation, which relates mass flow and pressure in gas pipes.
This thesis focuses on replacing the Weymouth equation in the Optimal Gas Flow problem with
a set of mixed-integer linear constraints derived from a trained neural network, resulting in a
Neural Network constrained Optimal Gas Flow Problem (NNOGF).
We investigate the impact of different neural network architectures on the NNOGF model perfor-
mance and observe a clear correlation between network size and accuracy but with an associated
increase in computational complexity. Consistent with existing literature, we find that shallow
neural networks are needed for formulating a tractable optimization problem.
Two data simulation approaches for training data collection are evaluated. The first involves
sampling inlet and outlet pressure from a uniform distribution and calculating the mass flow,
while the second generates feasible operating points using an Interior Point solver based on locally
optimal solutions to the non-convex OGF model with varying load profiles. Additionally, we
compare the NNOGF models to the widely used Incremental Piecewise Linear Approximation.
Numerical results demonstrate that the NNOGF model trained on uniformly sampled data
performs slightly better than PLA-based models with similar complexity (number of binaries).
The neural network trained on feasible operating points exhibits the lowest error in relation to
the Weymouth equation but has the longest runtime.
Furthermore, we propose a ReLU-specific Branch-and-Bound branching rule and test it using
the CPLEX solver. While the empirical work does not show an improvement in computational
eﬀiciency, we speculate that it could still be beneficial as part of a dynamic branching rule set,
commonly utilized by commercial solvers.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors for their guidance and support
throughout this project. Their valuable advice and encouragement have been instrumental in
shaping the direction of this thesis.
I am also grateful to my friends and family for their unwavering support during this challenging
journey. Their presence and belief in me have been a constant source of strength.
Thank you all for your support and inspiration.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background and related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objectives and Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Optimal gas flow problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Neural networks as surrogate models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Branch and bound algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Incremental Piecewise Linear Approximation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Numerical Results
16
3.1
Performance of Neural Network Architecture in NNOGF . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Outcome of data generation methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Impact of big-M bound tightening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Comparison of model performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
ReLU-specific branching rule using CPLEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Discussion
25
4.1
Computational eﬀiciency of the NNOGF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Potential benefits of the ReLU-specific branching rule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Limited learning capacity of shallow neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Conclusion
29
Bibliography
30
A Neural Network constrained Optimal Gas Flow model
33
B Derivation of Weymouth equation
34
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
v
==PAGE:6==
Optimal Gas Flow Model Nomenclature
Sets
T
Set of all time periods t
N
Set of all nodes n in the gas network
P
Set of pipelines from node n to m containing pairs (n, m).
C
Set of compressors (n, m)
D
Demand nodes d, where D ⊂N
S
subset of gas well sources s, where S ⊂N
AD
n
Set of demand sites located at gas node n.
AS
n
Set of supply sites located at gas node n.
Θ
Set of decision variables.
K
Set of layers k in the neural network.
Decision variables
qw
s,t
Gas flow form supply site s in time period t [kcf/h]
qn,m,t Natural gas flow in pipeline (n, m) in period t [kcf/h]
hn,m,t Average mass (linepack) in pipeline (n, m) in period t [kcf]
pn,t
Pressure at node n in period t [MPa]
qout/out
n,m,t
Inflow/outflow natural gas rate of pipeline (n, m) in period t [kcf/h]
qcomp
Natural gas flow through compressors (n, m)C in period t [kcf/h]
qcurl
Natural gas curtailment at demand site d in period t [kcf/h]
Parameters
Γ, Γ
Minimum and maximum compression factors
P n, P n Minimum and maximum pressure at node n [MPa]
Qw
s,t, Q
w
s,t Minimum and maximum supply for each supply site s in period t [kcf]
Cw
s
Supply cost of supply site s [€/kcf]
Dn,t
Natural gas demand at node n in period t
Kn,m
Natural gas flow constant of pipeline (n, m) [kcf/(MPa h)]
Sn,m
Linepack constant of pipeline (n, m) [kcf/(MPa)]
Neural network variables
˜yk,n,m,t Vector input for each layer k in the neural network for each pipeline (n, m) and period
t. The size of the vector is equal to the number of neurons in the layer.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
vi
==PAGE:7==
yk,n,m,t Vector ouput for each layer k in the neural network for each pipeline (n, m) and period
t. The size of the vector is equal to the number of neurons in the layer.
xnk,n,m,t Negative part of ReLU output, for each layer k in the neural network for each pipeline
(n, m) and period t
xpk,n,m,t Positive part of ReLU output, for each layer k in the neural network for each pipeline
(n, m) and period t
zk,n,m,t Output (approximated mass flow) of the neural network for each pipeline (n, m) and
period t. [kcf/h]
Neural network parameters
Bk,n,m,t Vector of biases of the neural network for each layer k, for each pipeline (n, m).
W k,n,m,t Matrix of weights of the neural network for each layer k, for each pipeline (n, m).
ymax
k,n,m Vector of maximum bound for ReLU activation for each k, for each pipeline (n, m)
ymin
k,n,m,t Vector of minimum bound for ReLU activation for each k, for each pipeline (n, m)
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
vii
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The topic of neural network constrained gas flow optimization models is a relatively new research
area. This chapter aims to provide motivation for the chosen subject, followed by highlights of
other relevant research in the area before the objectives and contributions of the thesis are
presented.
1.1
Motivation
The power sector is currently undergoing a global transition towards deep decarbonization in
order to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and combat climate change.
Historically, power
systems have heavily relied on fossil fuel sources such as coal and oil. However, in recent years,
there has been a notable shift towards renewable energy sources (RES), with solar and wind
emerging as prominent contenders [1].
While this shift towards RES is commendable for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, it also
introduces challenges related to power production flexibility and uncertainty [2]. This results
in the increased complexity of modelling power systems and necessitates the incorporation of
peaking power plants, which meet the excess demand during periods when RES generation falls
short.
Peaking plants often rely on fossil-based fuels like coal or gas.
Notably, natural gas
is particularly beneficial in this context since it is possible to produce carbon-neutral synthetic
natural gas (SNG) [3]. Moreover, Power-to-Gas (PtG) solutions can be utilized, allowing natural
gas to serve as a storage medium for surplus renewable energy [4].
Consequently, there has been extensive research worldwide on optimal planning of integrated gas
and power systems in recent years [5]. This coordination involves addressing two well-known
optimization problems: the Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problem and the Optimal Gas Flow
(OGF) problem. Both of these problems entail dealing with nonlinear, non-convex constraints,
which make achieving optimality challenging [6].
While the OPF problem often employs a
simplified version of the AC power flow equation, known as the DC power flow equation [7], this
is not the case for the OGF problem. Instead, the OGF problem invokes the non-trivial task of
capturing the relationship between pressure and mass flow in pipelines using the nonlinear and
non-convex Weymouth equation.
q|q| = K2∆p2
(1.1)
Here, K is a pipeline specific constant, ∆p2 is the squared pressure difference between the inlet
and outlet of a pipe, and q is the mass flow.
Developing methods to solve the OGF problem to global optimality, especially when integrated
with power systems, can yield significant economic benefits due to the enhanced flexibility it
provides [8]. This thesis focuses specifically on addressing the OGF problem and leverages novel
methods for dealing with the challenges posed by the Weymouth equation.
1.2
Background and related work
The Weymouth equation is derived from a set of partial differential equations (PDEs) adhering
to the laws of thermodynamics.
In the literature, various levels of simplification have been
employed. Steady-state conditions have commonly been assumed, as demonstrated in [9] and
[10].
However, recent studies have highlighted the advantages of considering quasi-dynamic conditions
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
1
==PAGE:9==
that allow for linepack, resulting in increased system flexibility [11]. Linepack is a storage-like
ability of the system to accumulate gas within the pipes, for use in later time periods.
Another modelling choice that needs to be considered in the mathematical formulation is the
direction of gas flow. Recent research has shown that bidirectionality together with linepack can
yield further benefits to the system but can lead to an increase in computational time, depending
on the convexification method [12].
Regardless of whether linepack and bidirectionality are included or not, the non-convex proper-
ties of the OGF problem render it intractable to solve for global optimality. Therefore, existing
work in the field resorts to convexification techniques that transform the OGF problem into a
new formulation that can be solved using conventional methods. The predominant techniques
are convex relaxation or linear approximation of the Weymouth equation.
Convex relaxation work best when assuming unidirectional flows though, as binaries must be
added to explicitly control the flow direction in a bidirectional setting, as exemplified in [13].
Here, they apply a Mixed Integer Second Order Cone Program (MISOCP) tightened with Mc-
Cormick envelopes for a bidirectional OGF problem, where they also model linepack.
On the other hand, approximation techniques directly replace the Weymouth equation with
a set of new constraints. Two commonly used approximations of the Weymouth equation in
the literature are the Incremental Piecewise Linear Approximation (PLA) [14] and outer linear
approximations [15]. PLA breaks the Weymouth equation into a set of linear segments while
the latter uses Taylor-series expansion around fixed points that lie as tangents to the Weymouth
equation.
Both of these methods introduce binary variables to ensure convexity1 thus transforming the
OGF from a non-convex, non-linear program (NLP) into a Mixed-Integer Linear Program
(MILP). These linear approximations can implicitly deal with bidirectionality and do not need
further explicit modelling. It should be noted, that while the mathematical formulation does
not directly change, the feasible region expands, which can lead to higher computational time,
compared to unidirectional flows.
Furthermore, the recent advancement in machine learning techniques has paved the way for
novel ways to integrate them into optimization models. Neural networks, in particular, have
demonstrated significant potential and are typically utilised in two manners. Firstly, as a proxy
for the entire optimization routine, directly predicting the optimal decision set, as seen in [17] and
[18]. Alternatively, a neural network can be used directly as a set of constraints by leveraging
an exact linear reformulation of the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function, which
transforms the problem into a MILP by introducing binaries [19]. The focus of this thesis will
be on the latter.
This methodology has recently been applied in power systems, where neural networks are used as
surrogate models for the nonlinear AC power flow equations in a unit commitment problem [20].
Similarly, neural networks have been employed as surrogate models for the Weymouth equation
in OGF problems [21], and most recently, as part of a coordinated gas and power flow problem
[22]. The former study employs input convex neural networks in an emission-aware setting to
demonstrate how the neural network surrogate model aids in finding optimal solutions, although
without incorporating linepack in their formulation.
1While integrality constraints are not convex per se, they are often referred to as convex, due to the conventional
solution methods involving linear relaxation[16]
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
2
==PAGE:10==
The work presented in the latter closely relates to the research conducted in this thesis. The
authors establish the initial mathematical foundation for what we will refer to as the Neural
Network constrained Optimal Gas Flow (NNOGF) problem albeit in an integrated power and
gas setting.
They train a shallow neural network on a data set generated directly from the Weymouth equa-
tion within the operating range of the gas pipes. They compare the neural network constrained
model against a PLA-based model and a SOC relaxation. These three methods compared to
the Weymouth equation, are illustrated in Figure 1.1.
They conclude that the PLA and the neural network constrained models are comparable, and
both outperform the SOC-based convexification technique, under a unidirectional flow assump-
tion. They do also underline an increased computational burden of employing the neural network
constrained model though.
Other work that employs neural networks in power systems has focused on generating training
data from feasible solutions to the OPF problem while varying load profiles, as seen in [20] and
[23]. This approach tries to mimic actual operating data and lets the neural network focus on
learning the relevant parts of the model it tries to approximate.
To the best of our knowledge, this has not been tried in a gas system setting before, and will
be explored in this work, together with measures for increasing the computational speed of the
NNOGF.
Figure 1.1: Illustrative example of the Weymouth equation assuming bidirectional flow, with the squared
pressure difference between the inlet and outlet of a pipe on the x-axis and the mass flow on the y-axis.
The accuracy of the piecewise linear approximation scales with the fixed amount of breakpoints (blue
dots) while the accuracy of the neural network accuracy is determined by its size and training method.
The shaded area is the SOC relaxation of the Weymouth equation. The SOC relaxes the region greatly
and is often further tightened with McCormick envelopes and methods alike.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
3
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Objectives and Contribution
The primary objective of this thesis is to further investigate how neural networks can pose as
a surrogate model of the Weymouth equation in an OGF model and see how it compares to
an Incremental Piecewise Approximation method. Compared to other previous work, we will
focus on bidirectional gas flow assumptions, investigate simulation approaches for neural network
training and explore options for decreasing the computational time of the MILP.
Specifically, we pose the following research questions
1. How does the neural network architecture influence the performance of a neural network
constrained optimal gas flow model?
2. Is it possible to increase the accuracy of the neural network constrained optimal gas flow
problem by using data that simulates the feasible operating points of the pipes?
3. How do neural network constrained and piecewise linear approximation constrained optimal
gas flow models compare under bidirectionality and linepack assumptions?
4. Can a novel domain-specific Branch-and-Bound branching rule increase the computational
eﬀiciency of the neural network constrained gas flow model?
The research questions have sought to be answered through numerical case studies. The following
contributions are highlighted from the empirical work of this thesis.
1. We show that the neural network constrained optimal gas flow model has at least compa-
rable performance to PLA-based models assuming bidirectional flows and linepack.
2. A data simulation approach is formulated that leverages feasible operating data, gathered
from solutions to a non-convex optimal gas flow model under varying load. Training neural
networks using this data showed increased accuracy of the neural network constrained
optimal gas flow model compared to training on data sampled from the entire pressure
range.
3. A novel branching rule is presented, that leverages the specific structure of the neural
network activation function, although no clear indication of a performance increase could
be verified through the numerical work.
The contributions of the thesis should be seen mostly as a proof of concept and it is impor-
tant to acknowledge that much work lies ahead for this methodology to be directly applicable.
Nonetheless, our findings highlight potential future research directions.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
This chapter describes the models and general methods applied in the work of the thesis.
2.1
Optimal gas flow problem
The optimal gas flow problem seeks to minimize the cost of operating a gas network, seen from
the operator’s perspective.
The gas network connects supply sites s ∈S through pipelines (n, m) ∈P to the demand sites
d ∈D. A set of nodes n ∈N connects the pipes.Note that both S and D are subsets of N.
Certain node connections are considered compressors, and has a high associated increase in
pressure from node n to m, and are defined by a separate set of node pairs (n, m) ∈C. The
problem is operated over several time periods, defined by t ∈T .
The full mathematical model is defined in Equation 2.1. An overview and concise definition of
all decision variables, sets and parameters can further be found in the nomenclature vi.
min
Θ
X
t∈T

X
s∈S
Cw
s qw
s,t +
X
(n,m)∈C
Ccomp(pn,t + pm,t) +
X
d∈D
Ccurlqcurl
d,t


(2.1a)
subject to
Qw
s,t ≤qw
s,t ≤Q
w
s,t
∀t ∈T , s ∈S
(2.1b)
P n ≤pn,t ≤P n
∀t ∈T , n ∈N
(2.1c)
qn,m,t|qn,m,t| = K2
n,m
 p2
n,t −p2
m,t

∀t ∈T, (n, m) ∈P
(2.1d)
qn,m =
 qin
n,m,t + qout
n,m,t

2
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.1e)
hn,m,t = Sn,m(pn,t + pm,t)
2
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.1f)
hn,m,t = ht−1,n,m +
 qin
n,m,t −qout
n,m,t

∀t ∈T \{1}, (n, m) ∈P
(2.1g)
qin
n,m,t −qout
n,m,t = 0
∀t = 1, (n, m) ∈P
(2.1h)
hn,m,t ≥h1,n,m
∀t = |T |, (n, m) ∈P
(2.1i)
0 ≤qcurl
d,t
≤Dd,t,
∀t ∈T , d ∈D
(2.1j)
Γnpn,t ≤pm,t ≤pn,tΓn
∀t ∈T, (n, m) ∈C
(2.1k)
0 ≤qcomp
n,m,t
∀t ∈T, (n, m) ∈C
(2.1l)
X
s∈ASn
qw
s,t +
X
m:(n,m)∈P
 qin
n,m,t −qout
m,n,t

+
X
m:(n,m)∈C
 qcomp
n,m,t −qcomp
m,n,t

=
X
d∈AD
n

Dd,t + qcurl
d,t

∀t ∈T, n ∈N
(2.1m)
The objective function Equation 2.1a minimizes the costs Cw
s , Ccomp and Ccurl associated with
the supply variables qw
s,t, pressure variables at the compressor pn,t, pm,t
∀(n, m) ∈C and the
gas curtailment variables qcurl
d,t .
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
5
==PAGE:13==
Constraints (2.1b) enforce minimum and maximum purchase limits of gas supply qw
s,t, for each
supply site s, for every hour, while constraint (2.1c) forces the pressure pn to be within the
operating limits of the respective node n, for every hour.
The Weymouth equation is defined by constraint (2.1d), relating the average mass flow of gas
qn,m,t through the pipe (n, m), with the squared pressure difference in the pipe, from in- and
outlet. Note that bidirectionality is allowed by this formulation, as a consequence of the left-
hand side being on the form qn,m,t|qn,m,t|. This is sometimes simplified to q2
n,m,t which enforces
unidirectionality in the system.
A sketch of a pipeline segment and how the pressure influences the mass flow is shown in Fig-
ure 2.1. Constraint(2.1e) relates the average mass flow in the pipe (n, m) to the mass flow in
and out of the pipe, defined by variables qin
n,m,t and qout
n,m,t, respectively.
Figure 2.1: Vizualization of a pipeline segment, between nodes n and m. Pressure pn and pm at each
end of the pipe relates mass flow, qnm through the Weymouth equation. The direction of the mass flow
in the pipe is determined by the relative size between the pressure at the nodes.
Constraint (2.1f) defines the linepack of the pipe through a relation between pressure and a
pipeline specific linepack constant Sn,m.
Constraint (2.1g) ensures proper balancing of the linepack in the previous time period t −1,
with the current time period t. If the linepack is charged or discharged, the term containing
mass flow in and out will be either positive or negative, indicating that gas has been added or
removed from the pipe. Constraint (2.1h) and (2.1i) are the initial and final conditions of the
linepack.
These ensure that the linepack for the last hour must be greater than the initial linepack while
leaving the initial linepack for hour 1 as a variable to be determined by the model. Including
linepack in the model allows it to utilize accumulated gas from one hour to the next, providing
flexibility to the system. This property can be useful if supply exceeds demand in certain hours,
but vice versa for other hours.
The gas curtailment qcurl
d,t
is forced to be greater than 0 while also being less than the demand
by constraint (2.1j).
The pressure pm after passing through the compressor station is constrained to be within a
certain range of the pressure pn before compression, given by minimum and maximum compres-
sion factors Γn and Γn, respectively. This is defined by constraint (2.1k), while (2.1l) enforces
unidirectional mass flow through the compressors, defined by variable qC
n,m,t.
Compression is a separate thermodynamic process, and therefore, the Weymouth equation is
not strictly valid for each side of the compressor station, which is why the mass flows through
the compressor station are modelled with separate variables.
The last set of constraints is the demand balance constraints (2.1m) for each node and time
period.
The first term adds gas from the supply nodes into the system, if node n is a supply node,
formalized by the set AS
n.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
6
==PAGE:14==
The second term ensures that the in and outflow of gas for all nodes m that are connected to
node n through pipes (n, m) ∈P are balanced. If the term is positive, it means that more gas
is added to the node, than leaves the node, and vice versa.
The last term is essentially the same, but for the mass flow of compressors, while the right-hand
side is the demand at node n. If it is a demand node, it is equal to the demand parameter D
and potential curtailment qcurl
d,t
and otherwise 0.
The Weymouth constraint is non-linear and also non-convex due to the equality constraint. This
makes the problem hard to solve eﬀiciently [6], which motivates the need for the convexification
techniques mentioned previously.
For a thorough description of how constraints (2.1d)-(2.1g) can adequately describe the pipeline
dynamics as well as a derivation of the Weymouth equation from the thermodynamic partial
differential equation, see Appendix B.
The remaining methodology will now be focused on methods that can be used to replace the
Weymouth equation, and how to solve the consequent problem.
2.2
Neural networks as surrogate models
Neural networks has recently seen use as surrogate models as part of optimization models. Here,
the term surrogate refers to the ability to approximate and replace another more complex model
in a computationally tractable way. The methodology of applying this in the OGF problem is
described by Figure 2.2. The different components of the flow chart and how they link together
will be described in the coming sections.
Collect training data
Train Neural Network
Reformulate NN into
set of MILP constraints
Replace Weymouth Equation
Solve MILP
Figure 2.2: Flow chart of steps needed to derive and solve the NNOGF model
2.2.1
Neural network basics
Neural networks are a class of machine learning models that mimics the functioning of the
human brain. It is built by a collection of neurons, that are activated based on a criteria, given
by an activation function. Multiple neurons are connected by a set of layers, and the connection
between the neurons in each layer is what transforms an input into a target output. Each neuron
consists of a weight and a bias term. This permutes the input from the previous layer, which
is then passed through an activation function to determine if the node is ’activated’ or not. A
sketch of a simple fully connected neural network is visualized in Figure 2.3
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Overview of a fully connected shallow neural network. (a) shows the overall structure of
the neural networks, with its different layers and neurons, while (b) shows how the input of the neuron
is aggregated from the neurons in the previous layer and then passed through an activation function to
produce the output of the neuron.
The complete neural network can in general matrix form, be described by the following set of
equations, where bolt notation is used to indicate vectors or matrices.
˜yk+1 = W k+1yk + Bk+1
∀k ∈{0, ..., K −1}
(2.2a)
yk = g(˜yk)
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.2b)
z = W k+1yk + Bk+1
∀k = K
(2.2c)
where W k is a n × m matrix of weights, for each layer k, with n being the number of neurons in
the current layer, and m in the succeeding layer, and Bk is a vector of biases of size m. yk is the
input vector of size n to the current layer k, while ˜yk is output of the layer before activation. g(·)
is the activation function and z is the final output of the neural network. Layers k ∈1, ..., K −1
are the hidden layers, while k = 0 and k = K are the input and output layers, respectively.
The neural network needs to tune the associated weight and bias parameters, to best match the
regression task at hand. This is usually done, by solving the following optimization problem
min
W,B
1
N
N
X
i=1
L (f (ˆy0,i, W, B) , ˆzi)
(2.3)
Here, L(·) is a loss function, that compares the prediction of the neural network f (ˆy0,i, W, B),
with a target value ˆzi, from an associated data set {y0,i, ˆzi} ∈D. The task of finding the best
set of weights of biases, that minimizes the loss function error, is referred to as training. It is
common practice to divide the data set into three separate sets, training, validation and test,
which are used for training the model, validating and terminating the training, and testing the
model.
Specialized algorithms have been developed to tackle the challenging task of training neural
networks. The foundation of these algorithms is stochastic gradient descent (SGD), where the
training data is split into smaller batches and passed through the neural network. The error of
the loss function is then computed and the associated gradient is backpropagated through the
neural networks to update the weights and biases. A notable variation is the Adaptive Moment
Estimation (Adam), which has gained popularity as an extension to the SGD algorithm.
2.2.2
Linear reformulation of ReLU activation
The type of activation function used in neural networks, often depends on the task at hand.
Common activation functions are tanh, sinh, sigmoid and the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU). In
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
8
==PAGE:16==
recent years, ReLU has been seen to outperform many other activation functions and is therefore
often used by default [24].
For the purpose of reformulating the neural network into a set of MILP constraints, only the
activation function g(·) needs to be linearized.
Since activation functions are nonlinear, it
is not a trivial task for every activation function.
The ReLU function though, defined as
f(x) = max(0, x) is a piecewise linear function, and is therefore easy to linearize, using the
’Big-M’ method. Thus, it is chosen for the linear reformulation of neural networks. A few dif-
ferent reformulations can be imposed, but the formulation proposed by [22] was chosen, as they
empirically demonstrate it to be faster than other formulations. For simplicity, we use matrix
notation again.
˜ymin
k
bk ≤xnk
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.4a)
xpk ≤˜ymax
k
(1 −bk)
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.4b)
˜yk = xnk + xpk
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.4c)
yk = xpk
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.4d)
bk ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.4e)
xnk ≤0
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.4f)
0 ≤xpk
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}
(2.4g)
The reformulation of the ReLU activation function above introduces the variables xnk and xpk
that splits the variable ˜yk into either a negative or positive part, respectively, leaving the other
variable equal 0. ˜ymin
k
and ˜ymax
k
, are the big-M bounds and bk is a binary activation variable,
defined as
bk =
(
1
if ˜yk ≤0
0,
otherwise ∀k ∈{1, .., K}
(2.5)
The institution behind the reformulation is as follows (for each neuron); if the input variable ˜yk
is negative, the binary takes the value 1, which allows the variable xnk to take a value within
the range [˜ymin
k
; 0] due to constraint (2.4a) being active, while simultaneously forcing xpk = 0,
since the right-hand side of (2.4b) is now 0. Constraint (2.4d) ensures that the output after
activation, can only take positive values (or zero). If the input variable is positive, the opposite
is now true, and xpk is now allowed to take a value within the range [0; ˜ymax
k
], while xnk must
equal 0. The full NNOGF model is shown in Appendix A.
For the formulation to hold, suﬀiciently large big-M bounds must be chosen in order not to
remove any feasible solution. Choosing too large values can lead to numerical issues, though.
This will be discussed further in the next section.
2.2.3
Calculating Big-M Bounds
Appropriate bound sizes are very important when using the Big-M method since oversized
bounds will provide weaker linear relaxation, which could slow down the MILP solver. Figure 2.4
visualises the feasible ReLU region and shows how two differently sized big-M bounds impact the
relaxation, and thus the output of the function. The relaxation allows the model to make ’illegal’
combinations of the negative and positive parts when the binary variable takes a fractional value.
Ideally, the big-M bounds should therefore not be any larger, than the largest activation that
the neural network can encounter.
After the neural network is trained, the Big-M bounds can be calculated by passing the entire
data set through the neural network, and use the maximum and minimum activation as the
bounds. This should provide good guarantees on the Big-M bounds being suﬀiciently large. In
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
9
==PAGE:17==
fact, it might be that the optimal solution to the problem never utilizes the outermost pressure
ranges. If that is the case, it is possible to further lower the bound and test whether it removes
the optimal solution.
If it does, the Big-M bound is too tight.
More sophisticated bound-
tightening approaches also exist in the literature as seen in [20], where they propose a MILP
that minimizes the bounds based on the problem characteristics.
xp
xn
y
˜ymax
˜ymax,2
˜ymin
˜ymin,2
y∗
yLP
yLP,2
˜y
Figure 2.4: The feasible region of the linearized ReLU function is given by the red and green lines,
where a negative or positive ˜y input should map to 0, or its own value, respectively. The shaded area
shows the relaxed ReLU region, between Big-M bounds ˜ymin and ˜ymax, while the dotted area presents
another relaxation, with larger bounds ˜ymin,2 and ˜ymax,2. For an arbitrary positive ˜y value, the difference
in output is illustrated by the blue dots on the line segments, where ∗, LP and LP, 2 are the optimal,
and linear relaxed outputs, respectively.
2.2.4
Approximating the Weymouth equation
For use in the OGF model, the neural network is trained to approximate the Weymouth equation.
The input y0 of the neural network is the inlet and outlet pressure of a pipeline (n, m),
y0
p =

prn,t
prm,t
⊤
(2.6)
As the neural network is used to linearize the Weymouth equation, the regression task is to learn
the mass flow directly, defined by the following piece-wise function, due to the bidirectionality.
qnm =
(
Kn,m
p
p2n −p2m,
if p2
n −p2
m ≥0
−Kn,m
p
p2m −p2n,
otherwise
(2.7)
The piece-wise property stems from the absolute value function in the original Weymouth equa-
tion, which is why the square root term sign is flipped when the squared pressure difference is
negative. Further more, by dividing by the constant Kn,m on both sides, the neural network
can now learn the underlying dynamics independently of the specific pipeline characteristics,
i.e. the neural network is trained to learn qn,m/Kn,m. This allows a single neural network to
be trained that can be used for all pipes in the network, as long as they allow for the same
operating pressure range.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
10
==PAGE:18==
2.2.5
Simulation of training data
The training data should consist of the operating conditions of the pipes, i.e. inlet and outlet
pressures and corresponding mass flow, for the neural network to properly learn the pipeline
dynamics. If real operating data is not available, it is important to simulate data appropriately.
Two different approaches are presented below.
Uniformly sampled inlet and outlet pressure
Assuming the entire pipeline pressure range is utilized, the training data should also reflect the
entire range. To generate data, we propose to sample inlet and outlet pressures from a uniform
distribution, that covers the entire pressure range of the pipe. After sampling suﬀicient inlet
and outlet pressures (independently), the corresponding mass flow can be computed directly
through the Weymouth equation. The data set thus consists of inlet and outlet pressures as
input features, and mass flow as the target.
Feasible operating points from non-convex OGF
To mimic real operating data, that might not cover the entire operating range, a sampling
approach was adopted, that generates feasible operating data points for each pipeline.
These data points were generated by solving the original non-convex OGF problem multiple
times with varying load profiles (demand), using the IPOPT solver which leverages an interior
point algorithm.
This solving method can only guarantee locally optimal solutions but can
therefore be used to simulate feasible operating ranges for each pipe. Algorithm 1 shows the
pseudo-code of the data simulation.
The nominal demand load is used to define a normal distribution for each hour (based on its mean
and standard deviation), where a new demand load is drawn from. This demand is scaled by a
predetermined factor and a fixed decrease in the scaling factor is performed for each iteration.
The scaling factor and random sampling make a unique load profile for each iteration. If the
non-convex OGF can be solved with IPOPT, then the feasible operating points for all hours, for
a specific pipe are aggregated into the same set. This returns a separate data set for each pipe
in the gas network.
This data set will be referred to as Feasible Operating Points (FOP) in the following sections.
Algorithm 1 Generation of Feasible Operating Points data.
1: DN
n,t = Nominal demand for each demand node n ∈D and hour t ∈T
2: µDN
t
= mean of the nominal load across nodes for each hour t
3: σDN
t
= standard deviation of the nominal load across nodes for each hour t
4: Fp = ∅, Sets of feasible operating points for each pipe p ∈P
5: S1 = initial scaling factor
6: ∆S = Decrease in scaling factor for each iteration
7: I = number of iterations
 S
∆S

8: for i = 1, 2, . . . , I do
9:
xn,t ∼N(µDN
t
, σDN
t
)
∀t ∈T , n ∈D
10:
Di
n,t = xn,t · Si
∀t ∈T , n ∈D
11:
Solve OGF(Di) using IPOPT
12:
if solution to OGF(Di) is feasible then
13:
Update set of feasible operating points Fp ←{pn, pm, qnm}t
∀(n, m), p ∈P, t ∈T
14:
end if
15:
Si+1 = Si −∆S
16: end for
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
11
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Branch and bound algorithm
As the NNOGF model is now a MILP, it cannot use the simplex algorithm directly, which is
used for linear programs. Instead, the combinatorial space that is posed by the binary variables
needs to be searched to find an optimal solution. The most common method to deal with this
is the Branch-and-Bound(B&B) algorithm and variations of it.
It functions by solving the problem posed by relaxing the integer constraints (called the linear
programming relaxation), and then adding constraints that remove fractional integer solutions
from the problem. The initial relaxation is called the root node of the search tree. If an integer
variable is fractional in the root node solution, this needs to be removed. This is done by adding
branches to the node, where each branch gets a constrained on the form x ≤⌊¯x⌋or x ≥⌈¯x⌉,
refered to as down and up-branches. This forms two new problems, in which the variable is
forced to take a value less than or greater than the nearest integer value, respectively.
In principle, the entire branch tree should be enumerated and searched to ensure that the
optimal solution is found, but a trick called implicit enumeration can reduce the search space by
leveraging knowledge of the primal and dual bounds of the problem to prune nodes. A simple
branch and B&B tree for an arbitrary maximization problem can be seen in Figure 2.5. This
illustrates the three ways a B&B algorithm can prune nodes.
1. by infeasibility, shown by node S2, i.e. forcing a variable through a constraint does not
yield a feasible solution
2. by optimality, demonstrated by node S4, in which a feasible (primal) solution is found
that satisfy the integrality constraints of the original problem. This value now represents
the best primal bound and is called the incumbent value. This is used for the last pruning
method.
3. by bound. Node S3 takes a dual value of 6. Since this is not feasible for the original
problem, it might be possible to branch further on this variable to find a primal solution.
But, a child node can never yield a higher dual bound or primal bound than the bound of
its parent node. Therefore, we know that a potential primal solution found through this
branch will always be worse than the best incumbent value found so far, which is 7. Thus,
this node is pruned by bound.
Figure 2.5: Numbers above the node is the dual bound, while numbers below the nodes are primal
bounds. Lines indicate that a node has been pruned. Adapted from [16]
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
12
==PAGE:20==
An important aspect of making the B&B algorithm eﬀicient is the choice of variable to branch
on. In large MILP problems, there are often multiple fractional variables, and usually no clear
indication of which choice would be better. Three common rules for selecting the variable to
branch on are
1. Infeasibility branching; branch on the most (or least) fractional variable.
2. Pseudo costs; the change in objective functions between nodes for up and down branching
are recorded. When choosing which variable to branch on, the pseudo cost is computed as
the cost difference times the distance to the nearest integer, for the up and down branch.
The smallest cost is chosen to branch on.
3. Strong Branching; for each fractional variable in the current solution, the objective
value from branching down and up on each variable is computed. For each, the maximum
of the up and down branch bound is chosen, and then the variable with the smallest bound
increase is chosen.
Pseudo costs, strong branching and a mix of those are leveraged by most state-of-the-art solvers.
For a thorough review of advancements in the Branch-and-Bound algorithm, and a more tech-
nical description of the branching rules, we refer to [25] and [26].
2.3.1
ReLU-specific branching rule
When considering the neural network constraint in a MILP framework, the ReLU activation
constraints are relaxed to follow the convex hull seen in Figure 2.4. It is not straightforward
how a generic branching rule can utilize the information given by the ReLU hyperplane. We,
therefore, formulate a rule that branches on the variable that has the largest absolute distance
between ReLU variables xn and xp relative to the output.
For a set of fractional binary candidate variables C, we must choose a single variable l ∈C to
branch on. We define the largest distance to the hyperplane, relative to the output for each
variable as
dl = | −xnl + xpl + c|
yl + c
∀l ∈C
(2.8)
where xn and xp are the negative and positive parts of the ReLU input defined in Equation 2.4c,
and c is a numerically small constant added to avoid division by 0 in certain cases.
The variable with the highest associated distance d is then chosen to branch on.
l∗= arg max
l∈C
dl
(2.9)
Ties would be broken using the lowest index for simplicity, but more sophisticated methods of
breaking ties could also be adapted.
This rule is seen mostly as a competitor to the maximum infeasibility rule which will be discussed
later.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
13
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Incremental Piecewise Linear Approximation
The Incremental Piecewise Linear Approximation breaks the Weymouth equation into smaller
linear segments, subject to a fixed number of breakpoints between mass flow and pressure, Qj
and Pj, where j ∈J , is the set of breakpoints. The linearized squared mass flow and pressure,
are introduced by variables hq
n,m,t and hpr
n,m,t, respectively.
Using the mass flow breakpoints, the linearization of mass flow can be described by the following
set of equations
hq
n,m,t = Q1|Q1| +
J
X
j=1
(Qj+1|Qj+1| −Qj|Qj|) δq
n,m,t,j,
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.10a)
qn,m,t = Q1 +
J−1
X
j=1
(Qj+1 −Qj) δq
n,m,t,j,
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.10b)
0 ≤δq
n,m,t,j ≤1,
∀j ∈J , t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.10c)
φq
n,m,t,j ≤δq
n,m,t,j,
∀j ∈J , t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P,
(2.10d)
δq
n,m,t,j ≤φq
n,m,t,j−1,
∀j ∈J \{1}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P, (2.10e)
φq
n,m,t,j ∈{0, 1},
∀j ∈J , t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.10f)
Constraints 2.10b and 2.10c establish linear segments between the linear mass flow and squared
mass flow, with start and end point between two breakpoints. The variable δq
n,m,t,j takes value
between 0 and 1, to ensure that the line segment of a chosen mass flow does not extend past the
breakpoints. Furthermore, the binary variable φq
n,m,t,j controls that only a single line segment
is active at a time, thereby ensuring the convexity of the problem.
The linearization of the pressure follows the same logic and is defined by the equations below.
hpr
n,t = P1|P1| +
J
X
j=1
(Pj+1|Pj+1| −Pj|Pj|) δpr
n,t,j,
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.11a)
pn,t = P1 +
J−1
X
j=1
(Pj+1 −Pj) δpr
n,t,j,
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.11b)
0 ≤δpr
n,t,j ≤1,
∀j ∈J , t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P,
(2.11c)
φpr
n,t,j ≤δpr
n,t,j,
∀j ∈J , t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P,
(2.11d)
δpr
n,t,j ≤φpr
n,t,j−1,
∀j ∈J \{1}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P,
(2.11e)
φpr
n,t,j ∈{0, 1},
∀j ∈J , t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(2.11f)
With these new constraints, the linearized Weymouth equation can be defined as
hq
m,n,t = K2
m,n
 hpr
m,t −hpr
n,t

∀(m, n) ∈P, t ∈T
(2.12)
The accuracy scales with the number of chosen breakpoints, and also the placement of them.
With no prior knowledge of good breakpoints, equal spacing of the breakpoints is often em-
ployed. The number of binaries increases at the same rate as breakpoints, thus increasing the
computational complexity of the resulting MILP significantly as it starts growing.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
14
==PAGE:22==
2.5
Performance metrics
To validate the accuracy of the different models, we leverage two metrics that quantify the
’feasibility gap’ between the mass flow found by the model in the optimal solution, and the
theoretical mass flow calculated from pressures. The first measure is the relative error for each
pipe, defined as
∆n,m,t =
q∗2
n,m,t −K2
n,m
 pr∗2
n,t −pr∗2
m,t

K2n,m
 pr∗2
n,t −pr∗2
m,t

,
∀(n, m) ∈P, t ∈T
(2.13)
The asterisk ∗indicates the value of the optimal solution, and thus K2
n,m
 pr∗2
n,t −pr∗2
m,t

is the
theoretical mass flow calculated using the Weymouth equation.
Note that the error can take both positive and negative values. The sign of the error indicates
the direction of the mass flow.
To quantify the overall feasibility gap of the model, we employ the normalized root mean squared
error,
Feasibility Gap =


1
|T | · |P|
X
t∈T
X
(n,m)∈P
∆2
n,m,t


1
2
(2.14)
which uses the relative error for each pipe as input.
For comparing neural network performance during testing, the Mean Squared Error (MSE) is
used
MSE = 1
N
N
X
n=1
(ˆyn −yn)2
(2.15)
where N is the number of samples, ˆy is the prediction, and y is the true target.
To compare the computational performance of the models, we use the number of explored nodes
through the Branch & Bound search tree, as well as the runtime.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
15
==PAGE:23==
3
Numerical Results
This chapter presents the relevant results obtained from the numerical evaluation of the neural
network-constrained optimal gas flow (NNOGF) framework and other methods provided in the
previous chapter.
The analysis begins with a small-scale Stylized case study to investigate the impact of the neural
network architecture on the NNOGF model. Subsequently, a larger-scale case study based on the
real Belgian gas network is conducted. This study compares the impact of two data sampling
approaches and tests the simple bound tightening technique. Finally, a comparison is made
between the NNOGF models and a PLA-based OGF model, also using the Belgian case study.
The effectiveness of the ReLU-specific branching rule is furthermore evaluated on the stylized
test case.
All optimization models where implemented in Julia using the JuMP framework, while the
Neural networks where build in python, using the Pytorch, Lightning, and WandB libraries
for deep learning applications [27][28][29]. All neural networks where trained with the default
Pytorch parameters, and used a 60%/20%/20% split between training, validation and test sets,
for all data sets. The source code can be accessed in the GitHub repository found here.
To solve the NNOGF and PLA-based models, both of which are MILPs, the Gurobi solver
was used with default settings, unless specified otherwise. Gurobi has demonstrated superior
performance compared to other commercial solvers such as XPRESS and CPLEX [30]. How-
ever, for testing the ReLU-specific branching rule, CPLEX was used due to its higher level of
customization.
To ensure reproducibility and comparability, all models tested on the Belgian case study were
solved on DTU’s High-Performance Computing (HPC) servers [31]. The computations were
performed on a system equipped with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2660 v3 running at a clock
speed of 2.60GHz. For the Stylized case study, the experiments were conducted on a Lenovo
desktop computer with a Intel(R) i5-10400 CPU with a clock speed of 2.9Ghz
Stylized case study
The Stylized case study represents a simple gas network consisting of 5 nodes, 3 pipelines, and a
single compressor. It includes one supply node located before the compressor and two demand
nodes. The model is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Stylized case study illustration
Belgian case study
The Belgian case study represents the Belgian gas network, which encompasses 21 nodes, includ-
ing 6 supply nodes and 9 demand nodes. The network features 21 pipelines and two compressor
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
16
==PAGE:24==
stations. Figure 3.2 displays the topology of the gas system, with inbound arrows representing
supply nodes and outbound arrows representing demand nodes. The figure also presents the
symbols for compressors and nodes. All pipelines in the gas network operate within a pressure
range of 3-7 MPa. Some of the supply nodes correspond to storage deposits, while others receive
gas from neighbouring countries. From a modelling perspective though, there is no distinction
between gas originating from storage or import.
Figure 3.2: Topology map of the Belgian High-pressure gas network. Adapted from[32]
3.1
Performance of Neural Network Architecture in NNOGF
In this section, we examine the performance of different neural network architectures in the
NNOGF models.
A total of 7 neural networks were trained using the same data collected
through the uniform sampling method. The models were solved using the Gurobi solver with
default settings, except for the optimality tolerance, which was set to 0 (from 1 · 10−4). The
results for the 7 models are presented in Table 3.1.
The prediction error, measured by MSE, varies slightly among the models but remains low for
all architectures. The highest MSE is observed for L2N2 with a value of 9.44 · 10−3, while the
lowest MSE is obtained for L2N8 with a value of 4.1 · 10−5. This trend aligns with the fact that
L2N2 has the fewest neurons (4) and L2N8 has the highest number of neurons (16).
The runtime of the NNOGF model is seen to increase as more neurons are added, while the
feasibility gap decreases. L2N8 exhibits the longest runtime of 1137 seconds and the lowest
feasibility gap of 0.210, whereas L2N2 solves in just 1 second but has the highest feasibility gap
of 0.469. Overall, these observations align well with our expectations, although there are a few
inconsistencies. For instance, L3N5 solves as fast as L1N10 but has a slightly lower feasibility
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
17
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1:
Performance of the NNOGF models with different neural network architectures on the
Stylized case study. The models are named based on the number of hidden layers, L, and the number of
neurons in each layer, N.
Architecture
NN error [MSE]
Binaries
runtime [s]
Feasibility gap
Expected Cost [€]
L1N4
4.5 · 10−3
288
1.0
0.385
791.68
L1N10
6.45 · 10−3
720
97.9
0.279
791.68
L2N2
9.44 · 10−3
288
0.9
0.469
791.66
L2N5
8.0 · 10−4
720
23.66
0.357
791.58
L2N8
4 · 10−5
1152
1137.2
0.210
791.70
L3N3
8 · 10−4
648
38.7
0.324
791.68
L3N5
1.8 · 10−4
1080
97.7
0.237
791.71
gap, despite having 5 neurons in each layer and thus a total of 360 more binaries in the NNOGF
model.
The objective value slightly varies across architectures but remains within less than a 0.2%
difference. Interestingly, L2N8 and L3N5 achieve the lowest feasibility gap but have slightly
higher objective values. This might be attributed to a better representation of the underlying
dynamics, leading to the removal of infeasible solutions which less accurate neural networks
might allow.
Based on these results, we observe a clear trade-off between computational time and feasibility
gap, given the number of neurons. Therefore, for further work, we decide to focus on the L2N5
architecture. This choice is motivated by its utilization in a similar application by [22] and its
favourable trade-off demonstrated on the stylized case study.
3.2
Outcome of data generation methods
In this section, the two data generation approaches described in subsection 2.2.5 are applied and
compared using the Belgian case study.
First, the uniform sampling approach is applied, where 1,000,000 inlet and outlet pressures are
sampled within the operating range of all pipes in the network (3 to 7 MPa). The corresponding
mass flows are calculated using the Weymouth equation with a pipeline constant K = 1. This
allows a single neural network to be trained and used for all pipes in the network. The mass
flow density distribution resulting from the uniform sampling approach is visualized in Figure
3.3a.
The FOP data was generated by following the method described in Pseudocode 1. The non-
convex OGF model was solved using the IPOPT solver, with a time horizon of 24 hours, using the
Belgian case study. Each time the model was solved, the mass flow, inlet and outlet pressures,
were aggregated over the time horizon into separate data sets for each pipe in the network. A
total of 420840 data points were collected for each pipe, corresponding to 17,535 non-convex
OGF models being solved, each with a unique load setting. With the generated FOP data,
21 different neural networks where trained - one for each pipe using its own unique data. The
neural networks trained with FOP for a specific pipe will denoted (FOPx), where x is the pipe
number.
Figure 3.3 shows density plots of the normalized mass flow densities (q/K) for the uniform and
FOP data. Specifically, the density plots for pipe 7 and pipe 20 from the FOP data are shown.
It can be observed that the mass flow distribution differs significantly between these two pipes.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
18
==PAGE:26==
(a) Uniform sampled data
(b) FOP pipe 7 density
(c) FOP pipe 20 density
Figure 3.3: Density plots of q/K for the uniform and FOP data. Only two out of the 21 unique data
sets are showne for the FOP data.
Pipe 20 exhibits a wider q/K distribution across load settings, indicating greater variability.
Moreover, pipe 7 predominantly has negative mass flow, while pipe 20 has mostly positive mass
flow, suggesting unidirectional behaviour. The distinct mass flow characteristics of these pipes
could be attributed to their location and the surrounding network topology.
Pipe 7 is located between two demand nodes as well, Gent and Antwerpen. The negative mass
flow indicates that gas is going from Gent to Antwerpen, which makes sense, given the supply
coming from the Gent side is larger, and Antwerpen is otherwise isolated in the system, except
for a small gas storage adjacent to it. Pipe 20 is positioned after the compressor in Sinsin and is
situated before two demand nodes, Arlon and Pétange. The presence of the compressor and the
varying loads in adjacent nodes likely contribute to the significant changes in mass flow under
varying loads observed in pipe 20.
3.2.1
Neural network prediction accuracy
The neural networks used in the Belgian case study consist of 2 hidden layers with 5 neurons in
each. One neural network is trained on the uniform sampled data, while each pipe has its own
dedicated neural network trained on the FOP data. Figure 3.4 displays the predictions made by
the trained neural networks on their respective test sets. Note that the neural networks trained
on the FOP7 and FOP20 data were chosen simply for consistency with previous results.
Among the three neural networks, the one trained on the uniform sampled data demonstrates
the best performance on its own test set, with a MSE of 4.14 × 10−3. On the other hand, the
neural networks trained on the FOP data perform worse, with MSE values of 1.62 × 10−1 and
1.53 × 10−2 for pipe 7 and pipe 20, respectively. One reason for this difference could be the
smaller training data that is used to train the (FOP)NN compared to the (U)NN.
3.3
Impact of big-M bound tightening
The big-M bounds used in the NNOGF models were computed using the method described in
subsection 2.2.3 and can be seen in Table 3.2.
The numbers highlighted in red, are the three bounds with the highest absolute value for each
network. The neural network trained using the FOP7 data has the largest bound of -16.42,
while FOP20 have relatively small bounds compared to it, with its largest bound being 4.52.
The (U)NNOGF bound with the largest absolute value, is -9.74, while the second largest drops
down to 4.10.
The entries marked in yellow had a negative bound, and these needs to be set to 0, in order for
the ReLU reformulation to be feasible (due to the domain constraints of the variable xp).
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
19
==PAGE:27==
(a) (U)NN, MSE 4.14 · 10−3
(b) (FOP7)NN, MSE 1.62 · 10−1
(c) (FOP20)NN, MSE 1.53 · 10−2
Figure 3.4:
Neural network predictions using the different training data; (U) is uniform sampling,
(FOP7) and (FOP20) is FOP data for pipeline 7 and 20, respectively
Table 3.2: Big-M bounds calculated by passing the largest pressure differences
Hidden layer 1
Hidden layer 2
Model
n1
n2
n3
n4
n5
n1
n2
n3
n4
n5
ymax
1.36
2.94
0.62
4.10
0.79
-0.26
2.62
0.50
2.50
1.66
(U)NN
ymin
-0.59
-1.38
-1.06
-3.91
-1.82
-1.90
-0.88
-1.45
-2.42
-9.74
ymax
0.63
0.26
1.49
0.63
1.79
-0.32
2.46
0.54
0.57
0.44
(FOP7)NN
ymin
-1.60
-1.33
-0.04
-0.99
-0.49
-0.89
-0.90
-6.01
-9.05
-16.42
ymax
1.01
2.02
1.94
2.48
-0.24
4.52
1.44
2.91
1.17
2.70
(FOP20)NN
ymin
-3.91
-2.08
-0.23
0.00
-1.26
-0.35
-0.67
-0.43
-2.28
-0.13
The approach used to establish these bounds aims to be suﬀiciently tight without eliminating
feasible solutions. It assumes that the optimal solution of the NNOGF, in terms of pressure
and mass flow, lies within the training data used for the underlying neural networks and the
computed bounds.
Despite this assumption, there might be potential to further narrow the bounds of the NNOGF
models, thereby eliminating redundant feasible solutions. This refinement could accelerate the
convergence of the model towards the optimal solution.
To test this, the (U)NNOGF model is solved in four variations, where the largest bounds are
lowered further. The variations are noted ’Bx’ where x is the new maximum absolute value of
the bounds. Note that bounds that are smaller than this value, will not be affected, and kept
as shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.3 summarizes performance metrics of the four different variations of the (U)NNOGF
model. The B3 variations has a much higher Expected Cost, than the other variations. This
indicates that the optimal solution is cut away, due to the Big-M bound being decreased too
much.
All the other variations show a comparable Feasibility gap of around 502.60 €. They all also
find the same dual bound of 502.57 €, for which they are all within the MIP gap tolerance
of 1.0 · 10−4. This indicates that decreasing the maximum bound all the way down to 4, and
potentially a bit further, does not cut away the optimal solution.
Variation B6 explores the least amount of nodes and solves the fastest in 2.4 hours, while the
(U)NNOGF without lowered upper bound solves in 8.31 hours. This indicates that tightening
the bound suﬀiciently might increase the computational eﬀiciency of solving the NNOGF.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
20
==PAGE:28==
Thus, for further comparison, the B6 variation is used.
Table 3.3:
Results from running the (U)NNOGF model, with different maximum bounds.
Nodes
explored are the number of nodes explored during the B&B algorithm before termination. The expected
cost is the objective value of the optimal solution found.
Model
Nodes Explored
runtime [h]
Feasibility gap
Expected Cost [€]
(U)NNOGF B3
107571
31.57
0.451
3059.560
(U)NNOGF B4
12574
3.93
0.583
502.611
(U)NNOGF B6
3054
2.40
0.457
502.605
(U)NNOGF
18447
8.31
0.459
502.598
3.4
Comparison of model performance
In this section, we compare the (U)NNOGF B6 and (FOP)NNOGF models, with three PLA-
based models, that use different numbers of breakpoints (BPx). The breakpoints are chosen with
equal spacing of the pressure and mass flow range, and modelled in accordance with section 2.4.
All models are solved using the Gurobi solver with default settings.
The results are shown in Table 3.4. All models have comparable objective values, and all find
the same dual bound during optimization, indicating they are finding a comparable optimal
solution in terms of objective value.
Table 3.4: Benchmak characteristics of the PLA and NN constrained models. Binaries are the total
number of binaries in the MILP, Nodes Explored are the number of nodes explored in the B&B algorithm.
Model
Binaries
Nodes Explored
runtime [h]
Feasibility gap
Expected Cost [€]
PLA (BP4)
2952
19189
1.6
0.583
502.620
PLA (BP6)
4920
25811
3.9
0.544
502.609
PLA (BP10)
8856
38707
13.9
0.403
502.610
(U)NNOGF B6
5040
3054
2.4
0.457
502.605
(FOP)NNOGF
5040
330278
46.5
0.282
502.597
For the PLA-bases models, the number of breakpoints increases the number of binaries, which
significantly increases the runtime of the different models. Together with the increased runtime,
we also observe a large decrease in the feasibility gap as the breakpoints increase. This behaviour
is expected since more breakpoints in the PLA, should approximate the Weymouth equation
more accurately.
Comparing the PLA-based models to the (U)NNOGF B6 model, we see, that the PLA (BP10)
model has the lowest feasibility gap of 0.403, but a runtime of almost 14 hours, while the
(U)NNOGF model has a slightly higher feasibility gap of 0.457, but solves almost 6 times faster.
Furthermore, the PLA (BP6) model, which has a comparable number of binaries, takes twice
the time to solve and also has a higher feasibility gap.
Lastly, comparing (U)NNOGF with the (FOP)NNOGF model, the latter shows a much lower
feasibility gap of 0.282, but has a runtime of 46.5 hours, which is almost 20 times slower than
the (U)NNOGF model. This indicates that the FOP data allows the neural networks to learn
important parts of the pipes operating ranges more accurately, but the increased accuracy might
be slowing down the solution process.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
21
==PAGE:29==
(a) PLA 6 break points
(b) PLA 10 break points
(c) (U)NNOGF B6
(d) (FOP)NNOGF
Figure 3.5: Relative error of the squared mass flow with respect to the Weymouth equation, for each pipe
and hour. Warm colors indicate a positive flow direction, while cold indicate a negative flow direction.
Some of the relative error increases 100%, but it was capped for better clarity.
While the results presented above focused on the overall feasibility gap across all pipes and hours,
Figure 3.5 shows the relative error with respect to the Weymouth equation for each hour and
pipe. The relative error can be seen to decrease for the PLA-based model as more breakpoints
are used. Comparing PLA (B10) with (U)NNOGF), which have comparable average feasibility
gap, it seems that the PLA-based model generally has a more consistent relative error of around
20-30%, while (U)NNOGF has more instances with low relative error, but also some with very
high relative error.
(FOP)NNOGF also has the lowest relative error, compared to the other model, which aligns well
with its overall low feasibility gap. Comparing (U)NNOGF and (FOP)NNOGF more thoroughly,
it can be seen that pipe 20 has a very low relative error for both models, while the error of pipe
1 is quite high in (U)NNOGF, but low in the (FOP)NNOGF model.
Figure 3.6 shows the mass flow and pressure from the optimal solutions to the PLA-based models
and the NNOGF models, compared to the true values of the Weymouth equation. The linear
behaviour of the PLA-based model can be seen in both plots (subject to some inconsistency due
to rounding errors). The (U)NNOGF does not capture the dynamics of pipe 1 very well, and
neither for the PLA-based models. (FOP)NNOGF on the other hand grasps the dynamics of
the Weymouth equation much better. All models have fairly high accuracy in pipe 20, but this
operating range is showing almost linear behaviour, which might be why it is easier to capture
for all models.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
22
==PAGE:30==
(a) Pipe 7
(b) pipe 20
Figure 3.6: Mass flow plotted against the squared pressure difference of the Weymouth equation and
the optimal decision variables from the different models.
Examining the training data used for the neural networks, we observe that the FOP training
data closely aligns with the mass flow from the optimal solution for both pipes. This relationship
is illustrated in Figure 3.7.
In the case of the uniformly sampled data, we note that the optimal mass flow falls within a
narrow range of the training data, with only 2% of the data falling within this interval.
For pipe 20 on the other hand, the mass flow now lies within a range of the data that makes up
almost 20% of the training data. This could explain why the (U)NNOGF model has such a high
error when calculating mass flow for pipe 1, while it almost has no error for pipe 20. The same
logic applies to the (FOP)NNOGF model. Since it uses separate neural networks for each pipe,
with training data that matches the optimal solution much better, the (FOP)NNOGF model is
able to calculate the mass flow much more accurately.
Figure 3.7:
The mass flow distributions of the optimal solutions from the (U)NNOGF and
(FOP)NNOGF models are compared to the mass flow distribution of the respective dataset. Data for
pipe 1 and pipe 20 are shown.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
23
==PAGE:31==
3.5
ReLU-specific branching rule using CPLEX
The branching rule presented in 2.3.1, was implemented in Julia using the CPLEX.jl package
and CPLEX solver. The default settings of the solver were used, except for setting the MIP gap
to 0 to ensure consistent solutions. The branching rule was initially tested on the Stylized case
study, and the results are presented in Table 3.5
Table 3.5: Comparison of the NNOGF model using the Gurobi solver and the CPLEX solver, with and
without ReLU-specific branching strategy
Model
Nodes Explored
runtime [s]
Feasibility gap
Expected cost[€]
NNOGF(GRB)
677
23.67
0.358
791.578
NNOGF(CPX)
6624
45.10
0.358
791.578
NNOGF(CPX) + CB1
12348
198.13
0.358
791.578
1 ReLU-specific branching
The results indicate that the ReLU-specific branching strategy does not perform better than the
default CPLEX settings. The number of nodes explored in the B&B tree increases, as well as
the runtime. It is worth mentioning that CPLEX was also tested on the Belgian case study -
with and without ReLU-specific branching - but neither were able to find a solution within the
wall time of 72 hours.
The implication of these observations will be discussed further in the next chapter.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
24
==PAGE:32==
4
Discussion
This chapter will highlight and discuss some of the most interesting observations from the
numerical results. This includes MILP solution behaviour, the ReLU-specific branching rule,
and potential future research directions.
4.1
Computational eﬀiciency of the NNOGF
4.1.1
MILP convergence rate and impact of heuristics
The NNOGF models that were solved as part of the numerical results were found to converge
very slowly towards the optimal solution. More specifically, the root relaxation, which serves
as the initial lower bound to the problem, never increased doing the B&B algorithm, while it
took the majority of the runtime to come up with an initial feasible solution, and thus upper
bound to the problem. This is visualized by Figure 4.1 showing the solution progress of the
(U)NNOGF B6 model. After finding the first incumbent value, the models converge relatively
fast, spending around 20% of the runtime from this point on.
Figure 4.1: Solution progress of the (U)NNOGF b6 model. The lower bound never changes, and an
initial upper bound (feasible solution) is found after 80% of the total runtime.
This phenomenon is not uncommon for large MILP models, and runtime can sometimes benefit
significantly if a feasible solution can be fed to the B&B algorithm as an initial starting point
[33]. This has do to with the pruning of the B&B search tree. If an incumbent value is found
early on, the tree can prune branches by bound much faster.
The most common way to find initial feasible solutions is through heuristics. While commercial
solvers also use heuristics to search for initial feasible solutions, they are sometimes too general
and can have issues with certain models. Therefore, formulating a greedy heuristic for finding an
initial feasible solution, could potentially lower the runtime of the MILP formed by the NNOGF
problem.
A simple heuristic for the OGF problem could be to use all available supply for each hour and
flow as much gas through the pipes as possible. The surplus would necessarily be curtailed,
resulting in a, most likely, horrible but feasible solution. How to fix the ReLU binaries based on
this might not be straightforward either, but we leave this question open for future work.
4.1.2
Sensitivity to the Branch-and-Bound solution path
The initial testing of the NNOGF models where conducted on different CPU types on the
HPC server, unintentionally. This resulted in significantly different runtimes, even for identical
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
25
==PAGE:33==
models. Checking the Gurobi logs revealed that a different solution path was chosen through
the B&B tree which increased the runtime as more nodes were explored.
After fixing the CPU type, the models now gave consistent results, but to check the impact
of the solution path on the runtime, the (U)NNOGF and PLA-based models were solved with
different random seed values in the Gurobi solver. The seed changes how certain random choices
are determined through the B&B tree, such as ties between the variable to branch on.
The new solution paths that were found significantly changed the number of nodes explored and
thus the runtime. Both PLA-based models and NNOGF models showed the same behaviour.
This is a known issue for certain MILP problems [34], and therefore, for a more trustworthy
comparison of the computational performance of the models, multiple runs using different seeds
could be considered.
Thus, it is important not to draw general conclusions on the computational performance between
the NNOGF and the PLA-based model, but rather focus on the fact that they seem comparable
in our numerical work.
4.1.3
hyperparameter tuning of the Neural Networks
The neural network training showed quite inconsistent results when using random initialization
of the weights, but otherwise consistent inputs and training/validation/test split. While it is a
known phenomenon for deep neural networks that different initialization can lead to different
local minima [24], it can also be a symptom of suboptimal hyperparameter tuning.
Especially for smaller-sized neural networks, our expectation would be to get more consistent
results. Inconsistent training is not always an issue though. In fact, ensemble modelling uses
this exact property by aggregating multiple trained neural networks and uses the average output
as the final output [35].
However, ensemble modelling is not relevant to our case, and the inconsistent neural networks
turned out to have large impacts on the NNOGF. Certain instances of trained neural networks
would find a solution rather quickly, while others would not find a solution within the wall time
of 72 hours. Looking deeper into hyperparameter tuning of the neural network such as learning
rate and batch size might help combat this.
4.2
Potential benefits of the ReLU-specific branching rule
In the numerical test conducted on the stylized case study, it was observed that the ReLU-
specific branching rule did not aid the computational eﬀiciency of the CPLEX solver. Several
factors could be attributed to this observation.
Although the rule is relatively simple compared to more sophisticated approaches like pseudo
cost and strong branching, there may still be situations where it can prove beneficial as part of a
dynamic rule set. Pseudo cost requires historical records from previous branches to be effective,
which can be a challenge in the initial phase of the branch and bound algorithm. Commercial
solvers often utilize strong branching to circumvent this limitation, but it can be computationally
expensive, especially when dealing with a large number of fractional variable bounds to search
for.
In case of the NNOGF, the number of binary variables can be very high. If the root relaxation
contains a substantial number of fractional binary variables, employing strong branching to
examine all of them may not be feasible. In such scenarios, two possible approaches could be
considered. One option is to randomly select a subset of variables for strong branching, while
the other option is to use simpler rules such as maximum infeasibility. Both of these alternatives
introduce a degree of randomness in the branching choices - which could explain the observed
sensitivity to the solution path discussed in the previous section.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
26
==PAGE:34==
It should be mentioned that most commercial solvers have specialized branching strategies that
they cannot disclose, and they might have other techniques to combat scenarios like this.
Furthermore, the objective function is only impacted by the mass flow and pressure relation
(and thus the binaries) through the purchase of gas from supply nodes, the compressor cost and
the curtailment cost, yielding a very loose relation to the binaries.
Consider the following example. In an arbitrary NNOGF model, let us assume the inlet pressure
of a random pipe is pn = 2, and the outlet pressure is pm = 1. Assuming K = 1 the mass flow
should be q =
√
22 −12 = 3. Now, suppose the relaxed neural network has a fractional binary.
The mass flow is then incorrectly mapped to 2.5 after passing through the neural network.
Fixing the binary in the child node now adjusts the mass flow to 2.8, but what impact does that
directly have on the objective function?
Due to the inclusion of linepack, the model could simply increase the linepack for that particular
pipe and time period, which would not change the objective function at all (given there is some
slack left in the pipe). In some cases though, this change in mass flow might trigger a chain
reaction, forcing variables with associated costs (such as pipes leading up to a compressor) to
change.
This example illustrates that the binaries in the NNOGF model, in certain cases, provide limited
information to the branching rules that rely on changes in the objective function to select the
next variable to branch on. If many binaries yield a reduced cost of 0, the model would only
have slightly better insight into making a choice than with a random selection.
While pseudocost and strong branching might still be beneficial overall, we theorize that the
ReLU-specific branching rule could outperform the Infeasibility branching at the very least.
In Table 4.1 three examples of fractional binaries are shown for the initial relaxation of the
(U)NNOGF b6 model tested on the Belgian test case. Here, we observe that in certain cases,
the ReLU condition is actually satisfied, yet the binary remains fractional (E1). If the maximum
infeasibility rule is used, it would select this binary for further branching, providing no value
to the solution. On the other hand, the ReLU-specific branching rule would choose E2, which
might provide better branching since the ReLU is violated.
Therefore, incorporating the ReLU-specific branching strategy in a dynamic setting might still
yield some benefits. To systematically test this, a B&B algorithm would have to be built from
scratch which was beyond the scope of this thesis, and we also leave this up for future research.
Table 4.1:
Three examples of fractional binaries from the solution to the initial relaxation of the
(U)NNOGF model tested on the Belgian case study. d is the relative distance to the hyperplane used in
the ReLU-specific Branching rule
Example
b
˜y
y
xn
xp
d
E1
0.511
0.507
0.507
0
0.507
1
E2
0.962
-0.34
0.08
-0.428
0.08
6.34
E3
0.625
0.192
0.785
-0.594
0.785
1.76
4.3
Limited learning capacity of shallow neural networks
The two data generation approaches showed significantly different feasibility gaps in the solutions
to the NNOGF model. This emphasises that the shallow neural network architecture has a
limited learning capacity and benefits from having a smaller operating range to learn.
Furthermore, due to the distribution of the uniformly sampled data, with mass flow centred
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
27
==PAGE:35==
around the negative and positive means, we also saw that the (U)NNOGF model accuracy was
biased toward this area. If a sample data simulation is chosen, it would be beneficial to smoothen
out the distribution to avoid this behaviour. This might lead to a generally higher error for all
pipes, but limit the largest errors seen, which hopefully would yield a lower overall error.
While the (FOP)NNOGF showed high accuracy, some precautions should be taken. Since the
data is trained on simulated feasible operating points, and not the entire operating range, it
limits the neural network to learn certain areas of the feasible region. To test the generalization
of the FOP data, it could be interesting to conduct a sensitivity analysis of the Belgian case
study, altering parameters such as load, cost and supply, to see how that affects the solution to
the (FOP)NNOGF model.
4.3.1
Historical data vs simulated data
The FOP data was created to more accurately mimic historical data, compared to a simple
data sampling of the entire range. It could be interesting to see if the good performance of the
FOP data transfers to historical training data as well. Another benefit of real data could be
more accurate behaviour than the analytical Weymouth equation, due to simplification taken.
This could yield a more accurate relation between pressure and gas than an analytically feasible
solution might do, as it takes actual operating conditions into account.
One caveat of training on a subset of the operating range, is that global optimality might not be
possible to achieve. If the optimal pressure range is not included in the FOP data, or historical,
it would not be possible to find it.
In general, though, the simplification needed to model real-life systems often necessitates some
permutations to the analytically optimal solution, which afterwards might not be the true glob-
ally optimal solution of the real system. Thus, with this in mind, we do not dwell further on
this topic.
4.3.2
Data driven Incremental Piecewise Linear Approximation
While the focus of the FOP data was to benefit the neural network accuracy, it could also
benefit the PLA-based model. Instead of making breakpoints with an equally sized spacing of
the entire operating range of mass flow and pressure, the approximation could target a certain
range indicated by the FOP data for a given pipe, or from historical data.
This could potentially make the PLA-based models more accurate, while also limiting the num-
ber of breakpoints needed, making it even faster. The benefit of this over a black box model
such as neural networks, is that it is more transparent, making it easier to quantify and control
the error.
In fact, if the spacing of the breakpoints is posed as an optimization task, the goal could be
to minimize the number of breakpoints used, while keeping the error less than a predefined
threshold.
This could give complete control of the accuracy of the approximation and give
better performance guarantees when used as a surrogate in an OGF model. This could be posed
either as a learning task, in a supervised learning setting or as a more traditional MILP problem.
We believe this could be a quite promising topic for further investigation, and leave it up for
future work as well.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
28
==PAGE:36==
5
Conclusion
The neural network-constrained optimal gas flow model was successfully formulated as a math-
ematical program and further implemented in a programming language, leveraging state-of-the-
art commercial solvers to solve the problem to optimality.
The neural networks that were trained as part of the NNOGF model were based on a shallow
architecture in order to establish a computationally tractable optimization model.
Multiple
architectures were tested and it was shown to have a large impact on the feasibility gap, and
the runtime of the associated NNOGF model. The architecture that showed the best trade-off
between computational speed and accuracy, when applied to the stylized case study, used 2
hidden layers, with 5 neurons in each. This architecture was thus applied to the larger test case.
Two data sampling methods were tested for training neural networks for the NNOGF model.
Uniform sampling of pressures, and simulation of Feasible Operating Points (FOP) by solving
the non-convex OGF problem with varying load profiles using the IPOPT solver.
It was found that tightening the Big-M bounds used for the linearization of the ReLU activations
could benefit the computational speed of the (U)NNOGF model. A decrease in runtime from
14 to 2.4 hours was found by limiting the maximum Big-M bound to 6 from 9.17.
The NNOGF model was compared with another popular approximation technique, the Incremen-
tal piecewise linear approximation. It was shown that the (U)NNOGF B6 model outperformed
the PLA (BP6) model, which has similar model complexity. Concretely the (U)NNOGF B6
model had a 9% decrease in the feasibility gap and solved 40% faster than the PLA (BP6)
model.
Furthermore, the (FOP)NNOGF was shown to outperform the (U)NNOGF B6 model as well
as the PLA-based models in terms of accuracy but also had the highest runtime, almost 20x
slower than the (U)NNOGF B6 model.
Efforts of bound tightening were not tried for the
(FOP)NNOGF but it might yield some benefits to the computational speed. From this, we con-
clude that the data used for training the neural network is very important for the performance
of the NNOGF model
Lastly, a novel branch and bound strategy, which branches on the binary whose associated
ReLU has the highest absolute distance to the true ReLU hyperplane, was implemented in
CPLEX. It did not show increased computational performance in the numerical results, but it
is hypothesized that it could still be beneficial within a set of dynamic branching rules, which
many modern solvers use.
Based on this work of the thesis, three potential future research directions are highlighted:
1. Improving computational eﬀiciency of the NNOGF model by developing problem-specific
heuristics for obtaining initial feasible solutions.
2. Investigating the ReLU-specific branching rule as part of a set of dynamic branching rules.
This would most likely necessitate building a separate branch and bound algorithm.
3. Explore the potential of data-driven Piecewise Linear Approximation (PLA) models as
an alternative to the neural network constrained approach, considering their potential for
improved accuracy and computational eﬀiciency.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
29
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
[1]
International Energy Agency. Electricity Market Report. OECD, Dec. 16, 2020.
[2]
Juan M. Morales et al. Integrating Renewables in Electricity Markets: Operational Prob-
lems. Vol. 205. International Series in Operations Research & Management Science. Boston,
MA: Springer US, 2014.
[3]
Andre Bolt, Ibrahim Dincer, and Martin Agelin-Chaab. “A critical review of synthetic
natural gas production techniques and technologies”. In: Journal of Natural Gas Science
and Engineering 84 (Dec. 1, 2020), p. 103670.
[4]
Manuel Götz et al. “Renewable Power-to-Gas: A technological and economic review”. In:
Renewable Energy 85 (Jan. 1, 2016), pp. 1371–1390.
[5]
Lun Yang, Xia Zhao, and Yinliang Xu. “A convex optimization and iterative solution based
method for optimal power-gas flow considering power and gas losses”. In: International
Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 121 (Oct. 1, 2020), p. 106023.
[6]
Stephen P. Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge, UK ; New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 716 pp.
[7]
K. Purchala et al. “Usefulness of DC power flow for active power flow analysis”. In: IEEE
Power Engineering Society General Meeting, 2005. IEEE Power Engineering Society Gen-
eral Meeting, 2005. ISSN: 1932-5517. June 2005, 454–459 Vol. 1.
[8]
Hossein Ameli. Frontiers | Coordinated Operation of Gas and Electricity Systems for Flex-
ibility Study. 2020. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fenrg.2020.00120/full
(visited on 06/23/2023).
[9]
Qing Zeng et al. “Steady-state analysis of the integrated natural gas and electric power
system with bi-directional energy conversion”. In: Applied Energy 184 (Dec. 15, 2016),
pp. 1483–1492.
[10]
Geunyeong Byeon and Pascal Van Hentenryck. “Unit Commitment With Gas Network
Awareness”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 35.2 (Mar. 2020). Conference Name:
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, pp. 1327–1339.
[11]
Enrica Raheli et al. “Optimal coordinated operation of integrated natural gas and electric
power systems: A review of modeling and solution methods”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 145 (July 1, 2021), p. 111134.
[12]
Junesoo Shin, Yannick Werner, and Jalal Kazempour. “Modeling gas flow directions as
state variables: Does it provide more flexibility to power systems?” In: Electric Power
Systems Research 212 (Nov. 1, 2022), p. 108502.
[13]
Anna Schwele et al. “Coordination of Power and Natural Gas Systems: Convexification
Approaches for Linepack Modeling”. In: 2019 IEEE Milan PowerTech. 2019 IEEE Milan
PowerTech. June 2019, pp. 1–6.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
30
==PAGE:38==
[14]
Carlos M. Correa-Posada and Pedro Sanchez-Martan. Gas Network Optimization: A com-
parison of Piecewise Linear Models – Optimization Online. Oct. 4, 2014. url: https :
//optimization-online.org/2014/10/4580/ (visited on 02/11/2023).
[15]
Christos Ordoudis, Pierre Pinson, and Juan M. Morales. “An Integrated Market for Elec-
tricity and Natural Gas Systems with Stochastic Power Producers”. In: European Journal
of Operational Research 272.2 (Jan. 2019), pp. 642–654.
[16]
Laurence A Wolsey. Integer programming. John Wiley & Sons, 2020.
[17]
Mostafa Mohammadian et al. “Learning Solutions for Intertemporal Power Systems Op-
timization with Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: 2022 17th International Conference on
Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems (PMAPS). 2022 17th International Con-
ference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems (PMAPS). Manchester, United
Kingdom: IEEE, June 12, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[18]
Raphaël Canyasse, Gal Dalal, and Shie Mannor. “Supervised learning for optimal power
flow as a real-time proxy”. In: 2017 IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies Conference (ISGT). 2017 IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT). ISSN: 2472-8152. Apr. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[19]
Bjarne Grimstad and Henrik Andersson. “ReLU networks as surrogate models in mixed-
integer linear programs”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 131 (Dec. 5, 2019),
p. 106580.
[20]
Alyssa Kody et al. Modeling the AC Power Flow Equations with Optimally Compact Neural
Networks: Application to Unit Commitment. Oct. 28, 2021.
[21]
Vladimir Dvorkin, Samuel Chevalier, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. Emission-Aware Opti-
mization of Gas Networks: Input-Convex Neural Network Approach. Sept. 18, 2022.
[22]
Adriano Arrigo et al. Machine Learning for Improved Gas Network Models in Coordinated
Energy Systems. Sept. 26, 2022.
[23]
Kyri Baker. “Emulating AC OPF Solvers With Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 37.6 (Nov. 2022). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Power Sys-
tems, pp. 4950–4953.
[24]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http : / / www .
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[25]
David R. Morrison et al. “Branch-and-bound algorithms: A survey of recent advances in
searching, branching, and pruning”. In: Discrete Optimization 19 (Feb. 2016), pp. 79–102.
[26]
Tobias Achterberg, Thorsten Koch, and Alexander Martin. “Branching rules revisited”. In:
Operations Research Letters 33.1 (Jan. 2005), pp. 42–54.
[27]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Li-
brary”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Vol. 32. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2019.
[28]
William A Falcon. “Pytorch lightning”. In: GitHub 3 (2019).
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
31
==PAGE:39==
[29]
Lukas Biewald. Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. Software available from
wandb.com. 2020.
[30]
Lars M Hvattum, Arne Løkketangen, and Fred Glover. “Comparisons of Commercial MIP
Solvers and an Adaptive Memory (Tabu Search) Procedure for a Class of 0-1 Integer
Programming Problems”. In: ().
[31]
DTU Computing Center. DTU Computing Center resources. 2023.
[32]
Bouchra Bakhouya and Daniel De Wolf. “The gas transmission problem when the merchant
and the transport functions are disconnected”. In: (Jan. 1, 2007).
[33]
Ed Klotz and Alexandra M. Newman. “Practical guidelines for solving diﬀicult mixed
integer linear programs”. In: Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science
18.1 (Oct. 2013), pp. 18–32.
[34]
Andrea Lodi and Andrea Tramontani. “Performance Variability in Mixed-Integer Pro-
gramming”. In: Theory Driven by Influential Applications. Ed. by Huseyin Topaloglu,
J. Cole Smith, and Harvey J. Greenberg. INFORMS, Sept. 2013, pp. 1–12.
[35]
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. “Simple and Scalable
Predictive Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems. Vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[36]
Bruce Roy Munson et al. Fluid mechanics. Wiley Singapore, 2013.
[37]
Tatsuhiko Kiuchi. “An implicit method for transient gas flows in pipe networks”. In: In-
ternational Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 15.5 (Oct. 1, 1994), pp. 378–383.
[38]
Felix Hennings. “Large-scale empirical study on the momentum equation’s inertia term”.
In: Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering 95 (Nov. 1, 2021), p. 104153.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
32
==PAGE:40==
A
Neural Network constrained Optimal
Gas Flow model
min
Θ
X
t∈T

X
s∈S
Cqw
s,t +
X
(n,m)∈C
Ccomp(pn,t + pm,t) +
X
d∈D
Ccurlqcurl
d,t


(A.1a)
subject to
qw ≤qw
s,t ≤qw
∀t ∈T , s ∈S
(A.1b)
P ≤pn,t ≤P
∀t ∈T , n ∈N
(A.1c)
y0
p =

prn,t
prm,t
⊤
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1d)
˜yk+1,n,m,t = W k+1,n,m,tyk,n,m,t + Bk+1,n,m,t
∀k ∈{0, ..., K −1}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1e)
˜ymin
k,n,m,tbk,n,m,t ≤xnk,n,m,t
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1f)
xpk,n,m,t ≤˜ymax
k,n,m,t(1 −bk,n,m,t)
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1g)
˜yk,n,m,t = xnk,n,m,t + xpk,n,m,t
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1h)
yk,n,m,t = xpk,n,m,t
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1i)
z = W k+1,n,m,tyk,n,m,t + Bk+1,n,m,t
∀k = K
(A.1j)
qn,m =
 qin
n,m,t + qout
n,m,t

2
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1k)
hn,m,t = Sn,m(pn,t + pm,t)
2
∀t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1l)
hn,m,t = ht−1,n,m +
 qin
n,m,t −qout
n,m,t

∀t ∈T \{1}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P, (n, m) ∈P
(A.1m)
qin
n,m,t −qout
n,m,t = 0
∀t = 1, (n, m) ∈P
(A.1n)
hn,m,t ≥h1,n,m
∀t = |T |, (n, m) ∈P
(A.1o)
0 ≤qcurl
d,t
≤qD
d,t,
∀t ∈T , d ∈D
(A.1p)
Cnpn,t ≤pm,t ≤pn,tCn
∀t ∈T, (n, m) ∈C
(A.1q)
0 ≤qC
n,m,t
∀t ∈T, (n, m) ∈C
(A.1r)
X
s∈ASn
qw
s,t +
X
m:(n,m)∈P
 qin
n,m,t −qout
m,n,t

+
X
m:(n,m)∈C
 qcomp
n,m,t −qcomp
m,n,t

=
X
d∈AD
n

Dd,t + qcurl
d,t

∀t ∈T, n ∈N
(A.1s)
bk,n,m,t ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1t)
xnk,n,m,t ≤0
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1u)
0 ≤xpk,n,m,t
∀k ∈{1, ..., K}, t ∈T , (n, m) ∈P
(A.1v)
All variables concerning the neural network are vectors with size of the number of neurons in
the respective layer, indicated in bolt.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
33
==PAGE:41==
B
Derivation of Weymouth equation
Gas flows in pipelines can be described by a set of partial differential equations, known as the
Euler equations [36]. These are general purpose equations, enforcing the conservation of mass,
momentum and energy, respectively.
∂ρ
∂t + ∂(ρu)
∂x
= 0
(B.1a)
∂(ρu)
∂t
+ ∂π
∂x + ∂
 ρu2
∂x
+ ρg sin α + λρu|u|
2D
= 0
(B.1b)
∂
∂t

ρ

e + 1
2u2

+ ∂
∂x

(ρu)

h + 1
2u2

−ρΩ+ ρgu sin α = 0
(B.1c)
Here, ρ, π and u are the density, pressure and velocity of the gas, respectively. x is the distance
along the pipeline axis, t is time.
g, D, α and λ are all constants, expressing the gravitational acceleration, diameter of the pipe,
pipeline inclination and a friction factor of the pipeline, respectively. e and h are gas specific
constants, representing the internal energy and enthalpy of the gas. Ωis the heat transfer rate
of the gas to the surroundings.
Together with the above equations, the relationship between gas state variables can be defined
by the following equation
π = Z(π, T)RT
Mg
ρ
(B.2)
where Z(π, T) is a compressibility factor, which is a function of the pressure and temperature,
T. R is the universal gas constant and Mg is the molar weight of the gas.
Given a range of assumptions, applicable under realistic operating scenarios, such as negligible
expansion and contraction of the gas, constant cross-sectional area of the pipe and a constant
compressibility factor zRT = c2 [14], Equation B.1a and Equation B.1b can be simplified to
∂π
∂t + c2
A
∂q
∂x = 0
(B.3a)
∂q
∂t + A∂π
∂x + λ c2q|q|
2DAπ = 0
(B.3b)
Where c is the speed of sound, q is the mass flow of the gas and A is the cross-sectional area of
the pipe. While Equation B.1c can be dropped all together, under the assumption of thermal
equilibrium with the surrounding environment, i.e. the soil around the pipeline, as pipelines are
usually buried underground.
The resulting PDE described by Equation B.3a and Equation B.3b now fully describes the dy-
namical relationship of pressure, time and the mass flow in gas pipelines given realistic operating
condition. These equations still does not have an analytical solution, and thus needs numerical
methods and discretization, to be used as part of an optimization model. A common approach
involves leveraging finite differences and boundary condition of the PDE [37] , and this is also
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
34
==PAGE:42==
applied here. Using ∆x and ∆t to represent the size of the discretization of the spatial and time
dimension, results in the following equations
πij,t −πij,t−1
∆t
+ c2
A
qj,t −qi,t
∆x
= 0
(B.4a)
qij,t −qij,t−1
∆t
|
{z
}
inertia term
+ Aπj,t −πi,t
∆x
|
{z
}
pressure drop
+ λc2
2DA
qij,t |qij,t|
πij,t
|
{z
}
friction term
= 0
(B.4b)
where the subscripts i, j is the start and end of the discretized pipeline section, and t is the
discretized time dimension. This means that the variable πi and πj describes pressure at the
start and end point of the pipe, while πij describes the pressure along the pipeline. The same
logic is applied to the mass flow variable q. For suﬀiciently small pipeline segments, the pressure
and mass flow along the pipeline segment, is simply calculated as the average pressure and mass
flow.
πij,t = πi,t + πj,t
2
,
qij,t = qi,t + qj,t
2
(B.5)
The system described by Equation B.4 and Equation B.5 now approximate the full dynamic set
of PDEs B.3, with increasing accuracy as ∆x and ∆t goes towards 0.
While this describes the fully dynamic system, one last assumption can be made, that trans-
form Equation B.4, into a set of quasi-dynamic equations, by removing the inertia term from
Equation B.4b, as it has been shown to only account for around 1% of the total mass flow, with
the friction term accounting for the majority [38].
Aπj,t −πi,t
∆x
+ λc2
2DA
qij,t |qij,t|
πij,t
= 0.
(B.6)
by still including other terms containtining the time derivative from Equation B.4, the model can
also consider what is known as linepack, which allows storage-like capabilities of the pipelines,
by aggregating gas in the pipe with an associated increase in pressure. This can provide a lot
of flexibility to the system and is therefore often modelled explicitly with a seperate variable
defined as
hij,t = Sijπij,t
(B.7)
where Sij = A∆x
c2 . Substituting Equation B.7 into Equation B.4b now yields an expression for
linepack storage between time steps t and t −1
hij,t = hij,t−1 + ∆t (qi,t −qj,t) .
(B.8)
The last step to derive a set of analytically tractable equations is to insert Equation B.5 (average
pressure), into Equation B.6 and rearrange a few terms, which then yields what is known as the
Weymouth equation
qij,t |qij,t| = Kij
 π2
i −π2
j

(B.9)
where K =
DA2
∆xλc2 , which is a coeﬀicient only dependent on the pipeline characteristics. As seen
from B.9, the Weymouth equation is non-linear and when applied in optimization also yields a
non-convex model, due to the equality.
This definition of the weymouth equation models bidirectional flows, due to the presence of the
|·| function. When considering unidirectional flow, the left hand side qij,t |qij,t| can be replaced by
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
35
==PAGE:43==
q2
ij,t, but this also entails defining a preferred direction of the flow in the pipes. For the purposes
of this thesis, the bidirectional Weymouth formulation is used, together with the explicit linepack
formulation.
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
36
==PAGE:44==
Neural network constrained gas flow optimization model
37
==PAGE:45==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
