==PAGE:1==
Master of Engineering
Master thesis in Financial Engineering
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend
Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach
Author: Flosi Hrannar Ákason
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning
Approach.
Automated Trading System With a Dynamic Investment Strategy.
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Flosi Hrannar Ákason
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mathematical Modelling and Computation, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Financial Engineering,
Department of Mathematical Modelling and Computation, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of finance, machine learning,
and time series predictions.
Flosi Hrannar Ákason - s212960
Signature
Date
ii
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This study explores intraday price trend predictions using a Random Forest model and con-
structs trading strategies based on the obtained results. A cost-sensitive learning method
is incorporated to improve the model’s classification results and trading performance. This
method penalizes the model for misclassifying downtrends as uptrends, which can lead to
financial losses, and rewards it for correctly identifying trends. The model leveraged tech-
nical indicators as input features to help identify trends within the data. Three distinct
labeling methods were adopted, five-class labeling, N-Period Min-Max (NPMM) labeling,
and a new technique called Threshold labeling. Two distinct trading strategies were de-
signed, the Probabilistic strategy, which invests in the cryptocurrency with the highest
predicted probability of a Buy signal, and the Diversified strategy, which invests equally
in all cryptocurrencies showing a Buy signal. The proposed trading system is evaluated
through an empirical analysis of seven cryptocurrencies, Cosmos (ATOM), Bitcoin Cash
(BCH), Ethereum Classic (ETC), Hedera (HBAR), Chainlink (LINK), Stellar (XLM),
and Monero (XMR), over a span of three years with 15-minute granularity. The study
shows that the Random Forest model, with NPMM labeling, achieved an F1 macro score
of 0.538 and a balanced accuracy of 0.746, resulting in a return of 37.22% over six months
of trading. Despite not outperforming the Buy & Hold strategy, the proposed approach
yielded a higher return than all cryptocurrencies except BCH and XLM.
Keywords:
Cryptocurrency, High-frequency data, Cost-Sensitive Learning,
Machine learning, Random Forest, Technical Trading Strategy.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my advisors, Stefan Røpke and
Nina Lange, whose expertise and understanding added considerably to my graduate expe-
rience. I appreciate their vast knowledge and skills in machine learning and quantitative
finance and their continuous encouragement throughout this challenging journey.
On a personal level, I am incredibly thankful to my family and friends, whose love, support,
and encouragement have been my source of strength throughout my years of study. I want
to express my heartfelt gratitude towards my girlfriend, Halla María. We’ve been through
so much together during our engineering studies, and her presence has been a blessing in
my academic journey, and I am forever grateful for her companionship.
Flosi Hrannar Ákason, MSc Mathematical Modelling and Computation, DTU
Author of this thesis.
iv
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Overview of Cryptocurrencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Problem Statement and Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Cryptocurrency Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine Learning in Financial Markets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Dynamic Investment Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Data Collection and Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Technical Indicators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Data labeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Machine Learning Model Selection and Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Data Preparation and Avoiding Look-Ahead Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Model Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.7
Model Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8
Trading Strategy Development and Backtesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results and Analysis
27
4.1
OHLCV Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Feature Engineering and Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Trading System Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.6
Importance of Cost-Sensitive Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Comparison with Existing Studies and Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Insights
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion and Future Work
59
6.1
Summary of Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Limitations and Potential Directions for Future Research
. . . . . . . . . .
60
Bibliography
61
A Trading Strategies
65
B Exploratory Data Analysis
66
C Decision Tree Hyperparameter Tuning
67
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
v
==PAGE:8==
D Tuning Investment Strategies
70
D.1 Trading Signal from Random Forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
D.2 Trading Signal from Decision Tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
vi
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
With the increasing computational power and advancement in predictive modeling tech-
niques over recent years, investors, researchers, and individuals have attempted to predict
the volatile and noisy stock- and cryptocurrency market with various results. Predicting
the market is a challenging task that may never be fully resolved, contrary to the MINSK
classification [1], as the semi-strong form of market eﬀiciency suggests that markets fully
incorporate all publicly accessible information. Additionally, the high dimensionality and
complexity of financial markets only add to this challenge. Nevertheless, there have been
instances where individuals have allegedly achieved this task [2].
Achieving a reasonably accurate prediction is more plausible than full predictability, how-
ever, with an increasing number of prediction models on the markets, their statistical
arbitrage edge is traded away, making the markets eﬀicient. Since 2001, excess returns
have started to deteriorate from machine learning models [3], and after 2010 excess re-
turns seem to be arbitraged away by using machine learning models [4]. A model with
accurate and robust predictions does not guarantee a high return on investment without
an effective investment strategy that leverages these predictions. The investor needs to
interpret the model results to find profitability sources and leverage those findings into
the investment strategy.
1.2
Overview of Cryptocurrencies
Over the past decade, the growth of cryptocurrencies has been exponential. Bitcoin, for
instance, has seen its price surge from its first transaction value of $0.0009 in October 2009
[5] to an all-time high of $68,789 in November 2021, marking an astounding annual growth
of 353.9% over 12 year period, and dropping down to $27,402 in April 2023, only a half a
year later. In addition to the exponential price growth of cryptocurrencies, their number
and global market capitalization have also increased, reaching $1.15 trillion in April 2023.
Along with the surge in cryptocurrencies, they have gained market acceptance. In recent
years, an increasing number of hedge funds, asset managers, and other financial institutes
have started incorporating cryptocurrencies into their portfolios. Similarly, researchers
have also shown interest, with 85% of all cryptocurrency research papers published between
2018 and the end of 2021, according to [6].
Cryptocurrencies, like the stock market, are a nonlinear and non-stationary time series
[7]. There is a debate regarding whether cryptocurrencies follow the random walk theory,
[8], where cryptocurrencies exhibit weak eﬀiciency [9]. The study [7] suggests that price
fluctuations do not follow the random walk theory but instead express chaotic character-
istics. The study suggests that cryptocurrency price fluctuations have inherent long-term
unpredictability but have short-term predictability to price fluctuations. One of the main
differences between cryptocurrencies and traditional financial assets is that the cryptocur-
rency market is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with transactions taking
place between individuals worldwide. Furthermore, the cryptocurrency market is noto-
riously more volatile than the stock market [10], [11]. These drastic fluctuations, both
interday and intraday price fluctuations, attract speculative investors due to the potential
for high returns, despite the increased risk. These characteristics of short-term predictabil-
ity and high intraday volatility prompt an investigation into the profitability of short-term
predictions and potential ways to exploit this statistical arbitrage opportunity.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Research Problem Statement and Objectives
This study explores the ability of machine learning models to predict cryptocurrency price
trends and how trading strategies affect profitability compared to a trading strategy driven
by each predicted trading signal. The price of the cryptocurrencies is mapped into discrete
classes that indicate the direction of the price movement, as illustrated in [12]. The new su-
pervisory data series contains discrete values that indicate the movement of an underlying
cryptocurrency at each time step, called trend deterministic data, and is appropriate for
classification tasks [12], [13], [14]. Technical indicators are used as features to represent
market conditions, enhancing the machine learning models’ ability to identify patterns
within the data and possibly preventing over-fitting in the classification to enhance their
accuracy and trading performance, as shown in [13]. The study leverages multi-class clas-
sification algorithms and two distinct trading strategies, creating an automated trading
system that generates consistent profits and offers insights into the application of ma-
chine learning in financial decision-making. The data used in the study is obtained from
Binance. [15], a cryptocurrency exchange that offers high-quality, open-source historical
data and real-time data streams. The chosen data spans three years, from January 1st,
2020 to 31st December 2022, with a granularity of 15 minutes.
The machine learning models employed in this study include a Random Forest (RF) [16]
model and a Decision Tree (DT) [17] model, which serves as the baseline model.
To
incorporate domain-specific knowledge into the classification task, cost-sensitive learning
[18] is employed to address the inherent flaw in tree-based algorithms, which is they treat
all misclassifications equally regardless of how far away they are from the true class. The
study has developed two trading strategies: Probabilistic trading and Diversified strategy.
The former involves opening a position solely in the cryptocurrency with the highest
predicted probability of an uptrend. The latter, on the other hand, purchases an equal
amount among each cryptocurrency predicted to have an uptrend.
The following research questions are imposed in the study.
• Can machine learning models be used effectively to classify short-term price trends
in the cryptocurrency market?
• How does implementing dynamic trading strategies based on machine learning pre-
dictions affect the profitability of cryptocurrency trading?
• How does the integration of domain knowledge through cost-sensitive learning affect
the performance of machine learning models in cryptocurrency price trend predic-
tion?
1.4
Thesis Outline
The remainder of the study is organized as follows. Chapter 2 provides an overview of key
literature and recent work related to cryptocurrency price prediction and the application
of machine learning techniques on financial data. Chapter 3 details the data selection, pre-
processing, labeling methods, and experimental design using machine learning algorithms.
Furthermore, we elaborate on the metrics employed to evaluate the performance of the
models as well as the investment strategies. Chapter 4 presents the main findings from the
experiments and discusses their implications. Chapter 5 contains a comparison with ex-
isting studies and other benchmarks. Finally, chapter 6 concludes the study, summarizes
the key takeaways, addresses the limitations, and outlines the future research scope.
2
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
In recent years, machine learning has been rapidly advancing and has been used to predict
cryptocurrency returns to enhance trading performances and find statistical arbitrage in
the market. In this section, I will discuss previous studies on the application of machine
learning algorithms in price prediction for cryptocurrencies and other financial assets, as
well as various trading strategies.
2.1
Cryptocurrency Overview
In [6], the authors conduct a comprehensive survey by covering 146 research articles on
various aspects of cryptocurrency trading. The goal of the literature summary was to
gather insights from existing research papers and results on cryptocurrency trading to
better comprehend the assets. The survey also aimed to highlight the methods that have
yielded positive outcomes and those that have been commonly used.
While there are
similarities between cryptocurrencies and traditional assets, cryptocurrencies have unique
characteristics and their behavior as an asset is still being studied. The cryptocurrency
market differs from traditional markets as it offers more arbitrage opportunities, higher
fluctuations, and greater transparency. These qualities make programmatic trading the
preferred method for most traders and analysts in the cryptocurrency market [6].
2.1.1
Data Labeling Techniques
When attempting to predict the future return or closing price of cryptocurrencies, a re-
gression algorithm is often used due to being continuous variables.
However, another
approach is to view the task as a trend prediction by labeling the data and use classifica-
tion methods. The most common labeling method for financial data is Up-down labeling.
This involves labeling an asset as Up if its closing price rises between time steps and Down
if it decreases. Although this method captures trends at all points in time, it can introduce
noise into the data and may miss the overall trend of the underlying asset.
In [12], the authors explain the importance of labeling and compare different labeling meth-
ods by trading performance. The authors propose a novel N-Period Min-Max (NPMM)
labeling method that shows superior trading performance compared to other labeling
methods. The NPMM labeling method labels the minimum and maximum prices over the
past N periods and thus labels clear trends and has less noise compared to the up-down
labeling. The labeling method can improve the model’s and the trading’s performance
because it’s a dataset reduction method that only extracts essential information from the
original data and significantly reduces noise.
Another way of labeling is presented in [19], the authors introduce a novel approach to data
labeling through the incorporation of a Trend Deterministic Data Preparation (TDDP)
layer. This layer serves as an intermediary between the financial data and the predictive
modeling algorithm. The TDDP layer is used to interpret and categorize the technical
indicators effectively in Up- or Downtrends using technical analysis rules. In conventional
methods, the Up-Down class is typically constructed based on the movement of returns.
However, in the TDDP layer, the authors take a different approach by utilizing technical
analysis rules to convert the continuous technical indicators data into discrete classes.
Specifically, each technical indicator is assigned a discrete value of 1 or -1, representing an
Up- or Downtrend, respectively.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
3
==PAGE:12==
By transforming the continuous technical indicators into discrete trend classes, the TDDP
layer essentially extracts and emphasizes trend-related information. When this processed
data is fed into the predictive models, it provides them with clearer signals regarding
market trends. This, in turn, significantly improves the accuracy of the stock price index
predictions.
2.2
Machine Learning in Financial Markets
As mentioned before, with the recent enhancements in the field of machine learning, its
application of predictive models has been increasing. From late 2016 to 2017, machine
learning and deep learning technology were applied in the prediction of cryptocurrency
returns [6], where the most frequent category of machine learning models is based on
LSTM, RNN, and GRU.
2.2.1
Classification Algorithms
Tree-based algorithms in their simplest form is a Decision Tree (DT), which is a non-
linear and a non-parametric supervised learning method [17]. Tree-based models have
been known for performing well due to being non-linear and outperforming deep learn-
ing on tabular data [20]. Random forest (RF) models are an ensemble learning method
that operates by constructing multiple Decision Trees [16]. [21] aimed to compare the
effectiveness of Random Forests (RF) and Deep Learning (DL) models in High-Frequency
cryptocurrency Trading (HFT) using minute-level data granularity. The study evaluated
both models’ F-1 precision and recall metrics and found that RF is still effective even
when faced with multicollinearity in ML features and model identification issues. The
authors show that the RF performed better than the DL model on average. Additionally,
the study aimed to develop an HFT strategy for Bitcoin using RF, where their findings
suggest that 15 min is optimal for Bitcoin trading.
In [22], an algorithmic trading strategy was examined. The strategy involved training a
support vector machine (SVM) model to identify cryptocurrencies with high or low pre-
dicted returns, and its profitability was analyzed. The results showed that the performance
of the SVM strategy was the fourth being better only than Buy & Hold strategy, holding
the S&P500 index. The authors noted that SVM requires a large number of parameters
and is, therefore, prone to overfitting, which negatively affects its performance. Similarly,
[23] compared the accuracy of four different machine learning algorithms (RF, SVM, GB,
and LR) in predicting the price of Bitcoin. The results revealed that SVM had the highest
accuracy rate at 62.31% and a precision value of 0.77 in binomial classification.
2.2.2
Neural Networks
LSTM models are considered superior to non-gated RNNs for financial time-series prob-
lems due to their selective memory capability, which allows them to retain patterns for
extended periods. LSTM models also tend to be stable in high volatility [24] and are often
the desired choice for predicting cryptocurrency data with high volatility [25]. In [24], the
authors also showed that the LSTM model was profitable even if the transaction fees were
increased.
In [4], the authors explained the architecture of LSTM models and why they are ideal for
predicting financial time series. This paper provides a detailed explanation of how LSTM
models are constructed and why they are successful in forecasting time series.
One of the most recent advancements in predicting financial time series using deep learning
techniques is a transformer encoder and attention mechanisms.
The encoder captures
dependencies and relationships among the input features, while the attention mechanism
allows the model to capture long-range dependencies and trends in the time series data.
4
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:13==
The multi-head attention transformers significantly outperformed existing state-of-the-art
models [26] and traditional deep learning models [27] in terms of accuracy and error. The
transformer also significantly outperforms these models in net value analysis and yields a
higher return [28].
2.2.3
Cost-sensitive learning
In the study [18], the authors suggest using a cost-sensitive deep forest algorithm to
address the issue of tree-based algorithms treating all misclassifications equally, regardless
of their distance from the true value. Additionally, [29] highlights the significance of cost-
sensitive learning for imbalanced datasets in a deep neural network. The study’s findings
demonstrate superior performance compared to other sampling techniques.
2.2.4
Role of Technical Indicators
Technical indicators [30] are used as input features in developing machine-learning trad-
ing signals. Technical indicators prevent over-fitting in the classification of non-stationary
financial time-series data [13]. This means transforming raw financial data to TA may en-
able extracting important information and cutting off extra noise from the data, leading to
enhanced trading performance. The authors of [31] and [32] utilize 22 technical indicators
from three distinct categories to provide a summary of the trends’ direction and strength
for cryptocurrencies.
2.2.5
Importance of Data Time Horizon
Selecting a period to extract data from and conduct the experiment on can drastically
affect the results of the study.
Choosing a period too far back can yield phenomenal
returns [4], while those returns start to deteriorate with time as markets become more
eﬀicient with increasing computational power and knowledge of ML. The amount of data
also has an effect as the ML models need to learn how the market behaves in certain
situations and try to learn the trend, so a suﬀicient enough amount of data needs to be
selected so the models can learn the patterns in the data.
In [33], the day-of-the-week effect in the cryptocurrency market is investigated, and ev-
idence of an anomaly (abnormal positive returns on Mondays) is found specifically for
Bitcoin. This paper indicates that the day-of-the-week variable could be a valuable fea-
ture or even the time-of-day as the crypto market is open 24 hours a day, seven days a
week.
2.3
Dynamic Investment Strategies
There are various ways of building an investment strategy, whether for short-term or long-
term investing, and the investor’s risk tolerance. In [34], the authors use the variable
length moving average (VMA) rule to generate a buy or sell signal for Bitcoin in 1-minute
time steps, and back-testing showed that VMA is the most beneficial strategy compared
to other popular trading rules in the form of the MA and trading range break strategies.
In [14], a trading strategy is presented where a trading signal is a continuous output
variable from 0 to 1 from a neural network, and the trading decision is made if the trading
signal breaks a defined threshold.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
5
==PAGE:14==
The papers [35] and [36] show that using specific trading rules generates excess returns
and beats the buy-and-hold strategy. The authors in [36] extended the Turtle Trading
System and achieved a 114.41% compound return in backtest. The authors claim they
tested and tuned to find optimal parameters but do not mention if it was performed on the
same data set, indicating a possibility of overfitting. Nevertheless, the paper showcases
the turtle trading strategy and how to implement it.
The authors [13] employ three
strategies. They either took long positions exclusively or long and short positions based
on the predicted class from an ANN model. As a result, they achieved better performance
than the Buy & Hold strategy.
To summarize, the literature review has provided insight into different aspects of cryp-
tocurrency trading, such as data labeling techniques, the role of machine learning in fi-
nancial markets, the significance of technical indicators, the impact of data time horizons,
and dynamic investment strategies. Studies have shown that machine learning techniques,
particularly neural networks, and tree-based algorithms, can effectively generate profitable
trading strategies in cryptocurrency markets’ fast-paced and volatile world. When training
models, it is also crucial to consider data labeling, technical indicators, and appropriate
data time horizons. Using these findings, we will move on to the methodology chapter,
where we will develop machine-learning models and trading strategies that can be practi-
cally applied in cryptocurrency markets.
6
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:15==
3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the details of the data collection process, data analysis and cleaning,
and feature generation for the prediction models.
3.1
Data Collection and Preprocessing
The starting point for this study is collecting clean and reliable data from a trusted
data source. The data is accessed from Binance [15], the world’s largest cryptocurrency
exchange, which stores historical market data for all currencies traded on their exchange.
Binance has over 350 listed currencies on its exchange and a wide variety of data products,
e.g., spot, option, or futures market data. The data granularity can range from one month
down to one second.
The reader can find further details about all available historical
market data provided by Binance in the following link [37]
Cryptocurrencies are traded in pairs similar to the foreign exchange market [38]. This
means investors can exchange one cryptocurrency for another without needing to first
exchange it for fiat currency.
To compare cryptocurrencies and present the results in
a clear manner, it’s best to choose a cryptocurrency pair where the quote currency is
pegged to a fiat coin. The most common quote currency is Tether (USDT), which is the
largest stablecoin by market capitalization and is pegged to the U.S. dollar (USD) [39].
Tether enables investors to transact with fiat currencies across the blockchain without the
inherent volatility and complexity typically associated with cryptocurrencies. This results
in all the prices for the cryptocurrencies in this study being in USD.
For this experiment, USDT is the quote currency, and spot data in 15-minute intervals is
collected, spanning three years starting in 1st January 2020 until 31st December 2022, and
the cryptocurrencies chosen are the following.
Table 3.1: List of selected cryptocurrencies, their corresponding ticker, and the currency
pair found on Binance.
Cryptocurrency Name
Ticker
Cryptocurrency Pair
Cosmos
ATOM
ATOMUSDT
Bitcoin Cash
BCH
BCHUSDT
Ethereum Classic
ETC
ETCUSDT
Hedera
HBAR
HBARUSDT
Chainlink
LINK
LINKUSDT
Stellar
XLM
XLMUSDT
Monero
XMR
XMRUSDT
These cryptocurrencies were selected from their position in the market capitalization, as
they sit in the rank 20 to 30 [40], at the time this study was conducted. This idea came as
a recommendation from the crypto hedge fund QBite [41], which based on their experience
in training AI models on cryptocurrencies in lower ranks in the market cap, showed better
results than cryptocurrencies in the top rank.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
7
==PAGE:16==
With the selected cryptocurrencies and the quote currency listed in 3.1, the public data
can be fetched from Binance using Python script and stored on-premise. Binance has
a GitHub site to help users download the public data [42]. The observed data is called
K-Line or candlestick data that is uniquely identified by their open time. The title for
each column in the K-Line data is the following.
Table 3.2: Names of each column in the Kline dataset downloaded from the Binance
exchange.
Column Names
Open time
Close time
Open
High
Low
Close
Volume
Quote asset volume
Number of trades
Taker buy base asset volume
Taker buy quote asset volume
Ignore
For this experiment, only the columns Open time, Open, High, Low, Close, and Volume are
necessary. As a result, the data for each cryptocurrency is a one-dimensional time series
consisting of open time, open, high, low, and close prices, as well as volume, in 15-minute
time intervals, these types of data are also known as OHLCV data. The OHLCV data
downloaded directly from the Binance exchange is a high-quality financial time series and
does not contain NaN or null values. Once the data collection is complete, the information
for each cryptocurrency is merged into a multi-dimensional DataFrame for further analysis.
3.2
Technical Indicators
The raw market data, OHLCV, is complex and often contains a significant amount of noise.
These characteristics make it challenging to identify trends in the data and formulate a
profitable trading strategy. Using technical indicators as features in the machine learning
model can help distinguish patterns within the data [13]. These indicators are derived from
the raw OHLCV data and provide an overview of the market conditions. The selection
of an appropriate set of technical indicators can be challenging due to its dependence
on various factors, including the frequency of the observed data, the intended use of the
indicators (e.g., signaling price or volume trends), and the strength of the trend.
In the studies conducted by [32] and [43], a list of 22 technical indicators was utilized for
daily OHLC data. This project will adopt the same technical indicators, which are listed
in Table 3.3 and their corresponding categories.
8
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:17==
Table 3.3: Features in the dataset, description, and their category of what the feature
signals.
Feature
Description
Category
Open
Opening price of the 15-minute interval
Candlestick
High
Highest price over the 15-minute interval
Low
Lowest price over the 15-minute interval
Close
Closing price of the 15-minute interval
Volume
Trading volume over the 15-minute interval
Pct
The percentage change between each time interval.
Trend
SMA5–20
Relative difference between SMA(5) and SMA(20)
SMA8–15
Relative difference between SMA(8) and SMA(15)
SMA20–50
Relative difference between SMA(20) and SMA(50)
EMA5–20
Relative difference between EMA(5) and EMA(20)
EMA8–15
Relative difference between EMA(8) and EMA(15)
EMA20–50
Relative difference between EMA(20) and EMA(50)
MACD
Moving Average Convergence/Divergence
AO14
Aroon Oscillator (14 periods)
ADX14
Average Directional Index (14 periods)
WD14
Difference between Positive Directional Index (DI+)
and Negative Directional Index (DI-) (14 periods)
BBands(20)
Bollinger Bands (20 periods)
PPO12–26
Percentage Price Oscillator (12 and 26 periods)
Volatility
RSI14
Relative Strength Index (14 periods)
MFI14
Money Flow Index (14 periods)
TSI
True Strength Index (25 and 13 periods)
SO14
Stochastic Oscillator (14 periods)
CMO14
Chande Momentum Oscillator (14 periods)
ATRP14
Average True Range Percentage: the ratio between
Average True Range and Close price (14 periods)
PVO12–26
Percentage Volume Oscillator (12 and 26 periods)
Volume
ADL
Accumulation Distribution Line
OBV
On Balance Volume
FI13
Force Index (13 periods)
FI50
Force Index (50 periods)
There are countless technical indicators available that could be used, 3.3 reports only the
ones considered in this experiment. For a more extensive discussion on technical analysis
and other indicators, see [30]. The definition of the main technical indicators from table
3.3 are as follows.
The first category, Candlestick, presents the raw values that is directly obtained from the
Binance exchange. They represent the highest, lowest, opening, and closing prices for each
15-minute interval, as well as the total volume traded in that period. This is typically the
starting point for more complex technical analysis. The second category, Trend, provides
insight into the direction and strength of the market’s movement. The Trend category
involves the usage of two widely used technical indicators, namely simple moving average
(SMA) and exponential moving average (EMA), for different periods.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
9
==PAGE:18==
The relative difference between shorter and longer period averages suggests an uptrend
if the difference is positive, while a negative difference suggests a downtrend [44]. The
MACD, AO14, ADX14, and WD14 are trend-following momentum indicators that reveal
the strength of the trend.
The mathematical formulation for a few of the technical indicators in the Trend category
is here as follows. The simple moving average (SMA) [45], which is the arithmetic average
of the cryptocurrency’s past closing price, the number of past closing prices used for the
calculation is the time period or window size.
SMA(N) =
∑N
t=1 Pt
N
(3.1)
Where Pt is the closing price of the cryptocurrency at time t, and N is the number of time
periods over which the SMA is calculated.
The exponential moving average (EMA) is a weighted moving average over the past N
periods that gives more weight to recent closing prices and is denoted by EMA(N)t for N
period EMA at time t and is calculated as follows [46].
EMA(N)t = (1 −α) × EMA(N)t−1 + α × Pt
(3.2)
Where the α is the so-called smoothing factor that determines the weight given to the
current closing price.
α =
2
(N + 1)
To initialize the EMA, the first period’s EMA is typically calculated using the Simple
Moving Average (SMA). The relative difference between shorter and longer period averages
is calculated as follows.
SMA(Short)-(long) = SMA(Long) −SMA(Short)
SMA(Short)
× 100
(3.3)
When referring to time frames or moving averages, ”short” indicates a shorter time frame
or a faster-moving average, while ”long” indicates a longer time frame or a slower-moving
average. A positive relative difference indicates an uptrend, while a negative difference
suggests a downtrend. This principle also applies to the EMA.
Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD) measures the difference between two
EMA, the most common MACD line is subtracting 26-period EMA from 12-period EMA
and is used in this experiment.
MACD = EMA(12) −EMA(26)
(3.4)
The Aroon Oscillator can provide insight into the strength of the current trend direction
and a sign for potential trend reversals, where a new trend direction is starting. The
formula for the Aroon Oscillator is as follows:
Aroon Oscillator = Aroon Up −Aroon Down
(3.5)
10
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:19==
The Aroon Up and Aroon Down metrics help determine the number of periods that have
passed since the highest peak and lowest low within a specified period, respectively, and
are found using the following equations.
Aroon Up = (N −Number of Periods Since Highest High)
N
× 100
Aroon Down = (N −Number of Periods Since Lowest Low)
N
× 100
Next is the Volatility category. These indicators measure price variation and the rate of
change of price movements. Higher volatility often indicates more uncertainty in the mar-
ket [47]. PPO12-26 is a percentage-based version of the MACD and gives similar insights.
RSI14 and MFI14 are oscillators that measure the speed and change of price movements
[48]. TSI, SO14, and CMO14 [49], [50], [51] are momentum oscillators that provide insights
about overbought or oversold conditions. ATRP14 provides a percentage that represents
market volatility in relation to the closing price [52]. The relative strength index (RSI) is
a momentum oscillator that measures the speed and change of price movements [48] and
is found as follows.
RSI = 100 −
(
100
1 + RS
)
(3.6)
Where relative strength (RS) is the ratio between the average- gain, and loss of the closing
price.
RS =
EMAUp
EMADown
(3.7)
Here the average gain and loss are found using EMA and the corresponding upward and
downward changes are found using the following equations.
EMADown = Down
periods + (1 −
1
periods) × EMADownt−1
EMAUp =
Up
periods + (1 −
1
periods) × EMAUpt−1
∆Close = Closet −Closet−1
Up = max(∆Close, 0)
Down = min(∆Close, 0)
Next, the mathematical formulation for the True Strength Index (TSI) is covered. TSI
is a momentum oscillator that measures the strength of the price momentum and trend
reversal. It’s a so-called ”double smoothed” indicator, meaning that the EMA is smoothed
again by a second EMA. The formula for the TSI is
TSIt = 100 ×
( EMAsmooth_t
|EMAsmooth_t|
)
(3.8)
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
11
==PAGE:20==
Where the smoothing factors are found using the following equations.
EMAsmooth_t = (1 −αsmoothing) · EMAsmooth_t−1 + αsmoothing · EMA1t
|EMAsmooth_t| = (1 −αsmoothing) · |EMAsmooth_t−1| + αsmoothing · |EMAt|
EMAt = (1 −αperiods) · EMAt−1 + αperiods · ∆Closet
|EMAt| = (1 −αperiods) · |EMAt−1| + αperiods · |Closet|
The alpha factors used for the TSI are identical to those used for the previously explained
EMA. The signal line is created by calculating the EMA of the TSI data series.
In Table 3.3, the final category is Volume. This section uses technical indicators to offer
insight into the strength of a cryptocurrency’s price trend by analyzing its underlying
volume. The percentage volume oscillator (PVO) measures the percentage difference be-
tween two volume moving averages, similar to the Price Percentage Oscillator (PPO) for
the price [53], the mathematical formulation for PVO is as follows.
PVO12 - 26 = EMA(26) −EMA(12)
EMA(12)
× 100
(3.9)
The Accumulation/Distribution Line (ADL) and On-Balance-Volume (OBV) are cumu-
lative indicators that add volume on up days and subtract it on down days, providing
a running total [54], [55]. The Force Index (FI13) and (FI50) combine both volume and
price to determine the strength of uptrends and downtrends in the market. A high positive
value indicates strong buying pressure, while a large negative value indicates strong selling
pressure [56].
The visual representation of technical indicators can be found in section 4.2 on page 32.
This provides more context for each feature.
3.3
Data labeling
The labeling method generates the target data for the model training. In this section,
different labeling methods are argued, and a supervisory data series is constructed by
mapping the regression problem into a classification task, with class labeling based on
the raw OHLC data of each cryptocurrency. The new supervisory data series, the target,
contains discrete values that indicate the movement of the underlying cryptocurrency at
each time step. This is called trend deterministic data and is often preferred for predicting
the movement of the price, while the raw continuous-valued data is more suitable for
predicting the future price of the underlying asset.
3.3.1
Five-Class Labeling
The first labeling method considered uses the returns of the cryptocurrency to label the
trend, and the method creates five distinct labels, 0 if the return is positive at time t, 1 if
the return is negative at time t, 2, if the return is zero, 3 if the return at time t is higher
than the 1-kth percentile the returns and 4 if the return at time t is lower than kth. This
is somewhat similar to [13], where the authors labeled the target variable by dividing the
returns into four classes, utilizing the percentiles. The Five-Class labeling method at each
time step is defined as follows.
12
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:21==
Lt+1 =















0
if Rt > 0 at time t
1
if Rt < 0 at time t
2
if Rt = 0 at time t
3
if Rt > 1−kth percentile at time t
4
if Rt < kth percentile at time t
(3.10)
Where Rt is the simple return between each 15-minute time period.
The Five-Class
labeling method is an extension of the commonly used binary labeling method (Up and
Down) labeling method, which only has labels if the return is positive or negative during
each time step. With this approach, there is a label for larger moves that could be used
in order to gain a higher return on investment or prevent large losses.
08:00
Jan-25
09:00
Jan-25
10:00
Jan-25
11:00
Jan-25
12:00
Jan-25
13:00
Jan-25
14:00
Jan-25
15:00
Jan-25
16:00
Jan-25
17:00
Jan-25
Date
35.00
35.25
35.50
35.75
36.00
36.25
36.50
36.75
37.00
37.25
Close Price
Up
Down
Strong Up
Strong Down
Figure 3.1: Five-Class labeling
3.3.2
N-Period-Min-Max Labeling
Next is the N-period-Min-Max (NPMM) labeling method introduced in [12]. The NPMM
labeling defines the label as Up or 0 at the maximum point and Down or 1 at the minimum
point. Since it labels only at certain points, it becomes insensitive to small changes. These
cases will be labeled as 2, indicating no trend. The NPMM labeling method is defined as
follows.
Lt =





0
if Ct = Nmax at time t
1
if Ct = Nmin at time t
2
Otherwise
(3.11)
Where Ct is the closing price at time t for each cryptocurrency. Nmax is the maximum
closing price of the N-term period, and Nmin is the minimum closing price of the N-term
period.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
13
==PAGE:22==
Moreover, N can be adjusted to suit the characteristics of the data. A short-term trend
can be identified as the value decreases, and a long-term trend can be determined as the
value increases.
00:00
Jan-25
06:00
Jan-25
12:00
Jan-25
18:00
Jan-25
00:00
Jan-26
06:00
Jan-26
12:00
Jan-26
18:00
Jan-26
Date
34.0
34.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
36.5
37.0
Close Price
Up
Down
Figure 3.2: NPMM labeling
3.3.3
Threshold Labeling
The final labeling method is a slightly modified version of the NPMM and the Five-Class
labeling and extending labeling method from [57]. This method defines the label as Up or
0 if the cumulative return over the past N-period was higher than two times the trading
fee, indicating if a trade was profitable after paying trading fees. The label Down or 1
is if the cumulative return over the past N-period was lower than two times the trading
fee, indicating an unprofitable trade during the period. 2 indicates no trend, and like in
the Five-Class labeling method, label 3 is if the return at time t is higher than the 1-kth
percentile the returns and 4 if the return at time t is lower than kth.
The Threshold labeling method at each time step is defined as follows.
Lt =















0
if Rcumulative_t > c , at time t
1
if Rcumulative_t <= c , at time t
2
if Rt = Rt−1 at time t
3
if Rt > 1−kth percentile at time t
4
if Rt < kth percentile at time t
(3.12)
Where c is the total trading fee for opening and closing a trade during the N-term period.
The cumulative return over the past N-term period is calculated as follows.
Rcumulative_t =
N
∏
i=1
(1 + Returnt) −1
(3.13)
14
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:23==
This labeling method identifies profitable periods compared to the highest or lowest point
in NPMM or up and down label in the Five-Class labeling method. These three labeling
methods will be used throughout the study and compared at the end.
08:00
Jan-25
09:00
Jan-25
10:00
Jan-25
11:00
Jan-25
12:00
Jan-25
13:00
Jan-25
14:00
Jan-25
15:00
Jan-25
16:00
Jan-25
17:00
Jan-25
Date
35.00
35.25
35.50
35.75
36.00
36.25
36.50
36.75
37.00
37.25
Close Price
Up
Down
Strong Up
Strong Down
Figure 3.3: Threshold labeling
3.4
Machine Learning Model Selection and Validation
In this section, the primary focus is on the process of selecting the most appropriate
machine learning models for the study and the subsequent validation of these models
to ensure their eﬀicacy and reliability in forecasting financial markets. After selection,
validation is a vital process that tests the robustness and effectiveness of these models
under various scenarios. The models that perform well in both stages are then tuned and
optimized for further use.
3.4.1
Decision Tree
This study uses a Decision Tree classifier [58] as a baseline model. Decision Tree is a non-
parametric supervised learning method [17]. Decision Tree is a non-linear model making
it a suitable baseline model as the OHLCV data used in this study, and financial data in
general, often exhibit complex, non-linear relationships. Decision trees are also known for
their intelligibility and simplicity.
The Decision Tree works by creating a model that predicts the value of a target variable by
learning simple decision rules inferred from the input features. The decision rules are made
by finding a splitting point that best separates the target variable. All the features are
placed at the tree’s root and then iteratively split the data into subsets which constitute
the child nodes. This process is repeated until every child node is 100% pure (i.e., all of
the samples in the node belong to the same value of the target variable). The final node
is called a leaf node and assigns the value of the samples at the node as its prediction.
The Gini impurity measures the level of impurity in a node. It determines the probability
of mislabeling a random variable, given that the random variable is labeled according to
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
15
==PAGE:24==
the label distribution within the node’s subset. A node is considered pure when the Gini
impurity equals zero, meaning all node values belong to one of the target classes. The
formula for calculating the Gini impurity is as follows.
Gini(p) = 1 −
J
∑
i=1
(pi)2
(3.14)
Where p represents the vector of probabilities for each class at a given node. pi is the
probability of class i at the node. J is the total number of classes.
Decision Trees are one of the most interpretable machine learning models due to their
simplicity. Each node in the tree corresponds to a specific condition, split, on one of the
features, allowing for clear visualization of the decision-making process. This transparency
can help gain insights into market dynamics by understanding how different technical in-
dicators and features affect predictions. However, Decision Trees are prone to overfitting.
Allowing the tree to grow until it reaches 100% purity and using complex data can guar-
antee to overfit. To prevent this, parameters can be used to control the tree’s complexity,
which is explained and tuned later in the report. Another way to prevent overfitting is by
using the Random Forest model.
3.4.2
Random Forest
Random Forest is an ensemble method that constructs multiple Decision Trees during the
learning process and creates a forest of trees [16], [59]. Random Forest uses the Bagging
method to construct a collection of Decision Trees, where each Decision Tree is built on
bootstrapped samples from the dataset. This means it randomly selects N instances from
the dataset with replacement, where N is the size of the dataset. This results in some
instances appearing multiple times and some not appearing at all. Repeating this process
multiple times outputs an ensemble of Decision Trees. This technique is known as Bagging,
and it helps to reduce variance and overfitting. The Random Forest trains each tree on
the different bootstrapped subsets, intending to lower the model’s variance. Although this
approach might marginally increase bias and slightly reduce the model’s interpretability,
it typically leads to a significant enhancement in the overall performance of the final model
and reduces the chances of overfitting.
The variance reduction is a result of reducing the correlation between the Decision Trees
by using bootstrap sampling the Random Forest de-correlates the trees by showing them
different training sets.
Additionally, a random subset of the input features is used to
grow each tree.
Reducing the number of features shown to each tree will reduce the
correlation between any pair of trees in the ensemble. After the forest has been made and
a new observation needs to be classified, it’s passed down to each Decision Tree in the
forest, where each tree gives its own independent prediction. The final predicted class is
then found by the majority vote from all the trees. It’s advisable to use an odd number of
Decision Trees in a Random Forest to prevent ties, but that applies to binary classification.
It is crucial to note that since Random Forest uses bootstrapping to sample a subset of
data in the bagging procedure, the structure of the time series is distorted. In addition,
bootstrapping can cause too many duplicated values or over-sample and under-sample cer-
tain periods in the time series, causing poor data representation. However, bootstrapping
does not cause look-ahead bias in the Random Forest model as it doesn’t have a notion of
time or order. The model treats each sample independently, which means it does not learn
trends within the data in the way time-series models (like ARIMA or LSTM) do. The
Random Forest model only makes predictions based on the decision rules each Decision
16
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:25==
Tree has inferred from the input features. It is, however, required that the evaluation
of the models is done by using either the sliding- or expanding window cross-validation
method, making sure to train the model on data from the past and have it predict the
future. Evaluating the model using, for example, k-fold cross-validation that randomizes
the dataset during evaluation would not be valid as it would fit the model on data from
the future and have it predict the past resulting in optimistically biased results.
The parameters will subsequently be optimized to enhance performance, prevent overfit-
ting, and reduce the complexity of the Decision Trees.
3.5
Data Preparation and Avoiding Look-Ahead Bias
In the context of this research, tree-based machine learning algorithms are used to predict
the signals. These algorithms utilize a rule-based decision process to split the data, making
the normalization of the feature set unnecessary as the split doesn’t change with any
monotonic transformation. Thus, in this specific investigation, the standard procedure of
data normalization, typically crucial in many machine-learning contexts, is not a required
step.
To prevent the potential introduction of look-ahead bias into our model, the target variable
is shifted one step backward. This ensures that predictions for any given time step t + 1
are solely based on the information available at or before time step t, thereby preserving
the temporal integrity of the model.
During the last stage of data preparation, the dataset is divided into two parts such that
the training dataset comprises 80 percent of the entire data, while the remaining 20 percent
forms the test dataset. This division is performed at a specific time stamp, 2022-05-27
05:30:00, ensuring that the temporal sequence of the data is preserved.
3.6
Model Evaluation Metrics
This section covers the evaluation metrics utilized to measure the performance of the
Decision Tree and Random Forest models in predicting cryptocurrency trends.
These
metrics provide a comprehensive understanding of how well the models perform, such as
correctly classifying observations, handling false positives and negatives, and effectively
dealing with imbalanced datasets.
The study’s dataset contains a multi-class target variable, where each class represents the
trend of a different cryptocurrency, as described in section 3.3. Since each cryptocurrency
can exhibit a unique trend, it can lead to class imbalances in the dataset, which refers to
a biased distribution of the known classes. This imbalance presents a significant challenge
for predictive modeling since many machine learning algorithms used for classification are
traditionally built on the premise of an equal distribution of class examples. This results
in poor predictive performance, particularly for the minority classes. This is a significant
issue as the minority classes are often more important, making the problem more sensitive
to classification errors for the minority class than the majority class.
Before diving into the discussion of evaluation metrics, it’s essential to establish some
standard notation for the metrics involved in their computation.
In this context, the
recall is quantified as follows.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.15)
whereas precision is denoted as
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.16)
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
17
==PAGE:26==
Where
• TP – true positive
• TN – true negative
• FP – false positive
• FN – false negative
Recall, or sensitivity or true positive rate (TPR), quantifies the number of true positive
predictions made out of all actual positive instances. Precision quantifies the number of
true positives predictions that actually belong to the positive class
3.6.1
Balanced Accuracy
Balanced Accuracy is a metric used in machine learning for classification tasks, particularly
those with imbalanced datasets. In a multi-class classification problem with n classes, the
balanced accuracy score is calculated as the arithmetic mean, or macro average, of recall
of each individual class. The equation for balanced accuracy with n number of classes is
as follows.
Balanced Accuracy = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
TPi
TPi + FNi
(3.17)
While Recall and Balanced Accuracy are useful metrics, especially in situations where
one is more concerned about minimizing false negatives, it does have some limitations. It
disregards TN - True Negatives and FP - False Positives
This could lead to a model that incorrectly classifies many negative instances as positive
but still has a high Recall. Or the model could achieve high Recall by merely classifying
everything into the majority class due to the imbalance in the dataset.
The recall does not take into account the Precision of a model. A model with high Recall
could still have low Precision if it incorrectly classifies a large number of negative examples
as positive.
3.6.2
F1 Score
The F1 score can be interpreted as a harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a
balance between these two metrics. In the context of imbalanced multi-class classification,
the F1 score is calculated as an average of the F1 score of each class, we employ a macro-
weighted average to ensure equal importance to all classes. The macro-weighted F1 score
is calculated as follows:
F1 Macro = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
2 × Precisioni × Recalli
Precisioni + Recalli
(3.18)
Where precision and recall are computed as explained in equations 3.15 and 3.16.
When dealing with imbalanced data and focusing on the positives (i.e., TP and FP), F1 is
an excellent scoring metric to utilize. However, the F1 score doesn’t take into consideration
TN - True Negatives.
18
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:27==
3.6.3
Custom Score Function
While the balanced accuracy and F1 score are crucial for model evaluation, they lack the
consideration of domain-specific information. This becomes evident when examining the
target variable’s labeling, explained in section 3.3 (page 12), with the labels representing
the trend and the magnitude of each cryptocurrency. These labels play a key role in the
investment strategy.
For instance, consider a scenario where the model misclassifies an uptrend as a downtrend.
The corresponding investment strategy, under this impression, would abstain from taking
a long position in the cryptocurrency, leading to a missed opportunity for potential profit.
However, since no trade was made, no financial loss was incurred. Conversely, if the model
inaccurately predicts a downtrend as an uptrend, the investment strategy would decide
to enter a long position, expecting a profitable uptrend. In reality, the strategy entered a
downtrend leading to a financial loss.
The implications of these examples are clear. Misclassifying a downtrend as an uptrend
has more severe consequences, leading to a direct loss. In comparison, the misclassification
of an uptrend as a downtrend result in a missed opportunity rather than an incurred loss.
Turning our attention to the final labels outlined in 3.10 and 3.12, the objective lies in
identifying substantial upswings in the data, represented by the class labels 3 and 4.
Misclassification involving these labels would yield even graver consequences, suggesting
that such instances should be penalized even further. Conversely, class label 2, in each
labeling method, signifies a lack of trend in the data. Misjudging this label could lead to
losses if the succeeding trend turns out to be a downtrend.
Understanding the consequences of classification for each trend, we can now assign specific
costs to both correct classifications and misclassifications of each label. In the cost matrix,
a positive cost signifies a reward for accurate predictions by the model, while a negative
cost denotes a penalty for misclassification, similar to the work in [18].
Let’s denote the cost of predicting class j when the true class is i as Cij. The cost matrix,
which comprises these costs, is defined as:
C =


C00
C01
C02
C03
C04
C10
C11
C12
C13
C14
C20
C21
C22
C23
C24
C30
C31
C32
C33
C34
C40
C41
C42
C43
C44


The cost matrix used for the five distinct classes outlined for the five class labeling in 3.10
and Threshold labeling in 3.12 is given as follows:
C =


1
−1
−1
−0.5
−2
−1
1
−1
−2
−0.5
−1
−1
1
−1
−1
−0.5
−2
−1
2
−2.5
−2
−0.5
−1
−3
2


(3.19)
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
19
==PAGE:28==
For each predicted label, the function retrieves the corresponding cost from the cost matrix,
given the true label. The total cost is the sum of all these costs:
total cost =
N
∑
k=1
Cy(k),ˆy(k)
(3.20)
Where y(k) is the true label and ˆy(k) is the predicted label for the kth sample, and N is
the total number of samples. Next, the function computes the average cost per sample.
average cost = total cost
N
(3.21)
The function then returns the average cost. The objective is to maximize this cost, which
would indicate the model’s predictions are aligning better with the true labels, considering
the varying penalties for different types of errors. Based on the domain knowledge pre-
viously explained, the penalties and rewards were manually chosen. Correct classification
was rewarded, with higher rewards given for correctly identifying strong up and down-
trends. Misclassification was penalized, with a larger penalty for misclassifying strong
trends and the largest penalty for misclassifying a downtrend as an uptrend.
For the NPMM labeling method, there are only three distinct classes, resulting in a sub-
sequent cost matrix.
C =


1
−1
−1
−1
1
−1
−1
−1
1


(3.22)
The cost associated with each prediction follows the same calculation procedure as ex-
plained earlier in the context of five class labels.
3.7
Model Tuning
Once the evaluation metrics have been selected, the subsequent step involves fine-tuning
the models by adjusting the parameters to obtain the most optimal score. This process
is accomplished using an exhaustive search [60] over a subspace of parameter values, also
known as grid search. Each combination of parameters is utilized to create and evaluate
a model, with time-series cross-validation being employed to ensure accuracy and prevent
any bias. The time-series cross-validation method is specifically designed to uphold the
integrity of the time-based data and eliminate any look-ahead bias.
The time-series cross-validation method uses an expanding window which preserves the
time integrity of the data and prevents look-ahead bias in the model. The time series
split used in the study can be observed in Figure 3.4.
The split was applied to each
cryptocurrency during the hyper-parameter tuning phase.
20
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:29==
2020-01-01
2020-05-27
2020-10-20
2021-03-15
2021-08-08
2022-01-01
2022-05-27
Date
1
2
3
4
5
CV Fold Index
Time Series Split
Validation set
Training set
Figure 3.4: Visualization of expanding window technique for time-series cross-validation
on the training data.
For the baseline model, Decision Tree, the parameters listed in Table 4.4 are tuned to find
the most optimal score using the method described. This comprehensive tuning process
was applied to each cryptocurrency, facilitating the development of robust and accurate
forecasting models. The same procedure was applied to the Random Forest model, which
is an ensemble of Decision Trees, the parameters listed in 4.5 are used to fine-tune the
Random Forest model.
3.8
Trading Strategy Development and Backtesting
The investment strategy operates based on the trading signals predicted by the models.
These trading signals are simply one of the labels covered in 3.3 that represent trends
in the data. Specifically, an uptrend signifies a Buy or Hold signal, while a downtrend
translates to a Sell signal. When a Buy signal is predicted, a long position is opened by
utilizing all available capital. In contrast, when a Sell signal is predicted, the position is
closed, concluding the trade and securing the realized return.
Binance trading fees are taken into consideration in the trading strategy with the purpose
of mirroring the conditions of real-world trading. Binance spot trading fee for regular
users is 0.1% for each trade, i.e., both for opening and closing a position. Every trade
was performed at the close price of the corresponding 15-minute time period the trading
signal occurred.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
21
==PAGE:30==
3.8.1
Investment Strategy Design
In the subsequent investment simulation, two trading strategies are adopted, similar to
[57] and [13]. The first strategy involves buying the cryptocurrency predicted to have
the highest probability of entering an uptrend, this strategy will be named Probabilistic
Trading. Essentially, multiple cryptocurrencies share the same Buy trading signal, the
strategy opens a position only in the coin that has the highest predicted probability of
the corresponding signal. The pseudocode for the Probabilistic Trading is outlined in
Algorithm 1.
To minimize the potential for losses and reduce the frequency of trades, we implemented
a constraint that prevented the strategies from closing a position if the trade resulted in a
loss, considering the trading fees. This was necessary as frequent trades tended to result
in the trading fee consuming any profits earned and would often lead to an early exit
from the trade, missing out on any future uptrends. Furthermore, we utilized the strength
of the trend, as outlined in equations 3.10 and 3.12, where class-label 3 and 4 indicate
stronger signals and are prioritized over the simpler signals represented by class labels 0
and 1 and are unconstrained.
Algorithm 1 Probabilistic Trading: Buy The Coin With Highest Probability
Require: DataFrame containing trading signal, probability and price information
Ensure: Cumulative Returns
1: Initialize variables
2: for each row in DataFrame do
3:
Get current signals and probabilities
4:
Denote class-labels into Signals as:
5:
0 = Buy and (1 = Buy for NPMM)
6:
1 = Sell and (0 = Sell for NPMM)
7:
2 = Hold
8:
3 = Strong Buy
9:
4 = Strong Sell
10:
if any coin is being held then
11:
Update highest price and trailing stop
12:
end if
13:
if trailing stop or maximum holding period is exceeded then
14:
SELL
15:
else if Strong Sell signal is present then
16:
SELL
17:
else if Sell signal is present and the position is not in a loss then
18:
SELL
19:
else if Strong Buy signal is present and no coin is being held then
20:
BUY
21:
else if Buy signal is present and no coin is being held then
22:
BUY
23:
else
24:
HOLD
25:
end if
26: end for
27: Calculate final cumulative return and other statistics
28: return the cumulative returns
22
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:31==
The second strategy invests in all the cryptocurrencies displaying a Buy signal, dividing
the available capital equally among these coins, we will name this strategy Diversified
Trading.
Once a Sell signal is identified for a particular coin, the strategy proceeds
to close that position, reallocating the realized capital towards the next set of coins,
indicating a Buy signal. The return for each time step is calculated as the percentage
difference between the total capital at the start of the time step and the capital after
realizing the returns during that time step. The pseudocode for the Diversified Trading
strategy is outlined in Algorithm 2.
The parameters within the investment strategies, max holding periods, and trailing stop,
are fine-tuned to optimize the final return on investment, specifically using the test dataset.
The optimization process involved an exhaustive search over max holding periods from 1 to
15 days and trailing stop orders from -1 to -41 at two-step intervals. The parameters that
result in the highest final return will be selected as optimal. If there are two parameters
with identical results, the configuration with the lowest standard deviation will be chosen.
Since the fine-tuning of these strategies is conducted on the test dataset, it’s necessary
to validate the optimal parameters on a completely new out-of-sample dataset, one that
hasn’t been used by either the models or the strategies. Therefore, data ranging from
January 1st, 2023 to June 30th, 2023 was selected for this validation process. Table 3.4
outlines the data splits used in the study, where training data is used for the training and
visually explained in Figure 3.4, test dataset is used to evaluate the models and tune the
parameters of the investment strategies. Finally, the out-of-sample dataset was used to
assess the performance of the models and investment strategies on an unseen dataset.
Table 3.4: Division of data into training, test, and out-of-sample datasets.
Dataset
Start Timestamp
End Timestamp
No. Data Points
Training Data
2020-01-01 12:30:00
2022-05-27 04:30:00
84014
Test Data
2022-05-27 04:45:00
2022-12-31 23:30:00
21004
Out-of-Sample Data
2023-01-01 12:30:00
2023-06-30 23:30:00
17320
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
23
==PAGE:32==
Algorithm 2 Diversified Trading: Buying All Coins With Uptrend
Require: DataFrame containing trading signal and price information
Ensure: Cumulative Returns
1: Initialize variables
2: for each row in DataFrame do
3:
Get current signals
4:
Denote class-labels into Signals as:
5:
0 = Buy and (1 = Buy for NPMM)
6:
1 = Sell and (0 = Sell for NPMM)
7:
2 = Hold
8:
3 = Strong Buy
9:
4 = Strong Sell
10:
if any coin is being held then
11:
Check the trailing stop for each coin
12:
if trailing stop or maximum holding period is exceeded then
13:
SELL the coin
14:
end if
15:
end if
16:
if Strong sell signal is present then
17:
SELL the coin
18:
else if Sell signal is present, the position is not in a loss then
19:
SELL the coin
20:
else if Strong Buy signal is present and no coin is being held then
21:
BUY the coin
22:
else if Buy signal is present and no coin is being held then
23:
BUY the coin
24:
else
25:
HOLD the coin
26:
end if
27: end for
28: Calculate final cumulative return and other statistics
29: return the cumulative returns
24
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:33==
3.8.2
Performance Measures
The profitability of the trading system was evaluated using the winning ratio (Wr), the
payoff ratio (Pr), the profit factor (Pf), and the cumulative return (Rc), like in [12] for
the sake of comparison.
The winning ratio denotes the proportion of profitable trades out of the total trades
conducted. It is represented as:
Wr = NW
N
(3.23)
Here, NW is the number of profitable trades, and N is the total number of trades, i.e.
N = NW + NL
The payoff ratio is the proportion of the average profit per winning trade divided by the
average loss per losing trade, calculated as:
Pr = W
L
(3.24)
Where
W =
∑W
NW
and
L =
∑L
NL
In this case, W symbolizes profits, whereas L refers to losses.
Lastly, the profit factor is the ratio of the total profits of the trading system to its total
losses. It can be computed as:
Pf =
∑W
∑L
(3.25)
The cumulative return, Rc, over the investment period is then calculated as:
Rc =
N
∏
i=1
(1 + Returni) −1
(3.26)
The risk measures of the trading system were evaluated using the maximum drawdown
(MDD), the standard deviation of the returns (σr), and the average holding periods. The
maximum drawdown represents the greatest drop from a Peak Value to a Trough Value
in a portfolio’s value before it reaches a new peak. It serves as a measure of the most
significant decline in portfolio value over a given time frame. It can be computed as:
MDD = Peak Value −Trough Value
Peak Value
(3.27)
The standard deviation of the returns gives intuition of the variation in the returns and
is often used as a measure of an investment’s volatility or riskiness. It is calculated as:
σr =
√∑N
i=1(Ri −R)2
N −1
(3.28)
Where the Ri is the return of the ith trade and R is the mean return.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
25
==PAGE:34==
3.8.3
Interpretation and Analysis of Results
The winning ratio denotes the frequency of successful trades but doesn’t consider the scale
of profit or loss. A high ratio typically signifies effective trading. However, it’s the profit
factor that indicates whether the strategy has yielded profit overall. If the factor exceeds
one, it denotes a net profit, while if the factor is below one, it’s a net loss. The payoff
ratio reflects the balance between average profits and losses. A ratio above one implies
that average profits exceed average losses. Conversely, a ratio less than one suggests the
strategy is riskier due to greater average losses.
26
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:35==
4
Results and Analysis
This chapter covers the analysis of the data, experimental setup, and results from the nu-
merical experiments conducted throughout the study. Visualizations and statistics will be
provided in section 4.1 to facilitate a better comprehension of the OHLCV data. Moreover,
the technical indicators utilized to assist the ML models in section 4.2 will be described in
detail. The setup for the training procedure will be explained in section 4.3, followed by
section 4.4, where the model performance and comparison using evaluation metrics will be
discussed. The performances of the trading strategies using the results obtained in section
4.4 will be outlined in section 4.5. Section 4.6 shows the effects of utilizing cost-sensitive
learning on the models.
4.1
OHLCV Data
As explained in 3.1, the OHLCV is a high-quality financial time series. There are no NaN
or null values in the whole dataset. There are several data points where the volume is
zero during a 15-minute time interval, meaning there were no trades made in these time
intervals. These cases are left in the data and not altered in any way, the reason is that the
machine learning model should ideally learn that during time intervals with zero volume,
there is no change in the closing price. The total number of observations used in this
experiment is 105068, covering three years. Table 4.1 contains descriptive statistics of
the closing price for each cryptocurrency in the data. For a more detailed examination
of the trading volumes for each cryptocurrency, refer to Table B.1 on page 66 within the
Appendix.
Table 4.1: Summary of descriptive statistics for close prices of each cryptocurrency over
the period.
Coin
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
Mean
14.10
357.16
25.27
0.14
14.77
0.20
165.71
Std
10.52
218.17
20.70
0.12
10.14
0.14
80.66
Min
1.17
88.00
3.29
0.01
1.45
0.03
25.73
25%
5.10
222.13
6.84
0.04
6.78
0.08
101.35
50%
10.95
294.07
20.02
0.07
12.45
0.13
151.50
75%
21.74
490.16
37.63
0.23
22.96
0.29
221.20
Max
44.33
1640.50
166.01
0.56
52.65
0.80
515.99
4.1.1
Exploratory Data Analysis
A portfolio was created by assigning an equal initial value of 100 USD to all cryptocur-
rencies, and their historical values were compared starting from 1st of January 2020. The
development of each cryptocurrency can be observed in Figure 4.1.
The percentage change between each closing price, usually referred to as the return, is
found, and the distribution of these 15-minute returns is shown in Figure 4.2. The dis-
tribution is characterized by leptokurtosis, with tails extending from -0.22 to 0.34, which
are substantial deviations for returns observed within a 15-minute period. To get a better
view of the distribution, the x-axis tails have been trimmed to ±0.05 while the maximum
count on the y-axis has been limited to 3000.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
27
==PAGE:36==
Dec 2019
Jan 2020
Feb 2020
Mar 2020
Apr 2020
May 2020
Jun 2020
Jul 2020
Aug 2020
Sep 2020
Oct 2020
Nov 2020
Dec 2020
Jan 2021
Feb 2021
Mar 2021
Apr 2021
May 2021
Jun 2021
Jul 2021
Aug 2021
Sep 2021
Oct 2021
Nov 2021
Dec 2021
Jan 2022
Feb 2022
Mar 2022
Apr 2022
May 2022
Jun 2022
Jul 2022
Aug 2022
Sep 2022
Oct 2022
Nov 2022
Dec 2022
Jan 2023
Feb 2023
Date
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Value [USD]
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
Figure 4.1: Development of each cryptocurrency over the three years, with an initial value
of 100 USD.
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Percentage Change [%]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Count
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
Figure 4.2: Histogram of the percentage change between each time interval.
The distribution of the returns in Figure 4.2 is bimodal, with one peak slightly above
zero, while the other is just below zero, and the less frequent returns are close to zero for
all cryptocurrencies. This indicates that the returns on each cryptocurrency experience
minor fluctuations upwards and downwards around zero within 15-minute intervals, with
few occurrences of significant gains or losses.
Table 4.2 contains the statistical summary for the returns of each cryptocurrency. It is
noteworthy that the 50th percentile (or median) is precisely zero, indicating that half of the
observed closing price changes are positive, and half are negative, suggesting it’s equally
likely to have a positive or negative return over any 15-minute period.
28
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.2: Descriptive statistics for the 15-minute returns of selected cryptocurrencies.
Coin
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
Mean
0.000038
0.000011
0.000037
0.000048
0.000037
0.000027
0.000029
Std
0.007750
0.006020
0.007130
0.008469
0.007255
0.006719
0.005881
Min
-0.173836
-0.215314
-0.176799
-0.156058
-0.171372
-0.203820
-0.175545
25%
-0.003343
-0.002285
-0.002617
-0.003149
-0.003110
-0.002515
-0.002402
50%
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
75%
0.003383
0.002347
0.002632
0.003190
0.003175
0.002574
0.002571
Max
0.262270
0.198397
0.208272
0.288052
0.340263
0.253684
0.278336
Furthermore, the distribution of the returns is approximately symmetrical around the zero
median up to the second decimal point. These observations suggest that the occurrence
of a positive or negative return is equally probable.
The cryptocurrency spot market is distinct from other financial spot markets in that the
trading hours are twenty-four-seven, allowing investors to buy and sell cryptocurrencies at
all times. This spreads the volume of trades over a twenty-four-hour period, as opposed
to the limited trading hours of traditional stock markets. This results in the trade volume
being spread over a 24-hour period. To better understand these fluctuations, the volume
of trades is aggregated over each hour of the day and each day of the week, as seen in
Figure 4.3.
0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1e8
Volume
(a) Distribution of trading volume for ATOM
over 24 hours. Time is represented in UTC.
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thusday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1e8
Volume
(b) Distribution trading volume for ATOM
across different days of the week.
Figure 4.3: Aggregated trading volume distributions across different time frames: hourly
(left) and daily (right). Times are represented in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).
The open and close timestamps are in Unix timestamp format, which means that the
time is in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) when converted to the 24-hour format.
Figure 4.3 shows that the volume fluctuates throughout the day, with the lowest volume
occurring at around 5:00 and 21:00 and the highest volume at around 14:00 and 00:00.
These fluctuations are likely due to the opening hours of other major global stock markets
as investors start trading. Figure 4.3 only shows the trading volume solely for ATOM,
however, the other cryptocurrencies exhibited a comparable pattern, and will not be shown
here.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.3 shows the standard trading sessions of the US stock market and various European
and Asian stock markets, as well as the time conversion from their local time to UTC. The
majority of the trading that takes place outside of regular trading hours, i.e., pre-market
and after-hours, tends to occur at the start or end of these periods [61]. In pre-market
trading, the majority of the trades happen from 12:00 to 13:30 UCT, just before the U.S.
markets open. The after-hours session also shows a similar trend, with most trades taking
place before 22:30 UCT.
Table 4.3: Time conversion for various European and U.S. stock exchanges from local time
to UTC with Daylight Saving Time (DST)
Stock Exchange
Local Time
UTC Time (with DST)
New York Stock Exchange
09:30 - 16:00
13:30 - 20:00
Pre-Market
04:00 - 09:30
08:00 - 13:30
After-Hours
16:00 - 20:00
20:00 - 00:00
London Stock Exchange
08:00 - 16:30
07:00 - 15:30
Euronext
09:00 - 17:30
07:00 - 15:30
Frankfurt Stock Exchange
09:00 - 17:30
07:00 - 15:30.
Borsa Italiana
09:00 - 17:30
07:00 - 15:30
Tokyo Stock Exchange
09:00 - 15:00
00:00 - 06:00
Shanghai Stock Exchange
09:30 - 15:00
01:30 - 07:00
Hong Kong Stock Exchange
09:30 - 16:00
01:30 - 08:00
Considering this domain-specific knowledge and reassessing Figure 4.3, the volume varia-
tion can be more comprehensively interpreted. There is a noticeable increase in volume
from 07:00 to 08:00, which coincides with the opening of pre-market trading activity in the
U.S. Subsequently, there is a significant surge in volume from 11:00 to 12:00, which aligns
with the majority of pre-market trades occurring in the U.S. The volume continues to rise
from 12:00 to 16:00, with the U.S. market opening at 13:30. After 16:00, the volume drops
and decreases to its lowest point at 21:00 as the U.S. market closes for the day at 20:00.
There is another spike in volume at 00:00 before it drops again at 01:00, which aligns with
the closure of after-hours trading and the finishing of all trading activities in the US.
In the context of European markets, which open at 07:00 and close at 15:30 UTC, the
volume shows an upward trend from 06:00 to 16:00, corresponding to the active trading
hours in Europe. The drop in volume at 16:00 coincides with the closing of the European
markets.
In contrast, the opening hours in the Asian market do not exhibit a strong
pattern with the volume fluctuations in the cryptocurrency market, as seen in the US and
European markets. However, it is worth noting that the Tokyo stock market opens at
00:00 UTC, which aligns with the spike in volume during that specific hour.
Figure 4.3b doesn’t show significant fluctuations in aggregation throughout the day of
the week.
Nevertheless, the volume is consistently higher on weekdays as opposed to
weekends. Based on these observations, it might be beneficial for the models to integrate
the time-of-day and day-of-week as time indicators to effectively capture the trend in the
volume and ascertain an optimal time to place an order.
30
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.4 shows the correlation heatmap of the simple returns for each cryptocurrency. As
observed from the figure, all cryptocurrencies demonstrate a positive correlation. Among
them, BCH and ETC stand out as the pair with the highest correlation of 0.73. This
suggests that creating a portfolio from these cryptocurrencies would lack diversification.
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
0.62
0.61
0.73
0.48
0.5
0.48
0.67
0.7
0.67
0.52
0.6
0.66
0.63
0.48
0.66
0.61
0.66
0.63
0.49
0.66
0.62
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
Figure 4.4: Correlation heatmap of the returns for each cryptocurrency.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
31
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Feature Engineering and Selection
As covered before, the OHLCV data is complex and technical indicators play a crucial
role in the identification of trends within the data. This section gives better intuition of
the technical indicators listed in Table 3.3 and explained in section 3.2.
The first set of technical indicators from the Trend category is the relative difference of
moving averages for different periods, in Figure 4.5a and 4.5b, the SMA and EMA for 5
and 20 periods are shown, along the relative difference. In Figure 4.5c, it’s shown when
the relative difference is negative, the closing price experiences a downtrend and vice versa
for positive values.
The MACD and Bollinger Bands are similar to the relative difference indicators as MACD
shows the relationship between two moving averages, and the Bollinger bands are at a
standard deviation level above and below a simple moving average of the close price.
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
27.0
27.5
28.0
28.5
29.0
29.5
30.0
30.5
Close Price for ATOM
Price
SMA5
SMA20
(a) 5-period SMA and 20-period SMA along with
the close price.
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
27.0
27.5
28.0
28.5
29.0
29.5
30.0
30.5
Close Price for ATOM
Price
EMA5
EMA20
(b) 5-period EMA and 20-period EMA along
with the close price.
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
-1.00
-0.75
-0.50
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Relative Difference
SMA5-20
EMA5-20
(c) The relative difference between the moving averages.
Figure 4.5: Simple moving average (SMA) and exponential moving average (EMA) along
the relative difference. A positive difference suggests an uptrend, while a negative differ-
ence suggests a downtrend.
32
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:41==
27.0
27.5
28.0
28.5
29.0
29.5
30.0
30.5
Close Price for ATOM
Price
EMA12
EMA26
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
MACD and Signal Line
MACD
Signal
(a) MACD and the Signal line.
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
26
27
28
29
30
31
Close Price for ATOM
Price
SMA20
Upper band
Lower band
(b) Bollinger Bands with SMA(20)
The Aroon Oscillator (AO14), Average Directional Index (ADX14), and the difference
between Positive Directional Index (DI+) and Negative Directional Index (DI-) named
(WD14) are all indicators that help identify trends and the strength of trends.
27.5
30.0
Close Price
Price
-100
0
100
AO14
AO14
25
50
75
ADX14
ADX14
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
0
1000
WD14
WD14
Figure 4.7: Trend Indicators, AO14, ADX14, and WD14, that are commonly used to
identify strength and direction of trends.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
33
==PAGE:42==
AO14 readings above zero indicate that an uptrend is present, while readings below zero
indicate that a downtrend is present. If the value moves above 50 or below -50, the signal
is considered strong [62]. When the ADX indicator is above 25, the trend, either uptrend
or downtrend, is considered strong, while if the ADX is below 20, the price is said trendless
[63]. WD calculates the absolute difference between the positive and negative directional
index, giving the magnitude of the difference. The higher value, the stronger the trend
[64], [65].
The next category in Table 3.3 is Volatility. These indicators measure price variation and
the rate of change of price movements. The indicators are shown in Figure 4.8. Figure 4.8a
shows the technical indicators that are often associated with identifying trends using price
data and volume. PPO-12-26 shows the relationship between the 12-period moving average
and the 26-period moving average in percentage terms. The PPO generates trade signals
in the same way as the MACD. When the PPO is above zero, it’s considered an uptrend,
and when it’s below zero, it’s considered a downtrend [53]. TSI is a momentum oscillator
used to identify trends and reversals. Similar to the PPO, a positive value indicates an
uptrend, while a negative indicates a downtrend [49]. ATRP is used to measure volatility.
It’s calculated as the Average True Range (ATR) indicator divided by the close price,
allowing ATRP to be compared to other cryptocurrencies or financial assets, where ATR
does not [52]. The ATR decomposes the entire range of the price for each 15-minute time
period, taking into account any gaps in the price movement. The price range is the High,
Low, and Close prices.
28
29
30
Close Price
Price
-1
0
1
PPO12-26
PPO12-26
-20
0
20
40
TSI
TSI 25
TSI Signal
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
ATRP14
ATRP14
(a) Volatility trend indicators that identify and
follow the trend of the close price.
28
29
30
Close Price
Price
0
50
100
SO14
%K 14
%D 3
0
25
50
75
RSI14
RSI14
-50
0
50
CMO14
CMO14
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Date
0
25
50
75
100
MFI14
MFI14
(b) Volatility oscillators, designed to signal po-
tential reversals in closing price.
Figure 4.8: Volatility oscillators used to measure price variation and the rate of change of
price movements.
34
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.8b shows the indicators used to signal potential reversals in price. They fluctuate
above and below a centerline or between set levels and are often used to find overbought
or oversold conditions. Stochastic oscillators (SO) measure recent prices on a scale of 0 to
100, with measurements above 80 indicating that an asset is overbought and measurements
below 20 indicating that it is oversold. The SO indicator consists of two lines, %K-14,
usually referred to as the fast stochastic oscillator, and is calculated over 14 periods, and
%D-3, which is a 3-period moving average of %K-14. RSI is a momentum oscillator that
measures the speed and change of price movements [50]. The RSI oscillates between zero
and 100. The RSI is considered overbought when above 70 and oversold when below 30
[48]. CMO measures the trend strength. The higher the absolute value of the CMO, the
stronger the trend, and conversely, the lower absolute values of the CMO indicate a weak
trend. CMO indicates overbought conditions when it reaches the 50 level and oversold
conditions when it reaches −50 [51]. MFI generates overbought or oversold signals, similar
to RSI, except it uses both prices and volume data. An MFI reading above 80 is considered
overbought, and an MFI reading below 20 is considered oversold [66].
The final category in Table 3.3 is Volume. These indicators are based on volume and help
understand the intensity or conviction behind a price trend. The indicators are shown in
Figure 4.9.
PVO12-26 is a momentum oscillator that calculates the percentage difference between the
12-period moving average and the 26-period moving average of the volume. Generally
speaking, volume is above average when the PVO is positive and below average when
the PVO is negative.
PVO is shown with a 9-period moving average signal line (like
MACD). The ADL and OBV are cumulative indicators that add volume on up days and
subtract it on down days, providing a running total. It helps confirm price trends and spot
divergences. Meaning if the price is rising, but the indicator is falling, then it suggests that
the accumulation volume may not be enough to support the price rise, and a price decline
could be forthcoming [54], [55]. The Force Index combines volume and price to measure
the strength of uptrends and downtrends. A high positive value indicates strong buying
pressure, and a large negative value indicates strong selling pressure. A rising force index
above zero helps confirm uptrends, while a falling force index below zero helps confirm
downtrends [56].
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
35
==PAGE:44==
28
29
30
Close Price
Close Price
-20
0
20
40
PVO-12-26 and Signal
PVO-12-26
PVO signal
5.74
5.76
5.78
ADL
1e7
ADL
3.0
3.5
4.0
OBV
1e6
OBV
00:00
15-Feb
2022
00:00
16-Feb
00:00
17-Feb
12:00
12:00
12:00
Time
-20000
0
20000
FI 13 and FI 50
FI-13
FI-50
Figure 4.9: Volume trends.
36
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:45==
The technical indicators listed in Table 3.3 and visually represented within this section
demonstrate substantial similarity.
The motivation behind the utilization of these in-
dicators is to extract varied insights and help create a comprehensive picture of market
behavior. Combining these indicators can improve the robustness and reliability of a trad-
ing strategy. However, it is important to note that if the correlation among the features is
excessively high, their individual contributions to the model may be marginal. Moreover,
this excessive correlation could potentially distract from other features within the model
that might be of considerable significance. In Figure 4.10, a correlation heatmap of each
feature is shown.
Open
High
Low
Close
Volume
Pct
SMA5-20
SMA8-15
SMA20-50
EMA5-20
EMA8-15
EMA20-50
MACD
MACD˙signal
AO14
ADX14
WD14
upper˙band
lower˙band
PPO˙12˙26
RSI˙14
TSI˙25
TSI˙25˙signal
MFI˙14
%K˙14
%D˙14
CMO˙14
ATRP˙14
PVO˙12˙26
PVO˙signal
ADL
OBV
FI˙13
FI˙50
Open
High
Low
Close
Volume
Pct
SMA5-20
SMA8-15
SMA20-50
EMA5-20
EMA8-15
EMA20-50
MACD
MACD˙signal
AO14
ADX14
WD14
upper˙band
lower˙band
PPO˙12˙26
RSI˙14
TSI˙25
TSI˙25˙signal
MFI˙14
%K˙14
%D˙14
CMO˙14
ATRP˙14
PVO˙12˙26
PVO˙signal
ADL
OBV
FI˙13
FI˙50
1.00
1.00 1.00
1.00 1.00 1.00
0.20 0.21 0.20 0.20
-0.01 -0.00 -0.00 0.01 0.03
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.05
0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.04 0.04 0.94
0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.04 -0.00 0.36 0.28
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.14 0.95 0.86 0.56
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.11 0.97 0.89 0.54 1.00
0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.06 0.02 0.53 0.46 0.92 0.68 0.67
0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.06 0.04 0.68 0.61 0.68 0.76 0.76 0.73
0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.00 0.51 0.45 0.78 0.62 0.62 0.79 0.95
-0.01 -0.01 -0.00 -0.00 0.02 0.09 0.69 0.67 0.20 0.65 0.66 0.32 0.44 0.32
-0.03 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 0.11 -0.00 -0.03 -0.03 -0.05 -0.05 -0.05 -0.05 -0.03 -0.04 -0.03
-0.07 -0.08 -0.07 -0.07 -0.04 0.00 -0.03 -0.04 -0.03 -0.04 -0.04 -0.04 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 0.56
1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.21 -0.00 -0.01 -0.01 0.02 -0.00 -0.00 0.02 0.01 0.02 -0.02 -0.02 -0.07
1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.19 -0.00 -0.01 -0.01 0.02 -0.00 -0.00 0.02 0.01 0.02 -0.02 -0.04 -0.08 1.00
0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.05 0.82 0.74 0.82 0.92 0.92 0.89 0.83 0.79 0.54 -0.06 -0.04 0.01 0.01
-0.01 -0.00 -0.00 -0.00 0.03 0.41 0.66 0.58 0.24 0.73 0.71 0.34 0.45 0.30 0.68 -0.02 -0.02 -0.02 -0.02 0.55
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.06 0.72 0.64 0.71 0.80 0.80 0.77 0.70 0.67 0.63 -0.05 -0.05 -0.01 -0.01 0.87 0.65
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.01 0.59 0.52 0.80 0.70 0.70 0.82 0.69 0.70 0.49 -0.06 -0.05 -0.01 -0.01 0.85 0.47 0.97
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.13 0.69 0.65 0.27 0.68 0.69 0.39 0.48 0.37 0.75 -0.03 -0.04 0.01 0.00 0.59 0.72 0.70 0.57
-0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 0.01 0.39 0.57 0.54 0.06 0.59 0.57 0.17 0.32 0.16 0.65 -0.00 -0.01 -0.03 -0.03 0.38 0.90 0.45 0.26 0.62
-0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 0.02 0.13 0.69 0.64 0.10 0.67 0.66 0.23 0.39 0.22 0.78 -0.01 -0.01 -0.03 -0.03 0.47 0.83 0.55 0.36 0.70 0.90
-0.01 -0.01 -0.00 -0.00 0.03 0.23 0.77 0.73 0.23 0.76 0.76 0.37 0.50 0.36 0.83 -0.02 -0.03 -0.02 -0.02 0.62 0.86 0.72 0.56 0.86 0.78 0.83
0.18 0.19 0.18 0.18 0.50 -0.00 -0.09 -0.08 -0.13 -0.12 -0.13 -0.17 -0.09 -0.09 -0.04 0.10 0.03 0.20 0.17 -0.15 -0.04 -0.06 -0.06 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.04
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.45 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.24 0.15 0.02 0.01 0.03 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.11
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.23 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.00 0.34 0.30 0.03 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.05 0.05 0.02 -0.00 0.00 0.01 0.15 0.75
0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.19 -0.00 -0.00 -0.00 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.02 -0.02 -0.07 0.75 0.75 -0.01 -0.02 -0.02 -0.02 0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.02 0.16 0.03 0.03
0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.15 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.00 -0.03 -0.05 0.70 0.70 0.04 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.02 -0.01 -0.01 0.00 0.06 0.01 0.01 0.38
0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.18 0.24 0.46 0.41 0.21 0.51 0.49 0.29 0.52 0.37 0.22 0.01 0.00 0.04 0.04 0.41 0.32 0.28 0.22 0.26 0.25 0.25 0.29 0.01 0.05 0.05 0.02 0.07
0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.20 0.12 0.43 0.38 0.45 0.51 0.50 0.53 0.67 0.64 0.18 -0.00 -0.01 0.10 0.09 0.54 0.25 0.36 0.35 0.23 0.15 0.17 0.24 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.04 0.13 0.81
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 4.10: Correlation among the technical indicators for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
As observed, a substantial correlation exists among specific indicators, particularly the
upper and lower bands of the Bollinger Bands and the price features. This provides a
basis for excluding these indicators and instead concentrating solely on the Close price.
4.3
Experimental Setup
As mentioned in Section 3.7, each model has a set of hyperparameters that need to be ini-
tialized and tuned to get optimal results through cross-validation. For the Random Forest
model, the best configuration of parameters specific to each cryptocurrency is detailed in
Tables 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9. In the case of the single Decision Tree model, the chosen set of
parameters for fine-tuning is described in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Parameter grid used for hyperparameter tuning for the Decision Tree model.
Hyperparameter
Values
class_weight
balanced, custom_weights
criterion
gini
min_samples_leaf
5, 10, 15, 30
min_samples_split
5, 10, 15, 30
max_features
sqrt, 0.5, None
max_depth
5, 7, 10
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
37
==PAGE:46==
Moving on to the Random Forest model, it should be noted that being an ensemble of De-
cision Trees, this model needs tuning of additional parameters compared to those required
by the single Decision Tree. The complete set of parameters chosen for hyperparameter
tuning of the Random Forest model is detailed in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Parameter grid used for hyperparameter tuning in the Random Forest model.
Hyperparameter
Values
bootstrap
True
class_weight
balanced, custom_weights
criterion
gini
min_samples_leaf
5, 10, 15, 30
min_samples_split
5, 10, 15, 30
n_estimators
500
max_features
sqrt
max_depth
5, 7, 10
The parameter class_weight can be set in two ways, using the built-in balanced mode
or by assigning custom weights. Let’s explore these modes in more detail. The balanced
mode uses the values of the target class to adjust weights inversely proportional to class
frequencies [59]. This puts higher weight on less common classes. To enhance this effect,
particularly for the most critical classes similar to what was done in section 3.6.3 with the
custom scoring function, custom weights are introduced. These specially assigned weights
for each class label are demonstrated in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Comparison of class weights assigned using the balanced method and custom
method for different labeling methods. The Balanced weights are for the cryptocurrency
ATOM.
Labeling Method
Balanced Weights
Custom Weights
Five Class
{0: 0.52, 1: 0.53, 2: 8.73, 3: 1.84, 4: 1.83}
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 1, 3: 6, 4: 6}
NPMM
{2: 0.40, 0: 3.73, 1: 4.06}
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
Threshold
{0: 0.55, 1: 0.50, 2: 8.73, 3: 1.84, 4: 1.83}
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 1, 3: 6, 4: 6}
Table 4.6 shows that the NPMM class is less influenced by the class weighting since the
more critical classes (0 and 1) are assigned higher weights due to being less frequent, while
class 2 has lower weight due to being more common yet less significant. On the contrary,
both the five class and Threshold labeling methods put the greatest emphasis on class 2
due to being less frequent in these labeling approaches. The custom_weights is introduced
as a parameter during the exhaustive grid search, enabling the model to be trained and
then select the weights that yield the highest score.
38
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:47==
4.3.1
Tuning Random Forest
The exhaustive grid search was performed using the time-series split shown in 3.4 while
refitting the models using the custom score function outlined in section 3.6.3, with the
objective of maximizing the cost in equation 3.21. The optimal parameters for each cryp-
tocurrency using different labeling methods are shown in Tables 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9.
Table 4.7: Optimal hyperparameters obtained from the exhaustive search for the Random
Forest model with five class labeling method.
bootstrap
class_weight
criterion
min_samples_leaf
min_samples_split
n_estimators
max_features
max_depth
ATOM
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
30
500
sqrt
7
BCH
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
15
5
500
sqrt
7
ETC
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
30
5
500
sqrt
5
HBAR
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
15
500
sqrt
7
LINK
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
15
500
sqrt
7
XLM
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
30
500
sqrt
7
XMR
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
15
15
500
sqrt
7
Table 4.8: Optimal hyperparameters obtained from the exhaustive search for the Random
Forest model with NPMM labeling method.
bootstrap
class_weight
criterion
min_samples_leaf
min_samples_split
n_estimators
max_features
max_depth
ATOM
True
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
BCH
True
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
ETC
True
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
HBAR
True
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
LINK
True
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
XLM
True
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
XMR
True
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
15
500
sqrt
10
Table 4.9: Optimal hyperparameters obtained from the exhaustive search for the Random
Forest model with Threshold labeling method.
bootstrap
class_weight
criterion
min_samples_leaf
min_samples_split
n_estimators
max_features
max_depth
ATOM
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
30
5
500
sqrt
5
BCH
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
15
500
sqrt
10
ETC
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
15
500
sqrt
10
HBAR
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
LINK
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
10
5
500
sqrt
10
XLM
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
15
5
500
sqrt
10
XMR
True
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
5
500
sqrt
10
The results for the Five-Class labeling method differ from the other labeling method,
leading to a decision to revisit the training process for the Five-Class labeling and constrain
the model to select only custom weights to achieve a more balanced and reliable prediction
across all class labels.
The reason for this is elaborated in section 4.3.3.
Aside from
that, the results present substantial similarities for each of the cryptocurrencies and even
between different labeling methods. We will now delve deeper into the classification results
using the ATOM cryptocurrency across all labeling methods.
Figure 4.11a presents the progress of the tuning process during cross-validation for the
Five-Class labeling method. This figure illustrates the custom score for both the training
and validation datasets. On the other hand, Figure 4.11b shows the F1 score. The training
score experiences significantly more variation than the validation score when hyperparam-
eters change, suggesting that the Random Forest model does not enhance classification
accuracy with a more complex model. The parameters that have the most impact on the
training are the class_weight and max_depth of the tree. The three noticeable increments
in the training score curve represent changes in max_depth while the drop corresponds to
a transition from class_weight to balanced weights.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
39
==PAGE:48==
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Score [Custom Scorer]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using Custom Scorer
Training score
Validation score
(a) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
Score [F1 Macro]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using F1 Macro
Training score
Validation score
(b) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
Figure 4.11: Comparison of Custom Score and F1 Score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency using Five-Class labeling.
Figure 4.12a presents the confusion matrix for the Five-Class labeling. The first row of the
figure represents the class label 0 and displays how frequently each class was predicted for
this label. The Random Forest model most often correctly identifies class 0 as 0. However,
it also frequently misclassifies class 0 as 1, which is an error. The third most common
prediction for class 0 is class 3, an uptrend that doesn’t exactly match the intended target
of class 0. Class 4 is the second to last frequently predicted class, while class 2 is never
predicted when the actual label is class 0.
0
1
2
3
4
Predicted label
0
1
2
3
4
True label
4745
3590
0
274
181
4229
4250
0
275
196
273
245
0
30
21
575
479
0
207
99
609
414
0
195
117
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
(a) Confusion matrix for ATOM
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Feature Importance Score
ATRP˙14
Volume
EMA5-20
Close
FI˙13
EMA8-15
ADL
PPO˙12˙26
Pct
FI˙50
EMA20-50
SMA5-20
SMA8-15
RSI˙14
SMA20-50
%K˙14
MACD
WD14
TSI˙25
MACD˙signal
OBV
TSI˙25˙signal
%D˙14
PVO˙12˙26
CMO˙14
ADX14
MFI˙14
PVO˙signal
AO14
Features
Visualizing Important Features for ATOMUSDT
(b) Feature importance
Figure 4.12: Confusion matrix and the feature importance for the ATOM using five class
labeling.
Figure 4.12b visualizes the feature’s importance in the Random Forest model. The Average
True Range Percentage (ATRP) is the most important feature of the ATOM cryptocur-
rency, while the Volume is the second most significant feature.
40
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:49==
Let’s now shift our attention to the results obtained through the NPMM labeling method.
As detailed in Figure 4.13, the training and validation scores from the cross-validation
move in synchrony with changing hyperparameters, demonstrating a better outcome when
compared to the Five-Class labeling method.
As previously observed, the parameters
exerting the most substantial influence are the class_weight and max_depth of the tree.
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
Score [custom scorer]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using custom scorer
Training score
Validation score
(a) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
Score [F1 Macro]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using F1 Macro
Training score
Validation score
(b) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
Figure 4.13: Comparison of Custom Score and F1 Score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency using NPMM labeling.
The confusion matrix in Figure 4.14a shows that class label 0 is barely misclassified as class
label 1, indicating exceptional model performance. However, there are still a few instances
where the model predicted class label 0 as class 2. In Figure 4.14b, the feature importance
is now more dispersed than previously observed. Notably, the Relative Strength Index
(RSI) holds the most importance for the ATOM coin.
0
1
2
Predicted label
0
1
2
True label
1576
8
249
5
1433
248
3919
3848
9718
2000
4000
6000
8000
(a) Confusion matrix for ATOM
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
Feature Importance Score
RSI˙14
EMA5-20
%K˙14
EMA8-15
CMO˙14
%D˙14
FI˙13
SMA5-20
PPO˙12˙26
MACD
Pct
TSI˙25
MFI˙14
AO14
SMA8-15
TSI˙25˙signal
MACD˙signal
PVO˙12˙26
SMA20-50
WD14
ADX14
EMA20-50
Volume
PVO˙signal
ATRP˙14
FI˙50
ADL
Close
OBV
Features
Visualizing Important Features for ATOMUSDT
(b) Feature importance
Figure 4.14: Confusion matrix and the feature importance for the ATOM using NPMM
labeling.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
41
==PAGE:50==
Lastly, we turn our attention to the outcomes of the grid search utilizing the Threshold
labeling method. While the movement of the training and validation scores observed in
Figure 4.15 is not as closely synchronized as seen with the NPMM labeling, they surpass
the scores obtained through the Five-Class labeling.
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Score [custom scorer]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using custom scorer
Training score
Validation score
(a) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
Score [F1 Macro]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using F1 Macro
Training score
Validation score
(b) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
Figure 4.15: Comparison of Custom Score and F1 Score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency using Threshold labeling.
As shown in Figure 4.16a, the confusion matrix under the Threshold labeling method
presents markedly superior results compared to the Five-Class labeling, although not as
exceptional as the ones achieved using NPMM labeling. As for the feature importance
illustrated in Figure 4.16b, it’s similar to the Five-Class method.
However, there’s a
slightly greater distribution of feature importance but not to the extent witnessed in the
NPMM labeling.
0
1
2
3
4
Predicted label
0
1
2
3
4
True label
6889
1182
0
4
31
1319
8242
0
70
3
259
308
0
0
2
635
678
0
38
9
602
677
0
40
16
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
(a) Confusion matrix for ATOM
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Feature Importance Score
TSI˙25
PPO˙12˙26
MACD
ATRP˙14
TSI˙25˙signal
MACD˙signal
EMA5-20
SMA20-50
Volume
EMA8-15
EMA20-50
FI˙13
SMA5-20
FI˙50
RSI˙14
Pct
CMO˙14
SMA8-15
Close
ADL
MFI˙14
%K˙14
AO14
%D˙14
WD14
ADX14
PVO˙12˙26
PVO˙signal
OBV
Features
Visualizing Important Features for ATOMUSDT
(b) Feature importance
Figure 4.16: Confusion matrix and the feature importance for the ATOM using Threshold
labeling.
42
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:51==
Undeniably, the NPMM labeling method stands out as the most promising, producing
the best results in the grid search. Moving forward, we can examine the performance of
the models using the optimal parameters listed in Tables 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9. The time-of-
day and day-of-week features displayed in Figure 4.3 had no feature importance and were
excluded. Additionally, the open, high, and low prices, as well as the Bollinger Bands,
were also excluded as they had a perfect positive correlation with the close price.
4.3.2
Tuning Decision Tree
The process of tuning the hyperparameters for the baseline model followed the same
methodology used for the Random Forest model, with the primary difference being that we
are working with a single Decision Tree, not an ensemble of trees like in a Random Forest.
The most influential parameters in the training of the Decision Tree (DT) are max_depth
and max_features. Here, max_features denotes the number of features considered when
deciding the best split.
Details of training and tuning of the baseline decision model are described in Appendix C,
for more in-depth details on the tuning process of the Decision Tree model. The optimal
parameters for each model are compiled in tables 4.10, 4.11 and 4.12.
Table 4.10: Optimal hyperparameters obtained from the exhaustive search for the Decision
Tree model with the Five-class labeling method.
class_weight
criterion
min_samples_leaf
min_samples_split
max_features
max_depth
ATOM
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
15
5
None
5
BCH
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
30
5
None
5
ETC
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
5
None
5
HBAR
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
10
5
None
5
LINK
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
30
0.5
5
XLM
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
30
5
0.5
5
XMR
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
15
5
None
5
Table 4.11: Optimal hyperparameters obtained from the exhaustive search for the Decision
Tree model with NPMM labeling method.
class_weight
criterion
min_samples_leaf
min_samples_split
max_features
max_depth
ATOM
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
None
10
BCH
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
0.5
10
ETC
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
15
5
0.5
10
HBAR
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
5
5
None
7
LINK
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
15
5
None
5
XLM
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
30
5
None
10
XMR
{0: 6, 1: 6, 2: 0.5}
gini
30
5
0.5
10
Table 4.12: Optimal hyperparameters obtained from the exhaustive search for the Decision
Tree model with Threshold labeling method.
class_weight
criterion
min_samples_leaf
min_samples_split
max_features
max_depth
ATOM
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
5
None
5
BCH
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
30
5
None
5
ETC
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
30
5
None
5
HBAR
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
5
5
None
5
LINK
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
10
5
0.5
7
XLM
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
15
5
0.5
7
XMR
{0: 3, 1: 3, 2: 0.5, 3: 6, 4: 6}
gini
15
5
0.5
5
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
43
==PAGE:52==
4.3.3
Affect from Custom Class Weights
Here the importance of the custom weights detailed in Table 4.6 is emphasized, especially
for the highly imbalanced datasets using five class and Threshold labeling.
In Figure
4.17, the confusion matrix for the ATOM cryptocurrency is shown for two different sets
of parameters. Delving deeper into the classification outcomes for ATOM using different
weight schema, namely the custom weights and balanced weights, we focus on Figure 4.17,
which presents their respective confusion matrices. The ATOM coin using the balanced
weights, as illustrated in 4.17b, predicts class label 2 most often and achieves the highest
score.
However, this approach is undesirable behavior compared to the ATOM using custom
weights in 4.17a, where class label 2 is the least frequently predicted. This discrepancy
comes from the fact that the custom cost matrix in equation 3.19 rewards the model for
correct classification pushing the model to make better predictions based on our domain
knowledge. This did not significantly impact the NPMM labeling. The balanced setting
assigns greater weight to the crucial classes and reduces the weight of the most common
class, labeled as 2. Based on these observations, it was concluded that all models should
be constrained to select only custom weights to achieve a more balanced and reliable
prediction across all class labels.
0
1
2
3
4
Predicted label
0
1
2
3
4
True label
4745
3590
0
274
181
4229
4250
0
275
196
273
245
0
30
21
575
479
0
207
99
609
414
0
195
117
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
(a) Confusion matrix for the ATOM coin using
custom class weights.
0
1
2
3
4
Predicted label
0
1
2
3
4
True label
1220
1114
3611
498
352
885
1277
3501
405
362
411
614
1430
136
97
301
222
1101
546
371
269
247
1087
484
463
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
(b) Confusion matrix for the ATOM coin using
balanced class weights.
Figure 4.17: Comparison of confusion matrices for ATOM using different weights schema.
4.4
Model Performance
This section provides a summary of classification performance for the models used in the
study. All models were fitted using the parameter configuration explicated in the previous
section on an unseen test dataset. The remaining 20% of the data is used for testing,
covering May 27th to Dec 31st 2022. See Table 3.4.
4.4.1
Random Forest Performance
Let’s start by looking at the performance of the Random forest models. Table 4.13 outlines
the performance scores for the evaluation metrics outlined in section 3.6, considering
all labeling methods and cryptocurrencies. In the study, a model was created for each
cryptocurrency. This resulted in seven models for each labeling method, which brings the
total number of models to 21.
44
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:53==
Table 4.13: Comparison of Random Forest models performance across different labeling
methods for each cryptocurrency. Average scores for each evaluation metric are calculated
over all cryptocurrencies for each labeling method.
F1 Macro Weighted
Balanced Accuracy
Custom Score
Labeling
Five Class
NPMM
Threshold
Five Class
NPMM
Threshold
Five Class
NPMM
Threshold
ATOM
0.253
0.514
0.329
0.251
0.755
0.349
-0.162
0.212
0.410
BCH
0.248
0.552
0.322
0.259
0.740
0.360
-0.264
0.305
0.202
ETC
0.276
0.524
0.359
0.281
0.743
0.371
-0.221
0.291
0.263
HBAR
0.234
0.566
0.312
0.256
0.735
0.362
-0.274
0.260
0.182
LINK
0.256
0.520
0.359
0.254
0.752
0.371
-0.167
0.225
0.407
XLM
0.224
0.555
0.315
0.239
0.742
0.356
-0.241
0.243
0.280
XMR
0.204
0.538
0.325
0.245
0.756
0.354
-0.236
0.211
0.275
Average
0.242
0.538
0.332
0.255
0.746
0.360
-0.224
0.250
0.288
It’s worth noting that if your classifier achieves a balanced accuracy of 0.2 on a Five-
Class problem (Five-Class and Threshold labeling), and a balanced accuracy of 0.333 on
a three-class problem (NPMM labeling), it is performing similarly to a random classifier.
Upon closer inspection of the different labeling methods, Table 4.14 presents the average
outcomes for each metric.
Table 4.14: Comparison of the average score from the Random Forest models. F1 Macro
Weighted, Balanced Accuracy, and Custom Score Metrics Across Different Labeling Meth-
ods (Five-Class, NPMM, Threshold).
Evaluation Metrics
Labeling Methods
F1 Macro Weighted
Balanced Accuracy
Custom Score
Five-Class
0.242
0.255
-0.224
NPMM
0.538
0.746
0.250
Threshold
0.332
0.360
0.288
Overall, the NPMM labeling method excels in F1 score and balanced accuracy compared
to other labeling techniques. However, the Threshold method had a higher custom score
than the NPMM method, while the Five-Class labeling method yielded a negative custom
score and the lowest score in each metric.
4.4.2
Decision Tree Performance
The assessment of the classification performance of the Decision Tree models follows the
same procedure as before and Table 4.15 presents the performance scores for the evalua-
tion metrics, considering all labeling methods and cryptocurrencies for the Decision Tree
models.
Table 4.15: Comparison of Decision Tree models performance across different labeling
methods for each cryptocurrency. Average scores for each evaluation metric are calculated
over all cryptocurrencies for each labeling method.
F1 Macro Weighted
Balanced Accuracy
Custom Score
Labeling
Five Class
NPMM
Threshold
Five Class
NPMM
Threshold
Five Class
NPMM
Threshold
ATOM
0.240
0.450
0.330
0.249
0.735
0.349
-0.183
0.020
0.416
BCH
0.252
0.465
0.345
0.263
0.709
0.370
-0.284
0.056
0.150
ETC
0.281
0.453
0.362
0.291
0.726
0.372
-0.239
0.073
0.212
HBAR
0.236
0.521
0.318
0.256
0.732
0.362
-0.283
0.126
0.161
LINK
0.262
0.476
0.361
0.260
0.745
0.370
-0.174
0.092
0.370
XLM
0.167
0.501
0.314
0.229
0.731
0.352
-0.277
0.087
0.250
XMR
0.234
0.471
0.330
0.255
0.733
0.357
-0.255
0.024
0.244
Average
0.239
0.477
0.337
0.258
0.730
0.362
-0.242
0.068
0.258
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 4.16 outlines a closer view of the average outcome from the Decision Tree of each
metric across each labeling method. The findings are consistent with those of the previous
Random Forest model, showing that the NPMM method has the highest F1 score and
balanced accuracy, while the Threshold method achieves the highest custom score. Once
again, the Five-Class method has the lowest score across all metrics. Although the Decision
Tree is only a single tree, it produces promising results, but its performance is not as good
as the Random Forest models illustrated in Table 4.14.
Table 4.16: Comparison of the average score from the Decision Tree models. F1 Macro
Weighted, Balanced Accuracy, and Custom Score Metrics Across Different Labeling Meth-
ods (Five-Class, NPMM, Threshold).
Evaluation Metrics
Labeling Methods
F1 Macro Weighted
Balanced Accuracy
Custom Score
Five-Class
0.239
0.258
-0.242
NPMM
0.477
0.730
0.068
Threshold
0.337
0.362
0.258
4.5
Trading System Performance
Once the models have been trained, it’s time to generate the trading signal and implement
the trading strategies, namely, Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading, as discussed
in section 3.8. These strategies, detailed in Algorithms 1 and 2 respectively, are applied
across each data labeling method.
The parameters within the investment strategies, max holding periods, and trailing stop,
are fine-tuned to optimize the final return on investment, specifically using the test dataset.
The optimization process involved an exhaustive search over max holding periods from 1 to
15 days and trailing stop orders from -1 to -41 at two-step intervals. The parameters that
result in the highest final return will be selected as optimal. If there are two parameters
with identical results, the configuration with the lowest standard deviation will be chosen.
The results of the fine-tuning process are elaborated further in Appendix D.
Since the fine-tuning of these strategies is conducted on the test dataset, it’s necessary
to validate the optimal parameters on a completely new out-of-sample dataset, one that
hasn’t been used by either the models or the strategies. Therefore, data ranging from
January 1st, 2023 to June 30th, 2023 was selected for this validation process. The data
split is outlined in Table 3.4. The optimal parameters for the investment strategies are
shown in Table 4.17
Table 4.17: Optimal parameters for Probabilistic and Diversified Trading using different
labeling methods
Max Holding Period (days)
Trailing Stop Threshold (%)
Five-Class
10
-23
NPMM
12
-21
Probabilistic Trading
Threshold
12
-33
Five-Class
4
-25
NPMM
7
-19
Diversified Trading
Threshold
14
-37
46
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:55==
To underscore the significance of our investment strategies, we construct a portfolio that
executes trades solely based on our model’s predictions. This approach, named No Strat-
egy, is outlined in Algorithm 3 and represented in orange on the graphs, serves to highlight
the eﬀicacy of our strategies. The trading results from the No Strategy algorithm can be
found in Appendix D.
4.5.1
Trading Performance with Random Forest Signals
We will begin by discussing the Five-Class labeling method. Figure 4.18 visualizes the
trading performances over the out-of-sample testing period for the Five-Class labeling
method using Random Forest models. The figure displays each underlying cryptocurrency
that the strategies can open a position in light gray and a Buy & Hold strategy that
buys an equal amount of each coin at the beginning of the period and holds without re-
balancing in blue. The trading strategies appear in red for Probabilistic Trading and green
for Diversified Trading. All portfolios and cryptocurrencies begin with an initial value of
100 USD. By the end of the period, the cumulative return of the Probabilistic strategy
is just below the Buy & Hold strategy, while the cumulative return for the Diversified
strategy ends slightly above zero.
Jan
2023
Feb
2023
Mar
2023
Apr
2023
May
2023
Jun
2023
Jul
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure 4.18:
Trading performance using Random Forest and the Five-Class labeling
method.
Table 4.18 summarizes the performance measures for the Five-Class labeling. The Diver-
sified trading strategy has a winning ratio of 0.847, but it only manages to break above
zero return. However, the payoff ratio is higher than that of the Probabilistic trading
strategy, which resulted in a significantly higher return. The Diversified trading strategy
executes nearly three times more trades compared to the Probabilistic strategy. This is
because the Diversified strategy is capable of buying and selling in multiple coins during
each time step, while the Probabilistic strategy can only execute a maximum of one trade
per time step.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 4.18: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading
utilizing the Five-Class labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Final Return (%)
41.21
0.81
Annualized Return (%)
101.33
1.64
Number of Trades
350
935
Average Holding Period (Hours)
11.55
30.32
Max Drawdown
-0.207
-0.377
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.195
-0.372
Return Standard Deviation
0.0138
0.0070
Winning Ratio
0.929
0.847
Payoff Ratio
0.113
0.182
Profit Factor
1.464
1.007
Next, let’s take a look at the trading outcomes of the NPMM labeling approach. Figure
4.19 displays the trading results over the test period, like previously. Both the Probabilistic
and Diversified strategies end with cumulative returns lower than the Buy & Hold strategy.
However, the Diversified strategy results in positive returns compared to the Five-Class
labeling method.
Jan
2023
Feb
2023
Mar
2023
Apr
2023
May
2023
Jun
2023
Jul
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure 4.19: Trading performance using Random Forest and the NPMM labeling method.
48
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:57==
Table 4.19 presents the performance metrics for the NPMM labeling.
Both strategies
yield positive returns, with the Diversified strategy using NPMM labeling outperforming
in terms of higher return, winning ratio, as well as profit factor compared to the Diversi-
fied strategy using the Five-Class labeling. On the other hand, the Probabilistic strategy
utilizing the NPMM labeling had a higher winning ratio and profit factor but a lower
final return compared to the Five-Class labeling, despite NPMM labeling resulting in sig-
nificantly higher evaluation metrics as seen in Table 4.14. However, the Profit factor for
NPMM labeling is higher, and to recall the Profit factor, being a ratio of total gains to
losses seen in equation 3.25, implies its robustness and overall better performance, espe-
cially evident between mid-February to mid-June seen in Figure 4.19 and 4.18 where the
Probabilistic strategy (shown in red) having higher cumulative return. Thus, despite a
lower final return, the Probabilistic strategy using NPMM labeling is more desirable due
to its enhanced overall performance during the test period, aligning with the model perfor-
mance in Table 4.14, where NPMM had higher scores in all evaluation metrics. However,
both NPMM-based strategies have lower Payoff ratios than the Five-Class labeling, imply-
ing higher average losses against average gains, potentially indicating a riskier approach,
but this is offset by the higher winning ratios, making losses less frequent.
Table 4.19: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading
utilizing the NPMM labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Final Return (%)
37.22
24.65
Annualized Return (%)
89.95
56.32
Number of Trades
144
235
Average Holding Period (Hours)
27.53
41.82
Max Drawdown
-0.229
-0.218
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.197
-0.212
Return Standard Deviation
0.0205
0.0176
Winning Ratio
0.951
0.953
Payoff Ratio
0.080
0.071
Profit Factor
1.568
1.453
Finally, we consider the trading performance for the Threshold labeling method, as visual-
ized in Figure 4.20. Similarly to the other two labeling methods, neither the Probabilistic
nor the Diversified strategy generated a higher final return compared to the Buy & Hold
strategy.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
49
==PAGE:58==
Jan
2023
Feb
2023
Mar
2023
Apr
2023
May
2023
Jun
2023
Jul
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure 4.20:
Trading performance using Random Forest and the Threshold labeling
method.
In Table 4.20, the Diversified Trading strategy shows stronger results than the Five-Class
labeling method but falls short compared to the NPMM labeling method. However, the
Diversified strategy records the highest Payoff ratio among all strategies. Despite this, the
ratio remains below one, indicating that the average losses outweigh the average profit.
The Probabilistic strategy in Table 4.20 with the Threshold labeling method delivers the
lowest return and Profit factor, making it the least preferable option out of the three
labeling methods.
Table 4.20: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading
utilizing the Threshold labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Final Return (%)
20.55
18.77
Annualized Return (%)
46.08
41.73
Number of Trades
75
319
Average Holding Period (Hours)
55.50
116.18
Max Drawdown
-0.396
-0.382
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.390
-0.377
Return Standard Deviation
0.0415
0.0143
Winning Ratio
0.88
0.837
Payoff Ratio
0.169
0.236
Profit Factor
1.243
1.210
50
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:59==
In summary, the Probabilistic trading strategy utilizing the NPMM labeling method shown
in Table 4.19 presents the most promising results, aligning with the model performance
outcomes from the previous section. Interestingly, the Probabilistic trading strategy us-
ing the Five-Class labeling method records the highest final return, while the Diversified
trading strategy for the Five-Class labeling ended up with the worst results among all
methods. The Diversified trading strategies demonstrated a lower standard deviation of
returns across all labeling methods as well a higher payoff ratio for the Five-Class and
Threshold labeling, except for the NPMM method. This indicates that the Diversified
strategy is less risky compared to the Probability strategy.
4.5.2
Trading Performance with Decision Tree Signals
The trading signals from the Decision Tree were generated following the same procedure
as the Random Forest model. In this section, we will discuss the same trading techniques
and models as before with the Random Forest.
Figure 4.21 visualizes the trading performances for the Decision Tree using the Five-
Class labeling method. Neither strategy outperforms the Buy & Hold strategy, and the
Diversified trading strategy results in negative returns. Table 4.21 summarizes that trading
performance for each strategy’s trading performance, and the results are significantly worse
in terms of final returns and risk compared to the Random Forest model in Table 4.18.
Jan
2023
Feb
2023
Mar
2023
Apr
2023
May
2023
Jun
2023
Jul
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure 4.21: Trading performance using Decision Tree and the Five-Class labeling method.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.21: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading
utilizing the Five-Class labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Final Return (%)
24.56
-4.10
Annualized Return (%)
56.09
-8.13
Number of Trades
158
1105
Average Holding Period (Hours)
26.65
24.92
Max Drawdown
-0.318
-0.372
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.307
-0.368
Return Standard Deviation
0.0243
0.0078
Winning Ratio
0.848
0.835
Payoff Ratio
0.221
0.192
Profit Factor
1.234
0.973
Figure 4.22 shows the performance of the Decision Tree using the NPMM labeling method.
The Diversified strategy shows superior results compared to the Probabilistic strategy,
and the previously employed Five-Class labeling method. The Probabilistic strategy yields
lower results using the NPMM labeling compared to the Five-Class labeling, which contra-
dicts the model performance of these two labeling methods. Further information regarding
the trading performance can be found in Table 4.22.
Jan
2023
Feb
2023
Mar
2023
Apr
2023
May
2023
Jun
2023
Jul
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure 4.22: Trading performance using Decision Tree and the NPMM labeling method.
52
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:61==
Table 4.22: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading
utilizing the NPMM labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Final Return (%)
10.55
20.75
Annualized Return (%)
22.54
46.56
Number of Trades
209
384
Average Holding Period (Hours)
18.89
54.46
Max Drawdown
-0.392
-0.349
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.375
-0.325
Return Standard Deviation
0.0247
0.0147
Winning Ratio
0.971
0.940
Payoff Ratio
0.033
0.080
Profit Factor
1.126
1.248
Finally, Figure 4.23 shows the trading progress using Decision Tree and Threshold labeling,
where the Probabilistic strategy results with a final return just below the Buy & Hold
strategy.
As shown in Table 4.23, the Probabilistic strategy using Threshold labeling
records the highest final return and the highest Profit factor among all strategies, whether
utilizing the Decision Tree or Random Forest, this final return is still lower than the Buy
& Hold strategy. The Diversified strategy resulted in higher performances compared to
the Five-Class labeling but lower than the NPMM labeling.
Jan
2023
Feb
2023
Mar
2023
Apr
2023
May
2023
Jun
2023
Jul
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure 4.23: Trading performance using Decision Tree and the Threshold labeling method.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
53
==PAGE:62==
To summarize, the trading strategies had lower performance when using signals from
the Decision Tree presented in this section compared to signals from the Random Forest
model in the previous section. However, the Probabilistic trading strategy, which utilized
a Decision Tree and Threshold labeling, demonstrated the best performance among all the
strategies.
Table 4.23: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading
utilizing the Threshold labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Final Return (%)
47.97
11.55
Annualized Return (%)
121.35
24.82
Number of Trades
95
382
Average Holding Period (Hours)
43.77
112.96
Max Drawdown
-0.266
-0.364
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.214
-0.355
Return Standard Deviation
0.0343
0.0117
Winning Ratio
0.884
0.822
Payoff Ratio
0.205
0.245
Profit Factor
1.564
1.132
54
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:63==
4.6
Importance of Cost-Sensitive Learning
In this section, we demonstrate the effects of utilizing cost-sensitive learning, as explained
in 3.6.3, by training models and selecting parameters to achieve the highest F1 macro-
weighted score rather than using the custom score. Table 4.24 shows the model perfor-
mance when using the F1 macro score. By comparing these results to the average scores
in Table 4.14, where we utilize the highest custom score metric to identify optimal param-
eters, we can observe that F1 macro-weighted approach produced higher scores across all
metrics.
Table 4.24: Average score from the Random Forest models, refitted using F1 Macro
weighted.
Evaluation Metrics
Labeling Methods
F1 Macro Weighted
Balanced Accuracy
Custom Score
Five-Class
0.246
0.257
-0.226
NPMM
0.539
0.746
0.250
Threshold
0.335
0.363
0.291
These models are then used to generate trading signals using the test data, outlined in
Table 3.4, and the investment simulation is performed. Table 4.25 displays each strategy’s
final return, Winning ratio, Payoff ratio, and Profit factor across all labeling methods.
By comparing these results to those in Appendix D, which used cost-sensitive learning, it
is clear that cost-sensitive learning produces higher scores across all metrics compared to
the F1 macro weighted setting showed in Table 4.25, contrary to the model performances
showed before.
Table 4.25: Trading results from the tuning period using F1 macro weighted settings.
Metrics
Final Return
Winning Ratio
Payoff Ratio
Profit Factor
Probabilistic
-49.35%
0.84
0.15
0.80
Five-Class
Diversified
-63.45%
0.74
0.26
0.76
Probabilistic
78.38%
0.97
0.05
1.61
NPMM
Diversified
31.62%
0.93
0.10
1.24
Probabilistic
-47.50%
0.76
0.21
0.67
Threshold
Diversified
-40.90%
0.69
0.34
0.77
In summary, utilizing cost-sensitive learning results in sacrificing model performance to
enhance trading performance. This occurs because cost-sensitive learning penalizes the
model for specific misclassification, as detailed in section 3.6.3.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:65==
5
Discussion
In this section, the findings of this study will be compared to existing literature and other
market benchmarks. This comparison will give an intuition of the study’s performance
within the context of the wider market.
5.1
Comparison with Existing Studies and Benchmarks
The study conducted by [12] involved implementing the NPMM labeling method and
comparing its results with other commonly used labeling techniques. The evaluation was
based on the Winning ratio, Payoff ratio, and Profit factor. Our experiment produced
higher Profit factor and Winning ratio results than the authors’ findings. However, [12]
had a significantly higher Payoff ratio.
The difference in results could be due to the
varying data granularity and the investment strategies implemented. [12] used daily data
with N spanning 31 days, while our study incorporated 15-minute interval data with N
spanning 31 past periods. Additionally, our study involved an investment strategy rather
than opening a position at every predicted trade signal. This approach resulted in a higher
winning ratio and higher average losses that happen less frequently.
In [31], the authors leveraged multiple classification algorithms to classify positive or nega-
tive overreactions in cryptocurrencies using a labeling method that generates three distinct
labels. The study found that their top-performing models achieved F1 weighted scores of
0.77, 0.74, and 0.78 for Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Litecoin, respectively. In contrast, our
study attained an average F1 weighted score of 0.538 using the NPMM labeling method, a
significantly lower performance. Over a one-year period, their investment strategy deliv-
ered returns of 8.63% for Bitcoin, 126.23% for Ethereum, and 68.13% for Litecoin. In our
study, the Probabilistic trading strategy achieved the highest return using the Threshold
labeling and the baseline Decision Tree model, producing a 47.97% return, or 121.35%
when annualized. The Random Forest model with NPMM labeling had a 37.33% return,
or 89.95% when annualized.
In Table 5.1, we have compared the returns of the top-performing trading strategies from
our study with the returns of the Buy & Hold strategy, crypto and stock indices, and
Bitcoin during the test period.
Table 5.1: Returns of different indices compared to the top performing strategies from the
study and the Buy & Hold.
Index/Asset
Return
Bitcoin (BTC)
80.21%
NASDAQ Crypto Index (NCI) [67]
72.90%
Bitwise 10 Crypto Index (BITW) [68]
66.43%
NASDAQ-100 [69]
39.74%
S&P500 [70]
16.38%
MSCI World Index [71]
13.99%
Buy & Hold
52.42%
Probabilistic Trading with Threshold, DT
47.97%
Probabilistic Trading with NPMM, RF
37.22%
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
57
==PAGE:66==
The results in Table 5.1 reveal that our strategies and the crypto market significantly
outperformed the S&P 500 and MSCI World indices. However, the NASDAQ-100 per-
formed better compared to the Probabilistic trading strategy using the NPMM labeling
method and the Random Forest model during the test period. On the other hand, our
best-performing strategies could not outperform any of the crypto benchmarks, and as
previously discussed, even resulted in lower returns than the Buy & Hold strategy.
5.2
Insights
It is worth noting that the basic Decision Tree models had comparable outcomes in terms
of both model and trading performance, with the added benefit that the Decision Tree
model trains significantly faster than Random Forest.
It may be pertinent to explore
further ways to enhance the Decision Tree model, considering its simplicity and superior
computational eﬀiciency over Random Forest.
During the out-of-sample testing, two cryptocurrencies showed remarkable progress. BCH
experienced a 215% increase, and XLM saw a 54% increase. Although our results didn’t
surpass the Buy & Hold strategy in terms of final returns, we obtained higher returns
than most cryptocurrencies, except BCH and XLM, by using Random Forest and NPMM
labeling.
It would be beneficial to test this strategy on data without such significant
growth.
58
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:67==
6
Conclusion and Future Work
This final chapter concludes the study and summarizes the key findings from experiments
of previous chapters in the pursuit of answering the research questions posed at the be-
ginning of the thesis. Furthermore, the limitations are addressed following the potential
for future research.
6.1
Summary of Key Findings
The research investigated the use of machine-learning models to classify the direction of
price trends and generate meaningful trading signals from the input technical indicators
and develop effective investment strategies to generate excess profit compared to the Buy
& Hold. The takeaways of the research are summarized below:
• The use of machine learning, namely Random Forest, to classify NPMM labeling
achieved an F1 macro weighted score of 0.538, balanced accuracy of 0.746, and a
custom score of 0.250.
• Implementing an investment strategy generated a significantly higher return in all
settings compared to trading solely based on predicted signals.
• The use of domain knowledge through cost-sensitive learning proved to yield higher
trading performances at the expense of reduced model evaluation scores.
Despite achieving suﬀicient classification results based on evaluation scores using the
NPMM and threshold labeling, the Buy & Hold strategy still yielded a higher final return,
making these methods less desirable. However, it encourages further study as the clas-
sification results are promising based on the fact that we are able to extract meaningful
trading signals using Random Forest and the NPMM labeling, indicating better perfor-
mance compared to random classifiers based on evaluation scores. The highly imbalanced
datasets with Five-Class and threshold labeling make it diﬀicult to conclude if the models
performed better than a random classifier. The classification results for the Five-Class la-
beling indicate the models were not able to accurately predict the trends. However, based
on the classification results from the threshold labeling, it’s evident from the confusion
matrix shown in 4.16a that the model is able to predict up and downtrend (class labels
1 and 0) suﬀiciently while it is not able to accurately predict the stronger moves, (class
labels 3 and 4), leaving a substantial room for model improvement. Both the Five-Class
and Threshold labeling methods were unable to accurately classify class labels 3 and 4.
This suggests that it may be beneficial to focus on the class labels 0 and 1 instead when
using the Threshold labeling method. Furthermore, it is clear that the choice of labeling
method has a significant impact on the model’s performance, as stated by [12].
The implementation of the investment strategy proved to be a pivotal factor in generating
profit, as trading performance using the No Strategy resulted in negative returns across
all settings. The strategy implemented here is relatively simple, allowing only for long
positions.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
59
==PAGE:68==
The use of cost-sensitive learning, introduced in section 3.6.3, is beneficial for trading
performances where the trading performances increased across all settings in the study.
However, the cost-sensitive learning approach reduces the model evaluation scores sug-
gesting that higher model performances does not result in higher investment returns, as
mentioned at the beginning of this thesis. Assigning custom weights of each target class
improved the classification results for the Five-Class and threshold labeling as explained
in 4.3.3 as the datasets used in the study were highly imbalanced.
6.2
Limitations and Potential Directions for Future
Research
This study focused solely on tree-based algorithms, namely Decision Trees and Random
Forests, to solve the classification task of short-term trend predictions. A drawback of
these algorithms is their inability to learn trends or temporal patterns in the data, as
their goal is to find optimal decision split based on the features to predict the target
variable. For future research, it would be relevant to compare the findings of tree-based
algorithms in this study to machine learning algorithms that are capable of learning time
trends.
The trading strategies implemented in the study proved to generate profit, compared to
trading with the No Strategy, which yielded negative returns for all settings. The param-
eters for the strategy were selected solely based on the best parameters during trading
simulation over the test period, shown in Appendix D. Therefore, a more comprehensive
backtesting of the strategies in order to achieve a more robust investment strategy that
consistently performs well could be beneficial. The strategies introduced in this study
are relatively simple. Enhancements such as incorporating limit orders could potentially
boost performance, and further development could lead to more sophisticated strategies,
including the capability to open both long and short positions. Another limiting factor
of the study is the assumption to open and close a position is always done at the closing
price of the 15-minute time interval for simplicity, which is not always feasible in reality
due to bid-ask spreads. For a more realistic investment simulation, the order book is often
included to calculate the spread between the bid and ask, and a sensitivity analysis on
the bid-ask spread is conducted to see how it affects the performance of the investment
simulation, as shown in the work done in [13].
In this study, the NPMM and threshold labeling methods, introduced in sections 3.3.2 and
3.3.3, respectively, utilized a time frame of 31-terms, covering approximately 8 hours. To
gain a better understanding of how different values of N affect classification results and
trading performance, it would be beneficial to conduct further simulations and investment
simulations. While the authors of [12] found that an N value of 31 produced the best
results, their data granularity was on a daily level, whereas this study’s granularity was
15 minutes.
The cost matrix values used in cost-sensitive learning, as seen in equation 3.19, were chosen
based on the domain knowledge described in section 3.6.3. These values could potentially
be adjusted to enhance both model and trading performance. Exploring the use of other
machine learning models that have the option of being constrained with cost-sensitive
learning could also be beneficial. This is because models like Decision Trees and Random
Forests inherently determine decision splits based on Gini impurity, which may not always
provide the optimal solution.
60
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Dan Ciregan, Ueli Meier, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Multi-column deep neural net-
works for image classification”. In: 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. IEEE. 2012, pp. 3642–3649.
[2]
Gregory Zuckerman. The Man Who Solved the Market: How Jim Simons Launched
the Quant Revolution. Penguin Books, 2019. isbn: 9780735217980.
[3]
Christopher Krauss, Xuan Anh Do, and Nicolas Huck. “Deep neural networks,
gradient-boosted trees, random forests: Statistical arbitrage on the S&P 500”. In:
European Journal of Operational Research 259 (2 June 2017), pp. 689–702. issn:
0377-2217. doi: 10.1016/J.EJOR.2016.10.031.
[4]
Thomas Fischer and Christopher Krauss. “Deep learning with long short-term mem-
ory networks for financial market predictions”. In: European Journal of Operational
Research 270 (2 Oct. 2018), pp. 654–669. issn: 0377-2217. doi: 10.1016/J.EJOR.
2017.11.054.
[5]
Dan Ashmore. Bitcoin price history 2009 to 2022. Feb. 2023. url: https://www.
forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency/bitcoin-price-history/.
[6]
Fan Fang et al. “Cryptocurrency trading: a comprehensive survey”. In: Financial
Innovation 8 (1 2022). issn: 21994730. doi: 10.1186/s40854-021-00321-6.
[7]
Zhongwen Tong, Zhanbo Chen, and Chen Zhu. “Nonlinear dynamics analysis of
cryptocurrency price fluctuations based on Bitcoin”. In: Finance Research Letters 47
(June 2022), p. 102803. issn: 1544-6123. doi: 10.1016/J.FRL.2022.102803.
[8]
Divya Aggarwal. “Do bitcoins follow a random walk model?” In: Research in Eco-
nomics 73 (1 Mar. 2019), pp. 15–22. issn: 10909443. doi: 10.1016/j.rie.2019.01.002.
[9]
Andrew Urquhart. “The ineﬀiciency of Bitcoin”. In: Economics Letters 148 (Nov.
2016), pp. 80–82. issn: 01651765. doi: 10.1016/j.econlet.2016.09.019.
[10]
Elie Bouri et al. “On the hedge and safe haven properties of Bitcoin: Is it really more
than a diversifier?” In: Finance Research Letters 20 (2017), pp. 192–198.
[11]
Christy Dwita Mariana, Irwan Adi Ekaputra, and Zaäfri Ananto Husodo. “Are Bit-
coin and Ethereum safe-havens for stocks during the COVID-19 pandemic?” In:
Finance research letters 38 (2021), p. 101798.
[12]
Yechan Han, Jaeyun Kim, and David Enke. “A machine learning trading system for
the stock market based on N-period Min-Max labeling using XGBoost”. In: Expert
Systems with Applications 211 (2023). issn: 09574174. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2022.
118581.
[13]
Masafumi Nakano, Akihiko Takahashi, and Soichiro Takahashi. “Bitcoin Technical
Trading With Artificial Neural Network”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (2018). doi:
10.2139/ssrn.3128726.
[14]
Rajashree Dash and Pradipta Kishore Dash. “A hybrid stock trading framework
integrating technical analysis with machine learning techniques”. In: Journal of Fi-
nance and Data Science 2 (1 2016). issn: 24059188. doi: 10.1016/j.jfds.2016.03.002.
[15]
Cryptocurrency Exchange for Bitcoin, Ethereum & Altcoins. Accessed: 2023-03-08.
url: https://www.binance.com/en.
[16]
Leo Breiman. “Random forests”. In: Machine learning 45 (2001), pp. 5–32.
[17]
Leo Breiman et al. Classification and regression trees. CRC press, 1984.
[18]
Chao Ma et al. “Cost-sensitive deep forest for price prediction”. In: Pattern Recog-
nition 107 (2020), p. 107499.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
61
==PAGE:70==
[19]
Jigar Patel et al. “Predicting stock and stock price index movement using Trend De-
terministic Data Preparation and machine learning techniques”. In: Expert Systems
with Applications 42 (1 2015). issn: 09574174. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2014.07.040.
[20]
Léo Grinsztajn, Edouard Oyallon, and Gaël Varoquaux. “Why do tree-based models
still outperform deep learning on typical tabular data?” In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), pp. 507–520.
[21]
Au Vo and Christopher Yost-Bremm. “A high-frequency algorithmic trading strat-
egy for cryptocurrency”. In: Journal of Computer Information Systems 60.6 (2020),
pp. 555–568.
[22]
Robert Ślepaczuk and Maryna Zenkova. “Robustness of support vector machines
in algorithmic trading on cryptocurrency market”. In: Central European Economic
Journal 5.52 (2018), pp. 186–205.
[23]
Dharminder Singh Virk. “Prediction of bitcoin price using data mining”. PhD thesis.
Dublin, National College of Ireland, 2017.
[24]
Laura Alessandretti et al. “Anticipating Cryptocurrency Prices Using Machine Learn-
ing”. In: Complexity 2018 (2018). issn: 10990526. doi: 10.1155/2018/8983590.
[25]
Do Hyung Kwon et al. “Time series classification of cryptocurrency price trend based
on a recurrent LSTM neural network”. In: Journal of Information Processing Systems
15 (3 2019). issn: 2092805X. doi: 10.3745/JIPS.03.0120.
[26]
Sashank Sridhar and Sowmya Sanagavarapu. “Multi-Head Self-Attention Trans-
former for Dogecoin Price Prediction”. In: vol. 2021-July. 2021. doi: 10 . 1109 /
HSI52170.2021.9538640.
[27]
Chaojie Wang et al. “Stock market index prediction using deep Transformer model”.
In: Expert Systems with Applications 208 (2022). issn: 09574174. doi: 10.1016/j.
eswa.2022.118128.
[28]
Qiuyue Zhang et al. “Transformer-based attention network for stock movement
prediction”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 202 (2022). issn: 09574174. doi:
10.1016/j.eswa.2022.117239.
[29]
Salman H Khan et al. “Cost-sensitive learning of deep feature representations from
imbalanced data”. In: IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems
29.8 (2017), pp. 3573–3587.
[30]
John J Murphy. Technical analysis of the financial markets: A comprehensive guide
to trading methods and applications. Penguin, 1999.
[31]
Gian Pietro Bellocca et al. “Leveraging the momentum effect in machine learning-
based cryptocurrency trading”. In: Machine Learning with Applications 8 (2022),
p. 100310.
[32]
Giuseppe Attanasio, Luca Cagliero, and Elena Baralis. “Leveraging the explainabil-
ity of associative classifiers to support quantitative stock trading”. In: Proceedings of
the sixth international workshop on data science for macro-modeling. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[33]
Guglielmo Maria Caporale and Alex Plastun. “The day of the week effect in the
cryptocurrency market”. In: Finance Research Letters 31 (2019). issn: 15446123.
doi: 10.1016/j.frl.2018.11.012.
[34]
Shaen Corbet et al. “The effectiveness of technical trading rules in cryptocurrency
markets”. In: Finance Research Letters 31 (2019). issn: 15446123. doi: 10.1016/j.frl.
2019.04.027.
[35]
Dirk F. Gerritsen et al. “The profitability of technical trading rules in the Bitcoin
market”. In: Finance Research Letters 34 (2020). issn: 15446123. doi: 10.1016/j.frl.
2019.08.011.
62
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:71==
[36]
Sirapop Kamrat, Napasorn Suesangiamsakul, and Rangsipan Marukatat. “Technical
Analysis for Cryptocurrency Trading on Mobile Phones”. In: 2019. doi: 10.1109/
TIMES-iCON.2018.8621823.
[37]
Binance. Historical Trading Data. Accessed: 2023-02-15. 2023. url: https://www.
binance.com/en/landing/data.
[38]
Investopedia. Foreign Exchange (Forex) Definition. Accessed: 2023-03-10. 2023. url:
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/forex/f/foreign-exchange-markets.asp.
[39]
Tether. Tether Token. Accessed: 2023-03-10. 2023. url: https://tether.to/en/.
[40]
CoinMarketCap. Cryptocurrency Market Capitalizations | CoinMarketCap. Accessed:
2023-03-10. 2023. url: https://coinmarketcap.com/.
[41]
Multi-strategy quantitative hedge fund. Accessed: 2023-03-08. url: https://qbite.
capital/.
[42]
Binance. binance-public-data. Accessed: 2023-03-10. 2023. url: https://github.com/
binance/binance-public-data/.
[43]
Gian Pietro Bellocca et al. “Leveraging the momentum effect in machine learning-
based cryptocurrency trading”. In: Machine Learning with Applications 8 (2022),
p. 100310.
[44]
James Chen and Somer Anderson. What Is a Crossover in Technical Analysis, Exam-
ples. Apr. 2021. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/crossover.asp (visited
on 06/25/2023).
[45]
Adam Hayes and Charles Potters. Simple Moving Average (SMA): What It Is and the
Formula. Feb. 2022. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/sma.asp (visited
on 06/25/2023).
[46]
James Chen and Charles Potters. What is EMA? How to Use Exponential Moving
Average With Formula. Mar. 2023. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/
ema.asp (visited on 06/25/2023).
[47]
Yukun Liu and Aleh Tsyvinski. “Risks and returns of cryptocurrency”. In: The Re-
view of Financial Studies 34.6 (2021), pp. 2689–2727.
[48]
Jason Fernando and Charles Potters. Relative Strength Index (RSI) Indicator Ex-
plained With Formula. Mar. 2023. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/rsi.
asp (visited on 06/25/2023).
[49]
Cory Mitchell. True Strength Index (TSI). May 2022. url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/t/tsi.asp (visited on 06/25/2023).
[50]
Adam Hayes. Stochastic Oscillator: What It Is, How It Works, How To Calculate.
June 2021. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/stochasticoscillator.asp
(visited on 06/25/2023).
[51]
Adam Hayes. Chande Momentum Oscillator: Definition, Formula, Example. June
2021. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/chandemomentumoscillator.asp
(visited on 06/25/2023).
[52]
Adam Hayes. Average True Range (ATR) Formula, What It Means, and How to
Use It. Dec. 2022. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/atr.asp (visited on
06/25/2023).
[53]
Cory Mitchell. Percentage Price Oscillator (PPO): Definition and How It’s Used.
May 2022. url: https : / / www . investopedia . com / terms / p / ppo . asp (visited on
06/25/2023).
[54]
Cory Mitchell. Accumulation/Distribution Indicator (A/D): What it Tells You. May
2022. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/accumulationdistribution.asp
(visited on 06/25/2023).
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
63
==PAGE:72==
[55]
Adam Hayes. On-Balance Volume (OBV): Definition, Formula, and Uses as Indi-
cator. July 2022. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/o/onbalancevolume.asp
(visited on 06/25/2023).
[56]
Cory Mitchell. Force Index: Overview, Formulas, Limitations. Sept. 2022. url: https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/f/force-index.asp (visited on 06/25/2023).
[57]
Tome Almeida Borges and Rui Ferreira Neves. “Ensemble of machine learning algo-
rithms for cryptocurrency investment with different data resampling methods”. In:
Applied Soft Computing 90 (2020), p. 106187.
[58]
Scikit-learn Developers. sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier. 2023. url: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier.html.
[59]
Scikit-learn Developers. sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier. 2023. url: https:
//scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.
html.
[60]
Scikit-learn developers. GridSearchCV: Exhaustive search over specified parameter
values for an estimator. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.
model_selection.GridSearchCV.html. Accessed: 2023-07-06. 2021.
[61]
Cory Mitchell and Charles Potters. Extended Trading Definition. July 2021. url:
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/extended_trading.asp (visited on 06/25/2023).
[62]
Cory Mitchell. Aroon Oscillator: Definition, Calculation Formula, Trade Signals.
June 2022. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/aroonoscillator.asp (visited
on 06/25/2023).
[63]
Cory Mitchell. Average Directional Index (ADX): Definition and Formula. Aug.
2022. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/adx.asp (visited on 06/25/2023).
[64]
Cory Mitchell. Positive Directional Indicator (+DI): Overview, Formula, Uses. Sept.
2022. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/positivedirectionalindicator.asp
(visited on 06/25/2023).
[65]
Cory Mitchell. Negative Directional Indicator (-DI) Definition and Uses. June 2022.
url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/n/negativedirectionalindicator.asp (visited
on 06/25/2023).
[66]
Cory Mitchell. Money Flow Index - MFI Definition and Uses. May 2022. url: https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/m/mfi.asp (visited on 06/25/2023).
[67]
NASDAQ. Nasdaq Crypto Index. Accessed: 2023-07-06. url: https://indexes.nasdaqomx.
com/index/Overview/NCI.
[68]
Bitwise. Bitwise 10 Crypto Index Fund. Accessed: 2023-07-06. url: https://bitwiseinvestments.
com/crypto-funds/bitw.
[69]
NASDAQ. NASDAQ-100. Accessed: 2023-07-06. url: https://www.nasdaq.com/
market-activity/index/ndx.
[70]
S&P Dow Jones Indices. S&P 500. Accessed: 2023-07-06. url: https://www.spglobal.
com/spdji/en/indices/equity/sp-500/#overview.
[71]
MSCI. MSCI World Index. Accessed: 2023-07-06. url: https://www.msci.com/end-
of-day-data-search.
64
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:73==
A
Trading Strategies
Algorithm 3 No Strategy
Require: DataFrame containing trading signal and price information
Ensure: Cumulative Returns
1: Initialize variables
2: for each row in DataFrame do
3:
Get current signals
4:
Denote class-labels into Signals as:
5:
0 = Buy
6:
1 = Sell
7:
2 = Hold
8:
3 = Strong Buy
9:
4 = Strong Sell
10:
if Strong Sell signal is present then
11:
SELL
12:
else if Sell signal is present then
13:
SELL
14:
else if Strong Buy signal is present and no coin is being held then
15:
BUY
16:
else if Buy signal is present and no coin is being held then
17:
BUY
18:
else
19:
HOLD
20:
end if
21: end for
22: Calculate final cumulative return and other statistics
23: return the cumulative returns
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
65
==PAGE:74==
B
Exploratory Data Analysis
Table B.1 provides a comprehensive summary of trading volumes for each of the seven
different cryptocurrencies. There’s a large variation in trading volumes across these cryp-
tocurrencies, with XLM having the highest mean trading volume while XMR has the least.
HBAR and XLM have particularly high maximum trading volumes, suggesting occasional
large trading activity for these coins.
Table B.1: Descriptive statistics for the trading volume of selected cryptocurrencies
Coin
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
Mean
36,935
1,708
30,825
976,441
88,579
1,922,581
1,165
Std
49,535
2,630
56,037
1,986,156
113,693
3,450,258
1,434
Min
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25%
11,793
466.21
6,838
220,103
31,507
509,851
429
50%
22,629
903
14,463
487,405
55,525
987,578
776
75%
43,109
1,845
32,474
1,051,124
102,020
2,020,529
1,383
Max
1,447,587
66,795
2,341,904
148,834,919
2,964,871
161,385,217
76,916
Figure B.1 highlights how, through resampling the data to a longer time interval, the
median of the returns begins to shift away from zero. This emphasizes that the returns in
high frequency fluctuate around zero.
ATOM
BCH
ETC
HBAR
LINK
XLM
XMR
Cryptocurrency
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Percentage Change [%]
Figure B.1: Box plot of weekly returns, illustrating the shift in median values away from
zero when resampling to longer time intervals.
66
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:75==
C
Decision Tree Hyperparameter
Tuning
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iteration
−0.8
−0.7
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
Score [custom scorer]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using custom scorer
Training score
Validation score
(a) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iteration
0.150
0.175
0.200
0.225
0.250
0.275
0.300
0.325
0.350
Score [F1 Macro]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using F1 Macro
Training score
Validation score
(b) Macro weighted F1 score during hyperpa-
rameter tuning for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
Figure C.1: Comparison of Custom Score and Macro weighted F1 Score during hyperpa-
rameter tuning for decision tree model using the ATOM cryptocurrency and Five-Class
labeling.
0
1
2
3
4
Predicted label
0
1
2
3
4
True label
5458
2820
0
43
469
5105
3278
0
53
514
334
188
0
8
39
656
384
0
61
259
697
310
0
49
279
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
(a) Confusion matrix for ATOM
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Feature Importance Score
ATRP˙14
RSI˙14
Volume
%K˙14
CMO˙14
Pct
EMA20-50
WD14
FI˙13
%D˙14
EMA5-20
FI˙50
PVO˙signal
MFI˙14
PVO˙12˙26
ADL
OBV
Close
TSI˙25˙signal
TSI˙25
ADX14
AO14
MACD˙signal
MACD
EMA8-15
SMA20-50
SMA8-15
SMA5-20
PPO˙12˙26
Features
Visualizing Important Features for ATOMUSDT
(b) Feature importance
Figure C.2: Confusion matrix and the feature importance for the decision tree using the
ATOM cryptocurrency and Five-Class labeling.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
67
==PAGE:76==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iteration
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Score [custom scorer]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using custom scorer
Training score
Validation score
(a) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iteration
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
Score [F1 Macro]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using F1 Macro
Training score
Validation score
(b) Macro weighted F1 score during hyperpa-
rameter tuning for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
Figure C.3: Comparison of Custom Score and Macro weighted F1 Score during hyper-
parameter tuning for decision tree model using the ATOM cryptocurrency and NPMM
labeling.
0
1
2
Predicted label
0
1
2
True label
1632
18
183
13
1483
190
4875
5010
7600
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
(a) Confusion matrix for ATOM
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Feature Importance Score
RSI˙14
PPO˙12˙26
TSI˙25
EMA5-20
Pct
SMA8-15
ADX14
PVO˙12˙26
CMO˙14
SMA5-20
%K˙14
ADL
WD14
TSI˙25˙signal
Volume
MFI˙14
FI˙50
PVO˙signal
EMA20-50
AO14
%D˙14
OBV
Close
MACD
SMA20-50
FI˙13
ATRP˙14
EMA8-15
MACD˙signal
Features
Visualizing Important Features for ATOMUSDT
(b) Feature importance
Figure C.4: Confusion matrix and the feature importance for the decision tree using the
ATOM cryptocurrency and NPMM labeling.
68
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:77==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iteration
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Score [custom scorer]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using custom scorer
Training score
Validation score
(a) Custom score during hyperparameter tuning
for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iteration
0.300
0.325
0.350
0.375
0.400
0.425
0.450
0.475
Score [F1 Macro]
Hyperparameter tuning for ATOMUSDT using F1 Macro
Training score
Validation score
(b) Macro weighted F1 score during hyperpa-
rameter tuning for the ATOM cryptocurrency.
Figure C.5: Comparison of Custom Score and Macro weighted F1 Score during hyperpa-
rameter tuning for decision tree model using the ATOM cryptocurrency and Threshold
labeling.
0
1
2
3
4
Predicted label
0
1
2
3
4
True label
6662
1396
0
44
4
1088
8479
0
46
21
243
319
0
4
3
607
699
0
39
15
572
709
0
35
19
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
(a) Confusion matrix for ATOM
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Feature Importance Score
TSI˙25
ATRP˙14
RSI˙14
SMA20-50
Volume
SMA8-15
Pct
PPO˙12˙26
CMO˙14
EMA20-50
%D˙14
PVO˙signal
PVO˙12˙26
MFI˙14
ADL
OBV
FI˙13
%K˙14
Close
TSI˙25˙signal
WD14
ADX14
AO14
MACD˙signal
MACD
EMA8-15
EMA5-20
SMA5-20
FI˙50
Features
Visualizing Important Features for ATOMUSDT
(b) Feature importance
Figure C.6: Confusion matrix and the feature importance for the decision tree using the
ATOM cryptocurrency and Threshold labeling.
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
69
==PAGE:78==
D
Tuning Investment Strategies
This section provides the outcomes of the parametric optimization process for the in-
vestment strategies. Additionally, it presents the performances achieved by each strategy
under optimal parameters, segmented by different labeling methods.
D.1
Trading Signal from Random Forest
Jun
2022
Jul
2022
Aug
2022
Sep
2022
Oct
2022
Nov
2022
Dec
2022
Jan
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure D.1: Performance of Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading strategies, mod-
eled using Random Forest and the five-class labeling method, compared to the movement
of the underlying cryptocurrencies over the given testing time period.
Table D.1: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading, Diversified Trading, and No
Strategy utilizing the Five-Class labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
No Strategy
Final Return (%)
-46.24
-52.53
-95.07
Annualized Return (%)
-64.62
-71.28
-99.35
Number of Trades
440
1495
4363
Average Holding Period (Hours)
10.84
24.70
3.44
Max Drawdown
-0.551
-0.578
-0.955
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.515
-0.551
-0.953
Return Standard Deviation
0.0259
0.0117
0.0067
Winning Ratio
0.850
0.793
0.491
Payoff Ratio
0.135
0.204
0.662
Profit Factor
0.765
0.782
0.638
70
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:79==
Jun
2022
Jul
2022
Aug
2022
Sep
2022
Oct
2022
Nov
2022
Dec
2022
Jan
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure D.2: Performance of Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading strategies, mod-
eled using Random Forest and the NPMM labeling method, compared to the movement
of the underlying cryptocurrencies over the given testing time period.
Table D.2: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading, Diversified Trading and No
Strategy utilizing the NPMM labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
No Strategy
Final Return (%)
84.04
31.17
-53.98
Annualized Return (%)
177.69
57.49
-72.73
Number of Trades
199
466
929
Average Holding Period (Hours)
23.39
39.60
3.15
Max Drawdown
-0.2179
-0.2644
-0.5850
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.1781
-0.2088
-0.5684
Return Standard Deviation
0.0275
0.0159
0.0145
Winning Ratio
0.9698
0.9120
0.6243
Payoff Ratio
0.0512
0.1184
0.4884
Profit Factor
1.6456
1.2278
0.8116
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
71
==PAGE:80==
Jun
2022
Jul
2022
Aug
2022
Sep
2022
Oct
2022
Nov
2022
Dec
2022
Jan
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure D.3: Performance of Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading strategies, mod-
eled using Random Forest and the Threshold labeling method, compared to the movement
of the underlying cryptocurrencies over the given testing time period.
Table D.3: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading, Diversified Trading and No
Strategy utilizing the Threshold labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
No Strategy
Final Return (%)
-19.40
-32.60
-97.54
Annualized Return (%)
-30.31
-48.34
-99.80
Number of Trades
122
507
2259
Average Holding Period (Hours)
40.79
111.40
3.68
Max Drawdown
-0.442
-0.441
-0.976
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.442
-0.409
-0.973
Return Standard Deviation
0.0582
0.0206
0.0117
Winning Ratio
0.730
0.712
0.247
Payoff Ratio
0.331
0.324
1.984
Profit Factor
0.892
0.802
0.651
72
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:81==
D.2
Trading Signal from Decision Tree
Jun
2022
Jul
2022
Aug
2022
Sep
2022
Oct
2022
Nov
2022
Dec
2022
Jan
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure D.4: Performance of Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading strategies, mod-
eled using single Decision Tree and the five-class labeling method, compared to the move-
ment of the underlying cryptocurrencies over the given testing time period.
Table D.4: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading, Diversified Trading, and No
Strategy utilizing the Five-Class labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
No Strategy
Final Return (%)
-50.28
-43.59
-97.36
Annualized Return (%)
-68.96
-61.65
-99.77
Number of Trades
218
1649
5809
Average Holding Period (Hours)
22.56
22.37
13.61
Max Drawdown
-0.584
-0.539
-0.976
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.583
-0.533
-0.973
Return Standard Deviation
0.0369
0.0103
0.0057
Winning Ratio
0.761
0.743
0.459
Payoff Ratio
0.220
0.296
0.777
Profit Factor
0.701
0.857
0.658
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
73
==PAGE:82==
Jun
2022
Jul
2022
Aug
2022
Sep
2022
Oct
2022
Nov
2022
Dec
2022
Jan
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure D.5: Performance of Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading strategies, mod-
eled using single Decision Tree and the NPMM labeling method, compared to the move-
ment of the underlying cryptocurrencies over the given testing time period.
Table D.5: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading, Diversified Trading, and No
Strategy utilizing the NPMM labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
No Strategy
Final Return (%)
-5.75
48.89
-64.47
Annualized Return (%)
-9.44
94.72
-82.31
Number of Trades
217
363
1595
Average Holding Period (Hours)
21.75
47.26
2.53
Max Drawdown
-0.588
-0.322
-0.682
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.553
-0.240
-0.665
Return Standard Deviation
0.0362
0.0201
0.0104
Winning Ratio
0.949
0.939
0.633
Payoff Ratio
0.0511
0.0881
0.474
Profit Factor
0.958
1.366
0.816
74
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
==PAGE:83==
Jun
2022
Jul
2022
Aug
2022
Sep
2022
Oct
2022
Nov
2022
Dec
2022
Jan
2023
Date
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
Investment Value [USD]
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
Buy & Hold
No Strategy
Cryptocurrencies
Figure D.6: Performance of Probabilistic Trading and Diversified Trading strategies, mod-
eled using single Decision Tree and the Threshold labeling method, compared to the move-
ment of the underlying cryptocurrencies over the given testing time period.
Table D.6: Comparison of results from Probabilistic Trading, Diversified Trading, and No
Strategy utilizing the Threshold labeling method.
Trading Strategies
Metrics
Probabilistic Trading
Diversified Trading
No Strategy
Final Return (%)
-14.88
-31.38
-97.89
Annualized Return (%)
-23.64
-46.77
-99.84
Number of Trades
142
645
2591
Average Holding Period (Hours)
34.88
90.68
4.15
Max Drawdown
-0.407
-0.379
-0.979
Max Weekly Drawdown
-0.380
-0.372
-0.977
Return Standard Deviation
0.0549
0.0142
0.0100
Winning Ratio
0.775
0.718
0.262
Payoff Ratio
0.269
0.323
1.726
Profit Factor
0.924
0.822
0.612
Short-Term Cryptocurrency Price Trend Prediction Using Machine Learning Approach.
75
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
