==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
DTU, Pharma IT 
Key Opinion 
Leader 
identification 
based on 
literature and 
social network 
analysis 
Master’s Thesis 
Inigo Miguelez Goyeneche 
S205981 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
DTU  
 
1 
 
Acknowledgments 
I want to thank many people who have contributed to this project. First of all, I would like to 
thank Pharma IT and DTU for granting me the opportunity to develop this project in a 
collaborative way. In particular, I would like to thank my supervisors Vincent Laulagnet, 
Violaine Michel Lange and Thomas Howard for their support and patience when I was not able 
to perform at the highest level. Thank you for you input to this project and the time you have 
spent in making this happen.  
I would also like to thank all the colleagues and team members at Pharma IT and beyond, that 
have helped me when I was stuck. Alicia Astorga, Itamar Lokzinsky and Mads Møller, this tool 
would not have been finalized without your support and advice. Thank you. 
Of course, I must also thank my mother, my family and my friends, with whom I have been 
able to endure and enjoy these hard years of work and studies. Without you I would not have 
managed to stay sane and learn so much. In particular, thanks to you Aitana. This phase of our 
lives is coming to an end but I cannot wait to see what new projects will live bring to us.  
To all of you, Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Pharma IT 
2 
 
Abstract 
 
Key Opinion Leaders (KOLs) are individuals recognized for their expertise and authority within 
their domains, playing significant roles in innovation. Their identification is crucial in the 
biomedical, pharmaceutical and other technical fields as well as marketing. In order to identify 
KOLs, many approaches have been followed with social network analysis (SNA) and 
applications of graph theory being the most predominant ones in the literature.  
This project aims to develop a tool for identifying KOLs within a specific research field, 
leveraging the massive data available from digital scholarly literature and social networks. The 
proposed tool utilizes SNA and Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) for KOL identification. 
SNA uses graph theory principles to detect KOLs as central figures within a network while ABSA 
detects the polarity of a text towards a given term. A description of the development process 
is provided as well as benchmarking of the tool against existing solutions in this category. The 
current off-the-shelf solutions for KOL detection are predominantly subscription based or part 
of larger systems with additional functionality that is not necessary for the task. This poses a 
difficulty for startups and smaller companies with limited resource availability. Therefore, this 
tool aims to offer a lightweight solution that can be more attractive for such companies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
DTU  
 
3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .......................................................................................................... 1 
ABSTRACT ........................................................................................................................... 2 
1 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND .............................................................................. 4 
1.1 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................. 4 
1.2 
PRESENTATION OF THE COMPANY ......................................................................................... 5 
1.3 
KEY OPINION LEADER ......................................................................................................... 6 
1.3.1 
Evolution of the KOL concept .................................................................................... 7 
1.3.2 
Key Opinion Leaders in different contexts ................................................................. 9 
1.4 
IDENTIFICATION METHODS FOR KEY OPINION LEADERS ........................................................... 10 
1.4.1 
PageRank ................................................................................................................. 12 
1.4.2 
Sentiment analysis ................................................................................................... 13 
1.4.3 
Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis ............................................................................ 14 
1.5 
DATA SOURCES................................................................................................................ 15 
1.5.1 
Twitter ..................................................................................................................... 15 
1.5.2 
Linkedin ................................................................................................................... 15 
1.5.3 
Pubmed.................................................................................................................... 16 
1.5.4 
Google scholar and Google Patents ........................................................................ 16 
2 
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS ............................................................................................. 17 
2.1 
PROBLEM DEFINITION ....................................................................................................... 17 
2.2 
ANALYSIS OF EXISTING SOLUTIONS AND COMPETITORS ........................................................... 18 
2.3 
SELECTION OF DEVELOPMENT APPROACH ............................................................................. 21 
2.4 
SELECTION OF DATA SOURCES ............................................................................................ 21 
2.5 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE TOOL .............................................................................................. 22 
2.6 
EVALUATION OF THE TOOL ................................................................................................. 24 
3 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................. 26 
3.1 
OVERALL DESCRIPTION ..................................................................................................... 26 
3.2 
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................... 27 
3.3 
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................... 30 
4 
EVALUATION AND TESTING ......................................................................................... 34 
4.1 
APPROACH ..................................................................................................................... 34 
4.2 
BENCHMARKING AND RUNTIME ASSESSMENT ....................................................................... 35 
5 
CONCLUSION .............................................................................................................. 40 
6 
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES ................................................................................................ 41 
7 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ............................................................................................................ 42 
ANNEX 1. USER EXPERIENCE QUESTIONNAIRE ................................................................................... 48 
ANNEX 2 ORIGINAL PROJECT PLAN .................................................................................................. 49 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Pharma IT 
4 
 
1 Introduction and Background 
1.1 Introduction 
The rapid digitization of scholarly literature and the exponential growth of social networks 
have provided researchers with unprecedented access to vast arrays of data. This data 
abundance provides an opportunity to identify key opinion leaders (KOLs) within specific 
professional domains. KOLs are recognized as influential authorities due to their expertise and 
professional experience and they play a crucial role in driving innovation within their fields. 
Their identification is especially important for certain sectors, including academic research, 
healthcare, pharmaceuticals, and marketing, where their endorsements, opinions and support 
can substantially affect the public perception towards an entity (Mojtaba et al. 2019). 
 
This project attempts to design and implement a tool to identify KOLs within a field of 
research. For this purpose, it explores the different established approaches and selects one for 
the tool development and implementation. Among the frameworks analyzed, literature-based 
discovery and social network analysis (SNA) are some of the most relevant (Dubois 2014; Jain, 
Katarya, and Sachdeva 2019; Jonnalagadda, Peeler, and Topham 2012). On the one hand, 
literature-based discovery leverages the rich corpus of academic literature, where the 
influence and impact of potential KOLs can be assessed in regard to the number and quality of 
their scientific contributions (Jonnalagadda, Peeler, and Topham 2012). SNA, on the other 
hand, investigates the relationship structure within a network and relies on principles of graph 
theory to assess the potential KOLs (Jain et al. n.d.). This framework reveals KOLs as central 
figures with a high degree of connectivity or centrality within the network. It also allows us to 
examine the social profile of these individuals as collected in the social platform, providing 
valuable information related into their reach, engagement, and information flow(Mojtaba et 
al. 2019). 
 
However, despite the high potential benefits of this search tool, certain challenges have to be 
addressed. Issues around data privacy and accessibility, as well as the interpretation of what 
influence means in an increasingly connected digital world, are some of the intricacies that 
need to be investigated. This project confronts these issues by performing a literature review 
to provide a better understanding of the changing role of KOLs and assessing the potential 
data sources to select one that provides valuable information without violating data privacy 
==PAGE:6==
 
DTU  
 
5 
 
policies. The resultant tool aims to provide a lightweight alternative to other products in the 
market tailored specifically for startups and smaller companies. 
 
1.2 Presentation of the company 
This Master's thesis has been carried out in collaboration with Pharma IT, a consultancy 
company based in Denmark. Pharma IT core interest is to perform as a “one-stop” consultancy 
company where customers can find a tailored solution for any need. It was founded in 2016 
and has earned its spot among other consultancies by working with over 100 companies in the 
EU and earning the Børsen Gazelle price in 2020, 2021 and 2022.  
Pharma IT currently has over 130 consultants and primarily excels in pharma, biotech, and 
medical device industries. In 2022 it became part of Product Life Group, a leading consultancy 
in France with expertise in regulatory affairs and strategy in order to deliver a more complete 
portfolio to customers (Figure 1).  
In this sense the core values of Pharma It that are relevant for this project are the following: 
- 
Provide solutions to companies of all sizes: Pharma IT aims to partner with all types of 
companies, from startups to large players in the industry. These customer 
relationships are personalized to deliver the best solution to each client and promote 
its growth. 
- 
Tailor the solution to the client’s needs: As the company collaborates with companies 
of all sizes, it also adapts the solutions provided to the client in particular. Larger 
clients have different procedures than smaller ones and this is taken into account 
when assessing the solution that they need. 
- 
Match the required expertise: The expertise that a given project might require varies 
depending on several factors. By allocating both senior experts and young talents to a 
project, the tasks can be spread according to the required capabilities in order to 
deliver the best possible results with the lowest costs. 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
Pharma IT 
6 
 
- 
 
Figure 1: Pharma IT areas of influence 
This project has been carried out primarily within the IT Automation and Analytics Consulting 
department, whose main function is to develop GxP and non-GxP solutions upon request for 
the pharmaceutical sector. However other personnel belonging to the Commercial and 
Medical Consulting have participated in discussions and provided feedback on key elements of 
this project.  
 
1.2.1 Objective of the Project 
The objective of this project is to explore the current frameworks for Key Opinion Leader 
Identification and develop a lightweight solution that can help companies identify Key 
Opinion Leaders both as experts in their field and as potential board members.  
 
1.3 Key Opinion Leader  
A Key Opinion Leader(KOL) is member of a community that has the ability to affect the group 
opinions on some relevant issues relative to the other group members(Chowdhry and 
Newcomb 1952). The role of leaders in regards to group dynamics and opinions has been 
studied since  the 1950s (Chowdhry and Newcomb 1952; Katz 1957). These early analyses 
were focused on monomorphic opinion leaders, who have their main expertise within a single 
domain. However, later research described KOLs from a polymorphic point of view analyzing 
the ability of an individual to spread information through several channels (Rogers and 
Shoemaker 1971). This change in the perception of the role KOLs have in groups and societies 
==PAGE:8==
 
DTU  
 
7 
 
is a good example of how the concept of KOLs is dynamic and changes depending on the 
context and time.  
Because of such a variety of contexts and domains, several authors have attempted to define 
the term. Despite the differences the most common characteristics mentioned are likability, 
trustworthiness, influential and self-confident (Chan 1990; Doumit et al. 2011; Mojtaba et al. 
2019). Current research categorizes KOLs based on their characteristics and the structure of 
the social network they belong to. As such, KOLS can be categorized as Local or Global, 
depending on the scope of their influence; Monomorphic or Polymorphic, depending on the 
range of domains they affect; Positive or Destructive, depending on their approach to 
leadership; and Long-term and Short-term, depending on the timespan of their significance 
(Mojtaba et al. 2019).   
Based on their reach, identification and engagement of KOLs has become a crucial strategic 
activity for companies, especially those that rely on online marketing. The activities that KOLs 
perform for such companies include product endorsement, directing innovation or generating 
partnerships among others (Lyu et al. 2022; Zou et al. 2019). 
One of the most common ways to identify the KOLs in a social platform is network analysis. 
From this perspective, KOLs are often analogized to "nodes" in a network, possessing high 
"degree centrality" or "betweenness centrality" metrics. In this context, Degree centrality 
refers to the number of direct connections a node has, while betweenness centrality refers to 
the frequency a node appears on the shortest paths between pairs of other nodes. This means 
that KOLs have an expansive reach within their network, and they are necessary for the flow 
and dissemination of information, ideas, and trends(Egger et al. 2016; Putzke and Takeda 
2016). 
 
1.3.1 Evolution of the KOL concept 
 
The concept of Key Opinion Leaders has evolved significantly over the last two decades, 
particularly due to the growth of the internet and social media platforms and the data 
accessibility that this implies. The historical approach of performing surveys and interviews has 
been substituted by a computational application and greatly increased datasets(Mojtaba et al. 
2019). The main changes in the KOL concept are the following: 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
Pharma IT 
8 
 
Broadening of the Concept: Traditionally, KOLs were considered to be experts in their 
respective fields, usually with an extensive academic background or management positions in 
industry, academia, or professional associations. They were historically healthcare 
professionals, academics, or industry leaders with presence in the media (Scher and Schett 
2021). However, with the growth of social media and the democratization of information, the 
concept of a KOL has broadened. Today, anyone with expertise, a strong digital presence, and 
a relatively large number of followers can become a KOL in their particular niche, this niche 
being scientific or industrial but also social, cultural or political (Lyons and Henderson 2005; 
Lyu, Qi, and Liu 2022). 
 
Offline to Online: Previously, KOLs exerted their influence primarily through offline channels, 
such as speaking at conferences, publishing in professional journals, or through personal 
networks. With the explosion of the internet, however, the sphere of influence for KOLs has 
transitioned from primarily offline to also online platforms. They now engage with their 
followers through blogs, social media posts, online webinars, podcasts, and other digital 
platforms. 
 
Data-Driven Approach: The advent of big data and analytics has allowed for a more data-
driven approach to identify and engage with KOLs (Scher and Schett 2021). Brands are able to 
use social media metrics to identify key influencers in their sector, as well as to assess the 
content that has a higher impact on the audience. This allows them to evaluate how effective 
their KOL partnerships are (Khan et al. 2022). 
 
Influence in Consumer Behavior: KOLs have also increasingly changed from advisors in 
product development to promoters of a product for marketing campaigns(Niu et al. 2023; 
Zhao et al. 2018). This is a result of the reduced effectiveness of traditional advertising 
channels in favor of Influencer marketing (Gretzel 2018).  
 
Altogether, the concept of KOLs has evolved from being exclusively highly qualified 
professionals to include other individuals with a sizable online following and influence. Their 
methods of communication have become more digital, interactive, and data-driven, and their 
role in influencing consumer behavior and marketing has expanded dramatically. 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
DTU  
 
9 
 
1.3.2 Key Opinion Leaders in different contexts 
 
Key Opinion Leaders have a significant role in various sectors, including pharmaceutical, 
technological, and humanities. However, the nature of their expertise and the type of 
influence they have can vary significantly depending on the field. 
 
Pharmaceutical sector: Extensive literature indicates that an effective involvement of KOL 
during the development phase is an important marker for market penetration of a new drug 
(Matikainen et al. 2015).  In addition to this, KOLs serve companies in several different roles, 
but mainly as speakers at professional meetings and similar settings arranged by sales 
representatives, as well as providing courses that doctors are obliged to take to keep their 
licenses. Research, education, and marketing are often fused in terms of KOL interaction 
(Sismondo 2017). There has been controversy regarding this particular role of KOLs in 
marketing as it could constitute a conflict of interests (Sismondo 2013). However, the role of 
regional medical advisor has been implemented in the field to prevent conflict of interests and 
facilitate the exchange of unbiased information between companies and KOLs (Gupta and 
Nayak 2013).  
 
Technological sector: Within the technological sector, one of the roles of KOLs is to support 
companies in knowledge management, which is the process of creating and sustaining a 
balanced intellectual capital portfolio to be competitive and successful (Brahmi, Mustafa, and 
Ii 2019).  KOLs also have unique advantages in launching a new product in a similar manner as 
in the pharmaceutical sector as they can interact with potential users, build customer 
relations, and improve user satisfaction (Hua and Yuan 2022). This factors together with their 
advisory role, have shown that KOL inclusion has a positive impact in company 
competitiveness (Soniewicki 2021). 
 
Humanities: KOLs in the humanities might be distinguished academics, authors, critics, or 
public intellectuals. They contribute to scholarly discourse, influence cultural trends, and often 
play a role in shaping public opinion on various societal issues(Weeks, Ardèvol-Abreu, and Gil 
De Zúñiga 2017). They usually communicate their ideas through academic publications, books, 
public lectures, and increasingly, online platforms like blogs and social media. In the context of 
social media interaction, prior research has shown that there is a reciprocal relationship 
between the opinion leadership and the political efficacy of such KOL, meaning that the KOL 
==PAGE:11==
 
Pharma IT 
10 
 
influence is determined by its position and this position reinforces the influence that it has 
(Shah and Scheufele 2006).  
 
In general, KOLs across all sectors share some characteristics such as expert knowledge in their 
field and a wide sphere of influence. However, the nature of their expertise, being academic or 
practical, as well as their means of communication, differs across sectors. Also, despite many 
of the KOLs being related to marketing and product endorsement, their role and effect on the 
company are also industry specific. 
 
 
1.4 Identification methods for Key Opinion Leaders 
 
 
 
Image 1. Opinion leader detection approaches. Extracted from (Mojtaba et al. 2019) 
 
Regarding the KOL detection and identification, there is a number of approaches that rely on 
different data sources and analysis (Image 1. Opinion leader detection approaches. Extracted 
from (Mojtaba et al. 2019)Image 1). Based on the description provided by Mojtaba et al, the 
most significant approaches can be grouped into 6 major categories: Descriptive approaches, 
Diffusion Process Based approaches, Statistical and Stochastic approaches, Topological 
Measures, Data Mining and Learning Methods and Hybrid Content Mining.  
==PAGE:12==
 
DTU  
 
11 
 
 
Descriptive approaches: Descriptive approaches include observation, surveys and interviews. 
These methods are well suited for social sciences thanks to their simplicity. However, they are 
very cost-intensive, and therefore they are slowly being retired in favor of computational 
approaches that are able to analyze large amounts of information efficiently. Despite this, 
these methods were amongst the first methods described for KOL identification and are still 
useful for applications with a small sample size (Chowdhry and Newcomb 1952; Mojtaba et al. 
2019).  
Diffusion Process Based approaches: These approaches are generally with the field of 
influence maximization and diffusion simulation and they are based on the development of 
models that can mimic or replicate the information flow and influence of each individual 
within the network. These models can then be analyzed using opinion dynamics strategies that 
can subsequently identify who are the key components of the network and how is the 
information spreading. This is specially useful in applications of product acceptance(Zhang et 
al. 2016).  
Statistical and Stochastic approaches: The application of statistical models to datasets is based 
on the fact that KOLs have a distinct set of characteristics that differentiate them from the 
general population. In this sense, the opinion leader identification is approached as an 
anomaly detection problem that can be solved with existing techniques(Ahmed et al. 2016) 
Data Mining and Learning Methods:  The goal of the methods in the data mining field is to 
reveal meaningful and useful information from large volumes of data. In the case of opinion 
leader detection, the application of this method is similar to the statistical approach and users 
are clustered and outlier detection is applied to identify significant individuals. Machine 
learning techniques have also been applied to predict if a user is a KOL or not. However, these 
techniques are very dependent on the quality and size of the labelled datasets used to train 
and validate them, which is a major limitation at the moment (Mojtaba et al. 2019).  
Hybrid Content Mining: Methods within this category are varied and implemented in different 
contexts. However, they mostly share a high dimensionality approach and they all require vast 
datasets to achieve high effectiveness (Mojtaba et al. 2019). 
Topological measures: Topological measures are amongst the most used methods for KOL 
detection because of their ease of use and the value of the information produced by them. 
They are based on graph theory and how the position of a node(individual) within a network 
can be a measure of its influence. In this sense a social network can be constructed based on 
==PAGE:13==
 
Pharma IT 
12 
 
the information provided by microblogging platforms or other interaction structures setting 
the nodes of the resulting graph as individuals and the edges as the connections between 
them. Once the graph has been constructed, different algorithms can be applied to highlight 
nodes based on different characteristics. Some of the 
most relevant algorithms applied are: 
- Degree centrality: It is a measure of the number 
of edges associated with one node. It can be used to 
detect local opinion leaders.  
- Closeness centrality: It is a measure of how close 
each node is to all other nodes in the network. This 
means that it is sensitive to a system with a wide range of 
distances between nodes. 
- Betweenness centrality: it is a measure of how a 
node facilitates the connection between other nodes. As 
such, it will identify users that act as bridges between 
different parts of the network. 
- Eigenvector centrality: it is a measure of how 
relevant the nodes are connected to the studied one. A 
node would have high Eigenvector centrality if the nodes 
connected to it also have high centrality. 
 
Apart from these algorithms, the PageRank algorithm and adaptations of it are widely used in 
the field. As this is the algorithm used in this thesis, it will be explained in further detail in the 
following section. 
 
1.4.1 PageRank 
The PageRank algorithm is a mathematical algorithm developed by Google's founders, Larry 
Page and Sergey Brin (Brin and Page 1998). It serves as the backbone of Google's search engine 
and is designed to rank web pages based on their relative importance or relevance. 
Conceptually, the PageRank algorithm considers the Internet as a large, directed graph, where 
web pages are represented as nodes and hyperlinks between pages as directed edges. The 
underlying premise is that more important websites are likely to receive more links from other 
Figure 2: Common network analysis algorithms. 
Extracted from (Mojtaba et al. 2019). 
==PAGE:14==
 
DTU  
 
13 
 
websites (Bianchini, Gori, and Scarselli 2005). Thus, a link from a highly ranked website is 
considered a strong endorsement and contributes significantly to the linked page's ranking. 
This concept is easily translated to social or coauthorship networks where the individuals are 
the nodes and the interactions between them are the links.  
In simple terms, the PageRank of a given page A is determined by the sum of the PageRanks of 
all pages Ti that link to it, divided by the number of links on page Ti. The damping factor d is a 
measure of the probability that a user will continue clicking on links and is introduced to 
prevent the algorithm from spiraling out of control. The PageRank values are calculated using 
an iterative process until the values converge, i.e., the change in PageRank values between 
two iterations is below a certain threshold (Gleich 2015). 
While the original PageRank algorithm has been significantly refined and supplemented with 
various other factors in Google's ranking algorithms over the years, it continues to be a 
fundamental concept in the field of web search and information retrieval, providing the basis 
for measuring the importance of web pages in a vast, interconnected web ecosystem. 
In the context of this project, PageRank is applied to co-authorship networks. For these, the 
PageRank algorithm scores higher authors who collaborate with different authors, and also 
those who collaborate with a few highly ranked individuals(Yan and Ding 2011).  
 
1.4.2 Sentiment analysis 
Sentiment Analysis, also known as opinion mining, is a subfield of Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) and Text Mining that involves the use of computational techniques to identify and 
categorize opinions expressed in a piece of text. The goal is to identify sentiment orientation 
(positive, negative, neutral) and to quantify the intensity of the sentiment. This analysis can be 
done at document, sentence or aspect levels depending on the application of the technique. 
(Medhat, Hassan, and Korashy 2014).  
Different data sources can be used for sentiment analysis but the most common ones are 
product reviews, microblogging posts and news articles as they provide clear, polarized 
information and contain valuable information such as sentiment associated with a  given 
product or service(Feldman 2013).  
The first step in a standard sentiment analysis pipe is generally based on pre-processing 
actions, such as tokenization, stop-word removal, and stemming or lemmatization. Following 
==PAGE:15==
 
Pharma IT 
14 
 
this, features are selected within the text  such as term presence and frequency, parts of 
speech, opinion words or negations (Medhat, Hassan, and Korashy 2014).  
 
Subsequently, a variety of machine learning (ML) or deep learning (DL) algorithms can be 
employed to analyze this structured data and classify sentiment. ML algorithms like Naïve 
Bayes, Support Vector Machines (SVM), and Random Forests have been used, while DL 
methods leverage artificial neural networks, including Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Long 
Short-Term Memory (LSTM), or Transformer-based models (Medhat, Hassan, and Korashy 
2014). 
Despite its great applicability, sentiment analysis still faces several challenges, especially 
related to context-specific information, ambiguity or sarcasm (Mejova 2009). Also, the chance 
of implementing such a system is dependent on the language to be analyzed as its efficacy is 
dependent on the corpus available for training. 
Within this project, a particular subdivision of sentiment analysis, Aspect based Sentiment 
Analysis has been used. This technique will be described in the following section. 
 
1.4.3 Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis 
Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) is an extension of sentiment analysis that aims to go 
beyond overall sentiment classification by identifying and analyzing sentiment expressed 
towards specific aspects or entities mentioned in the text. It enables a more detailed 
understanding of sentiment, allowing businesses to gain insights into customer opinions and 
preferences about specific features or aspects of their products or services (Do et al. 2019).  
The process of Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis is significantly more complex than the 
standard Sentiment Analysis pipeline and it consists of the following steps(D’aniello et al. 
2022): 
Aspect Extraction: The first step in ABSA involves extracting the relevant aspects and entities 
from the provided text. Aspects represent specific features, attributes, or entities that users 
mention in their opinions or reviews. 
Aspect Sentiment Classification: Once the aspects are identified, the next step is to classify the 
sentiment expressed towards each aspect. This involves determining whether the sentiment is 
positive, negative, or neutral. For this task, deep learning models can be used as they are well 
suited for fine grain analysis. 
==PAGE:16==
 
DTU  
 
15 
 
Aspect-Based Sentiment Aggregation: After sentiment classification for each aspect, the 
overall sentiment for the entire text is derived by aggregating the sentiment scores or labels 
assigned to individual aspects. This is an optional step that will only be present in some 
implementations. 
Altogether, ABSA is an advanced Natural language processing technique and therefore it has 
only been described briefly here as the implications of developing, training and assessing such 
methodology are outside the scope of this project. The technique will be implemented using a 
pre-trained model and approach described in  Yang and Li 2021, in order to reduce the 
complexity of this application.  
 
1.5  Data Sources 
1.5.1 Twitter 
Twitter is an online social networking and microblogging platform. It utilizes a one directional  
follow mechanics to establish dynamic networks of information exchange. Twitter is 
predominantly text-based, allowing users to publish messages (tweets) of up to 280 
characters. This encourages concise, targeted exchanges. Twitters data structure is very 
appropriate for network generation, where users and tweets represent nodes, and 
relationships are depicted as directed edges. Several metrics are used to evaluate user 
engagement such as retweets, likes, replies, and shares. It is also a prominent platform for 
data mining, trend prediction, and opinion formation, facilitated by an API (Application 
Programming Interface) access facilitating academic and commercial research. However, 
recent changes in company policies have massively increased the operational cost therefore 
compromising its status as data provider. 
 
1.5.2 Linkedin 
LinkedIn is a professional networking platform that uses basic principles of other social 
networks while maintaining a professional approach. Linkedin users are able to create 
connections, participate in recruitment processes, and the exchange of industry-specific 
knowledge. Designed for business and employment activities, LinkedIn applies a symmetric 
"connection" model. In this model, two users mutually agree to form a connection. From the 
point of view of graph theory, LinkedIn data can be organized as an undirected graph, where 
==PAGE:17==
 
Pharma IT 
16 
 
nodes correspond to users, and edges to professional relationships. However, a major caveat 
of this platform is that a basic user only has access to connections up to a third degree. This 
means that a user can only access the profile information of “friends of friends” and therefore 
it is not a viable option for automated data collection as a preconstructed network of users 
would be needed in the application. 
 
1.5.3 Pubmed 
PubMed is a free-access bibliographic database with a particular interest in life science and 
biomedical literature. It has been developed and maintained by the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and forms an integral part of the Entrez system of 
databases, built on principles of text mining, bioinformatics, and information retrieval. The 
platform allows for Boolean logic search and utilizes the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), a 
controlled and hierarchically organized vocabulary, which enhances search precision through 
keyword mapping, synonym identification, and query expansion. It provides an API that 
facilitates large-scale data extraction and integration, making PubMed a key tool in academic 
research, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses across the biomedical and life sciences. 
 
1.5.4 Google scholar and Google Patents 
Google Scholar and Google Patents are specialized search engines designed to index and 
retrieve scholarly literature and patent documents, respectively. Google Scholar provides a 
database of academic resources regardless of the discipline. These resources include articles, 
books, conference papers, and technical reports. Google Patents, on the other hand, is a free 
service that collects both patents and patent applications from offices worldwide, making it an 
extraordinary tool for prior art searches.  
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
DTU  
 
17 
 
2 Development Process 
2.1 Problem definition 
The first step in the development of the program was the problem definition. The clear 
determination of the issue that the program must address as well as the establishment of a 
framework or domain for the development of the solution is key to deliver a satisfactory 
solution. In that sense, formulating the problem as a use case allows for a deeper 
understanding of the need, the stakeholders and their expectations. In order to define the use 
case several stakeholders were approached. In the first place, Martin Rother, Director of 
Commercial and Medical Consulting (Pharma IT) was approached to define a use case that 
would be relevant for the pharmaceutical and biomedical industry. He proposed the project as 
an opportunity to collaborate to a high-level pharmaceutical company located in Denmark but 
the feedback resulted in a lack of interest for the project. The main argument of the company 
was that there are already providers that fulfill this task for the company and therefore a 
lightweight solution would not be sufficient for them to change their systems. Based on this 
feedback and a subsequent discussion with the project supervisors, it was decided to steer the 
project in a broader direction. This allows to target more companies and in particular startups, 
which often are not able to afford other more complete systems for KOL management. This 
resulted in the formulation of the following use case as an example procedure that could be 
used to guide the development process (Table 1). 
 
 
During this stage a project plan was also devised to accommodate the different phases of the 
development. 
The 
main 
phases 
considered 
were 
Literature 
review 
and 
NLP 
training, 
Data 
extraction pipeline generation, Development (Iterative) and Reporting ( 
). This plan was a helpful tool for assigning and prioritizing the tasks but had to be modified 
through the project reducing the Development and Reporting phases as the initial phases 
required more time than expected.  
 
 
 
 
  
==PAGE:19==
 
Pharma IT 
18 
 
USE CASE NAME:  
KEY OPINION LEADER SELECTION FOR STARTUP BOARD 
ACTORS  
Startup members, Potential candidates for new board membership  
SYSTEMS  
Key Opinion Leader Basic Operation Tool (KBOT) 
GOALS  
The goal of the user is to obtain a list with the most suitable 
candidates to be part of a startup board. These candidates must be 
experts within their field and ideally should have practical expertise 
in Venture boards.  
PRECONDITIONS  
The start-up must be in such a state that it requires new board 
members.  
The current members of the company need to be looking for a 
board member with expertise in a specific field.  
 
BASIC FLOW  
The startup members find a lack of expertise in a specific scientific 
area or require a new board member.  
 
They search for potential new board members that can complement 
that gap using KBOT inputting search parameters. 
 
KBOT produces a ranked list of individuals within the search 
parameters specified.  
 
The candidate is contacted for a potential collaboration. If it is 
successful, the collaboration is achieved. If it is not successful 
another candidate is approached.   
Table 1: Use case. Key Opinion Leader selection for startup board 
 
 
2.2 Analysis of existing solutions and competitors 
The next step was to analyze the current state-of-the-art solutions that address Key Opinion 
Leader detection and analysis as well as currently established solutions that provide leadership 
management. This was done to assess which of the techniques currently in place could be used 
in the project and to evaluate what are the advantages or disadvantages that a different 
approach could provide. In the context of this thesis, the literature review was the main 
==PAGE:20==
 
DTU  
 
19 
 
approach used for such comparison as well as discussions with Industry experts belonging to 
the commercial consulting section of Pharma IT. 
From these discussions and the associated market analysis, the main conclusion was that there 
are already service providers for KOL management. The market leader in this sector seems to 
be Veeva Alling, part of the Veeva Systems that is capable of finding Opinion Leaders within a 
biomedical field and also registering the interactions between the user and such individuals in 
a similar manner as a Customer Relation Management system (Veeva 2021). However, this 
tool is generally sold together with other Veeva systems and therefore it is an expensive 
solution. Apart from Veeva, other smaller companies provide KOL identification solutions but 
most of them are only available within subscription models and include market insight and 
other functionalities that add to the cost(iKala 2022; Lindenfeld 2022). Noteworthy, many of 
these solutions are not tailored for pharmaceutical or scientific KOL detection but instead they 
are focused in the field of digital marketing and influencer management. Apart from these 
costly options, there is one free accessible tool was found: keyopinionleaders.com 
(kolcom)(KOL KeyOpinionLeaders.com #MadeByExGooglers n.d.). This tool was developed by 
former Google employees and provides a list of 10 influential people in a field of research 
upon demand. It has subscription models to access more results from a query but it is a fast 
and intuitive tool that will be used for comparison in later stages of the project.  
 
Literature analysis of the methods and techniques for Opinion Leader detection revealed that 
most approaches rely on graph theory and network analysis. Within these fields, there are a 
large number of algorithms that can be applied optimally depending on the specific purpose of 
the Opinion leader detection (Kolugala & Jayasena, 2019; Sharma et al., 2022; Valente et al., 
2007). These algorithms work under two general approaches: measuring how the nodes of a 
graph are connected and which paths are established between them (topology) and measure 
how the information is transmitted through the network by identifying repeating pattern (Data 
mining). Apart from these, simpler stochastic analyses are also applied on occasion as well as 
mixed frameworks that include some of the previous (Mojtaba et al. 2019). Finally, manual 
surveys have also been used in the past to identify Opinion Leaders. This method provides 
direct feedback from users but it has a high execution cost (Berna, Girgin, and Gümüşçekiçci 
2022) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
Pharma IT 
20 
 
Altogether, from this section of the project, the following key points could be extracted: 
 
- 
The market already contains solutions with a similar functionality to the proposed for  
this project. 
- 
Most of these solutions are based on subscription models. 
- 
Many different methods of varying complexity can be used for KOL detection. 
 
Based on this knowledge, it was decided to narrow the description of the tool further with the 
following User Requirement Specifications: 
 
 
URS ID 
URS DESCRIPTION 
KBOT-URS-1 
The system should identify Opinion Leaders using a stablished 
method supported by literature.  
 
KBOT-URS-2 
The system should be simple and specific for Opinion Leader 
selection. 
 
KBOT-URS-3 
The system should allow for Opinion Leader identification 
within a specified field. This field can be any scientific area. 
 
KBOT-URS-4 
The system should not rely  on any subscription model in order 
to minimize the potential prize point of the tool. 
 
KBOT-URS-5 
The system should be targeted toward Opinion Leader 
detection with an industrial profile.  
 
Table 2: User Requierement Specifications 
  
 
==PAGE:22==
 
DTU  
 
21 
 
2.3 Selection of development approach 
Based on the previous analysis, a development strategy was selected. The main considerations 
were the general techniques used in the field as well as limited time and personal resources 
that constrained the scope of the project. For that matter, it was decided to follow an Iterative 
approach where the functions of the program could be tested and improved systematically 
through discussions with colleagues and members of the department. Alternatively, an agile 
approach was also considered and put into action at the beginning of the project. This 
approach is especially effective in complex projects that require traceability of the User 
Requirements and Design Specifications. Given that the project had such a short time span and 
that it was carried out by a single student, it was decided that the effort of using it was 
excessive for its gains and it was finally discarded in favour of the continuous development 
approach. 
 
2.4 Selection of Data sources 
Apart from the different methods used to analyze the data, one of the main differences 
between the current approaches to Identify Key Opinion Leaders has been the selection of 
data sources to analyze and process (Parau et al. 2017). This difference stems from the fact 
that different Industries have different preferred modes of communication and, therefore, the 
analysis must be focused on these (Wu et al. 2015). Despite the differences, the most common 
sources of Information are scientific communications and social networks. The main reasons 
for this are the ease of access to the data, which has historically been free for PubMed and 
Twitter, and the consistent logic behind network generation and analysis, which can be done 
with relative ease In both cases.  
For this project, several data sources were formally assessed. Among them are google scholar, 
PubMed, google patents, Twitter and LinkedIn. A big focus was put on LinkedIn in particular, 
including the development of a preliminary data pipeline, given its professional approach, 
which was relevant for the KOL selection outside the academic environment. The main 
disadvantage of this source is the lack of API support and the website regulations that limit the 
access to data using third-party software. Alternatively, Twitter was also Investigated as a 
relevant source of valuable information. However, given the recent changes In company 
policies and the increased cost of access, it was decided not to pursue this source further in 
the project. Subsequently, Google Scholar and Google patents were assessed as the next 
significant options as they also provide medical trial information and patent information that 
==PAGE:23==
 
Pharma IT 
22 
 
could be relevant for the entity evaluation. Initial development of a scraper tool was 
performed but further investigation of the company policies revealed that Google does not 
allow third party software to access their data. Therefore it was decided to stop this line of 
research and transition back to using the more stablished method of retrieving information 
from Pubmed.  
The use of Pubmed had the main advantage of having an API that simplified data collection, 
however this approach has been vastly used for KOL identification in the past and therefore it 
leaves minor room for improvement. Also, Pubmed is not the most effective source to gather 
information about industrial or professional profiles, being targeted towards academic 
research. For this reason it was decided to pivot the project and provide further information 
on the researchers identified with a sentiment analysis of their abstracts. In this way, despite 
selecting users based on their influence in their field it is possible to make a secondary filter 
through the sentiment shown in their publications. This sentiment analysis is not a completely 
accurate tool as the abstracts are generally written in scientific terminology that is generally 
factual and not opinion based. However, within the context of this project, as no other tool 
could be found with this functionality and the Pubmed-based opinion leader detection is an 
already stablished technique, it was considered relevant to include this additional analysis as 
part of the tool.    
2.5 Development of the tool 
The tool was developed in Python based on the requirements previously described (Table 2). 
The first item to be developed was the data pipeline. The initial development was done in 
parallel to the data selection. For this reason, several data pipelines based on selenium were 
developed to extract data from LinkedIn, Google Scholar and Google Patents respectively. 
However, during the data source assessment it was discovered company policies did not allow 
for such method for data collection and therefore these pipelines were deemed 
obsolete((Google Terms of Service – Privacy & Terms – Google n.d.; Prohibited software and 
extensions | LinkedIn Help n.d.). 
The data collection pipeline was then developed for PubMed. Differently than other platforms 
assessed, PubMed offers a public API that allows to retrieve search data directly from 
PubMeds servers (Sayers 2022a, 2022b). Initially, it was considered to use the API to request 
the information directly to PubMed but, since there are limitations to the amount and format 
of the requests made, it was decided to utilize the Biopython package to control these rate 
limits.  
==PAGE:24==
 
DTU  
 
23 
 
The next step in the development process was to decide on which data to analyze from the 
records extracted in a data preprocessing step. This data was determined by the algorithm to 
be applied later and therefore several options were assessed. The main three options 
consisted in; analysis based on the content of the article and information distribution, author 
list and collaborations and citations between authors in the field. Due to the large increase in 
complexity, it was decided not to continue with the first option (information flow) as this 
would require a more powerful system capable of analyzing the content of whole articles and 
it also poses difficulties in regards to article access. The next option assessed was the citation 
network as the number of interactions between authors is greatly increased and the flow of 
information can be tracked to a certain level allowing for more accurate analysis. However, 
Pubmed API does not allow retrieving the citations of a given article, making this option 
unfeasible. Finally, the author's collaboration list was analyzed. For this, the author list of each 
article would be extracted in order to create a network and value authors that have a higher 
number and a higher diversity of connections. This was a successful approach and a DataFrame 
composed of article ID, author list and abstract could be constructed.  
The following step in the development process was to build a graph that could be analyzed in 
the next step of the process. For this, the NetworkX package, a commonly used library for 
graph generation and analysis, was used. It also included an in-built PageRank algorithm that 
simplified the analysis of the graph even further.  
At this stage, it was possible to produce a ranked list of users that were influential within their 
field. However, it was not possible to assess if they had any relation with the industry or 
startups or any other matter. In order to cover this limitation, other sources of information 
were considered, such as proff.dk, a Danish website where it is possible to search for the 
position of a given person. However, it was not possible to find any source that could provide 
this information on a global scale apart from LinkedIn, which as explained before does not 
allow for data collection. For this reason, another method was decided: Aspect Based 
Sentiment Analysis. This approach allows for the assessment of sentiment towards a given 
term or aspect and is a compromise between the lack of information and the need for more 
information on the individuals found. This analysis requires complex methods to be developed 
and tuned. However, it is possible to use pre-trained models and pipelines that greatly reduce 
the implementation effort. In regards to this project, literature research was performed to 
select a model that was suitable for the task and it was decided to continue with a version of 
the DeBERTa v2 model, which is constructed upon other well-studied models and has shown to 
have good performance for this task (Das and Zhang 2020). However, the results obtained 
==PAGE:25==
 
Pharma IT 
24 
 
from this model must be assessed considering that scientific abstracts are written in a factual 
manner and therefore the sentiment analysis that can be performed on them is quite limited.  
 
All the steps in this development process included discussions with members of the 
development team as well as former colleagues and informal testing to confirm system 
functionality. The development process followed the Design-Build-Test-Learn cycle to ensure 
continuous improvement of the code. 
 
2.6 Evaluation of the tool 
The tool was evaluated from 3 different aspects: URS fulfilment, performance evaluation and 
benchmarking. In regard to the first aspect, each URS was assessed for completion and given a 
evaluation as “fulfilled”, “partially fulfilled” or “not fulfilled” (Table 3). This evaluation resulted 
in 2 URS considered as fulfilled and 3 considered as “partially fulfilled” and can be used to 
determine future developments of the tool.  The other aspects of the evaluation are described 
in Section 4 of this document.  
Apart from these, User Experience was also considered as a measure of the overall 
performance of the tool. A User Experience Questionnaire was prepared and testers were 
approached to provide feedback on the tool (Schrepp 2016)(Annex 1). However, a low number 
of responses were collected on time and therefore it was decided not to include the results in 
this report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
DTU  
 
25 
 
 
 
URS ID 
URS DESCRIPTION 
URS EVALUATION 
KBOT-URS-1 
The system should identify Opinion 
Leaders using a stablished method 
supported by literature.  
 
This URS is considered “fulfilled” as the tool 
is able to use the PageRank algorithm to 
assess the influence of each author 
 
KBOT-URS-2 
The system should be simple and 
specific for Opinion Leader selection. 
 
This URS is considered “partially fulfilled” as 
the tool is run from the command line and 
therefore requires some level of expertise 
in order to be used. A simple user interface 
could help to fulfill this requirement. 
  
KBOT-URS-3 
The system should allow for Opinion 
Leader identification within a specified 
field. This field can be any scientific 
area. 
 
This URS is considered as “partially fulfilled” 
as the user is able to specify a search term 
when executing the program. However, the 
data accessible to PubMed is not equally 
distributed among scientific fields and 
therefore 
the 
quality 
of 
the 
results 
obtained might vary 
 
KBOT-URS-4 
The system should not rely  on any 
subscription 
model 
in 
order 
to 
minimize the potential prize point of 
the tool. 
 
This URS is considered as “fulfilled” as the 
access to the data is free and the basic 
functionality of the program does not 
require high computational power. 
 
KBOT-URS-5 
The system should be targeted toward 
Opinion Leader detection with an 
industrial profile.  
 
This URS is considered as “partially fulfilled” 
as the program is able to select for Opinion 
Leaders with a predominantly industrial 
area of science and filter through the 
results using the sentiment analysis to 
select the profiles that have a positive 
sentiment towards “industry” or “startups”. 
 
Table 3: URS fulfillment evaluation. 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
Pharma IT 
26 
 
3 System Description 
3.1 Overall Description 
The tool generated as a result of this project is KBOT, a command-line python program that 
uses a search query to identify and extract PubMed articles, analyze the list of retrieved 
authors and abstracts, and creates a co-authorship network Figure 3: UML Diagram of 
standard workflow.(Figure 3). This collaboration network is then used to identify the opinion 
leaders in the field using the PageRank algorithm. In addition, the program analyzes the 
content of all the abstracts associated with a given author to identify their sentiment towards 
user-specified terms. Apart from the search query, the user is also able to select if they want to 
use the sentiment analysis module or not, experiencing great performance gains when only 
the simple ranking is performed.  
 
 
Figure 3: UML Diagram of standard workflow. 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
DTU  
 
27 
 
3.2 System Requirements 
As a requirement, the users need to have Python 3 installed in their systems and have an 
Internet connection. The user must also create an account in PubMed and produce an API key 
as well as install all the necessary requirement libraries listed in the requirements.txt file. The 
dependencies of the tool are the following: 
 
- 
BioPython:  Biopython is an open-source Python library dedicated to biological 
computation. It provides a wide range of tools for the analysis of biological data 
including sequence handling in various formats, phylogenetic tree generation and 
general bioinformatics programs such as BLAST or Clustalw (Chang et al. 2023). In the 
context of this project, the library was used to manage access to Pubmed articles by 
the NCBI Entrez Programming Utilities. 
 
The Entrez Programming Utilities (E-utilities) are a set of programs that provide an 
interface to the Entrez query and database system at the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information (NCBI). The E-utilities are based on URL requests to provide 
access to text-based NCBI databases. There are nine different programs that retrieve 
different information (Sayers 2022a, 2022b); 
o EInfo retrieves information about the databases themselves. 
o ESearch produces a list of unique identifiers (UIDs) based on a text query.  
o EPost takes a list of UIDs and stores it in the History server. Then it responds 
with a query key and environment for the uploaded set. 
o ESummary uses a list of UIDs to retrieve their corresponding document 
summaries. 
o EFetch retrieves a specific record in a specified format based on a list of UIDs 
in a similar manner to ESummary. 
o ELink can be used to retrieve related UIDs or create hyperlinks between them. 
o EGQuery provides the number of records retrieved in all databases that 
correspond to a single query. 
o ESpell retrieves spelling suggestions for a text query in an specified database 
o ECitMatch retrieves the UID for a specific citation string. 
==PAGE:29==
 
Pharma IT 
28 
 
Among these, ESearch and EFetch were used consecutively to generate a database of 
UIDs, authors and abstracts based on a search input.  
Access to these records is however restricted in regard to the amount of records that 
can be retrieved simultaneously. This is done to prevent an overload of the servers and 
limits normal users to three requests per second. This rate limit can be increased to 
ten requests per second by using an API key, that can be obtained through the settings 
page of the user's NCBI profile. In this sense, the Biopython package covers key 
functionality as it controls that the rate limit is not exceeded and allows for an easy 
way to provide the email address and corresponding API key when performing the 
requests to the servers. It is important to maintain the requests below the limit as 
failure to do so can result in IP blockage (Sayers 2022a). 
 
- 
Pandas: Pandas is an open-source library used for data manipulation and analysis. It 
includes custom data structures and functions that make working with structured data 
easier and more efficient (Essential basic functionality — pandas 2.0.2 documentation 
n.d.; User Guide — pandas 2.0.2 documentation n.d.). It is widely used because it 
allows developers to work with spreadsheet-like data structures called DataFrames 
that are optimized for fast loading and allow for complex data handling. It is also useful 
because it is able to interact with various data formats both as input and output, which 
makes it a valuable tool for different environments (Image 2: pandas input and output 
formats (Source: NVIDIA)(Pandas Python– What Is It and Why Does It Matter? n.d.). 
 
 
Image 2: pandas input and output formats (Source: NVIDIA) 
As mentioned before, the DataFrame is the main working structure in pandas. It 
consists of a two-dimensional tabular data structure that can store data of different 
types (numerical, string, boolean, etc.) in columns. This similarity with other commonly 
used formats such as .xlsx or .csv makes the logic and operations with the DataFrame 
==PAGE:30==
 
DTU  
 
29 
 
more accessible.  Also, the library is specially proficient at handling missing data as 
NaN and is seamlessly integrated with NumPy and Matplotlib, basic Python libraries 
that pandas builds upon (Mckinney 2011). 
In regard to this project, Pandas has been used to store and process the data retrieved 
from Pubmed in a series of DataFrames. These DataFrames are used subsequently to 
produce more complex structures that allow for deeper analysis. 
 
- 
NetworkX: NetworkX is a popular open-source Python library used for the creation, 
manipulation, and study of complex networks or graphs. It provides a powerful set of 
tools and data structures that allow for the representation of both simple and directed 
graphs. It also has great flexibility in node and edge assignment and contains many 
graph algorithms that measure different network parameters (Hagberg and Conway 
2020; Hagberg, Swart, and S Chult 2008).  
NetworkX has been used in this project to generate a graph of author collaborations 
based on an input Pandas DataFrame containing the author list of each paper found. 
The library was also used to analyze this graph using the in-build PageRank algorithm 
resulting in a ranked list of nodes/authors.  
 
- 
Itertools: Itertools is a simple list comprehension module in Python. In the context of 
this project, it was used in combination with NetworkX to generate the collaboration 
graph as it allows to generate edges by producing all possible two-author 
combinations within a paper (Hunt 2019) 
 
- 
Transformers: The transformers library, previously known as pytorch-transformers, is 
a python library developed by HuggingFace (Transformers n.d.). It provides a set of 
tools and pretrained models for different tasks such as Natural language processing, 
Computer vision or audio analysis. 
In this project the transformers library has been used for the Aspect Base Sentiment 
Analysis module. The pretrained models yangheng/deberta-v3-base-absa-v1.1 
and yangheng/deberta-v3-large-absa-v1.1 were applied together with a base 
implementation available in (python - aspect sentiment analysis using Hugging face - 
Stack Overflow n.d.). 
==PAGE:31==
 
Pharma IT 
30 
 
3.3 Technical description 
 
In this section a brief description of each function is provided. More information can be found 
in the script. The program has been constructed upon the following functions: 
search_articles(search_term, num_results): This function takes a search term and the desired 
number of results, and uses the Entrez package to search for related articles in PubMed's 
database. It returns a list of article IDs. 
 
 
get_authors(pubmed_id): This function uses Entrez again to fetch the details of an article 
based on its PubMed ID. It extracts both authors and abstracts of the articles. 
 
 
 
create_dataframe(article_ids, authors, abstracts): This function takes article IDs, authors, and 
abstracts as inputs, and returns a DataFrame object with these as columns. 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
DTU  
 
31 
 
create_graph(df): This function constructs a weighted, undirected graph based on the 
authorship data. Each node in the graph represents an author, and each edge between nodes 
represents a co-authorship. The weight of the edge is the number of papers co-authored by 
the pair. 
 
absa_analysis(df,aspectlist): This function performs aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) on 
the abstracts using a version of the pre-trained DeBERTa model from the transformers library. 
The aspect list represents different topics for which sentiment scores are calculated. 
 
 
The main() function requests the user to define a search term and a number of results, then 
confirms if the analysis has to be run with or without ABSA. If ABSA is selected, the user must 
also input the term or terms to analyze. 
==PAGE:33==
 
Pharma IT 
32 
 
 
 Once these parameters have been input by the user, it calls for the previously defined 
functions to collect data, create a co-authorship graph, and calculate PageRank for each author 
in the graph. If the ABSA model has been selected, it also performs the sentiment analysis on 
the concatenated abstracts for each author and merges this information with the PageRank 
score. 
==PAGE:34==
 
DTU  
 
33 
 
 
 
The main() function ends by printing the resulting DataFrame and returning it both in the 
terminal and as an output file: output_results.txt: 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
Pharma IT 
34 
 
4 Evaluation and Testing 
4.1 Approach 
The testing was carried out in different stages. First, informal testing was conducted to ensure 
that the system was working as intended. This included a code review performed by two 
different colleagues to spot potential issues with the implementation.  
Further testing was done in the form of runtime analysis and benchmarking with other existing 
systems. Also, user acceptance testing was proposed as a way to verify that the system 
achieves the desired performance and otherwise point the developers in the right direction for 
further improvements.  
In that sense, User acceptance testing was also designed to compare this tool together with 
keyopinionleaders.com (KOLCOM), an equivalent free available tool.  In this way, the test users 
could score both systems with a standardized questionnaire that values user experience using 
a Likert scale (Annex 1). This allows the user to point in different directions getting a more 
complete view of the results. This approach also has the advantage of reducing the time spent 
in completing the form while providing a good metric of the experience the user has in regard 
to the program. The use of validated systems also results in a higher literature available and 
higher chances for benchmarking which in turn can help the developers get an understanding 
of the users needs and context when using the system. Despite the great value added by user 
experience testing, it is important to remember that the user´s evaluation is greatly impacted 
by their background and previous experiences with tools of a similar kind. This means that an 
attempt should be made to gather a large group of testers that closely resemble the target 
users of the system to obtain the most valuable results from this test However, time 
constraints in the final part of the project did not allow for the collection of sufficient 
responses to extract any meaning information and for this reason, the User acceptance testing 
was deferred to a later date. 
In regards to benchmarking, the systems results where compared to KOLCOM as well and 
positioning and selection of authors were evaluated.  For this, the same query was run in both 
tools and the ranking of authors provided was compared. The choice of KOLCOM was made as 
it was the only tool available that was free and focused primarily on KOL identification. As 
mention in the Introduction, most of the other available tools for KOL identification are 
sustained by a subscription model or have a high entry cost and therefore they have not been 
considered for the benchmarking process. 
==PAGE:36==
 
DTU  
 
35 
 
Runtime was also assessed by measuring the time elapsed between the start of the program 
and the production of the results. This was done on a Windows 11 machine with 32GB of DDR4 
RAM, an i7-9750H CPU and a NVIDIA GTX1650 GPU, so changes in runtime will change 
depending on the setup used to run the software (Error! Reference source not found.).  
 
The ABSA model performance was not measured in terms of accuracy as this is something 
beyond the scope of the project and previous research has shown that for ABSA, BERT-based 
models are the golden standard despite being computationally more expensive than Non-BERT 
models(Das and Zhang 2020). As the pre trained models used for the sentiment analysis are a 
variation of DeBERTa, an already improved model constructed on top of Googles BERT and 
Facebooks RoBERTa further analysis of the results was deemed unnecessary (He et al. 2020; 
Yang and Li 2021).  
 
4.2 Benchmarking and runtime assessment 
The result of this project is a command line tool (KBOT) that is able to produce a list of 
influential people based on a PubMed search query. The tool is also capable of performing an 
Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis on the abstracts associated with each author and includes 
the results of such analysis together with the confidence on that prediction in the same ranked 
author list.  
During analysis of the output produced by KBOT, it was noticed that there is a high prevalence 
of names of Chinese origin, especially in larger fields or research, with the same names 
appearing in vastly different areas. Upon studying this matter in further detail, it was noticed 
that some of these individuals were not leaders in their respective fields (Error! Reference 
source not found. A and B). An explanation for the high ranking of such individuals could be 
that their names are so common in the population that several individuals with the same name 
can occur within a field of research. If these individuals had the exact same name, the program 
would cluster them together, artificially increasing the amount and weight of their 
connections. This seems a likely scenario as some of the most common overrepresented 
names are Zhang, Li, Chen, Liu and Wang which are the 5 most common surnames in China 
accounting for up to 30% of the Chinese population (~430 million people)(Yeung 2021). In 
order to solve this, the Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID) was created in 2012 (Haak 
et al. 2012). This ID attempts to generate a uniquely identifiable code for a researcher. 
==PAGE:37==
 
Pharma IT 
36 
 
However, the implementation of this system has not been immediate and more time is 
required until it becomes a completely standardized tool to identify researchers (Cress 2019).  
 
Figure 4: Comparison of the results obtained in four different searches. A: sustainability, B: cancer, C: biochar, D: 
Graphene. For each search, 10000 articles were analyzed and the Pagerank score was assessed. Aspect Based 
Sentiment Analysis was not performed in these searches.  
 
Further investigation of the results provided by the tool showed that, in some cases, the 
PageRank score could be used as an indicator of the veracity of an author (Error! Reference 
source not found. C and D). If the first authors have a significantly higher score compared to 
the subsequent ones, there is a higher likelihood of these authors being real experts within 
their field. A good example of this is seen in Error! Reference source not found.D, where Kenji 
Watanabe and Takashi Taniguchi have been found as the top KOL in the field of graphene by a 
noticeable margin whereas Wei Zhang and the subsequent authors have a low decrease in 
their scores. In this example, a manual assessment of the first and second authors showed that 
they are both experts in the field of graphene with an h-index higher than 150. However, it 
was not possible to find any leading author in the field of graphene under the name of Wei 
==PAGE:38==
 
DTU  
 
37 
 
Zhang though many researchers in related fields were encountered. Also this name also 
appears amongst the top authors of sustainability and cancer. As this is the most common 
single name in China (Yeung 2021), it supports the hypothesis of common names being 
overrepresented in the analyzed network and points towards one of the major points for 
improvement of the tool. Despite these assumptions, further investigation into this topic 
would be necessary before actions can be taken to solve this issue. 
 
Figure 5: A: Rank Biased Overlap of selected searches (0 corresponds to no similarity and 1 corresponds to identical 
lists). Blue: comparison between KOLCOM and KBOT using 5000 articles. Orange comparison between KOLCOM and 
KBOT using 5000 articles. B: Percentage of articles analyzed by KBOT 
The benchmark of the resulting list was performed by comparing the two lists generated by 
kolcom and KBOT respectively (Figure 6A). A series of random topics were selected covering 
different fields of science of different magnitude (number of articles retrieved by the search). 
These lists were then compared using the Rank Biased Overlap (RBO) method as a way of 
==PAGE:39==
 
Pharma IT 
38 
 
accounting for position (Webber et al. 2010). The results show a small correlation between the 
two lists which was expected as each tool uses a different underlying algorithm. However, it 
was possible to see that running KBOT with a higher number of articles analyzed resulted in a 
more similar list, suggesting that the number of articles that the system is able to analyze is a 
limiting factor in regard to the information content available for analysis. For this reason, it 
was hypothesized that a larger coverage of a given field would have a higher likelihood of 
producing a more complete result (Figure 6B). However, there doesn’t seem to be a direct 
relationship between the two factors as a search with 100% coverage (Chocolate) had a lower 
RBO score (0.06)  than one with 5% coverage (Alzheimer)(0.11). These results should still be 
taken into account with caution as the sample size is extremely limited, and many query-
specific factors could play a role in determining the RBO score between KBOT and kolcom. 
 
Finally, regarding the runtime assessment (Figure 7), the first take away is that the runtime 
scales linearly with regards to the number of articles analyzed. This seems to correspond to a 
Big (O) notation of O = (O)n. though further analysis of the code would be necessary to confirm 
this result. Despite this being a good scalability for a program  of this complexity, the overall 
performance of the system is limited by the high computational power required to run the 
ABSA module efficiently. In Figure 7 A it can be seen that the time per article analyzed is much 
higher when ABSA analysis is carried out rising from 0.006 seconds on the sole PageRank 
assessment to 8.8 and 30 seconds when the base and large models are used respectively. This 
could be overcome by a more powerful machine or by supplementing the system with cloud 
computing but that could be in conflict with KBOT-URS-4 as rental of computing power can 
easily become an expensive solution. Also, further optimization of the model could be carried 
out as the same abstract is analyzed for each author resulting in several redundant analyses 
that could be avoided. In  regards to Figure 7B, it also shows that the graph size also scales 
linearly together with the number of articles analyzed.  
 
  
==PAGE:40==
 
DTU  
 
39 
 
 
Figure 6:Performance analysis. A: runtime analysis for a single search. Yellow: only PageRank Analysis; Green: 
PageRank Analysis with ABSA using base model; Blue: Page Rank analysis and ABSA using large model. B: Graph size 
increment. Blue: nodes(Authors), Orange: edges(connections) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
Pharma IT 
40 
 
5 Conclusion 
The result of this project has been the development of a tool to identify Key Opinion Leaders. 
The overall result is considered successful though the produced tool has several caveats that 
need to be addressed in the future to achieve a competitive status. The main obstacle in the 
development process has been data accessibility as most of the data sources considered at the 
early stages of the process have not been available for data collection later in the development 
phase. This has also limited the capacity of the tool to accomplish its main goal as it is not fully 
capable of selecting profiles directly related to the industry. Another main concern is the 
relative simplicity of the algorithm used for the individual analysis which has major limitations 
in regard to how authors with the same name are scored and what information is available for 
the end user to assess. In that sense, comparison with an equivalent tool has shown that KBOT 
is slower and produces less accurate results, which makes it a weak competitor in an already 
crowded market. 
Despite this result, this project has served as a great learning experience in regard to how 
product development is performed and what are the main items to consider in the different 
phases of it. Also, the limitations found open new and exciting paths for improvement that 
could lead to a better version with higher capabilities and the corresponding learning. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
DTU  
 
41 
 
6 Future perspectives 
As described in the previous section, the tool produced as a result of this project has several 
limitations that should be addressed in the next iteration of development. In that sense, the 
first action to be taken is to perform a deeper analysis of the results obtained and compare 
them if possible, with other tools in the market. In this comparison, more algorithms could be 
applied in order to find better candidates than PageRank for scoring the users. Some of these 
algorithms could be LeaderRank, PersonRank or InfluencerRank, that work in a similar manner 
to PageRank but have been shown to produce better results depending on the context. 
Also, it would be interesting to produce a user interface that could facilitate the access of the 
tool to more users. A first attempt at this has already been done in this project using the Kivy 
framework but it was not possible to achieve a sufficient performance to include it in the 
results. Therefore, further development of this feature would be necessary. 
Finally, the inclusion of more data sources would be a significant advantage to the project as 
the information available from the connection graph is very limited and undermines the rest of 
the program. The integration between different data providers would be complex as the same 
person can have several and different IDs in different platforms but a combined information 
network would be significantly more valuable for the posterior data analysis. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
Pharma IT 
42 
 
7 Bibliography 
“🤗 Transformers.” https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index (July 1, 2023). 
Ahmed, M, AN Mahmood, J Hu - Journal of Network and Computer, and Undefined 2016. 
2016. 
“A 
Survey 
of 
Network 
Anomaly 
Detection 
Techniques.” 
Elsevier. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804515002891 (July 1, 2023). 
Berna, Ayşe, Altinel Girgin, and Gizem Gümüşçekiçci. 2022. “From Past to Present: Spam 
Detection and Identifying Opinion Leaders in Social Networks.” Sigma J Eng Nat Sci 40(2): 
441–63. https://acikerisim.isikun.edu.tr/xmlui/handle/11729/4818 (July 1, 2023). 
Bianchini, Monica, Marco Gori, and Franco Scarselli. 2005. “Inside PageRank.” ACM 
Transactions 
on 
Internet 
Technology 
(TOIT) 
5(1): 
92–128. 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1052934.1052938 (July 1, 2023). 
Brahmi, Bechir, Malik Mustafa, and Malik Mustafa Ii. 2019. “Impact of Knowledge 
Management Process on Managerial Performance in the High Tech Sector.” International 
Journal of Business and Management 14(2). 
Brin, S, and L Page. 1998. “The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine.” 
Elsevier. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016975529800110X (July 1, 
2023). 
Chan, KK, S Misra - Journal of advertising, and undefined 1990. 1990. “Characteristics of the 
Opinion 
Leader: 
A 
New 
Dimension.” 
Taylor 
& 
Francis 
19(3): 
53–60. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00913367.1990.10673192 (July 1, 2023). 
Chang, Jeff et al. 2023. “Biopython Tutorial and Cookbook.” 
Chowdhry, Kamla, and Theodore M. Newcomb. 1952. “The Relative Abilities of Leaders and 
Non-Leaders to Estimate Opinions of Their Own Groups.” Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology 47(1): 51–57. 
Cress, Phaedra E. 2019. “Why Do Academic Authors Need an ORCID ID?” Aesthetic Surgery 
Journal 39(6): 696–97. https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/asj/sjz042 (June 29, 2023). 
D’aniello, Giuseppe et al. 2022. “KnowMIS-ABSA: An Overview and a Reference Model for 
Applications of Sentiment Analysis and Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis.” Artificial 
Intelligence Review 55: 5543–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-021-10134-9 (July 1, 
2023). 
==PAGE:44==
 
DTU  
 
43 
 
Das, Abhishek, and Wei Emma Zhang. 2020. “ABSA-Bench: Towards the Unified Evaluation of 
Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis Research.” Proceedings of the The 18th Annual 
Workshop 
of 
the 
Australasian 
Language 
Technology 
Association: 
65–71. 
https://aclanthology.org/2020.alta-1.7. 
Do, Hai Ha, Pwc Prasad, Angelika Maag, and Abeer Alsadoon. 2019. “Deep Learning for Aspect-
Based Sentiment Analysis: A Comparative Review.” Expert Systems With Applications 118: 
272–99. www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa (July 1, 2023). 
Doumit, Gaby et al. 2011. “Opinion Leaders and Changes over Time: A Survey.” 
Implementation Science 6(1). 
Dubois, E, D Gaffney - American behavioral scientist, and undefined 2014. 2014. “The Multiple 
Facets of Influence: Identifying Political Influentials and Opinion Leaders on Twitter.” 
journals.sagepub.com 
58(10): 
1260–77. 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0002764214527088 (July 1, 2023). 
Egger, Christopher, Web Science First, Kristian Fischer, and Gerhard Hartmann. 2016. 
“Identifying Key Opinion Leaders in Social Networks - An Approach to Use Instagram Data 
to Rate and Identify Key Opinion Leader for a Specific Business Field.” https://epb.bibl.th-
koeln.de/frontdoor/index/index/docId/845 (July 1, 2023). 
“Essential 
Basic 
Functionality 
— 
Pandas 
2.0.2 
Documentation.” 
https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/basics.html#basics (June 27, 2023). 
Feldman, Ronen. 2013. “Techniques and Applications for Sentiment Analysis.” Communications 
of the ACM 56(4): 82–89. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2436256.2436274 (July 1, 
2023). 
Gleich, David F. 2015. “PageRank beyond the Web.” SIAM Review 57(3): 321–63. 
https://epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/140976649 (July 1, 2023). 
“Google 
Terms 
of 
Service 
– 
Privacy 
& 
Terms 
– 
Google.” 
https://policies.google.com/terms?hl=en-US#toc-content (July 1, 2023). 
Gretzel, Ulrike. 2018. “Influencer Marketing in Travel and Tourism.” : 147–56. 
Gupta, Sandeep Kumar, and Roopa P. Nayak. 2013. “An Insight into the Emerging Role of 
Regional Medical Advisor in the Pharmaceutical Industry.” Perspectives in Clinical 
Research 4(3): 186. /pmc/articles/PMC3757584/ (July 1, 2023). 
Haak, Laurel L. et al. 2012. “ORCID: A System to Uniquely Identify Researchers.” Learned 
==PAGE:45==
 
Pharma IT 
44 
 
Publishing 25(4): 259–64. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1087/20120404 
(June 29, 2023). 
Hagberg, Aric, and Drew Conway. 2020. “Networkx: Network Analysis with Python.” URL: 
https://networkx. github. io. 
Hagberg, Aric, Pieter Swart, and Daniel S Chult. 2008. “Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics, 
and Function Using Networkx.” https://www.osti.gov/biblio/960616. 
He, Pengcheng et al. 2020. “DeBERTa: Decoding-Enhanced BERT with Disentangled Attention.” 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.03654v6 (June 30, 2023). 
Hua, Ye, and Quan Yuan. 2022. “The Launch of New Products: New Technology Driven Firm-
User Interactions with Key Opinion Leaders for Single and Multiple Interactions.” 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 56: 101206. 
Hunt, 
John. 
2019. 
“Collection 
Related 
Modules.” 
: 
401–6. 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-20290-3_34 (June 27, 2023). 
iKala. 
2022. 
“Best 
KOL 
Radar 
Alternatives 
& 
Competitors.” 
https://sourceforge.net/software/product/KOL-Radar/alternatives (June 30, 2023). 
Jain, L, R Katarya, and S Sachdeva. 2019. “Opinion Leader Discovery Based on Text Analysis in 
Online 
Social 
Network.” 
ieeexplore.ieee.org. 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9036205/ (July 1, 2023). 
Jain, L, R Katarya, S Sachdeva - Knowledge-Based Systems, and undefined 2020. “Recognition 
of Opinion Leaders Coalitions in Online Social Network Using Game Theory.” Elsevier. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705120304007 (July 1, 2023). 
Jonnalagadda, Siddhartha, Ryan Peeler, and Philip Topham. 2012. “Discovering Opinion 
Leaders for Medical Topics Using News Articles.” Journal of Biomedical Semantics 3(1). 
Katz, Elihu. 1957. “The Two-Step Flow of Communication: An Up-To-Date Report on an 
Hypothesis.” Public Opinion Quarterly 21(1): 61–78. https://dx.doi.org/10.1086/266687 
(July 1, 2023). 
Khan, Faizan, Boqi Chen, Daniel Varro, and Shane McIntosh. 2022. “An Empirical Study of Type-
Related Defects in Python Projects.” Ieee Transactions on Software Engineering 48(8): 
3145–58. 
“KOL KeyOpinionLeaders.Com #MadeByExGooglers.” https://www.keyopinionleaders.com/ 
(June 30, 2023). 
==PAGE:46==
 
DTU  
 
45 
 
Kolugala, L M B N, and H S Jayasena. 2019. “Identification of Opinion Leadership: A Literature 
Review.” ieomsociety.org. http://www.ieomsociety.org/ieom2019/papers/630.pdf (July 
1, 2023). 
Lindenfeld, Ariel. 2022. “Best KOL Management Software Tools for 2023 | PeerSpot.” 
https://www.peerspot.com/categories/kol-management-software (June 30, 2023). 
Lyons, Barbara, and Kenneth Henderson. 2005. “Opinion Leadership in a Computer-Mediated 
Environment.” 
Journal 
of 
Consumer 
Behaviour 
4(5): 
319–29. 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/cb.22 (July 1, 2023). 
Lyu, Wenjing, Ye Qi, and Jin Liu. 2022. “Proliferation in Live Streaming Commerce, and Key 
Opinion Leader Selection.” Electronic Commerce Research. 
Matikainen, Minna et al. 2015. “Determinants of New Product Launch Success in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry.” Journal of Pharmaceutical Innovation 10(2): 175–89. 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12247-015-9216-7 (July 1, 2023). 
Mckinney, Wes. 2011. “Pandas: A Foundational Python Library for Data Analysis and Statistics.” 
http://pandas.sf.net (June 27, 2023). 
Medhat, Walaa, Ahmed Hassan, and Hoda Korashy. 2014. “Sentiment Analysis Algorithms and 
Applications: A Survey.” Ain Shams Engineering Journal 5(4): 1093–1113. 
Mejova, Yelena. 2009. “Sentiment Analysis: An Overview Comprehensive Exam Paper.” 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/15-The-Internet-and-Civic-Engagement.aspx 
(July 1, 2023). 
Mojtaba, Seyed, Hosseini Bamakan, Ildar Nurgaliev, and Qiang Qu. 2019. “Opinion Leader 
Detection: A Methodological Review.” Expert Systems With Applications 115: 200–222. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.07.069 (July 1, 2023). 
Niu, Baozhuang, Xinhu Yu, Qiyang Li, and Yulan Wang. 2023. “Gains and Losses of Key Opinion 
Leaders’ Product Promotion in Livestream E-Commerce.” Omega 117: 102846. 
“Pandas Python– What Is It and Why Does It Matter?” https://www.nvidia.com/en-
us/glossary/data-science/pandas-python/ (June 27, 2023). 
Parau, P, C Lemnaru, M Dinsoreanu, and R Potolea. 2017. “OPINION LEADER DETECTION.” 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804412-4.00010-3 (July 1, 2023). 
“Prohibited 
Software 
and 
Extensions 
| 
LinkedIn 
Help.” 
https://www.linkedin.com/help/linkedin/answer/a1341387/prohibited-software-and-
==PAGE:47==
 
Pharma IT 
46 
 
extensions?lang=en (July 1, 2023). 
Putzke, Johannes, and Hideaki Takeda. 2016. “Identifying Key Opinion Leaders in Evolving Co-
Authorship Networks—a Descriptive Study of a Proxy Variable for Betweenness 
Centrality.” 
Studies 
in 
Computational 
Intelligence 
644: 
311–23. 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-30569-1_24 (July 1, 2023). 
“Python 
- 
Aspect 
Sentiment 
Analysis 
Using 
Hugging 
Face 
- 
Stack 
Overflow.” 
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76195972/aspect-sentiment-analysis-using-
hugging-face (July 1, 2023). 
Rogers, EM, and FF Shoemaker. 1971. “Communication of Innovations; A Cross-Cultural 
Approach.” https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED065999 (July 1, 2023). 
Sayers, 
Eric. 
2022a. 
“A 
General 
Introduction 
to 
the 
E-Utilities.” 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25497/ (June 27, 2023). 
———. 
2022b. 
“The 
E-Utilities 
In-Depth: 
Parameters, 
Syntax 
and 
More.” 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25499/ (June 27, 2023). 
Scher, JU, and G Schett. 2021. “Key Opinion Leaders—a Critical Perspective.” nature.com. 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41584-020-00539-1 (July 1, 2023). 
Schrepp, Martin. 2016. “User Experience Questionnaire Handbook Version 2 No Project View 
Project UX KPI View Project.” https://www.researchgate.net/publication/303880829 
(June 30, 2023). 
Shah, Dhavan V., and Dietram A. Scheufele. 2006. “Explicating Opinion Leadership: Nonpolitical 
Dispositions, Information Consumption, and Civic Participation.” Political Communication 
23(1): 1–22. 
Sharma, K, M Bajaj - 2022 7th International Conference On, and Undefined 2022. 2022. “A 
Review on Opinion Leader Detection and Its Applications.” ieeexplore.ieee.org. 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9835870/ (July 1, 2023). 
Sismondo, Sergio. 2013. “Key Opinion Leaders and the Corruption of Medical Knowledge: 
What the Sunshine Act Will and Won’t Cast Light On.” Journal of Law, Medicine and 
Ethics 41(3): 635–43. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jlme.12073 (July 1, 
2023). 
———. 2017. “Hegemony of Knowledge and Pharmaceutical Industry Strategy.” Philosophy 
and Medicine 122: 47–63. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-94-024-0979-
==PAGE:48==
 
DTU  
 
47 
 
6_4 (July 1, 2023). 
Soniewicki, Marcin. 2021. “Knowledge-Oriented Leadership in High Tech Companies on B2B 
and B2C Markets.” : 716–24. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/354438859 (July 
1, 2023). 
“User 
Guide 
— 
Pandas 
2.0.2 
Documentation.” 
https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/index.html (June 27, 2023). 
Valente, TW, P Pumpuang - Health education & Behavior, and Undefined 2007. 2007. 
“Identifying Opinion Leaders to Promote Behavior Change.” journals.sagepub.com. 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1090198106297855 (July 1, 2023). 
Veeva. 2021. “Veeva_Link_Datasheet_v14.Pdf.” 
Weeks, Brian E, Alberto Ardèvol-Abreu, and Homero Gil De Zúñiga. 2017. “Online Influence? 
Social Media Use, Opinion Leadership, and Political Persuasion.” International Journal of 
Public 
Opinion 
Research 
29(2). 
https://academic.oup.com/ijpor/article/29/2/214/2981869 (July 1, 2023). 
Wu, C et al. 2015. “Identifying Opinion Leader in the Internet Forum.” gvpress.com 8(11): 423–
34. https://gvpress.com/journals/IJHIT/vol8_no11/38.pdf (July 1, 2023). 
Yan, Erjia, and Ying Ding. 2011. “Discovering Author Impact: A PageRank Perspective.” 
Information Processing & Management 47(1): 125–34. 
Yang, Heng, and Ke Li. 2021. “Improving Implicit Sentiment Learning via Local Sentiment 
Aggregation.” http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.08604. 
Yeung, Jessie. 2021. “Why 1.2 Billion People in China Share the Same 100 Surnames | CNN.” 
CNN. 
https://edition.cnn.com/2021/01/16/china/chinese-names-few-intl-hnk-
dst/index.html (June 29, 2023). 
Zhang, Yuanxing et al. 2016. “Influence Maximization in Messenger-Based Social Networks.” 
2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference, GLOBECOM 2016 - Proceedings. 
Zhao, Yiyi, Gang Kou, Yi Peng, and Yang Chen. 2018. “Understanding Influence Power of 
Opinion Leaders in E-Commerce Networks: An Opinion Dynamics Theory Perspective.” 
Information Sciences 426: 131–47. 
Zou, Y, … F Peng - on Fashion communication: between tradition and, and undefined 2019. 
2019. “Key Opinion Leaders’ Influences in the Chinese Fashion Market.” Springer: 118–
32. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-15436-3_11 (July 1, 2023). 
==PAGE:49==
 
Pharma IT 
48 
 
 
Annex 1. User Experience Questionnaire 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
DTU  
 
49 
 
 
Annex 2 Original project plan 
 
