==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Novel fluorescent nucleobase analogues for
tracking protein-nucleic acid interactions
Master Thesis
Name
Student Number
Signature
Anna Kyung Jakobsen
s174083
Marie-Louise Wibom
s174068
Supervisor:
Kira Astakhova, DTU Chemistry
June 16, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In the last decade CRISPR-Cas9 has attracted considerable attention as a gene-editing tech-
nology. Despite all the attention, there are still aspects of the CRISPR-Cas9 that remain un-
known. This project aims to investigate the micro-environment of Cas9, as the protein finds and
binds gRNA, and target-DNA in real-time. It was hypothesized that by incorporating fluores-
cently modified nucleobase analogues into the gRNA, the fine aspects of the micro-environment
in Cas9:gRNA-interactions could be revealed, throughout the recognition of target DNA and the
double stranded cleavage. To investigate this, thorough research about the micro-environment
was compared to the methods known today.
In this project two fluorescent nucleobase analogues, deoxyuridine modified with thiophene,
dUThio, and deoxyuridine modified with thiazole, dUThia, were synthesized by Stille-coupling,
purified by liquid chromatography and characterized by 1D and 2D NMR. Furthermore, three
gRNAs were designed, and the control gRNAs were synthesized by solid phase oligonucleotide
synthesis using phosphoramidites, purified by RP-HPLC, and characterized by MALDI-TOF.
Through extensive research, a science-backed prediction of the output of future experiments,
using the FNAs and gRNAs designed, was constructed. Due to time-limitations experiments
were not carried out. Therefore, only expectations can be made, before screening and testing
have been completed.
Figure 1: An overview of the Cas9:gRNA complex and R-loop with target DNA.
Yellow stars indicate the positions of FNAs
1
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project is a 30 ECTS points Master’s project at the Institute of Chemistry at Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark (DTU) in the term February 2023 till June 2023.
We want to give a special thanks to our supervisor, associate professor Kira Astakhova, for the
guidance, thorough supervision, and providing us with the answers to our many questions.
A special thanks to PhD. student Adrian Hern´andez Bustos for instructing us in the laboratory, and
being patient with us throughout the process. Thanks to Dr. Sofie Slott for helping and teaching
us how to use the Expidite.
Thanks to BSc. Joachim Jeberg and MSc. Lise Bastue for the collaboration and insights, not to
mention the many helpful discussions, we have had.
Thanks to professor Jørgen Kjems for the input and suggestions regarding the design of the gRNA.
Finally, we want to thank everyone in the KAS group for the helpful inputs to our project during
group meetings and in the laboratory.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Scientific Background
8
1.1
CRISPR-Cas9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.1.1
Micro-environment between Nucleotides and the Cas9-protein . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1.1.1
X-ray Crystal Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1.1.2
Atomic Force Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.1.1.3
Cryogenic-Electron-Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.1.1.4
HNH and RuvC domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.1.2
Protein Binding in Major versus Minor Groove of DNA . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.1.3
gRNA design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.2
Fluorescence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.2.1
Using Fluorescence in Detection of Micro-Environment and Nucleotide Inter-
actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.2.2
Fluorescent Nucleobase Analogues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.3
Current Methods for Detecting Protein:gRNA Complex Interactions . . . . . . . . .
19
1.3.1
Static Detection of Protein:gRNA Complex Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.3.2
Dynamic Detection of Protein:gRNA Complex Interactions
. . . . . . . . . .
20
1.4
Designing a CRISPR Cas9-Cleavage Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.4.1
FNA-project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.4.2
Stille-Coupling Reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.4.3
Solid-Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.4.4
Purification and Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2
Hypothesis and Project Aim
28
3
Experimental
29
3.1
Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
FNA synthesis (Modifying Uridine using Stille-Couplings) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.3
Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.4
gRNA synthesis (SPOS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.5
TBDMS-removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.6
Purification and characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results
37
4.1
Fluorescent Nucleobase Analogues Design for CRISPR/Cas9 Study . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Designing gRNAs and Their Targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3
==PAGE:5==
4.2.1
Testing the Designs with NUPACK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Incorporating the FNAs into gRNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.1
Control-Oligonucleotides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Modifying Uridine using Stille-Couplings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4.3
Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5
Solid Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis of (Control) gRNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5.1
Purification, Characterization, and Yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Discussion
50
5.1
FNA synthesis strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Theoretical Folding of gRNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Type of gRNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
Oligonucleotide Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
Current Approaches for Structural and Micro-environmental Investigations of Cas9 .
53
5.6
Expectations to the Micro-environment Interaction Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusion
57
Appendix
ii
A NUPACK results
ii
B Selection of FNAs suggested by Adrian Hern´andez Bustos
x
C Commercially Bought Oligonucleotides
xi
D Reactions Tables of Modified Uridine
xii
D.1 Uridine Modified with Thiophene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xii
D.2 Uridine Modified with Thiazole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiii
E NMRs of Products
xiv
E.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiv
E.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xxvi
F Organostannane impurities
xli
G MALDI-TOF Spectra of Oligonucleotides
xlii
H HLPC Spectra of Crude Products
xlvi
4
==PAGE:6==
I
Comparison Between NUPACK Models and Theoretical Folding
l
J
Lab Journals
lii
J.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
lii
J.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
lvi
J.3
Control gRNA synthesis via. SPOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
lxi
5
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
dUThia 5-(thiazole-2-yl)-2'-deoxyuridine
dUThio 5-(thiophene-2-yl)-2'-deoxyuridine
2AP 2-Aminopurine
AFM Atomic Force Microscopy
BRCA Branched Rolling Circle Amplification
Cas CRISPR associated proteins
CC Column Chromatography
CPMG Car-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill
CRISPR Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
crRNA CRISPR RNA
Cryo-EM Cryogenic-Electron-Microscopy
dgRNA Dual-guide RNA
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid
DSB Double Stranded Break
dsDNA double-stranded DNA
ECD Electronic Circular Dichroism
eq Equivalent
FNA Fluorescent Nucleoside Analogues
FRET Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer
gRNA Guide-RNA
HDR Homology-Directed Repair
HOMO Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital
HR-MS High Resolution Mass Spectrometry
LC Liquid chromatography
6
==PAGE:8==
LLE Liquid-liquid extraction
LPOS Liquid Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis
LUMO Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital
MALDI-TOF Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight
MB Molecular Beacon
MD Molecular Dynamics
MS Mass Spectrometry
NHEJ Non-Homologous End Joining
NMR Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
NSD1 Nuclear receptor binding SET Domain protein 1
NTS Non-Target Strand
NUC Nuclease Lobe
PAM Protospacer-Adjacent Motif
PBS Phosphate Buffered Saline
PID PAM-Interacting Domain
PNA Peptide Nucleic Acid
pre-crRNA pre-CRISPR RNA
RCA Rolling Circle Amplification
REC Recognition Lobe
RNA Ribonucleic Acid
RP-HPLC Reverse Phase-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
sgRNA Single-Guide RNA
SNPs Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms
SpCas9 Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9
SPOS Solid Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis
tracrRNA trans-activating crRNA
TS Target Strand
7
==PAGE:9==
1
Scientific Background
1.1
CRISPR-Cas9
CRISPR is an acronym for Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats. In nature,
CRISPR-Cas is part of an adaptive immune system, found in bacteria and archaea, to protect the
cell against viral infections. When the prokaryotic cell is infected with a virus, it is in the nature of
the immune response to attack the viral DNA. CRISPR associated proteins (Cas) 1 and 2 will cut
out a piece of the viral DNA [1]. This piece is called a pre-spacer. The pre-spacer will be put into
an array, and is now called a spacer [2]. In the array, other spacers are found from other harmful
phages. In between the spacers, repeats are found. The repeats of the CRISPR array are short,
palindromic sequences of nucleotides. Spacers and repeats make up the double-stranded CRISPR
DNA, which is a direct memory of the phages. This will be useful, when it is needed, the next time
a virus attacks the cell [1].
The CRISPR DNA is transcribed into one long strand of pre-CRISPR RNA (pre-crRNA). The strand
is then nicked into short strands, only containing one spacer and one repeat each, by Cas-proteins.
This is now referred to as the CRISPR-RNA (crRNA). When a virus reinfects the prokaryotic cell,
the crRNA will match with the complementary viral DNA. This will in turn get nicked by the Cas-
protein that the crRNA is attached to, once or more, depending on the protein. Moreover, other
proteins will destroy the viral DNA, once it is nicked, and by this, the viral DNA is destroyed, and
cannot be reproduced in the prokaryotic cell [1]. All these steps can be followed in figure 2.
Figure 2: CRISPR/Cas systems in nature [1]
8
==PAGE:10==
In another sense, CRISPR-Cas systems can be used in eukaryotic cells, but it is not naturally occur-
ring. However, it can be delivered into the eukaryotic cells [3]. The most well-characterized system
of CRISPR-Cas is the CRISPR-Cas9, derived from Streptococcus pyogenes [4]. In nature, the Cas9-
protein uses a special trans-activating crRNA (tracrRNA) as a scaffold, connecting the crRNA to
the protein, as the repeat of the crRNA and the tracrRNA are complementary. These two parts
together is called a dual-guide RNA (dgRNA) [1, 3, 4]. In 2012, the dual guide was fused into one
strand, which is then called single-guide RNA (sgRNA) [5]. This is further explained in section 1.1.3.
The Cas9 protein itself contains two lobes: The recognition lobe (REC), and the nuclease lobe
(NUC). The main function of REC is to carry the gRNA. From here, the CRISPR:gRNA-complex
searches for a complementary DNA target strand to the gRNA. The NUC contains the PAM-
interacting domain (PID), which, as the name suggests, is the part of the protein that identifies
the PAM on a strand of DNA [3]. PAM is an acronym for Protospacer-Adjacent Motif. This is
small part of the target, consisting of a couple of nucleotides, depending on the specific Cas-protein.
Specifically for Streptococcus pyogenes and Cas9-systems, the PAM sequence is NGG, N being an
arbitrary nucleotide [1]. When a PAM has been identified, the gRNA will start to match with the
target-DNA. As (and if) the two strands match, the Cas9-protein will start unwinding the DNA,
exposing the target-DNA to the protein between the two lobes. Thus, the PAM sequence is found
on the non-target strand (NTS) of the double-stranded DNA [3].
NUC consists of two separate domains, HNH and RuvC, which act as the scissors themselves. Firstly,
the HNH domain will cut the target-strand (TS), immediately followed by the RuvC domain cutting
the NTS afterwards. These nicks happen approximately three nucleotides upstream from the PAM
sequence. This will result in a double stranded break (DSB) [3, 4]
In the eukaryotic cell, the DSB will cause damage of the genome, which, eventually, will lead to
damage repair.
Here, especially two different repairs are researched in terms of CRISPR: Non-
Homologous End Joining (NHEJ), and Homology-Directed Repair (HDR) [3, 5, 4]. The method of
NHEJ is, when the DSB occurs, a short sequence will be inserted into or deleted from the DNA.
This will knock out the gene, which was cut by Cas9 [3]. NHEJ is the most common reparation
method, however, it is extremely error-prone due to no direct control over what is being deleted nor
inserted [3, 5].
On the other hand, with HDR it is possible to control the sequence that is inserted as replacement
of the damaged DNA. This can be done by delivering an oligonucleotide strand of DNA. This is
where gene-editing by Cas9 comes into play, as the protein can knock out inheritable diseases, as an
example [3, 5].
9
==PAGE:11==
1.1.1
Micro-environment between Nucleotides and the Cas9-protein
The micro-environment between an enzymatic protein and its substrate is a very crucial part of how
that protein works. In this section, the micro-environment between the gRNA and the Streptococcus
pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9) will be mapped out, based on existing reports.
1.1.1.1
X-ray Crystal Structure
The crystal structure of the Cas9 protein is already well described in literature. Here, SpCas9 is one
of the most well defined. By using X-ray crystallography, the exact domains, where the gRNA is
interacting to the Cas9-protein, can be obtained [6]. These domains are already described in general
terms in section 1.1. However, summed up, SpCas9 consists of 2 lobes; the REC and the NUC. The
REC lobe consists of two main domains: REC1 and REC2. Furthermore, the NUC lobe consists of
three domains: RuvC, HNH, and PID. These 2 lobes are, moreover, connected by a bridge helix [6, 7].
To follow the description of the gRNA micro-environment, see figure 3. When only introducing
gRNA to the Cas9 protein, the backbone of the gRNA will interact with the positively charged Arg
residues of REC1 and the bridge helix, along with Lys, Gly, Tyr, and Asp. The gRNA will also make
hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl-groups of the peptide backbone of Val, Tyr and the side-chain
of Arg, with the gRNA-backbone, which in turn will flip the nucleotides out to be exposed to the
solvent. This happens around eight nucleotides towards the 5’-end, downstream from the repeat
end, which ensures pairing between the gRNA and the target DNA. This region is called the seed
region, as it is the seed for pairing gRNA and DNA [6, 7].
When introducing the target DNA to the Cas9:gRNA complex, the PAM sequence of the target
is recognized.
This is done by 2 Arg residues, which recognize one Guanine each of the PAM
sequence. From here, Glu and Ser residues of the PID will force H-bonding between them and the
phosphate backbone of the DNA. This will result in unwinding of the DNA, and the gRNA can
make Watson-Crick base-pairing with the target [7, 8].
When both gRNA and target DNA are introduced to Cas9, the DNA:gRNA complex will form a
T-shape in order to fit into Cas9. Here, the Watson-Crick pairings will ensure the negatively charged
backbones of both gRNA and DNA will point into the sites of Cas9. The precise position of this
hybrid duplex is between the NUC and REC lobes. Here, the backbone of the target DNA will
interact with Asn-, Trp-, Arg-, and Gln-residues of the REC1, along with a Gln residue of RuvC,
and a Glu-residue of PID. Furthermore, the DNA nucleotides will interact with their C2’ atoms with
van der Waals forces. These in particular will help the Cas9 distinguish between the target DNA and
the gRNA. The recognition of gRNA and target DNA is sequence independent, as it only recognizes
the backbone of the gRNA and target DNA strand [6]. This is what ensures the versatility of the
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing method.
10
==PAGE:12==
Furthermore, the repeat:anti-repeat part of the gRNA will be positioned in a positively charged
groove between NUC and REC. This part of the gRNA is Cas9 specific, which is why, it is sequence
dependent. Here, Nishimasu et. al [6] found only nine nucleotides of each strand will make Watson-
Crick base-pairs, and six nucleotides of each strand will be unpaired, on their sgRNA. U23 and
A49 will make hydrogen-bonds to the side-chain of Arg1122, and A42 along with G43 will make
hydrogen-bonds to the carbonyl group on the main-chain on Phe351. Furthermore, U44 is locked
between Tyr325 and His328 with hydrogen-bonds to Tyr325. Lastly, the unpaired G43 is π-stacking
itself with Tyr359 and making a hydrogen-bond to Asp364 [6].
Moreover, three stem loops of the tracrRNA is positioned ”down” in the T-shape from the RNA:DNA
and the Repeat:Anti-Repeat. These stem loops are recognized by both the REC and NUC lobes,
where their functions are to anchor the gRNA to the Cas9 protein. This is done by interactions
between the backbone of stem loop 1 to REC1 and PID, along with the bridge helix. Furthermore,
stem loop 2 is interacting via hydrogen bonds to the NUC lobe. Stem loop 3 is interacting via
backbone and hydrogen bonds to the RuvC domain [6, 7].
1.1.1.2
Atomic Force Microscopy
The dynamics of Cas9 has been described through Atomic Force Spectroscopy (AFM), as well. As a
method, it is further described in section 1.3. Shibata et. al. [9] accounted for three major conforma-
tions using AFM: RNA-bound (R), Intermediate (I), and Active Docked (D). Here conformations
R and I have already been accounted for in the latest section with Cas9 binding to gRNA and
Cas9:gRNA:DNA, respectively. One of the main differences between X-ray and AFM is that X-ray
gives a still-picture of the protein, as it is crystallized, whereas AFM generates real-time movies of
the protein-interactions. Both R and I conformations were confirmed by AFM, with Cas9 as a stable,
closed, bi-lobed structure. Furthermore, the rigid conformation of Cas9 itself by crystallization has
been disproved by AFM. Cas9 has showed to be in a flexible conformation in solution, rather than
rigid. This was observed as Cas9 could slide along dsDNA without any gRNA [9]. Furthermore, the
R-conformation was found to facilitate 3D-diffusion, as the complex finds the target [9]. 3D-diffusion
is one of the ways a protein can find specific DNA sites [10]. Here, the Cas9 will ”hop” a few base
pairs, searching for the PAM sequence, rather than a sliding motion, and testing all the base pairs
[9, 10].
The D-conformation is the conformation right before, and during the cutting of the strands. This
means that the HNH- and RuvC-domains of Cas9 need to undergo conformational changes. This
conformation and these changes have been validated with AFM. The conformations, and the changes,
are yet to be decided. However, Shibata et. al. [9] have accounted for fluctuations of the HNH-
domain. These fluctuations could be separated into two states, due to the difference in displacement
of the HNH-domain, and thereby confirming the I-conformation turning into D-conformation [9].
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3: Micro-environment from an X-ray crystal-structure [6]
12
==PAGE:14==
One drawback of this method is that after the cleavage of the target, the NTS was released instantly,
whereas the TS would remain bound to the Cas9-gRNA complex. It is, therefore, still uncertain,
how the target is released from Cas9 [9].
1.1.1.3
Cryogenic-Electron-Microscopy
Cryogenic-Electron-Microscopy (Cryo-EM) has been used to examine the mechanics of Cas9. As a
method, it is further described in section 1.3. Using Cryo-EM, Cofsky et. al. [11] has accounted
for two different conformations of Cas9: An open conformation of the protein-RNA-complex, where
the target DNA is found as a linear duplex across the inner surface of the complex, and a closed
conformation, where the DNA is tweaked between the NUC and REC lobe in a V-shape [11].
The open conformation resembles the R-conformation, as described in section 1.1.1.2.
The R-
conformation, however, is described as a closed conformation, which means, this open conformation
is another possible conformation of the same state [11].
The closed conformation resembles the I-conformation. Here, PAM is recognized, resulting in Cas9
will actively bend the target-DNA into the V-shape. Here, the bend exposes the nucleotides through
the major groove (see Section 1.1.2), which will result in the unwinding of the DNA, and base-pairing
with the gRNA is initiated[11]. To get from the linear conformation of the target DNA to the V-
shape conformation, the DNA undergoes innumerable counts of small regulating bends. These bends
occur from the so-called ”helix-rolling basic patch” of REC2. This patch has many Lys-residues,
which can couple to the DNA to regulate the bends. In conclusion, the V-shape initiates the seed
region, which will force the DNA to base-pair with the gRNA, and make the R-loop formation [11].
1.1.1.4
HNH and RuvC domains
For the cleavage itself, the catalytic residues of HNH and RuvC come into play. It has yet to be
confirmed the actual mechanisms of the nicks, however, a couple of mechanisms have been proposed
in literature.
The X-ray structure of the two nickase-domains has succeeded to confirm the following: HNH con-
sists of Asp839, His840, and Asn863 residues, where HNH is abbreviated from the His and Asn
residues. It has been suggested that HNH uses a single-metal mechanism to perform the nick of
the target strand. Here, the scissile phosphate on the backbone, Asn, and Asp coordinates with
a Mg2+, whereas His will activate a water-molecule for the catalysis [6]. RuvC consist of Asp10,
Glu762, His983 and Asp986. For this part, a two-metal mechanism is suggested to perform the
nick. Both HNH and RuvC mechanisms cannot be fully accounted for, as the X-ray structures are
captured in inactivated states of the protein [6].
13
==PAGE:15==
Other approaches have been tried. For instance, Cryo-EM structures have showed that a Cas9:sgRNA
:DNA ternary complex could be possible [12]. Using this information, Tang et. al. [13] constructed
atomic models, and performed molecular dynamics (MD) on both domains to simulate the possibil-
ities of the nicks. This approach could conclude a single-metal mechanism for HNH, as seen in the
x-ray crystal structure. Here, a Mg2+ could coordinate three water-molecules along with Asp839
and Asn863 residues, and the scissile phosphate of the target strand. The simulations showed an
octahedral structure for this complex. After this, the His840 residue could act as a Lewis base to
activate the water molecules, which in turn could perform the nucleophilic attack on the phosphate-
group [13].
This Cryo-EM/MD approach suggested a two-metal mechanism for RuvC, as suggested in X-ray
crystal structure as well. However, two other residues were introduced in facilitating the reaction:
His982 and His985. With MD it was suggested that the His983 residue coordinated to one of the
Mg2+, anchoring this ion to the catalytic site, and thereby stabilizing the conformation.
From
here, the scissile phosphate group could be observed between the two Mg2+-ions. Water along with
Asp10, Glu762 and Asp986 residues coordinated to the two Mg2+. This resulted in the phosphate
was forced closer to the catalytic center, where either His982 and His985 residues could act as Lewis
bases, and activate water molecules, leading to a nucleophilic attack on the phosphate group [13].
1.1.2
Protein Binding in Major versus Minor Groove of DNA
When two complementary strands of DNA hybridize to each other, they form a double helix. From
here, the phosphodiester backbones will have two different, special gaps between them, which are
called the major and the minor grooves. As the names suggest, there is more space between the
backbones in the major groove than in the minor groove [14], as seen in figure 4.
DNA-recognizing proteins and transcription factors can bind in either the major groove or the minor
groove of the DNA, however, it is mostly in the major groove such bindings take place, as it is more
sterically favorable than in the minor groove [14].
In the CRISPR/Cas9 complex, it is a little different from the usual, as the PID of Cas9 recognizes
DNA in both the major and the minor grooves [15]. The DNA is recognized on the basis of the PAM
sequence, as mentioned in section 1.1. The specific interactions with PAM are two Arg residues,
Arg1333 and Arg1335, which interact with the guanines of 5’-NGG-3’ of NTS through hydrogen
bonding. These can be seen in Figure 5 as G2∗and G3∗. Furthermore, the PID binds G3∗of the
NTS through another hydrogen bond with Ser1136, whilst Lys1107 will bind to cytosine, noted as
C−2 on Figure 5, of the TS. The phosphorus backbone of the two nucleobases downstream from C−2
will bind to Glu1108 and Ser1109, respectively. These interactions force the target strand out of
position in a so-called phosphate-lock loop, which results in the bases of the gRNA can begin base
pairing. [15].
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 4: Illustration of major and minor grooves in DNA helix structure [16]
1.1.3
gRNA design
A lot of consideration has to be made when designing a CRISPR-Cas9 system for experiments.
Gene editing with CRISPR/Cas9 is a phenomenon initiating the breakage of a double-stranded DNA
[17]. As aforementioned, the Cas9-enzyme needs to be activated by coupling the gRNA to perform
the breakage[18]. The Cas9-activator, known as gRNA, has been used interchangeably with the
abbreviation sgRNA in current literature. To avoid confusion, this project will be using the following
definitions; gRNA refers to all possible CRISPR gRNA formats, where, as mentioned in section 1.1,
one of the formats is the native dgRNA-format containing a crRNA used to mediate the recognition
of the target, and a partially complementary tracrRNA [19]. In addition to the dgRNA, the gRNA
can also be a sgRNA, which is composed of a crRNA section fused together with a tracrRNA scaffold
in a hairpin-shaped structure [20]. The dual gRNA system is the one observed in nature, where it
functions as a part of the adaptive immune-system of prokaryotic cells [1]. sgRNA is the gRNA-
format used in the majority of publications due to its easy transcription and expression with no
compromise of efficacy compared to the dual-gRNA observed in nature, when made via enzymatic
synthesis [21]. Jinek et al. [22] originally fused the two gRNA components, crRNA:tracrRNA, to
design a more simplified version of the native dual gRNA. Since this simplification the sgRNA has
been the preferred choice of gRNA format in gene editing. It is not until recently, we have been seeing
a shift back to the native dgRNA as a result of better RNA stability due to chemical modification
in addition to a similar if not higher editing activity [23].
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 5: Visual representation of dgRNA and sgRNA, and numbering of target and non-target.
Dark blue represents the gRNA sequence, light blue represents the target DNA sequence, and orange
represents the non-target DNA sequence
1.2
Fluorescence
In order to study dynamic interactions of molecules, fluorescence can be a useful tool. When atoms
bind to form a molecule, the electrons of the atoms make up new orbitals, called Molecular Orbitals.
[24]. In a double bond, π and π∗make up the molecular orbitals. The π-orbital is considered the
Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO), and the π∗is considered the Lowest Unoccupied
Molecular Orbital (LUMO). From here, an electron from the HOMO absorbs energy, which will
raise the electron into the LUMO [25], which is now in the excited state. The energy-difference
between the HOMO and the LUMO is very precise, so a certain wavelength is required for the
electron-transfer to happen [24, 25].
.
From here, the energy will be released from the molecule in the form of a photon, which will make
16
==PAGE:18==
the electron return to ground state. The energy here is shown as luminescence [24]. If a molecule
has more double bonds in a conjugated system, the π-electrons have a lower energy to get into the
LUMO, which in turn result in longer wavelengths, which can be emitted as luminescence [25].
Luminescence is parted into two sub-categories; Fluorescence and Phosphorescence. Phosphores-
cence is the emission of light, where the absorbed energy will force the excited electron into a triplet
state. This results in the emission will take longer time, since going from triplet state to singlet
state is not kinetically favored [26]. Moreover, fluorescence is also the emission of light, however,
the process of emission goes from an irradiated material to ground state from a singlet state, rather
than a triplet state. The emission energies are still, however, lower than the excitation energies, but
higher than phosphorescence [24, 26].
Fluorescence can be quantified in numerous ways; one can record the intensity as the function of time
in regard to the conformational changes of a molecule. This is also called Fluorescence Anisotropy
[27, 28]. One can record the position of the maximum emission, and from there differentiate one
fluorophore from another [27, 29]. Furthermore, one can use a selection of different wavelengths to
measure changes in the local environment of a molecule. This is called Ratiometric Fluorescence
[27, 30].
1.2.1
Using Fluorescence in Detection of Micro-Environment and Nucleotide Interac-
tions
To detect the surrounding micro-environment of (oligo-)nucleotides, the utilization of fluorescent
nucleotide analogues has been a widely used method of detection. In terms of fluorescence, the two
kinds of methods used are; hybridization-based methods or intercalating dyes [31].
A strategy for using fluorescence is as a detection method in biosensors. An example of this is
Gu et. al. [32], who obtained a quencher-free method using fluorescence to detect Trypsin. They
used DNA aptamers and their G-quadruple structure to bind to Thioflavin T. This complex emits
fluorescence. The addition of Cytochrome C showed low fluorescence, as the protein caused steric
hindrance for the aptamer to make the G-quadruple structure. Adding Trypsin would in turn cut
down the Cytochrome C, and leave the aptamer and Thioflavin T to emit fluorescence[32].
Other currently used biosensors are the FRET biosensors. FRET is short for Fluorescence Reso-
nance Energy Transfer[32, 33]. These kinds of sensors consist of 2 parts of fluorophores: A donor
and an acceptor. The main principle is, the emission of the donor will overlap with the excitation of
the acceptor. When the donor and the acceptor are in close enough proximity from one another, the
donor can transfer energy from the emission to the acceptor. If this happens, measurements of both
absorption and emission of both dyes are visible. This method can be parted into 2 categories: Intra-
17
==PAGE:19==
molecular and Inter-molecular FRET. Here, as the names clearly suggest, intra-molecular FRET has
the donor and the acceptor on the same molecule, whereas inter-molecular FRET has the donor and
the acceptor on 2 different molecules[33]. Both of these can be useful in contrasting ways. For
instance, conformational changes of a protein can be detected by FRET, as a ligand binds to the
protein [33, 34]. On the other hand, inter-molecular FRET can be used in the detection of protein-
protein interactions [34, 35].
FRET can also be used as a fluorescent-based quenching method.
By using the acceptor as a
quencher, the donor will, as it gets into close proximity of the acceptor, get quenched, and the
fluorescence will be minimal [35]. In general terms, the quencher absorbs the fluorescence, where
the complex will either emit less or no light, depending on how much of the excitation is absorbed.
This means, fluorescence will show brighter, as the quencher is either blocked or as the proximity
between the fluorophore and the quencher become larger [36, 37]. Single-stranded oligonucleotides
with an intra-molecular fluorophore-quencher pair is called a molecular beacon (MB) [38]. These
MBs form hairpin structures, where the fluorophore and the quencher can be in close proximity to
each other [37, 38]. For instance, Tabara et. al. [37] used oligonucleotide strands made from Peptide
Nucleic Acids (PNAs) to form MBs. When the target RNA finds the PNA MB, it will release the
fluorescence of the MB.
Fluorescence is also used in the detection of hybridization, mismatches, and protein:DNA complexes
with environment-sensitive fluorophores. These, as the name suggests, can become fluorescent, in
specific environments, such as specific viscosities, specific pHs, and more [39, 40]. If an environment-
sensitive fluorophore can change colors in different polarities, it is said to be solvato-chromatic. An
example of this is G¨uixens-Gallardo et. al. [39], who synthesized nucleotides with acetophenyl-
thienyl-aniline (ATA) labels by using Sonogashira-coupling. This is an example of a Fluorescent
Nucleoside Analogue (FNA), which will be explained further in section 1.2.2. A large Stokes shift,
between the colors and different environments, is favorable, as it helps with the distinction in a real
life scenario. G¨uixens-Gallardo et. al. [39] concluded that their modified cytosine, dCATATP, could
be used specifically for the affinity of DNA binding to different proteins, as the emission was different
between proteins. Here, the binding to p53, a protein well-known to bind DNA with high affinity,
had the maximum emission of 567 nm, whereas the binding to a histone showed maximum emission
of 551 nm[39]. Therefore, by the usage of isomorphic structures, which can emit fluorescence, the
micro-environments between different nucleotides and proteins could be explored [40].
1.2.2
Fluorescent Nucleobase Analogues
Natural nucleobases themselves are only weakly fluorescent. For nucleotides to emit fluorescence,
one either have to label the molecules, or modify the nucleobases. FNAs are, in short terms, small
molecules, which resemble or are modified nucleobases. By using small molecules as fluorophores
18
==PAGE:20==
ensure stability of the helix. This is especially important when modifying DNA or RNA, as the
secondary and tertiary structures of these long molecules are crucial for them to function properly
[27].
There has been accounted for four types of FNAs: Expanded, extended, chromophoric and isomor-
phic FNAs. When designing expanded FNAs, one uses the insertion of another conjugated, aromatic
ring [27]. This will, as the name suggests, expand the π-system, and from this, the fluorescence will
become more stabilized than before [27, 41]. Extended FNAs will have an externally fluorophore
attached with a linker to a normal nucleobase. This approach, however, results in a bulky fluo-
rophore, which can disturb the conformations to some extend. Chromophoric FNAs are, unlike the
other types, not derivations of natural nucleobases. Here one can replace the nucleobase entirely
with another aromate, which can fluoresce stronger than the natural molecule. Lastly, there is the
isomorphic FNAs, which are more elegant than the other types. Here, only a small modification by a
heteroatom, or another small substituent, is used to extend the π-system. This approach resembles
the original, natural nucleobase the most. It should retain the functions of a natural nucleobase as
well [27].
1.3
Current Methods for Detecting Protein:gRNA Complex Interactions
1.3.1
Static Detection of Protein:gRNA Complex Interactions
There are multiple research papers attempting to map out the Cas9 protein structure, and the bind-
ing between the protein and the gRNA.
Firstly, crystal structures of a protein can be obtained through X-ray crystallography to determine
how it is build up and the conformations of the protein [42]. Before crystallization, the protein in
question needs to be isolated. To isolate the protein, dissolving cell-membranes, and other unwanted
material, the use of detergents is in order. However, detergents can be very denaturing, and poten-
tially ruin the protein [43]. After the isolation, the protein needs to be crystallized. This can be
done by crystallization of the protein in a super-saturated solution. The main principles of X-ray
crystallography are electrons convert their energy into radiation by the collision of a heavy metal
decelerator. From here, the electrons can course diffraction of the protein crystals. The diffractions
have unique patterns, which can be analyzed to tell how the molecules are structured within the
protein structure. This method generates, however, only an immobile snapshot of the protein, as it
was, when it was crystallized [42]. The crystal structure of Cas9 is described and mapped out in
section 1.1.1, along with the functional sites.
Secondly, Cryo-EM can be used as a detection method. It is widely compared to X-ray crystallog-
raphy, as both methods obtain snapshots of the protein. When using Cryo-EM, one does not have
to use the denaturing detergents, which are used in X-ray, as the protein is flash-frozen instead to
19
==PAGE:21==
obtain the correct formation. The method has been used to determine many proteins in the cell
membrane, such as GPCR, among others [44]. Furthermore, this method have been used in the
confirmation of conformations and interactions between Cas9, gRNA and target, as described in
section 1.1.1.3 [11].
1.3.2
Dynamic Detection of Protein:gRNA Complex Interactions
One thing is to map out the Cas9:gRNA interactions statically, but the ability to monitor Cas9:gRNA
interactions dynamically over time, will give an even more detailed insight into the functions of Cas9,
and into the Cas9:gRNA micro-environment.
To discover and gain a better understanding of how certain proteins function over time, solution
NMR can be used in combination with simulated Molecular Dynamics [45]. It can be used to deter-
mine the dynamics, reaction rates, among others [46]. For instance, simulations over time of different
proteins and their ligands can be confirmed by solution NMR, as the method investigates the protein
in real-time [46]. One method of solution NMR that has shown to be useful is Car-Purcell-Meiboom-
Gill (CPMG) relaxation dispersion experiments [45]. Here, by not only using a 90o angle pulse for
the magnetization, as normal solution NMR, one also uses a so-called (τ −180o −τ)n pulse train.
In short terms, this form of pulse will create spin echoes throughout the signals [47], which in turn
will enhance the signal-to-noise ratio, and thereby generate a better spectrum than with the original
90o angle orientation [48]. CPMG has been used to refine the understanding of the HNH domain,
by confirming the residues in play [45].
Another dynamic method is Electronic Circular Dichroism (ECD), which is a phenomenon highly
sensitive to a protein- or polypeptide’s secondary structure. In contrast to the absorbance of isotopic
light, which is a type of light that radiates the same intensity of radiation in all directions, ECD is
a spectroscopy method measuring differential absorbance of left- and right-circularly polarized light
[49]. Identification of the structural changes of macro-molecules in solution, such as nucleic acids and
proteins, is the most widely used application for ECD spectroscopy. The ability to obtain structural
information from proteins is facilitated by the peptide bonds as these are optically active and the
ellipticity (the unit of ECD) they express is dependent on the local conformation of the molecule [50].
Furthermore, this method have been used to investigate the changes in Cas9’s secondary structure
upon gRNA binding, and vice versa [51]
Thirdly, AFM can be a useful method, as you can follow a process of a certain protein in real-time.
It has confirmed and detected cardiac fibrosis, HIV-research, and protein-protein interactions in
general, among others. [52, 53, 54]. With this method, in terms of CRISPR/Cas9-systems, it was
found out, that a flexible conformation actually was obtained of natural state of Cas9, rather than
a rigid, closed conformation seen in x-ray crystal structure. By using this method, it could also be
20
==PAGE:22==
confirmed, that Cas9 obtained a bi-lobed conformation [9], as described earlier in sections 1.1 and
1.1.1.2. This method, however, is not as widely used (yet) for CRISPR/Cas9-systems, and was only
accounted for in 2017 for SpCas9. Here, it was not accounted for which residues actually interact
dynamically with the protein either, as it only accounts for the motions and mechanics of processes
[9, 52].
In current literature, FNAs have been introduced as modifications on the target-DNA by Li et. al.
[55]. Here, 2-aminopurine (2AP) was introduced into DNA to investigate how Cas9 potentially could
unwind the dsDNA, and create the RNA/DNA base-pairing. The fluorescence of 2AP is conditional
to nucleobase stacking. This means, when 2AP is in a R-loop formation or integrated in dsDNA,
the fluorescence will be quenched. Furthermore, 2AP was found to be isomorphic [55].
Using different lengths of gRNA, a pseudo-dynamic method was created. By modifying the TS, six
nucleotides downstream from PAM, it could be concluded that no unwinding happened at this point.
On the other hand, unwinding was shown to happen in the distal to PAM region of the dsDNA.
Here, modifications of the NTS showed significant unwinding at 17 nucleotides downstream from
PAM. This unwinding happened, even though gRNA was not long enough to base-pair to the target.
From this, it was suggested that Cas9 was responsible of the unwinding of the target strand, making
it possible for gRNA to match to the DNA, rather than gRNA was responsible for the unwinding,
and, as a result of this, the base-pairing [55].
1.4
Designing a CRISPR Cas9-Cleavage Assay
1.4.1
FNA-project
The aim of this project is to develop FNAs in order to monitor nucleotide-amino acid interactions
as a part of the CRISPR:Cas9 system.
As stated in section 1.1.1: the micro-environment and
interactions between gRNA and Cas9 have been thoroughly mapped out, so what makes the FNA-
project differentiate from previous studies?
The majority of Cas9:gRNA interaction studies are
preformed by static analysis methods while the gRNA is bound to Cas9 [6, 7, 11]. What the FNA-
project wants to investigate is interactions between gRNA:Cas9, when tracked dynamically, while
the Cas9 system performs the DSB. To achieve this goal the FNA-project has taken inspiration from
Li et. al. [55], and utilized incorporation of FNAs into the gRNA sequence, as illustrated in figure 6.
Whereas Li et. al. have researched and monitored the unwinding of the target DNA, when forming
the R-loop by incorporating FNAs into the target sequence, the FNAs in this project will function
as reporters and emit fluorescent light when exposed to the right micro-environment.
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 6: An overview of the Cas9:gRNA complex and R-loop with target DNA. Yellow stars indicate
the positions of FNAs
1.4.2
Stille-Coupling Reaction
Synthesizing fluorescently modified nucleotides by palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions is a
very common strategy in literature. Utilizing organo-stannanes together with organic electrophiles
to make carbon-carbon bond forming cross-couplings were refined by J.K. Stille et. al. in 1978 [56].
This is known today as the Stille-coupling.
The Stille-coupling has been one of the two most selective, widely explored, and used palladium
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, together with the Suzuki reaction. What differentiates the two
reactions is the use of organo-boron compounds in the Suzuki-reaction, compared to the organo-
stannanes used in the Stille-coupling [56, 57]. Apart from the two main members of the palladium-
catalyzed cross-coupling family, others includes Kumada, Heck, and Songashira [57].
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 7: An overview of the Stille-coupling catalytic cycle. A) oxidative addition step B) transmet-
allation with organostannane, C) reductive elimination and recycling of palladium catalyst
The mechanism of the Stille-coupling is a catalytic cycle consisting of three steps, as seen in figure 7.
Firstly, an organo-palladium intermediate is achieved by oxidative addition of the palladium catalyst
to a vinyl or aromatic triflate or, more commonly, a halide [58]. Following the oxidative addition is
the trans-metalation with organo-stannane resulting in another organo-palladium intermediate now
containing two palladium-carbon sigma-bonds[58]. Lastly, the reductive elimination is to yield the
coupled product and, hereby, regenerates the palladium(0) catalyst, so it can catalyze the next cycle
of the Stille-coupling [58].
1.4.3
Solid-Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis
For decades oligonucleotides have been synthesized by solid phase phosphoramidite chemistry. The
method was developed in the 1970s to 1980s, and it can be used to synthesize oligonucleotides with
up to 150 nucleotides in length [60]. The name, Solid Phase Oligonucleotide synthesis (SPOS), is
due to the use of solid supports, also known as resins, which are insoluble particles that the oligonu-
cleotides are bound to during the synthesis. The first protected oligonucleotide in the sequence is
often pre-attached to the resin, however, universal solid supports can be used as well [59].
SPOS is a synthesis cycle composed of a series of steps, where, after each cycle, a new nucleotide is
added to the sequence. This slow one-nucleotide-at-a-time-approach provides complete control over
the final sequence [60]. As mentioned, the SPOS cycle has a series of steps, which include: Detrityla-
tion of the support-bound nucleoside, Activation and coupling of the next phosphoramidite, as well
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 8: An overview of Solid-Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis with DNA-phosphoramidites [59]
as a capping- and oxidation-step. These steps are repeated until the sequence has been completed
[59]. To follow the cycle, see figure 8. In contrast to the DNA biosynthesis in our bodies during DNA
replication, the SPOS (chemical synthesis) moves in the 3’- to 5’-direction throughout the synthesis
[59].
To avoid a wide range of by-products, the different reactive functional groups of the phosphoramidites
need to be protected. Because of their nucleophilic nature, the 5’-hydroxyl group is protected with
DMT, and the exocyclic primary amino groups on the nucleobases are protected with either benzoyl
groups (Adenine and cytosine) or isobutyryl groups (Guanine). Additionally, the oligonucleotide
backbone (the phosphate groups) is protected by 2-cyanoethyl phosphotriesters. The protecting
groups are all base labile except for the DMT, which is, intentionally, acid labile. To add a new
phosphoramidite to the sequence DMT needs to be removed, as it prevents polymerization from
happening. The removal of DMT is done by detritylation [59].
The next step in the SPOS cycle, after detritylation, is activation and coupling. Now that the DMT
has been removed, the solid support bound nucleoside is ready to react with the next phospho-
ramidite nucleoside of the sequence. Before the reaction can occur, the phosphoramidite nucleoside
is activated by an activator, usually tetrazole in acetonitrile. The diisopropylamino group in the
24
==PAGE:26==
phosphoramidite nucleoside is protonated, and is now converted to a good leaving group. This is
then attacked by the 5’-hydroxyl group of the support-bound nucleoside, which results in a new
phosphorus-oxygen bond being formed [59].
Following the activation and coupling step, a capping step in introduced. Capping is a necessary
step as no reaction achieves 100% yield, not even the purest and most efficient synthesis.
It is
inevitable to have unreacted 5’-hydroxyl groups on the resin-bound nucleoside, and they have to be
blocked from partaking in the next coupling. Further polymerization of a shortened sequence with
a lack of a base could deal a great loss of function of the desired oligonucleotide. Capping is usually
done by acetylation of the 5’-hydroxyl groups, disabling further polymerization of any free-standing
5’-hydroxyl groups, after coupling should have happened [59].
The last step of the SPOS cycle is oxidation of the phosphite-triester, P(III), to the stable P(V).
This is done specifically with an iodine oxidation in aqueous solution with water and pyridine. The
method yields a phosphotriester that can represent the DNA backbone, but protected with a 2-
cyanoethyl group. The protecting groups stays to prevent unwanted reactions at the phosphorous
[59].
The cycle is repeated until the desired oligonucleotide sequence is achieved. After the last cycle
of the SPOS, the oligonucleotide is cleaved from the solid support. The cleavage is carried out by
treatment with concentrated ammonium hydroxide. Now that a concentrated aqueous solution of
ammonia, and the desired oligo is obtained, there is only one step left which is the deprotection of
the backbone and the nucleobases. The deprotection methods may vary depending on the protect-
ing groups used in the synthesis, but most of them can be remove by simply heating the aqueous
ammonium hydroxide and oligonucleotide solution [59].
Although SPOS was originally developed for the synthesis of DNA, the method has since adapted to
the synthesis of RNA [61]. The main structural difference is the 2’-OH group on the RNA which needs
protection. The 2’-OH protection group need to be stable under the changing conditions throughout
the SPOS (The acidic condition during detritylations, basic conditions during the deprotection and,
lastly, the cleavage from the solid support). Next, the protection group needs to be removable under
mild conditions to avoid RNA degradation. Lastly, it is required that the protection group does not
get in the way of the coupling reaction [61]. When the RNA oligonucleotide is cleaved from solid-
support, the aqueous ammonium hydroxide used in DNA is replaced with methylamine in aqueous
solution, to maintain the mild conditions and avoid degradation.
1.4.4
Purification and Characterization
Being able to assure pure and well-characterized products after synthesis is essential for the success
of future experiments. There is a considerable number of different purification and characterization
25
==PAGE:27==
techniques to choose from, but this section will mention the ones utilized throughout this project.
To purify the FNAs, liquid chromatography (LC) was employed. Like other chromatography meth-
ods, LC consists of two immiscible phases: the mobile phase and the stationary phase. Interactions
between the sample and the two phases are, what cause separation. The separation can happen
based on different factors, such as molecule size, polarity, charge, or many others, depending on the
type of LC used [62]. This project made use of a type of LC called column chromatography (CC),
which separates the products of the crude sample based on polarity. The most commonly utilized
stationary phase in CC is silica gel. The crude sample will run through a silica gel packed column
with eluent under pressure. The concentration of the eluent can be changed gradually to achieve
better separation, and therefore makes it easier to yield more pure products [63].
To characterize the structure of the synthesized FNAs 1H −NMR or 13C −NMR can be used, which
are abbreviations of Hydrogen- and Carbon-Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, respectively. These spec-
troscopic methods make use of a powerful magnetic field to analyze the structure of molecules in
solution by measuring the interaction between the magnetic field and the nuclear spins [64]. NMR
yields a spectrum with the chemical shift displayed on the x-axis, and the intensity of NMR res-
onance signals on the y-axis. The difference between 1H −NMR and 13C −NMR is, as the name
implies, that H-NMR determines the amount of hydrogen-atoms and their environments, whilst C-
NMR determines the amount of carbon 13-atoms and their environments.
Furthermore, High Resolution Mass Spectrometry (HR-MS) can also be used for characterization
of FNAs. This is a spectrometry method, which can highly accurately measure the mass-to-charge
ratio of the sample molecules. In mass spectrometry the sample is first ionized, then it will travel
through a mass analyzer, where the ions will be separated by a magnetic field, and lastly the
ions will reach the detector, which will measure and collect the data [65]. HR-MS differs from other
types of MS systems by its measurements with high accuracy, measured in many decimal places [66].
Due to the high hydrophilicity provided by the backbone of oligonucleotides, Reverse Phase-High-
Performance Liquid Chromatography (RP-HPLC) is the predominant choice of purification method.
This method saves time due to the more hydrophilic compounds exiting the column faster, and an
eluent gradient can be customized accordingly. Reverse phase refers to the interactions between
the stationary phase and the sample as being hydrophobic, whereas in ”normal” HPLC is based
on hydrophilic interactions. In RP-HPLC the stationary phase is non-polar and the liquid phase
in polar, which, as aforementioned, will make the polar oligonucleotides run through the column
faster, than the more hydrophobic components of the sample. Compared to CC, RP-HPLC flushes
the crude product through the column with eluent under high pressure.
It can be difficult to characterize oligonucleotides, because of their larger size compared to traditional
small-molecules [67].
One method to help the characterization process is Matrix-Assisted Laser
26
==PAGE:28==
Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) Mass spectrometry. This mass spectrometry
method uses a laser to vaporize and ionize the sample. After ionization the ions are accelerated
by an electrostatic field. The acceleration results in the ions flying through a tube. Due to the
molecules in the sample receiving the same amount of energy from laser, the smaller molecules will
travel faster through the tube, than the larger ones will, as a result of the difference in kinetic energy.
The ions are registered by the time it take for them to reach the detector at the end of the tube.
27
==PAGE:29==
2
Hypothesis and Project Aim
CRISPR/Cas9 is a revolutionary gene-editing tool, but several aspects of the system still remain
unknown. When reading literature revolved around the CRISPR/Cas9 systems, the majority of the
studies have been researching and focusing on the duplex binding between gRNA and the target
DNA, along with Cas9. This is why the purpose of this project is to gain a better understand-
ing of the micro-environment, the gRNA:Protein binding, and complex interactions between gRNA
and Cas9. Furthermore, the purpose is to expand the research from static interaction-analysis to
follow the interactions dynamically throughout the DSB of the target-DNA. Therefore, we hypoth-
esize that with fluorescently modified nucleobase analogues, incorporated into synthetic gRNA, it
will be possible to reveal fine aspects of the micro-environment and gRNA:Cas9-interactions as the
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing takes place.
Specific project aims:
1. Theoretically design Cas9-gRNA system
2. Synthesize, purify and characterize fluorescent nucleosides
3. Incorporate nucleosides into gRNA
4. Purify and characterize nucleosides gRNA
5. Test Cas9-gRNA system and see if interactions between cas9 and gRNA can be detected based
on the micro-environment
28
==PAGE:30==
3
Experimental
Unless otherwise stated, unmodified gRNAs and control sequences, along with DNA target, non-
target strands, and tracrRNA, were ordered at IDT [68] with RNase-free HLPC quality, and were
used without further purification .
3.1
Instruments
FNAs were synthesized in the research lab and purified with liquid chromatography.
1H −NMR
and 13C −NMR were performed on a Bruker AVANCE 400 MHz system using DMSO −d6) as a
solvent. The 1H −NMR and 13C −NMR) spectra were viewed and analyzed using the application,
MestReNova. Afterwards, 2D-NMR experiments wer performed on the FNAs to further validate the
characterization the using a Bruker AVANCE 800 MHz system and the 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY,
1H −13 C −HSQC and 1H −13 C −HMBC spectra were viewed and analyzed using the application,
Topspin. For the synthesis of the fluorescently modified gRNAs, the ABI Expedite® 8909 Nucleic
Acid Synthesis System was applied, and the FNAs were hand-coupled, when they were to be incorpo-
rated. Hereafter, crude RP-HLPC spectra were obtained by the Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate
3000 Diode Array equipped with a DNAPacTM RP Column (4 m, 3.0 × 100 mm). The buffers used
for oligonucleotides were: Buffer A (triethylammoinium acetate (TEAA) in MilliQ water, 0.05 M,
pH 7.4) and B (MeCN 75% in TEEA 0.0125 M). Prior to screening, the samples were evaporated to
dryness under N2-flow or using the Eppendorf Concentrator plus (Centrifuge Concentrator). From
this point, this equipment is refereed to as the Speedvac. For characterization, MALDI TOF MS
was performed on a Brucker autoflex Speed. The oligonucleotides were spotted and mixed with
3-hydroxypicolinic acid on a MALDI-TOF MTP AnchorChip target plate. Screenings of the FNAs
were preformed on the Perkin Elmer LS 55 luminescence spectrometer using 96 well Thermo Fisher
Nunclon plates.
3.2
FNA synthesis (Modifying Uridine using Stille-Couplings)
The theory behind Stille-couplings is described in section 1.4.2. The full procedures can be found
in appendix J.
3.2.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene
5-Iodo-2-deoxyuridine (97.4 mg, 0.006 mmol) along with tetrakis triphenyl phosphine palladium (6.4
mg, 0.006 mmol), dry Tetrahydrofuran (THF) (5 mL) and 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiophene (0.11 mL,
0.346 mmol) were added to a dry, 25 mL round-bottomed flask equiped with a reflux condenser.
After adding each reactant, the reflux set-up was flushed with argon to keep an inert atmosphere.
The reaction was set to reflux over night. The reaction was monitored the next day with TLC (10%
MeOH in DCM). Due to incomplete reaction, 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiophene (0.04mL, 0.126 mmol,
29
==PAGE:31==
0.4 eq.), and Pd-compound (6,5 mg, 0.006 mmol, 0.02 eq) were added. After refluxing further for
19 h, TLC indicated the reaction was complete, and work up could be initiated.
The reaction-mixture was filtered through a celite-filter, and washed with DCM. Liquid-liquid ex-
traction (LLE) was used as a work-up method to purify the crude. A solution of 10% Ammonium
hydroxide was made and used as the aqueous phase in the work-up, whereas the organic phase was
DCM. The LLE was completed, and the organic phases were collected and dried with sodium sulfate,
and afterwards filtered through filter paper. The solution was evaporated until dryness, where a
yellow oil was obtained. The crude product was purified with liquid chromatography (LC) using a
concentration gradient of MeOH in DCM. Later LC was repeated as NMR showed impurities after
the first column. In the second column a new concentration gradient of heptane in DCM to MeOH in
DCM was used. After each NMR, the DMSO was evaporated to regain the product from the tubes.
9.8 mg of product were obtained as a white powder in 11% yield. This yield was very low, and a
contamination was observed on the 13C −NMR as well. This can be seen in appendix E, figure 35.
This resulted in the entire reaction was repeated. The same procedure as described above was fol-
lowed, except the LLE, which was not repeated. The LLE was removed as it was suspected to be the
biggest contributor to the low yield observed. The amount of reactants, solvents and catalyst were;
5-Iodo-2-deoxyuridine (101.8 mg, 0.287 mmol) along with tetrakis triphenyl phosphine palladium
(10.1 mg, 0.008 mmol), dry Tetrahydrofuran (THF) (5 mL) and 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiophene (0.11
mL, 0.346 mmol) were added. After the repetition improvements in the yield was observed. 26.5 mg
of product were obtained as a white powder in 29% yield. After NMR samples were analyzed only
9.5 mg out of the 10 mg used in NMR was regained. Lastly 2.3 mg of the final product was mea-
sured and dissolved in DMSO (180 µL), to run 2D −NMR experiments; 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY,
1H −13 C −HSQC and 1H −13 C −HMBC. A stock solution of the final compound (1.2 mg) dis-
solved in methanol (1.2 mL) was made for HR-MS samples. One drop of the solution were placed
in the HR-MS sample-vial and was diluted up to the top line marked on the vial. The rest of the
stock solution was evaporated under N2-flow to regain the final product.
3.2.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole
5-Iodo-2-deoxyuridine (99.7 mg, 0.282 mmol) along with tetrakis triphenyl phosphine palladium (7.7
mg, 0.006 mmol), THF (5 mL) and 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiazole (0.11 mL, 0.308 mmol) were added
to a dry, 25 mL round-bottomed flask. After adding each reactant, the flask was flushed with argon
to keep the environment dry. The reaction was set to reflux over night. The reaction was monitored
the next day with TLC in 10% MeOH, 0.5% TEA and DCM. This resulted in the addition of 2-
(Tributylstannyl)thiazole (0.04 mL, 0.169 mmol, 0.6 eq), and Pd-compound (6.5 mg, 0.006 mmol,
0.02 eq). After refluxing further for 18h, THF (5 mL) and of 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiazole (0.04 mL,
0.169 mmol, 0.6 eq) were added to the reaction-mixture, which refluxed further for 5.5 h.
The reaction-mixture was filtered through a celite-filter, and washed with DCM. The solution was
evaporated until dryness, where a yellow oil appeared. The crude product was purified with liquid
30
==PAGE:32==
chromatography using a concentration gradient of heptane in DCM to MeOH in DCM. This was
done twice, as the NMRs showed Sn-impurities after the first column. Both 1H−and 13C −NMRs
were obtained, and can be seen in appendix E, figures 40, 41, 48, and 49. NMRs were obtained in
DMSO. After each NMR, the DMSO was evaporated to regain the product from the tubes. After the
second column, the NMR still showed impurities. This resulted in diethyl-ether was used to remove
stannyl-compound from the product. This was done by using diethyl-ether (10 mL), and a falcon
tube, shaking the tube on the vortex, centrifuge the tube, and then remove the ether. This was done
three times, but not successfully. Impurities were still shown, as seen in E, figure 42. For the second
ether-precipitation, an eppendorff tube was used instead of a falcon tube, and only a small amount
of diethyl-ether (2 mL) were used for each precipitation. The rest of the ether was evaporated on
the speedvac at 45oC for 4 h. 1H −NMR and 13C −NMR were obtained in DMSO. The DMSO was
evaporated under N2-flow. After all the purifications, 4.7 mg of product were obtained as a white
powder in 6% yield. 1.8 mg product was dissolved in DMSO (180 µL) for 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY,
1H −13 C −HSQC and 1H −13 C −HMBC experiments. For HR-MS, 1.0 mg product was dissolved
in 1 mL MeOH. Here, one drop was put into a sample vial, and diluted with MeOH to the top mark.
The sample vial was sent away for analysis. The rest of the stock solution was evaporated under
N2-flow.
3.2.3
Characterization
Figure 9: 1H −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiophene
31
==PAGE:33==
For the characterization of the uridine-molecules, 1D 1H −NMRs and 13C −NMR spectra were
obtained, along with 2D 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY, 1H −13 C −HSQC and 1H −13 C −HMBC spec-
tra. Here, the results for uridine modified with thiophene (dUThio) were: 1D 1H −NMR (400 MHz,
DMSO −d6): δH 11.68 (1H, s, HA), 8.59 (1H, s, HB), 7.43 (2H, ddd, HC), 7.06 (1H, dd, HD), 6.23
(1H, t, HE), 5.30 (2H, m, HF), 4.32 (1H, dt, HG), 3.86 (1H, q, HH), 3.68 (2H, m, HI), 2.22 (2H, m,
HJ). The spectrum itself can be observed in figure 9.
The 13C −NMR results were: 1D 13C −NMR (400 MHz, DMSO −d6)): δC 161.79 (1C, s, CA),
149.83 (1C, s, CB), 136.15 (1C, s, CC), 134.45 (1C, s, CD), 126.90 (1C, s, CE), 126.14 (1C, s, CF),
123.00 (1C, s, CG), 108.78 (1C, s, CH), 88.06 (1C, s, CI), 85.27 (1C, s, CJ), 70.47 (1C, s, CK), 61.33
(1C, s, CL), 40.88 (1C, s, CM). The spectrum can be observed in figure 10.
Figure 10:
13C −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiophene.
Hydrogens are labeled with letters
according to figure 9.
Enlarged spectra along with a matching tables with an overview of the analysis can be observed in
appendix E.1.
The 2D-NMR-results can be found in table 1. Solvent used was DMSO −d6, and the spectra were
recorded at 800 MHz resonance frequency.
32
==PAGE:34==
Carbon no.
HSQC
1H −1 H-COSY
1H −13 C −HMBC
C1
-
-
HB
C2
-
-
HB, HF
C3
HB
-
HF
C4
-
-
HB, HC, HD, HE
C5
HE
HC, HD
HC, HD
C6
HC
HD, HE
HD, HE
C7
HD
HC, HE
HC, HE
C8
-
-
HB, (HC), HD
C9
HI
HJ, HH
(HF), HG, HJ, HK
C10
HF
HK
HB, HH, HK
C11
HH
HI, HK, HG
HB, HI, HJ, HK
C12
HJ
HI, HG
HG, HH
C13
HK
HH, HF
HG
Table 1: 2D-NMR experiments of dUThio
For uridine modified with thiazole dUThia, the results were: 1D 1H −NMR (400 MHz, DMSO −d6)):
δH 11.93 (1H, s, HA), 8.83 (1H, s, HB), 7.85 (2H, d, HC), 7.66 (1H, d, HD), 6.23 (1H, t, HE), 5.31
(2H, d, HF), 5.03 (1H, t, HG), 4.28 (1H, m, HH), 3.88 (1H, q, HI), 3.60 (2H, td, HJ), 2.30 (2H, m,
HK). The spectrum itself can be observed in figure 11.
Figure 11: 1H −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 12: 13C −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole. Hydrogens are labeled with letters accord-
ing to figure 11
Carbon no.
HSQC
1H −1 H-COSY
1H −13 C −HMBC
C1
-
-
HB
C2
-
-
HB, HD
C3
-
-
HB, HE
C4
HC
HD
HD
C5
HB
-
HE
C6
HD
HC
-
C7
-
-
-
C8
HI
HJ, HH
(HK), HJ, HG, HF
C9
HE
HK
(HK), HB, HI
C10
HH
HI, HK, HF
HF
C11
HJ
HI, HG
HG
C12
HK
HH, HE
HF
Table 2: 2D-NMR experiments of dUThia
The 13C −NMR results were: 1D 13C −NMR (400 MHz, DMSO −d6)): δC 161.77 (1C, s, CA),
158.57 (1C, s, CB), 149.85 (1C, s, CC), 142.24 (1C, s, CD), 139.02 (1C, s, CE), 120.30 (1C, s, CF),
108.12 (1C, s, CG), 88.29 (1C, s, CH), 85.79 (1C, s, CI), 70.98 (1C, s, CJ), 61.76 (1C, s, CK), 40.70
(1C, s, CL). The spectrum itself can be observed in figure 12. In appendix E.2, enlarged spectra
with matching table with an overview of the analysis can be found.
34
==PAGE:36==
The 2D-NMR-results can be found in table 2. Solvent used was DMSO −d6, and the spectra were
recorded at 800 MHz resonance frequency.
3.2.4
gRNA synthesis (SPOS)
gRNAs were prepared according to a standard method. The full procedure in steps can be seen
in appendix J.3. Standard method: Columns are weighted and prepared with approx. 28 mg
of universal solid support. The sequence is coded into the computer, where the modification to be
hand-coupled is marked as X. The Expedite is primed thrice, before attaching the columns. Start-
ing with the first nucleotide, the machine automatically activates and couples, caps, oxidates and
detritylates, until X is reached. For hand-coupling, 300 µL 0.25 g 2AP in dry acetonitrile is mixed
with 700 µL DCI activator in a 1 mL syringe. 50 µL solution is injected into the column each
minute. This results in 1 mL solution over 20 minutes. After hand-coupling, the Expidite was set to
finish the oligo-synthesis. After the last detritylation, each column is dried ten times with N2-gas.
After this, the columns are removed from the machine, and stored in the freezer until cleaving off
the solid-support.
To cleave the oligonucleotide from the universal solid-support the columns containing the oligonu-
cleotide were emptied in their designated vials. 1 mL 33 wt% Methylamine in ethanol was added
to the vials. The oligo-solutions were placed in a 65oC oven for 2 h. Afterwards, the oligo-solutions
were cooled to rt. The oligo-solution was filtrated into sterile eppendorf tubes and their vials and
filter were washed with 50:50 Absolute Ethanol/MilliQ H2O. The eppendorf tubes were placed in
the speedvac over night at 45oC.
3.2.5
TBDMS-removal
To deprotect the 2’ OH on oligonucleotide, the eppendorf tubes were removed from the speedvac.
Then, 100 µL desilylation reagent was added to each oligonucleotide. When the oligonucleotides were
completely dissolved in the desilylation reagent, the eppendorf tubes were placed on the thermo-
mixer at 67oC for 4 hours.
After desilylation, 10 µL of quenching solution was added to each
eppendorf tube and vortexed. The oligonucleotides did at this step become cloudy. 15 µL of 5M
sodiumperchlorate (NaClO4) was added to each eppendorf tube and vortexed. 1 mL of acetone
was added to the precipitate of each eppendorf tube and placed in the freezer for 30 min. After
the oligonucleotide solutions were cooled, they were vortexed and centrifuged for 10 minutes. The
precipitate was washed, vortexed, and centrifuged two times more, as described above. Following
the last wash the acetone was removed and all remaining acetone was evaporated on the speecvac.
The oligonucleotides was then dissolved in 1 mL MiliQ water.
35
==PAGE:37==
3.2.6
Purification and characterization
To obtain RP-HPLC spectra 25 µL of each oligonucleotide solution was measured and placed in
sample vials, and then placed on the RP-HPLC. Spectra were created in a 5-20% gradient of buffer
B in buffer A at 75oC over 30 min. An example of the obtained spectra can be seen in figure 13.
The rest can be seen in appendix H.
Figure 13: RP-HPLC spectrum of crude KAS352.1
To make samples for MALDI-TOF MS, the concentrations of the oligonucleotide solutions were
obtained by analysis of 2 µL of the solution on the NanoDrop ND-1000, a full-spectrum spectropho-
tometer. MiliQ water was used as a blank. Then 100 ng/µL oligo-solutions in miliQ water were
made. 0.5 µL of each oligonucleotide was spotted with 0.5 µL Matrix 3-hydroxypicolinic acid, with a
repeat spot, on a MALDI-TOF MTP AnchorChip target plate. An example of the obtained spectra
can be seen in figure 14. The rest can be seen in appendix G.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 14: MALDI spectrum of crude KAS352.1
Yields of the crude oligonucleotides can be found in section 4.5.1 in table 12.
4
Results
4.1
Fluorescent Nucleobase Analogues Design for CRISPR/Cas9 Study
The aim of the project is to monitor interactions between the FNAs, and the amino acids making
up the Cas9-enzyme. Therefore, it is important that the FNAs are sensitive to the desired micro-
environment. The micro-environment around the gRNA is determined based on the amino acids
present in close proximity of the gRNA, as described in section 1.1.1. There are several different types
of gRNA:Protein-interactions which includes; H-bonding, electrostatic interactions, hydrophobic
interactions and base-stacking [69]. For that reason it has been decided that different FNAs, that
emit light from the different kinds of interactions, are to be chosen.
An extensive list of possible and promising FNAs was establish by Marie-Louise Wibom [70] (MSc.
student at DTU) and Adrian Hern´andez Bustos (PhD. student at DTU Department of Chemistry),
37
==PAGE:39==
see appendix B. The FNAs, chosen for synthesis in the context of this thesis, were uridine modified
with thiophene (dUThio), and uridine modified with thiazole (dUThia). Both these modifications, see
figure 15, are thought to be sensitive to polarity [40, 71, 72].
(a) Structure of dUThio
(b) Structure of dUThia
Figure 15: Fluorescent Nucleobase Analogues for synthesis
As mentioned in section 1.2.2, there are four types of FNAs: Expanded, extended, chromophoric
and isomorphic FNAs. The choice for this project, are the two FNAs seen in figure 15, which both
are isomorphic, and should therefore act as normal uridine.
To screen the FNAs, emission and absorption spectra were obtained by MSc. Lise Bastue, and BSc.
Joachim Jeberg. Here, eight different additives were tested in three different concentrations. This
was made to find the optimal concentrations for emission/absorption of fluorescence, and to give
examples of the types of amino acids micro-environment, which would trigger the fluorescence in the
FNAs [73].
4.2
Designing gRNAs and Their Targets
In order to design the gRNAs for upcoming screening, several factors had to be considered, such
as type of gRNA, genome location, and theoretical folding. The initial designs were established
before the beginning of this project [70]. The resulting gRNA sequences, along with the target and
non-target strands can be found in table 3.
It needed to be considered whether the targets of the initial designs were to be found in the human
genome. To test this, the BLAST-algorithm was used [76]. Here, of course, NSD1 was found on
chromosome 5 of the human genome, as it is coding for nuclear receptor binding SET domain protein
1 (NSD1) [74]. From the genome, an unnecessarily extra nucleotide was accidentally added, however
38
==PAGE:40==
Name
Guide
NTS
TS
Reference
NSD 1
5’ UUG GAU UGA
CCA UUA CCG AA 3’
5’
TTG
GAT
TGA
CCA TTA CCG AA
NGG 3’
3’
AAC
CTA
ACT
GGT AAT GGC TT
NCC 5’
[74]
Li
5’ GUG AUA AGU
GGA AUG CCA UG
3’
5’
GTG
ATA
AGT
GGA ATG CCA TG
NGG 3’
3’
CAC
TAT
TCA
CCT TAC GGT AC
NCC 5’
[55]
Kjems
5’ GAG UGA GUG
UGU GCG UG 3’
5’ GAG TGA GTG
TGT GCG TG NGG
3’
3’
CTC
ACT
CAC
ACA CGC AC NCC
5’
[75]
Table 3: Initial gRNA designs with their respective non-target and target strands. The hypothetical
PAM sequences are highlighted .
this should not have any effect on the complexation with Cas9, as the correct PAM sequence (NGG)
is still present.
Surprisingly, the Li-sequence [55] was not to be found in the human genome, however, 16 nucleotides
were found to be a match on chromosome 6 and 20. Furthermore, this sequence was found on the
genome of an Escherichia coli strain, fully matching. Therefore, no modifications were made for this
sequence.
The third sequence was suggested by Prof. Jørgen Kjems [75], named accordingly. This sequence
was to be found as a vascular endothelial growth factor.
After using the BLAST algorithm, the targets were prolonged with nucleotides in each end. Here,
it was chosen to place 10 nucleotides on each end of the strands. The PAM sequences were in-
cluded as three of those nucleotides for each NTS. These amounts of nucleotides were chosen, as Li
et. al. [55] had already found them to be effective for R-loop formation. The added nucleotides
were taken from the genomes (except for Li), to mimic the natural DNA, without having to use
the whole genome. For the Li-sequence, it was chosen to use the same sequence, as it was found
in the article [55]. The matching TS were also updated along with the NTS. These can be found in 4.
39
==PAGE:41==
Name
Guide Sequence
NTS
TS
NSD 1
5’ UUG GAU UGA CCA
UUA CCG AAA 3’
5’
TCC
TGT
C GG G AA
AGC
CAT TAC CAG TTA
GGT TAA AAA GAC
TC 3’
3’
AGG
ACA
G CC C TT
TCG
GTA ATG GTC AAT
CCA ATT TTT CTG
AG 5’
Li
5’ GUG AUA AGU GGA
AUG CCA UG 3’
5’ AAG GAT GCC AGT
GAT AAG TGG AAT
GCC ATG TGG GCT
GTC A 3’
3’ TTC CTA CGG TCA
CTA TTC ACC TTA
CGG TAC ACC CGA
CAG T 5’
Kjems
5’ GAG UGA GUG UGU
GCG UG 3’
5’ CTG TGT GGG TGA
GTG AGT GTG TGC
GTG TGG GGT TGA
G 3’
3’ GAC ACA CCC ACT
CAC TCA CAC ACG
CAC ACC CCA ACT C
5’
Table 4: Updated gRNA designs with their respective non-target (NTS) and target strands (TS). The
PAM sequences are highlighted . Where the gRNAs are supposed to bind, are marked with bold.
The tracrRNA was established before this project as well [70, 77].
The chosen tracrRNA was
originally a part of a sgRNA, used by Li et al. [55] in his investigation of the target DNA unwinding,
but in 2013 an optimized version of the sgRNA was reported by Chen et. al. [77], which is the
version this project has decided to incorporate. However, it was chosen to use dgRNA instead, due
to activity, as mentioned in section 1.1.3. This resulted in splitting the gRNA in two sequences
between the repeat:anti-repeat parts, where the repeat-section was put onto the gRNA, and the
anti-repeat section is considered tracrRNA from this point. The splitting of the gRNA is shown in
figure 16. This resulted in a further update of the gRNAs, but not the TS and NTS, as seen in table
5.
Figure 16: The splitting of tracrRNA into two sequences
40
==PAGE:42==
Name
gRNA
NSD1
5’ UUG GAU UGA CCA UUA CCG AAA G UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU GGA
3’
Li
5’ GUG AUA AGU GGA AUG CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU GGA
3’
Kjems
5’ GAG UGA GUG UGU GCG UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU GGA 3’
Table 5: Updated gRNAs connected with the repeat part of tracrRNA. gRNAs are marked bold
4.2.1
Testing the Designs with NUPACK
After the updated designs of the fluorescent gRNAs, it is possible to analyze the gRNAs with
NUPACK. NUPACK is a RNA prediction software, which can give estimates of free energy, dimer-
ization complexes, and base pairing properties, among others [78]. The updated designs were tested
by themselves, and with tracrRNA to test how the secondary structures might look, and to predict
the stabilities of the potentially formed structures. The gRNA designs were tested at two temper-
atures: 21oC and 37oC. 21oC was chosen, as the oligonucleotide synthesis is carried out at room
temperature, whereas 37oC was chosen, as this is the temperature of the human body, and of the
upcoming test on CRISPR performance. The concentration of each strand was set to 100 nM. For
the gRNAs without tracrRNA, the max complex size was set to 2, whereas with the tracrRNA it
was set to 4. The stabilities were measured in free energy, and is shown in table 6. Furthermore,
simulated structures of the gRNAs with tracrRNA are shown in Figures 17, 18, and 19. These struc-
tures were chosen, as they should resemble the final product the most. The rest of the structures
can be seen in Appendix A. It was decided only to use NSD-gRNA and Li-gRNA, as the results
for these are found to be more optimal than Kjems-gRNA, since the Kjems-gRNA has too many
possible secondary structures. Kjems-gRNA is therefore unpredictable, and this possible design was
disregarded.
41
==PAGE:43==
NSD1 gRNA
21oC
37oC
By itself
-5.66 kcal/mol
-3.31 kcal/mol
With tracrRNA
-119.95 kcal/mol
-93.66 kcal/mol
-52.19 kcal/mol
-39.49 kcal/mol
-
-71.65 kcal/mol
Li gRNA
21oC
37oC
By itself
-8.17 kcal/mol
-5.36 kcal/mol
With tracrRNA
-137.03 kcal/mol
-107.60 kcal/mol
-60.72 kcal/mol
-46.46 kcal/mol
Kjems gRNA
21oC
37oC
By itself
-11.78 kcal/mol
-8.76 kcal/mol
With tracrRNA
-119.61 kcal/mol
-70.41 kcal/mol
-93.95 kcal/mol
-49.64 kcal/mol
-52.01 kcal/mol
-17.48 kcal/mol
-134.00 kcal/mol
-38.25 kcal/mol
-
-91.18 kcal/mol
-
-112.16 kcal/mol
-
-80.00 kcal/mol
-
-100.77 kcal/mol
Table 6: Free Energies of NSD1, Li, and Kjems gRNAs
(a) 21oC
(b) 37oC
Figure 17: NSD-gRNA secondary structures with tracrRNA
42
==PAGE:44==
(a) 21oC
(b) 37oC
Figure 18: Li-gRNA secondary structures with tracrRNA
(a) 21oC
(b) 37oC
Figure 19: Kjems-gRNA secondary structures with tracrRNA
4.3
Incorporating the FNAs into gRNA
The next step is to incorporate the selected FNAs in the gRNA design, mentioned in section 4.1,
into the gRNAs. The positions were selected with the purpose of interacting with the Cas9-protein,
as described in section 1.1.1.
43
==PAGE:45==
The first modification on both NSD and Li is chosen as 16 nucleotides distal from PAM. This is
chosen, since this part should not make base-pairings with the TS, as mentioned in section 1.3.2
[55]. The second modification is placed around 8 nucleotides downstream from the repeat end. This
results in the seed-region is accounted for [6]. The third modification is placed on the repeat part of
the gRNA. This could be beneficial, as Cas9 most certainly will bind to this part [6]. Lastly, a forth
modification is to be made on the Li-sequence. This modification was chosen, as this part of the
gRNA should be close to the complimentary sequence to PAM, as well as the HNH nickase during
the cut [6]. This concludes three to four modifications. Since there is no uridine close to PAM on
NSD1, this modification was left out. Furthermore, it was chosen to methylate both ends of the
gRNAs to create resistance against nucleases, and to create stability in the duplex formation [79].
The choice of the final modifications can be seen in tables 7 and 8.
No.
Sequence
0
5’ mUmUmGG AUU GAC CAU UAC CGA AA G UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmG
mA 3’
1
5’ mUmUmGG A U U GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmGmA
3’
2
5’ mUmUmGG AUU GAC CA U UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmGmA
3’
3
5’ mUmUmGG AUU GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC U AU GCU mGmGmA
3’
Table 7: Modifications to be made on NSD1-sequence are marked yellow . Marked green is the
guide, complementary to the target, and
red
is the repeat.
The m in front of nucleotides are
methylated nucleotides.
No.
Sequence
0
5’
mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA AUG CCA UG G UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmG
mA 3’
1
5’ mGmUmG A U A AGU GGA AUG CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmGmA
3’
2
5’ mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA A U G CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmGmA
3’
3
5’ mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA AUG CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC U AU GCU mGmGmA
3’
4
5’ mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA AUG CCA U GG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmGmA
3’
Table 8: Modifications to be made on Li-sequence are marked yellow . Marked green is the guide,
complementary to the target, and red is the repeat. The m in front of nucleotides are methylated
nucleotides.
44
==PAGE:46==
4.3.1
Control-Oligonucleotides
When tests are in place, it is crucial to have controls to relate to. In this project, it was chosen to
use the fluorescent modifications 2AP, as they have already been proved effective to identify duplex-
formation by Li et. al. [55], among others. The modification can replace both adenines and guanines
in RNA [80], making it a versatile detection method. This is why the placements are chosen to be
as close to the uridine modifications as possible, and as a replacement of adenines. Compared to
adenine, 2AP undergoes a inter-system crossing, rather than a barrier-less relaxation [80, 81, 82].
This results in red shifting, which in turn will delay the fluorescence [81, 82]. The modifications of
the controls can be seen in tables 9 and 10.
No.
Sequence
0
5’ mU mUmGG AUU GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mG
mGmA 3’
1
5’ mU mUmGG 2AP UU GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU
mGmGmA 3’
2
5’ mU mUmGG AUU GAC C 2AP U UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU
mGmGmA 3’
3
5’ mU mUmGG AUU GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC U 2AP U GCU
mGmGmA 3’
Table 9:
2AP modifications on NSD-sequence. The m in front of nucleotides are methylated nu-
cleotides.
No.
Sequence
0
5’ mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA AUG CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU mGmGmA
3’
1
5’ mGmUmG 2AP UA AGU GGA AUG CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU
mGmGmA 3’
2
5’ mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA 2AP UG CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU
mGmGmA 3’
3
5’ mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA AUG CCA UGG UUU AAG AGC U 2AP U GCU
mGmGmA 3’
4
5’ mGmUmG AUA AGU GGA AUG CC 2AP UGG UUU AAG AGC UAU GCU
mGmGmA 3’
Table 10:
2AP modifications on Li-sequence. The m in front of nucleotides are methylated nu-
cleotides.
Furthermore, non-modified gRNAs, targets, and tracrRNA were bought commercially from IDT
DNA [68]. These sequences can be found in appendix C. Non-modified gRNAs and targets were
bought to be negative controls. tracrRNA was bought, as it is too extensive a synthesis to perform in
house. Lastly, NSD1 was bought with fluorescent modifications. Here, a fluorophore-quencher pair
45
==PAGE:47==
was chosen to test and ensure Cas9 in fact creates a DSB during interactions with target DNA. The
chosen fluorophore is expected to fluoresce with maximum emission of 651nm, and the corresponding
quencher to quench at 620-730nm [83]. These particular wavelengths were chosen as they are not
expected to correlate with the wavelengths of emission from dUThio, dUThia, and 2AP. These three
modifications are expected to fluoresce with the approximate maxima of emission of 439 nm and
420 nm [71, 72], respectively, whereas 2AP is expected to fluoresce with a maximum emission 369
nm [27].
4.4
Modifying Uridine using Stille-Couplings
The theory behind Stille-couplings is described in section 1.4.2. The full procedures can be found
in appendix J.
4.4.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene
The procedure itself is described in section 3.2.1. The synthesis of dUThio was repeated, as the yield
was too low due to the work up. In the second synthesis a yield of 29.1% was obtained. Reaction
tables of both syntheses can be found in tables 17 and 18 in appendix D.
4.4.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole
The procedure is described in section 3.2.2. Due to complications with work-up from other students,
this step was skipped.
However, stannyl-compound was to be found on the 1H −NMRs, which
resulted in removal by ether-precipitations. This resulted in a yield of only 5.36% was obtained.
Due to time-limitations the synthesis was not repeated. Reaction table of the synthesis can be found
in 19 in appendix D.
4.4.3
Characterization
For the characterization of dUThio and dUThia, 1H −NMRs and 13C −NMRs were obtained. As seen
in figure 20, the DMSO used for NMRs was contaminated. These peaks were therefore disregarded
in the analysis of the products, as seen in section 3.2.3. All the spectra are to be found in appendix
E.
46
==PAGE:48==
(a) 1H −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiophene, C13H14N2O5S
(b) 1H −NMR of pure DMSO sample
Figure 20: 1H −NMRs with impurities from DMSO marked with yellow
The 1H −NMR spectrum of the final product of dUThio indicated that the organo-stannane impu-
rities were removed successfully. If traces of n-butyl were to be present, 1H −NMR-peaks would
be observed in the 0.8-1.7 ppm region. These n-butyl-1H −NMR-peaks were detectable in the first
synthesis of dUThio, but were not to be seen the 1H −NMR spectrum of the final repeated synthesis,
as seen in appendix F
Unfortunately, the 1H −NMR spectrum of dUThia did indicate that organo-stannane impurities
were present, as the n-butyl-peaks were detectable, as seen in appendix F. Despite repeating the
LC-column and the ether-precipitation twice, the stannyl-compound-impurities were still detectable.
This could be explained by the dUThia forming clumps during the evaporation of DMSO under N2-
flow. These clumps might still be present during the ether-precipitation resulting in the ether not
being able to dissolve the impurities, due to the reduced surface area. However, the amount of
impurities decreased for every purification method performed.
To characterize and assign specific positions of the H- and C-atoms in dUThio and dUThia, 2D-NMR
experiments were performed. After analyzing the spectra, the structures of dUThio and dUThia were
confirmed.
47
==PAGE:49==
4.5
Solid Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis of (Control) gRNA
Control-gRNAs were synthesized using SPOS. Each strand is synthesized twice, where the columns
with the same strands are assigned; KASXXX.1 and KASXXX.2 (XXX corresponds to KAS-
oligonucleotide index number). The synthesized strands with respective KAS-no. can be seen in
table 11. After the synthesis, estimates of efficiency were displayed. These can be found in figures
21, 22, 23, and 24.
No.
KAS no.
Sequence
0
KAS352
5’ mU mUmGG AUU GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU
GCU mGmGmA 3’
1
KAS353
5’ mU mUmGG X UU GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU
GCU mGmGmA 3’
2
KAS354
5’ mU mUmGG AUU GAC C X U UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC UAU
GCU mGmGmA 3’
3
KAS355
5’ mU mUmGG AUU GAC CAU UAC CGA AAG UUU AAG AGC U X U
GCU mGmGmA 3’
Table 11
(a) KAS352.1
(b) KAS352.2
Figure 21: Synthesis of control NSD1 no. 0, see table 11
(a) KAS353.1
(b) KAS353.2
Figure 22: Synthesis of control NSD1 no. 1, see table 11
48
==PAGE:50==
(a) KAS354.1
(b) KAS354.2
Figure 23: Synthesis of control NSD1 no. 2, see table 11
(a) KAS355.1
(b) KAS355.2
Figure 24: Synthesis of control NSD1 no. 3, see table 11
4.5.1
Purification, Characterization, and Yield
Due to time limitations, purifications of the control-oligonucleotides were not completed. Neverthe-
less, crude RP-HPLC spectra were obtained, and the area under the curve could be determined.
The area under the curve for each oligonucleotide represents the percentage of that peak compared
to the total calculated peak area. This information reflects factors like yield, purity, or level of
contaminants.
To characterize the oligonucleotides MALDI-TOF MS was performed. The exact mass of the NSD1-
gRNAs was calculated; 12929.9 g/mol. The masses of all NSD1-gRNAs should be identical, as 2AP
and adenine shares the same mass. The acquired spectra of the crude oligonucleotides were analyzed,
and a weak peaks at approximately 12929.9 g/mol were recognized on all spectra, except KAS354.1
and .2. These can be observed in appendix G. Indications imply that the desired oligonucleotides
are synthesized, but MALDI-TOF MS spectra of purified oligonucleotides should be collected, and
analyzed, before drawing conclusions. Furthermore, peaks with lower molarmass than the the desired
product were obtained for every oligonucleotide, except for KAS352.1 and .2. These can be observed
in appendix G.
Table 12 displays the results from RP-HPLC, MALDI-TOF, and yields of the crude oligonucleotides.
The theoretical yield is 1 µmol of an oligonucleotide.
49
==PAGE:51==
KAS no.
Identity
Calculated
mass
[g/mol]
MALDI
mass[g/mol]
Concentration
[ng/µL]
Amount
[µmol]
yield
[%]
Rel.
Area
[%]
KAS352.1
NSD1 no. 0
12929.9
12926.9
2035.3
0.1574
16
20
KAS352.2
NSD1 no. 0
12929.9
12942.3
2730.1
0.2111
21
18
KAS353.1
NSD1 no. 1
12929.9
12923.1
3858.2
0.2984
30
14
KAS353.2
NSD1 no. 1
12929.9
12928.0
1401.1
0.1084
11
14
KAS354.1
NSD1 no. 2
12929.9
-
944.2
0.0730
7
8
KAS354.2
NSD1 no. 2
12929.9
-
941.9
0.0728
7
8
KAS355.1
NSD1 no. 3
12929.9
12923.2
1331.0
0.1029
10
10
KAS355.2
NSD1 no. 3
12929.9
12910.5
1078.8
0.0834
8
10
Table 12: Estimated yields of crude oligonucleotides
5
Discussion
5.1
FNA synthesis strategy
The formation of a carbon-carbon bond is essential for the syntheses of the entire selection of FNAs in
this project, and a lot of different methods are available to do so. The method, chosen for this project,
was the palladium catalyzed Stille cross-coupling reaction, often referred to as the Stille coupling. As
mentioned in section 1.4.2 this was a C-C bond formation technology created by John Kenneth Stille
in 1978. But the Stille coupling is not the only choice of C-C bond formation technology, not even the
only Palladium catalyzed version. A lot of the carbon-carbon formation technologies would require
the nucleoside to be protected in order to work correctly, but that would add many unnecessary
steps to the synthesis. Therefore, it would be feasible to modify on unprotected nucleosides. This is
where the metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions come into play, as they are well-used, powerful
methods for C-C bond formation, as well as C-heteroatom bond formation, with aromatic and
heteroaromatic structures, such as unprotected nucleosides [84]. Especially when base-modifying
nucleosides, Palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions have been extensively used [84]. The two
most common Palladium-catalyzed cross-couplings are the Suzuki- and the Stille couplings, which
share a lot of similarities. Both have been reported to work on unmodified nucleosides [84, 85],
both under mild conditions. The biggest drawback for the Stille-coupling is the toxicity levels of
the stannyl-compound used, and the difficulty of removing their impurities from the final product.
These were also complications met throughout this project, where the stannyl-compound was still to
be detected on the NMRs. These complications could be avoided by the use of the Suzuki-reaction,
as the boronic acids are non-toxic, easily removed, and more commercially available [86]. If the
synthesis of the FNAs were to be repeated, or done on a bigger scale, the switch to Suzuki coupling
could be an improvement.
In terms of yields, the yield of dUThio was 29.1% and the yield of dUThia was 5.36%. These yields
however, can be compared to Nicholas J. Greco et. al. [72], who synthesized both dUThio and dUThia
50
==PAGE:52==
using the Stille-coupling. The yields obtained in the publication were 53% and 34% respectively,
where the same trend of a lower yield of dUThia were observed.
5.2
Theoretical Folding of gRNA
The gRNAs along with tracrRNA were tested in NUPACK, as described in section 4.2.1. In theory,
the gRNAs should generate 3 stem loops and a repeat-anti-repeat loop. As seen in section 4.2.1, this
is not the case for free gRNA. NSD-gRNA in 21oC generates stem loops 2 and 3, and a solid repeat-
anti-repeat loop. However, stem loop 1 is not observed in either temperatures. Both Li-gRNA and
Kjems-gRNA generate stem loops, which resembles stem loop 3 and repeat-anti-repeat loop in both
temperatures, however, neither stem loops 1 or 2 are present in the structures.
For a comparison, the sgRNA from Li et. al. [55], and from Nishimasu et. al. [6] were tested as
well. As described in section 4.2, Li et. al. used another tracrRNA for their sgRNA, in contrast to
this project. As the main difference between the two different tracrRNAs is stronger base-pairing
between repeat and anti-repeat-parts in the optimized version, the two tracrRNAs should in theory
fold similarly [77]. It was later found out, that Nishimasu et. al. used almost the same tracrRNA as
Li et. al. for their sgRNA, with the exception of three uridines on the 3’-end. Testing them both, it
was found out stem loops 2 and 3 are clearly visible in the NUPACK model. These foldings can be
observed in appendix I. Furthermore, the repeat-anti-repeat loop of the sgRNAs are accounted for
as well in the NUPACK model. It is observed, though, that the guide-part, along with stem loop 1
are not folding accordingly. This could suggest Cas9 and target-DNA contribute to the folding of
sgRNA. This is also supported by literature, as the T-shape of gRNA is generated in complexation
with Cas9 and target-DNA. However, how Cas9 and target-DNA contribute to the formation of the
T-shape is still to be investigated [6].
5.3
Type of gRNA
As aforementioned, the gRNA can have two different forms: the native dgRNA and the engineered
fused sgRNA. Since its creation, the sgRNA has been the preferred choice over the dgRNA for
reasons mentioned in section 1.1.3. Due to its high activity and improved RNA stability, it has
made a come back. However, as seen in section 4.2.1, and as discussed in section 5.2, dgRNA as a
free molecule does not generate the preferred stem-loops. This could cause potential problems in the
upcoming experiments, where the dgRNA-system is tested in relations with Cas9 and target-DNA.
It could be thought an increased stability of free dgRNA [23], could decrease, rather than increase,
the activity, if the free dgRNA-conformation is favorable.
This free conformation might also be favorable for sgRNA, as the optimized version should act
similarly to the dgRNA, since the only difference is the dgRNA is divided into two parts. The
synthesis of sgRNA, however, would take longer time than synthesizing dgRNA. Therefore, to test
what is best, the upcoming experiments could be repeated with sgRNA.
51
==PAGE:53==
5.4
Oligonucleotide Synthesis
There are two major synthesis pathways when synthesizing oligonucleotides. These syntheses are
Solid Phase and Liquid Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis (SPOS and LPOS, respectively). The main
advantages for using SPOS are the automation of the process, and the capping of impurities to
secure a pure product [59]. The typical synthesis scale of SPOS is nmol and µmol [59], but it can
exceed to 1 mol scale [87]. However this means, when one has to produce a product on a larger
scale than this, synthesis becomes expensive due to the extensive use of solvents [88]. The synthesis
steps of LPOS are similar to those of SPOS, however, the support used in LPOS is soluble. This
results in precipitation after each step is necessary to isolate the pure product from the by-products
[88, 89]. A considerable drawback of LPOS is the acidic environment of the solvents, which can
degrade the acid labile protection groups, as the product is exposed to too much solvent [88, 87].
Recent methods of improved LPOS can be used in large-scale production, which is a substantial
advantage in the industry [88, 87]. Therefore, SPOS is the preferred synthesis method.
In this study, SPOS was used, as the syntheses were on a µM scale. The approximated results and
yields are seen in section 4.5.1. However, hand-coupling of the 2AP-modifications on the oligonu-
cleotides were necessary, due to minimizing expenses and minimal use of the modification. These
couplings resulted in other challenges. On the MALDI-TOF spectra, prominent peaks, with lower
molecular weights than the actual product peaks, were shown for KAS353, KAS354, and KAS355.
Here the values were ∼11300, ∼9100, and ∼10250, respectively. With an average nucleobase weigh-
ing ∼340 g/mol [90], 4 nt, 11 nt, and 8 nt were missing, respectively, from a bulk mass of the
crude products. For KAS353 and KAS354 this could indicate inefficient hand-coupling. However,
for KAS355 this is not the case, and the other bulk mass could just indicate insufficient automatic
coupling.
Both the gRNAs NSD1 [74] and Li [55] were synthesized enzymatically in the articles. Therefore, a
comparison of yield could not be made in this manner. However, ATD Bio [59] suggests an overall
yield compared to coupling efficiency. Plots of the coupling efficiencies can be seen in section 4.5.
From in house experience, it could be concluded that these efficiencies were lower than 90%. The
oligonucleotides were 41 nucleotides in length, which would give a theoretical yield from ATD Bio
[59] of 0.5%-13.5%. As the yields of the crudes were 7%-30%, these syntheses can be concluded as
successful. On the other hand, these are crude products, which is why, it would be expected a lower
yield is obtained, once the oligonucleotides are purified.
52
==PAGE:54==
5.5
Current Approaches for Structural and Micro-environmental Inves-
tigations of Cas9
Numerous approaches have been applied to map out the micro-environment between Cas9 and its
gRNA. These include both static and dynamic methods. The approach used in this project is fluo-
rescence labeling through fluorescent nucleobase analogues. It is expected that this approach enables
the ability to follow the micro-environment between Cas9 and its gRNA in real-time, which is a step
up from some of the aforementioned methods including; X-Ray crystallography and Cryo-EM, which
both produces a 3D still-picture of the macro-molecule(s). These two methods are often compared
as they give similar outputs, but they still differentiate on some parameters. X-Ray crystallogra-
phy are performed at very high resolutions at ∼2 ˚A. The resolution of Cryo-EM moved closer to
resolutions comparable with of X-Ray crystallography, but is not quite there yet [91]. On the other
hand, Cryo-EM requires simpler sample preparations and lower concentrations of protein compared
to X-Ray crystallography [46]. As implied before, these applications are limited, as they only deter-
mine the structure of macro-molecules, such as the Cas9-enzyme, and complexes they participate
in.
To expand upon the knowledge obtained from the 3D still-pictures, utilizing methods, such
as solution NMR, ECD and AFM, could be an idea. The resolution of these methods are not to
be compared with X-Ray crystallography, but NMR, ECD and AFM can be carried out, without
the crystallization of the protein. Solution NMR in combination with MD simulations allows the
proteins structure to be resolved in solution, and the methods can give more dynamic data such as
protein folding and interactions [45]. The same goes for AFM, although AFM also provides real-
time movies at a nanometer resolution (∼10 ˚A) [9]. Compared to X-ray crystallography and NMR,
ECD does not need specific conditions in sample preparation, a spectrum can be obtained by low
concentrations of proteins, and the method requires less time (30 minutes or less) [51]. Still, these
methods are compared to the data achieved by X-Ray crystallography, to draw conclusions about
the interactions Cas9 engage in. Utilizing fluorescent labeling has not been done much, when inves-
tigating the Cas9-system, as the technique alone cannot determine the structure of a molecule, but
it can give information about the micro-environment surrounding it. When designing the fluorescent
nucleobase analogue experiment, it needs to be well thought out, and to be based on the structural
information already provided from aforementioned methods. Only one other biophysical study has
been done on Cas9-systems using FNAs, and it was done by Li et. al. as mentioned in section 1.3.
Fluorescence was employed to achieve an even more detailed insight into the functional Cas9:gRNA
micro-environment, than what is achievable through other reported methods.
5.6
Expectations to the Micro-environment Interaction Experiments
Due to time limitations, the micro-environment interactions between Cas9 and gRNA were not in-
vestigated experimentally. As a result, expectations and predictions will be discussed in this section.
Firstly, the control sequences are synthesized. These can be seen in tables 9 and 10. The control
53
==PAGE:55==
sequences contain 2AP, which, as described earlier on, can be used in the identification of duplex
formation. It would be expected the first modification of both sequences would contribute to fluores-
cence, as it was described in literature, the target-DNA and gRNA will not make duplex formation
at the end of 5’ [55]. However, as the free gRNA would have the conformations, as described in
section 5.2, it would be expected for the free gRNA not to fluoresce until in complexation with Cas9.
The second modification is placed in the seed-region. It would therefore be expected no fluorescence
from the 2AP modifications, as this is the part, where gRNA and TS will bind the strongest, ac-
cording to literature [6, 7]. Of course, when the target is released, fluorescence could be observed.
The third modification is placed in the repeat-part of the crRNA. Therefore, it would be expected
no fluorescence, as this part will always be quenched by the anti-repeat in the loop. The fourth
modification of Li-gRNA is close to the PAM sequence. For that reason no fluorescence is expected,
while Cas9, gRNA and target-DNA are in contact, however, before complexation with target-DNA
and after the nicks themselves, fluorescence would be expected to be observed.
The placements of the deoxy-uridine modifications are similar to those of the 2AP modifications, to
make the comparison of these positions possible. The native nucleobases are poorly fluorescent, as
described in 1.2.2. Therefore, a further extension of the π-system is needed for a good detection,
and conditional emission [27].
dUThio is expected to fluoresce in polar environments.
The more polar the environment is, the
brighter the fluorescence will be [71, 72]. Thiophene derivatives in general has been used in the
detection of cations in chemosensors. Since thiophene is an electron-donating group, coordination
to cations can occur [92]. The same coordination could happen with dUThio, where the carbonyl
oxygen on position 3 of uridine and sulfur of thiophene can undergo coordination to positive residues.
However, as the uridine should be base-pairing with the target strand, it might not be possible for
a coordination with positive residues to occur.
For dUThia, the sensitivity to polarity is still to be expected. On the other hand, dUThia could
also be expected to be sensitive to pH. As an electron-withdrawing group, thiazole will cause better
conditions for deprotonation of the nitrogen on position 3 of the nucleobase, as it lowers its pKa.
In a basic micro-environment this nitrogen is more likely to be deprotonated. Li. et. al. [93] tested
the fluorescent properties of thiazole moieties in a variety of pH. It was observed that the pH had a
strong influence on the fluorescence intensities and maxima on the absorption and emission spectra.
The intensities are oftentimes increased at basic pH [93]. Furthermore, it could be expected that the
nitrogen of thiazole can form a hydrogen-bond with the oxygen of the carbonyl group at position
4 of uridine, as a result of the position 3 nitrogen deprotonation in basic conditions [40], see the
proposed mechanism of the hydrogen-bond formation on figure 25. This could be an explanation for
the observations done by Li et. al. [93] as the co-planarization and enhanced π-system-conjugation
results in an increase in fluorescent intensities. Although, this has only been proven for effective
emission with the use of pyrimidine, rather than thiazole [40].
54
==PAGE:56==
Figure 25: Proposed mechanism of intramolecular hydrogen bond formation in dUThia
Therefore, in a micro-environment with basic and cationic residues in close proximity to the nucle-
obase analogues, brighter fluorescence is thought to be created than for the native nucleobases. The
expectations, therefore, for dUThia and dUThio are as the following: The first modification is close
to the 5’-end. As this end could be unwound during R-, I-, and D-conformations [55], it would be
expected a little-to-no fluorescence could be observed. On the other hand, Lys and Arg residues
are accounted for close to the 5’-end in the x-ray crystal structure [6]. These residues could lead
to potential fluorescence emitted by the modified deoxy-uridines, if they come into close proximity,
as both residues are bases and cations. The second modification is placed in the seed-region. This
region has Val, Tyr and Arg residues [6]. In the case of Val and Tyr, both of their side-chains
are hydrophobic, and are, therefore, not thought contribute with polarity. These residues might,
although, result in weak fluorescence, as the interactions between Val, Tyr and gRNA are with
the backbone of the Val and Tyr, rather than the side-chain. On the other hand, Arg residues
contribute with its basic and positive side-chain. As the target-DNA and the gRNA will perform
base-pairing from the seed region, fluorescence could occur. Furthermore, conformational changes
have been accounted for at this stage, specifically from a linear conformation, and into a V-shape.
This results in Lys-residues initiating the seed-region [11]. As Lys-residues are basic, and positive,
these could lead to fluorescence as well.
The third modification is placed on the repeat-part of
the gRNAs. In contrast to the control-sequences, these modifications are expected to fluoresce, as
they are to be placed in the Arg-rich, positive groove between NUC and REC. Lastly, the fourth
modification is in close proximity to the corresponding sequence to PAM. The HNH-domain needs
to undergo conformational changes for the cut to happen, as described in literature [9]. Therefore,
fluorescent read-out is not expected before these changes are in place. As the HNH-domain comes
into close proximity during the cut of the TS, fluorescent read-out is to be expected. Of course, the
mechanisms of HNH and RuvC themselves are not confirmed or fully accounted for, yet. However,
55
==PAGE:57==
since the residues of the nickases are accounted for, to some extend, the fluorescence is still to be
assumed in this case. All of these parallels are of course speculations, and it would be interesting to
draw conclusions from future experiments.
56
==PAGE:58==
6
Conclusion
The purpose of this project was to gain a better understanding of the micro-environment in the
Cas9:gRNA complexation, function, and interactions. It was hypothesized that with fluorescently
modified nucleobase analogues incorporated into synthetic gRNA, it would be possible to reveal the
fine aspects of the micro-environment and interactions during Cas9-gene editing. To investigate
this, an extensive research of the micro-environment was performed to gain an understanding of the
amino acid residues, which could reside at the sites of interest in the protein. Furthermore, it was
theoretically investigated how Cas9 can undergo the correct conformations for complexation with
gRNA and target-DNA. Here, several amino-acid residues showed to be present in the three different
stages of Cas9. The RNA-bound conformation (R) is a closed conformation, where Arg, Lys, Tyr
and Val residues are considerably found to be interacting with gRNA, among others. In the Inter-
mediate conformation (I), Cas9 can recognize the PAM sequence of the target. This was found to be
two Arg residues interacting with the Guanines, along with Glu and Ser making hydrogen-bonds to
the DNA backbone. For the D-conformation, residues Asp, His and Asn reside in the HNH domain,
and Asp, Glu, His reside in the RuvC domain.
With the knowledge in hand regarding the micro-environment, fluorescently modified gRNAs were
designed.
The design of gRNAs were carefully selected from literature.
FNAs with isomorphic
structures to uridine were synthesized using Stille-coupling with 6% and 29% yields, purified using
liquid chromatography, and characterized using NMR-spectroscopy. These modifications are yet
to be fully screened, and incorporated into gRNAs. However, the placements of the FNAs were
thought out. Here, the placements were considered with respect to where to find interactions between
residues and gRNA. Control gRNAs were synthesized, with crude yields between 7%-30%. Here, 2-
Aminopurine was chosen as a control, as this has been proven to have effective fluorescent properties
in other studies. To conclude this project, experiments with the synthetic gRNAs and controls must
be organized and performed. Therefore, at this point, only predictions can be conducted.
57
==PAGE:59==
References
[1] CRISPR in Nature - Innovative Genomics, Accessed on March 30th, 2023. https://innovati
vegenomics.org/crisprpedia/crispr-in-nature/.
[2] Cas Mosterd, Genevi`eve M Rousseau, and Sylvain Moineau. REVIEW A short overview of the
CRISPR-Cas adaptation stage 1. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 12(June 2020), 2021.
[3] CRISPR in Technology - Innovative Genomics, Accessed on March 30th, 2023. https://inno
vativegenomics.org/crisprpedia/crispr-technology/.
[4] Yuanyuan Xu and Zhanjun Li. Crispr-cas systems: Overview, innovations and applications in
human disease research and gene therapy. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal,
18, 2020.
[5] Nataˇsa Savi´c and Gerald Schwank. Advances in therapeutic crispr/cas9 genome editing. Trans-
lational Research, 168, 2016.
[6] Hiroshi Nishimasu, Ann Ran F., D. Hsu Patrick, Silvana Konermann, I. Shehata Soraya, Naoshi
Dohmae, Ryuichiro Ishitani, Feng Zhang, and Osamu Nureki.
Crystal structure of cas9 in
complex with guide rna and target dna. Cell, 156, 2014.
[7] Hiroshi Nishimasu, Le Cong, Winston X. Yan, F. Ann Ran, Bernd Zetsche, Yinqing Li, Arisa
Kurabayashi, Ryuichiro Ishitani, Feng Zhang, and Osamu Nureki. Crystal structure of staphy-
lococcus aureus cas9. Cell, 162, 2015.
[8] Vladimir Mekler, Leonid Minakhin, and Konstantin Severinov. Mechanism of duplex dna desta-
bilization by rna-guided cas9 nuclease during target interrogation. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114, 2017.
[9] Mikihiro Shibata, Hiroshi Nishimasu, Noriyuki Kodera, Seiichi Hirano, Toshio Ando, Takayuki
Uchihashi, and Osamu Nureki. Real-space and real-time dynamics of crispr-cas9 visualized by
high-speed atomic force microscopy. Nature Communications, 8, 2017.
[10] N. P. Stanford. One- and three-dimensional pathways for proteins to reach specific dna sites.
The EMBO Journal, 19, 2000.
[11] Joshua C. Cofsky, Katarzyna M. Soczek, Gavin J. Knott, Eva Nogales, and Jennifer A. Doudna.
Crispr–cas9 bends and twists dna to read its sequence. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology,
29, 2022.
[12] Cong Huai, Gan Li, Ruijie Yao, Yingyi Zhang, Mi Cao, Liangliang Kong, Chenqiang Jia,
Hui Yuan, Hongyan Chen, Daru Lu, and Qiang Huang. Structural insights into dna cleavage
activation of crispr-cas9 system. Nature Communications, 8, 2017.
58
==PAGE:60==
[13] Honghai Tang, Hui Yuan, Wenhao Du, Gan Li, Dongmei Xue, and Qiang Huang. Active-site
models of streptococcus pyogenes cas9 in dna cleavage state. Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences,
8, 2021.
[14] Roger L. Miesfield and Megan M. McEvoy. Chapter 3 Nucleic Acid Structure and Function,
pages 94–95. W.W. Norton & Company, first edition edition, 2017.
[15] Carolin Anders, Ole Niewoehner, Alessia Duerst, and Martin Jinek. Structural basis of pam-
dependent target dna recognition by the cas9 endonuclease. Nature, 513, 2014.
[16] Western Oregon University - CH450 AND CH451: BIOCHEMISTRY - DEFINING LIFE AT
THE MOLECULAR LEVEL, Accessed on May 28th, 2023. https://wou.edu/chemistry/cou
rses/online-chemistry-textbooks/ch450-and-ch451-biochemistry-defining-life-a
t-the-molecular-level/chapter-4-dna-rna-and-the-human-genome/.
[17] Similar editing efficiency with two-part and single guide RNA, accessed April 20th, 2023.
https://eu.idtdna.com/pages/education/decoded/article/a-high-degree-of-similari
ty-in-crispr-cas9-editing-efficiency-is-found-between-2-part-guide-rnas-and-
single-guide-rnas.
[18] CRISPR Guide, accessed April 20th, 2023. https://www.addgene.org/guides/crispr/.
[19] Stephan Riesenberg, Nelly Helmbrecht, Philipp Kanis, Tomislav Maricic, and Svante P¨a¨abo.
Improved gRNA secondary structures allow editing of target sites resistant to CRISPR-Cas9
cleavage. Nature Communications, 13(1), 2022.
[20] The Complete Guide to Understanding CRISPR sgRNA, accessed April 20th, 2023. https:
//www.synthego.com/guide/how-to-use-crispr/sgrna.
[21] Lucy Thorne. Benefits of Using Synthetic sgRNA for CRISPR-based Editing, accessed May
1st, 2023.
https://www.biocompare.com/Editorial-Articles/587903-The-Benefits-of-
Using-Synthetic-sgRNA-for-CRISPR-based-Gene-Editing/.
[22] Martin Jinek, Krzysztof Chylinski, Ines Fonfara, Michael Hauer, Jennifer A. Doudna, and
Emmanuelle Charpentier. A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive
bacterial immunity. Science, 337(6096), 2012.
[23] Keita Okada, Kanae Aoki, Teruyuki Tabei, Kota Sugio, Katsunori Imai, Yuki Bonkohara,
and Yusuke Kamachi. Key sequence features of CRISPR RNA for dual-guide CRISPR-Cas9
ribonucleoprotein complexes assembled with wild-Type or HiFi Cas9. Nucleic Acids Research,
50(5), 2022.
[24] Daniel C. Harris.
Fundamentals of Spectophotometry, pages 432–545.
Kate Parker, second
printing edition, 2016.
59
==PAGE:61==
[25] Khan Academy - Organic Chemistry - Lesson 2:
UV/Vis Spectroscopy, Accessed on May
20th, 2023. https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/spectroscopy-ja
y/uv-vis-spectroscopy/v/conjugation-and-color-1.
[26] Persistent Phosphors - From Fundamentals to Applications, Accessed on April 13th. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012818637400001X.
[27] Dmytro Dziuba. Environmentally sensitive fluorescent nucleoside analogues as probes for nu-
cleic acid - protein interactions: Molecular design and biosensing applications. Methods and
Applications in Fluorescence, 10, 2022.
[28] Horiba Scientific - What is Fluorescence Anisotropy or Fluorescence Polarization?, Accessed
on May 17th, 2023. https://www.horiba.com/int/scientific/technologies/fluorescenc
e-spectroscopy/what-is-fluorescence-anisotropy-or-fluorescence-polarization/.
[29] Yabin Zhou, Jin Hua, Dan Ding, and Youhong Tang. Interrogating amyloid aggregation with
aggregation-induced emission fluorescence probes. Biomaterials, 286, 2022.
[30] Horiba
Scientific
-
What
is
Ratiometric
Fluorescence?,
Accessed
on
May
17th,
2023. https://www.horiba.com/gbr/scientific/technologies/fluorescence-spectrosco
py/what-is-ratiometric-fluorescence/.
[31] Qian Ma and Zhiqiang Gao. A simple and ultrasensitive fluorescence assay for single-nucleotide
polymorphism. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 410, 2018.
[32] Pan Gu, Yangfan Lu, Shanni Li, and Changbei Ma. A label-free fluorescence aptasensor based
on g-quadruplex/thioflavin t complex for the detection of trypsin. Molecules, 27, 2022.
[33] Bryce Bajar, Emily Wang, Shu Zhang, Michael Lin, and Jun Chu. A guide to fluorescent protein
fret pairs. Sensors, 16, 2016.
[34] Michael Kauk and Carsten Hoffmann. Intramolecular and intermolecular fret sensors for gpcrs –
monitoring conformational changes and beyond. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 39, 2018.
[35] Jiayu Liao, Vipul Madahar, Runrui Dang, and Ling Jiang. Quantitative fret (qfret) technology
for the determination of protein–protein interaction affinity in solution. Molecules, 26, 2021.
[36] Yong Zhang, Chaoxian Wei, and Shuai Guo. Fluorescence spectroscopy: Part II practical appli-
cations. Elsevier, 2022.
[37] Kentaro Tabara, Kazunori Watanabe, Hajime Shigeto, Shohei Yamamura, Takamasa Kishi,
Mizuki Kitamatsu, and Takashi Ohtsuki. Fluorophore–pna–quencher/quencher–dna probe for
mirna detection. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 51, 2021.
60
==PAGE:62==
[38] Tairong Kuang, Lingqian Chang, Xiangfang Peng, Xianglong Hu, and Daniel Gallego-Perez.
Molecular beacon nano-sensors for probing living cancer cells. Trends in Biotechnology, 35,
2017.
[39] Pedro G¨uixens-Gallardo and Michal Hocek. Acetophenyl-thienyl-aniline-linked nucleotide for
construction of solvatochromic fluorescence light-up dna probes sensing protein-dna interactions.
Chemistry - A European Journal, 27, 2021.
[40] Renatus W. Sinkeldam, Paul Marcus, Dmitriy Uchenik, and Yitzhak Tor. Multisensing emissive
pyrimidine. ChemPhysChem, 12, 2011.
[41] LibreTexts Chemistry - 1.10: Pi Conjugation, Accessed on May 18th, 2023. https://chem.lib
retexts.org/Courses/Purdue/Purdue%3A Chem 26505%3A Organic Chemistry I (Lipton)/
Chapter 1. Electronic Structure and Chemical Bonding/1.10%3A Pi Conjugation.
[42] Mutharasappan Nachiappan, Ravi Guru Raj Rao, Mariadasse Richard, Dhamodharan Prabhu,
Sundarraj Rajamanikandan, Jeyaraj Pandian Chitra, and Jeyaraman Jeyakanthan. 3D Struc-
tural Determination of Macromolecules Using X-ray Crystallography Methods, pages 119–140.
Elsevier, 2021.
[43] Christopher G. Tate. Practical Considerations of Membrane Protein Instability during Purifi-
cation and Crystallisation, pages 187–203. Humana Press, 2010.
[44] Javier Garc´ıa-Nafr´ıa and Christopher G. Tate.
Structure determination of gpcrs: cryo-em
compared with x-ray crystallography. Biochemical Society Transactions, 49, 2021.
[45] Kyle W. East, Jocelyn C. Newton, Uriel N. Morzan, Yogesh B. Narkhede, Atanu Acharya,
Erin Skeens, Gerwald Jogl, Victor S. Batista, Giulia Palermo, and George P. Lisi. Allosteric
motions of the crispr–cas9 hnh nuclease probed by nmr and molecular dynamics. Journal of
the American Chemical Society, 142, 2020.
[46] Robbins Puthenveetil and Olga Vinogradova. Solution nmr: A powerful tool for structural and
functional studies of membrane proteins in reconstituted environments. Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 294, 2019.
[47] Lawrence McIntosh. CPMG, pages 386–386. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[48] Car-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) Echo Train Acquisition, Accessed on May 4th.
https:
//chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Textbook M
aps/Supplemental Modules (Physical and Theoretical Chemistry)/Spectroscopy/Magne
tic Resonance Spectroscopies/Nuclear Magnetic Resonance/NMR%3A Experimental/Soli
d State Experiments/Car-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) Echo Train Acquisition.
61
==PAGE:63==
[49] Jasco. Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy (Overview), accessed May 3rd, 2023. https://jascoi
nc.com/learning-center/theory/spectroscopy/circular-dichroism-spectroscopy/.
[50] Nick Hurlburt. Circular Dichroism, accessed May 3rd, 2023. https://chem.libretexts.org
/Bookshelves/Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Textbook Maps/Supplemental Modul
es (Physical and Theoretical Chemistry)/Spectroscopy/Electronic Spectroscopy/Ci
rcular Dichroism.
[51] Monika Halat, Magdalena Klimek-Chodacka, Jagoda Orleanska, Malgorzata Baranska, and
Rafal Baranski. Electronic circular dichroism of the cas9 protein and grna:Cas9 ribonucleopro-
tein complex. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 22(6), 2021.
[52] Brisa Pe˜na, Mostafa Adbel-Hafiz, Maria Cavasin, Luisa Mestroni, and Orfeo Sbaizero. Atomic
force microscopy (afm) applications in arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. International Journal
of Molecular Sciences, 23, 2022.
[53] Itay Rousso and Akshay Deshpande. Applications of atomic force microscopy in hiv-1 research.
Viruses, 14, 2022.
[54] Toshio Ando. High-speed atomic force microscopy. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology, 51,
2019.
[55] Yue Li, Yukang Liu, Jaideep Singh, Narin S. Tangprasertchai, Ravi Trivedi, Yun Fang, and Pe-
ter Z. Qin. Site-Specific Labeling Reveals Cas9 Induces Partial Unwinding Without RNA/DNA
Pairing in Sequences Distal to the PAM. CRISPR Journal, 5(2), 2022.
[56] Pablo Espinet and Antonio M. Echavarren. The mechanisms of the Stille reaction. Angewandte
Chemie - International Edition, 43(36), 2004.
[57] Mary Baby Aleena, Rose Mary Philip, and Gopinathan Anilkumar. Advances in non-palladium-
catalysed Stille couplings. Applied Organometallic Chemistry, 35(12), 2021.
[58] Nick Greeves Jonathan Clayden and Stuart Warren. Organic Chemistry. Oxford University
Press Inc., 2012.
[59] Solid Phase Oligonucleotide Synthesis, Accessed on April 19th. https://atdbio.com/nucleic
-acids-book/Solid-phase-oligonucleotide-synthesis.
[60] John Brazier. Chemical Synthesis of Oligonucelotide Sequences: Phosphoramidite Chemistry.
Humana, New York, NY, 2023.
[61] Owen Becette, Lukasz T. Olenginski, and Theodore K. Dayie. Solid-phase chemical synthesis
of stable isotope-labeled RNA to aiD structure and dynamics studies by NMR spectroscopy.
Molecules, 24(19), 2019.
62
==PAGE:64==
[62] Liquid Chromatography Principles, Accessed on May 20th, 2023. https://www.bio-rad.com/e
n-dk/applications-technologies/liquid-chromatography-principles?ID=MWHAS7E8Z.
[63] When is Gradient Elution Better than Isocratic Elution?, Accessed on May 22th, 2023. https:
//www.biotage.com/blog/when-is-gradient-elution-better-than-isocratic-elution.
[64] Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer (NMR), Accessed on May 18th, 2023. https://ww
w.jeol.com/products/science/nmr.php.
[65] What is Mass Spectrometry?, Accessed on May 22th, 2023. https://www.broadinstitute.org
/technology-areas/what-mass-spectrometry.
[66] Difference Between LC, LC-MS, LC-MS-MS, and HR-MS, Accessed on May 22th, 2023. https:
//veeprho.com/difference-between-lc-lc-ms-lc-ms-ms-and-hr-ms/.
[67] Oligonucleotide Characterization Service, Accessed on May 18th, 2023. https://labinsight
s.nl/en/article/oligonucleotide-characterization-service/.
[68] Integrated DNA Tecnologies, Accessed on March 27th, 2023. https://eu.idtdna.com/pages/p
romotions?utm source=google&utm medium=cpc&utm campaign=00588 1i 03&utm content=
search&gclid=Cj0KCQjw7aqkBhDPARIsAKGa0oK-0dlyApWK9B7xeVwfbxCtQgW7fAqjJDaxUmR8i
2xE7vOl9aRdFA0aArU5EALw wcB.
[69] Methods
for
Detecting
Protein–RNA
Interactions,
Accessed
on
May
25th,
2023.
https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/life-science/protein-biology/protein
-biology-learning-center/protein-biology-resource-library/pierce-protein-met
hods/methods-detecting-protein-rna-interactions.html.
[70] Marie-Louise Wibom. In house methodology. available on demand.
[71] Seergazhi G. Srivatsan and Yitzhak Tor. Enzymatic incorporation of emissive pyrimidine ri-
bonucleotides. Chemistry - An Asian Journal, 4, 2009.
[72] Nicholas J. Greco and Yitzhak Tor. Furan decorated nucleoside analogues as fluorescent probes:
synthesis, photophysical evaluation, and site-specific incorporation. Tetrahedron, 63, 2007.
[73] L. Bastue and J. Jeberg. In House Methodology, 2023. Available on demand.
[74] Shuhua Zhang, Fan Zhang, Qing Chen, Chidan Wan, Jun Xiong, and Jianqun Xu. Crispr/cas9-
mediated knockout of nsd1 suppresses the hepatocellular carcinoma development via the
nsd1/h3/wnt10b signaling pathway. Journal of Experimental & Clinical Cancer Research, 38,
2019.
[75] Meghdad Rahdar, Moira A. McMahon, Thazha P. Prakash, Eric E. Swayze, C. Frank Ben-
nett, and Don W. Cleveland. Synthetic crispr rna-cas9–guided genome editing in human cells.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112, 2015.
63
==PAGE:65==
[76] Nucleotide BLAST: Search nucleotide databases using a nucleotide query, Accessed on Februrary
27th, 2023.
https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PROGRAM=blastn&PAGE TYPE=Blas
tSearch&LINK LOC=blasthome.
[77] Baohui Chen, A. Gilbert Luke, A. Cimini Beth, Joerg Schnitzbauer, Wei Zhang, Gene-Wei
Li, Jason Park, H. Blackburn Elizabeth, S. Weissman Jonathan, S. Qi Lei, and Bo Huang.
Dynamic imaging of genomic loci in living human cells by an optimized crispr/cas system. Cell,
155, 2013.
[78] NUPACK Cloud alpha, Accessed on March 18th. https://nupack.org/.
[79] Gene Link - 2’-O methyl bases, Accessed on May 31st, 2023. https://www.genelink.com/new
site/products/mod detail.asp?modid=444.
[80] Kathleen B. Hall. 2-Aminopurine as a Probe of RNA Conformational Transitions, pages 269–
285. Methods in Enzymology, 2009.
[81] Anita C. Jones and Robert K. Neely. 2-aminopurine as a fluorescent probe of dna conformation
and the dna–enzyme interface. Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics, 48, 2015.
[82] Christian Reichardt, Chengwei Wen, R. Aaron Vogt, and Carlos E. Crespo-Hern´andez. Role of
intersystem crossing in the fluorescence quenching of 2-aminopurine 2’-deoxyriboside in solution.
Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences, 12, 2013.
[83] Eurogentec Dyes & Quenchers Compatibility Tables,
Accessed on March 23rd,
2023.
https://www.eurogentec.com/assets/bb11c824-8d45-49f8-9d42-e7aa78cd6ec9/GUIDE-EN
-Dyes-quenchers-compatibility-table.pdf.
[84] Kevin H. Shaughnessy.
Palladium-catalyzed modification of unprotected nucleosides, nu-
cleotides, and oligonucleotides. Molecules, 20(5), 2015.
[85] Pulak Ghosh, Heike M. Kropp, Karin Betz, Samra Ludmann, Kay Diederichs, Andreas Marx,
and Seergazhi G. Srivatsan. Microenvironment-Sensitive Fluorescent Nucleotide Probes from
Benzofuran, Benzothiophene, and Selenophene as Substrates for DNA Polymerases. Journal of
the American Chemical Society, 144(23), 2022.
[86] Vanessa Koch, Martin Nieger, and Stefan Br¨ase. Stille and Suzuki Cross-Coupling Reactions
as Versatile Tools for Modifications at C-17 of Steroidal Skeletons – A Comprehensive Study.
Advanced Synthesis and Catalysis, 359(5), 2017.
[87] Xuan Zhou, William F. Kiesman, Wuming Yan, Hong Jiang, Firoz D. Antia, Jing Yang, Yan-
nick A. Fillon, Li Xiao, and Xianglin Shi. Development of kilogram-scale convergent liquid-phase
synthesis of oligonucleotides. The Journal of Organic Chemistry, 87, 2022.
64
==PAGE:66==
[88] Guido Creusen, Cecilia Oluwadunsin Akintayo, Katja Schumann, and Andreas Walther. Scal-
able one-pot-liquid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis for model network hydrogels. Journal of the
American Chemical Society, 142, 2020.
[89] Satoshi Katayama and Kunihiro Hirai. Liquid-Phase Synthesis of Oligonucleotides, pages 83–95.
Springer Singapore, 2018.
[90] ThermoFisher Scientific - DNA and RNA Molecular Weights and Conversions, Accessed on
June 15th, 2023. https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/references/ambion-tech-s
upport/rna-tools-and-calculators/dna-and-rna-molecular-weights-and-conversio
ns.html.
[91] Yoshiyuki Fukuda, Kevin Stapleton, and Takayuki Kato.
Progress in spatial resolution of
structural analysis by cryo-EM. Microscopy, 72(October 2022), 2022.
[92] Rikitha S. Fernandes, Nitinkumar S. Shetty, Priyanka Mahesha, and Santhosh L. Gaonkar. A
comprehensive review on thiophene based chemosensors. Journal of Fluorescence, 32, 2022.
[93] Jinsi Li, Xuerong Fang, and Xin Ming. Visibly emitting thiazolyl-uridine analogues as promising
fluorescent probes. The Journal of Organic Chemistry, 85, 2020.
[94] SpectraBase. Bio-Rad Laboratories. tributyl-thiophen-2-ylstannane, Accessed on June 6th, 2023.
https://spectrabase.com/spectrum/IEfWrVYjESB.
Acknowledgments
The NMR Center at DTU and the Villum Foundation are acknowledged for access to the 800 MHz
spectrometer.
i
==PAGE:67==
Appendix
A
NUPACK results
NSD1
21oC
37oC
By
itself
With
tracr
ii
==PAGE:68==
Table 13: Free Energies and Structures of NSD1
iii
==PAGE:69==
Li
21oC
37oC
By
itself
With
tracr
Table 14: Free Energies and Structures of Li
iv
==PAGE:70==
Kjems
21oC
37oC
By
itself
With
tracr
v
==PAGE:71==
vi
==PAGE:72==
vii
==PAGE:73==
viii
==PAGE:74==
Table 15: Free Energies of Kjems
ix
==PAGE:75==
B
Selection of FNAs suggested by Adrian Hern´andez Bustos
Figure 26: Selection of all FNAs in the pilot project, suggested by pHD student Adrian Hern´andez
Bustos from the Department of Chemistry at DTU. The FNAs are all uridine fluorescent ana-
logues modiefied with; a) pyridine, b) pyridine-3-amine, c) pyridine-3-ol, d) nicotinonitrile, e)
5-chloropyridine, f) furan, g) thiophene, h) thiazole, i) 1-methyl-1H-indol-2-yl, j) 1-methyl-1h-
imidazol-4-yl
x
==PAGE:76==
C
Commercially Bought Oligonucleotides
Name
Sequence
NSD1 guide
5’ mU mUmGrG rArUrU rGrArC rCrArU rUrArC rCrGrA rArArG rUrUrU
rArArG rArGrC rUrArU rGrCrU mGmGmA 3’
Li guide
5’ mGmUmG rArUrA rArGrU rGrGrA rArUrG rCrCrA rUrGrG rUrUrU
rArArG rArGrC rUrArU rGrCrU mGmGmA 3’
tracr
5’ rArA rCrArG rCrArU rArGrC rArArG rUrUrU rArArA rUrArA rGrGrC
rUrArG rUrCrC rGrUrU rArUrC rArArC rUrUrG rArArA rArArG rUrGrG
rCrArC rCrGrA rGrUrC rGrGrU rGrCrU rUrUrU rUrUrU 3’
NSD1 TS
5’ AGG ACA GCC CTT TCG GTA ATG GTC AAT CCA ATT TTT CTG
AG 3’
NSD1 NTS
5’ CT CAG AAA AAT TGG ATT GAC CAT TAC CGA AAG GGC TGT
CCT 3’
Li TS
5’ TGA CAG CCC ACA TGG CAT TCC ACT TAT CAC TGG CAT CCT T
3’
Li NTS
5’ AAG GAT GCC AGT GAT AAG TGG AAT GCC ATG TGG GCT GTC
A 3’
NSD1 TS Fluoro
5’ /5ATTO633N//iSp18/AGG ACA GCC CTT TCG GTA ATG GTC AAT
CCA ATT TTT CTG AG 3’
NSD1 NTS Quencher
5’ CT CAG AAA AAT TGG ATT GAC CAT TAC CGA AAG GGC TGT
CCT /iSp18//3BHQ-3/ 3’
Table 16: Commercially ordered Oligonucleotides from IDT.
xi
==PAGE:77==
D
Reactions Tables of Modified Uridine
D.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene
Reagent
SM
Pd
Sn
THF
Theoretical
Product
Actual
Product
Yield
m [mg]
97.4
6.4+6.5=12.9
129.3+47
=
176.3
-
85.4
9.8
11.2%
Mw [mg/mmol]
354.1
1155.6
373.2
72.1
310.3
310.3
-
n [mmol]
0.275
0.011
0.346+0.126
= 0.472
-
0.275
0.032
-
V [mL]
-
-
0.11+0.04 =
0.15
5.0
-
-
-
ρ [g/mL]
-
-
1.175
0.889
-
-
-
Eq
1
-
1.72
-
1
-
-
Table 17: Reaction table of Uridine modified with Thiophene from the first reaction. SM = Starting
material (5-Iodo-2-deoxyuridine), Pd = Palladium compound (tetrakis triphenyl phosphine palla-
dium), Sn = Stannyl compound (2-(Tributylstannyl)thiophene.
Reagent
SM
Pd
Sn
THF
Theoretical
Product
Actual
Product
Yield
m [mg]
101.8
10.1
129.3
-
89.2
26.0
29.1%
Mw [mg/mmol]
354.1
1155.6
373.2
72.1
310.3
310.3
-
n [mmol]
0.287
0.008
0.346
-
0.287
0.084
-
V [mL]
-
-
0.11
5.0
-
-
-
ρ [g/mL]
-
-
1.175
0.889
-
-
-
Eq
1
-
1.21
-
1
-
-
Table 18: Reaction table of Uridine modified with Thiophene from the second reaction (the repeti-
tion). SM = Starting material (5-Iodo-2-deoxyuridine), Pd = Palladium compound (tetrakis triph-
enyl phosphine palladium), Sn = Stannyl compound (2-(Tributylstannyl)thiophene).
xii
==PAGE:78==
D.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole
Reagent
SM
Pd
Sn
THF
Theoretical
Product
Actual
Product
Yield
m [mg]
99.7
7.7+6.5=14.2
130.9+47.6
= 178.5
8890
87.634
4.7
5.36%
Mw [mg/mmol]
354.1
1155.6
374.2
72.1
311.3
311.3
-
n [mmol]
0.282
0.012
0.308+0.169
= 0.477
123.3
0.282
0.015
-
V [mL]
-
-
0.11+0.04 =
0.15
5.0+5.0
= 10
-
-
-
ρ [g/mL]
-
-
1.19
0.889
-
-
-
Eq
1
-
1.69
-
1
-
-
Table 19: Reaction table of Uridine modified with Thiazole.
SM = Starting material (5-Iodo-2-
deoxy-Uridine), Pd = Palladium compound (tetrakis triphenyl phosphine palladium), Sn = Stannyl
compound (2-(Tributylstannyl)thiazole).
xiii
==PAGE:79==
E
NMRs of Products
E.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene
1D and 2D 1H-NMR
ppm
int
multi
1H −1 H −COSY
HA
11.68
1.00
s
-
HB
8.59
1.04
s
-
HC
7.43
1.01
dd
HD, HE
HD
7.06
1.05
dd
HC, HE
HE
7.06
1.03
dd
HC, HD
HF
6.23
1.04
t
HK
HG
5.30
2.14
m
HH, HJ
HH
4.32
1.03
dt
HI, HK, HG
HI
3.86
1.05
q
HJ, HH
HJ
3.68
2.10
m
HI, HG
HK
2.22
2.12
m
HH, HF
Table 20: 1H −NMR analysis of uridine modified with thiophene
Figure 27: Uridine modified with Thiophene. Labels correspond to table 20.
xiv
==PAGE:80==
Figure 28: First 1D 1H −NMR obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene
xv
==PAGE:81==
Figure 29: Second 1D 1H −NMR obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene
xvi
==PAGE:82==
Figure 30: Third 1D 1H −NMR obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene
xvii
==PAGE:83==
Figure 31: The entire 2D 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY spectra obtained of Uridine modified with Thio-
phene
xviii
==PAGE:84==
Figure 32: Zoomed in 2D 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY spectra obtained of Uridine modified with Thio-
phene
xix
==PAGE:85==
Figure 33: The Zoomed in 2D 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY spectra obtained of Uridine modified with
Thiophene
xx
==PAGE:86==
13C-NMR
ppm
HSQC
HMBC
C1
161.79
-
HB
C2
149.83
-
HB, HF
C3
136.15
HB
HF
C4
134.45
-
HB, HC, HD, HE
C5
126.90
HE
HC, HD
C6
126.14
HC
HD, HE
C7
123.00
HD
HC, HE
C8
108.78
-
HB, (HC), HD
C9
88.06
HI
(HF), HG, HJ, HK
C10
85.27
HF
HB, HH, HK
C11
70.47
HH
HB, HI, HJ, HK
C12
61.33
HJ
HG, HH
C13
40.88
HK
HG
Table 21: 13C −NMR analysis of uridine modified with thiophene. ( ) indicates vague coupling
Figure 34: Uridine modified with Thiophene. Labels correspond to table 21.
xxi
==PAGE:87==
Figure 35: First 1D 13C −NMR obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene.
First synthesis,
second column.
xxii
==PAGE:88==
Figure 36: Second 1D 13C −NMR obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene. Second synthesis,
first column.
xxiii
==PAGE:89==
Figure 37: 1H −13 C −HSQC obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene, the final compound
xxiv
==PAGE:90==
Figure 38: 1H −13 C −HMBC obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene, the final compound
xxv
==PAGE:91==
E.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole
1D and 2D 1H-NMR
ppm
int
multi
1H −1 H −COSY
HA
11.93
1.00
s
-
HB
8.83
1.14
s
-
HC
7.85
1.15
d
HD
HD
7.66
1.12
d
HC
HE
6.23
1.17
t
HK
HF
5.31
1.19
d
HH
HG
5.03
1.16
t
HJ
HH
4.28
1.17
m
HF, HI, HK
HI
3.88
1.20
q
HH, HJ
HJ
3.60
2.43
td
HG, HI
HK
2.23
2.30
m
HE, HH
Table 22: 1H −NMR analysis of uridine modified with thiazole.
Figure 39: Uridine modified with Thiophene. Labels correspond to table 22.
xxvi
==PAGE:92==
Figure 40: First 1D 1H −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole
xxvii
==PAGE:93==
Figure 41: Second 1D 1H −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole
xxviii
==PAGE:94==
Figure 42: Third 1D 1H −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole
xxix
==PAGE:95==
Figure 43: Forth 1D 1H −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole
xxx
==PAGE:96==
Figure 44: The entire 2D 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY spectra obtained of Uridine modified with Thia-
zole, the final product
xxxi
==PAGE:97==
Figure 45: Zoomed in 2D 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY spectra obtained of Uridine modified with Thia-
zole, the final product
xxxii
==PAGE:98==
Figure 46: The Zoomed in 2D 1H −1 H −DQF −COSY spectra obtained of Uridine modified with
Thiazole, the final product
xxxiii
==PAGE:99==
13C-NMR
ppm
HSQC
HMBC
C1
161.77
-
HB
C2
158.57
-
HB, HD
C3
149.85
-
HB, HE
C4
142.24
HC
HD
C5
139.02
HB
HE
C6
120.30
HD
-
C7
108.12
-
-
C8
88.29
HI
HF, HG, HJ, (HK)
C9
85.79
HE
HB, HI, (HK)
C10
70.98
HH
HF
C11
61.76
HJ
HG
C12
40.70
HK
HF
Table 23: 13C −NMR analysis of uridine modified with thiazole. ( ) indicates vague coupling
Figure 47: Uridine modified with Thiophene. Labels correspond to table 23.
xxxiv
==PAGE:100==
Figure 48: First 1D 13C −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole
xxxv
==PAGE:101==
Figure 49: Second 1D 13C −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole
xxxvi
==PAGE:102==
Figure 50: Third 1D 13C −NMR of Uridine modified with Thiazole. Second ether precipitaion.
xxxvii
==PAGE:103==
Figure 51: 1H −13 C −HSQC obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene, the final compound
xxxviii
==PAGE:104==
Figure 52: 1H −13 C −HMBC obtained of Uridine modified with Thiophene, the final compound
xxxix
==PAGE:105==
xl
==PAGE:106==
F
Organostannane impurities
(a) Reference
1H −NMR spectrum of 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiophene from
Wiley SpectraBase [94]
(b) 1H −NMR spectrum of dUThio (First synthe-
sis)
(c)
1H −NMR spectrum of dUThio (Repeated
synthesis)
(d) 1H −NMR spectrum of dUThia (Final prod-
uct)
Figure 53: In house generated 1H −NMR spectra b) and c) compared to reference spectrum a) to
visualize the purification and removal of the Sn-compund. b) and d) still contain traces of Tributyl-
stannyl (from the organostannane). c) displays no traces of Tributylstannyl. (all spectra are zoomed
in)
xli
==PAGE:107==
G
MALDI-TOF Spectra of Oligonucleotides
Figure 54: MALDI spectrum of KAS352.1
xlii
==PAGE:108==
Figure 55: MALDI spectrum of KAS352.2
Figure 56: MALDI spectrum of KAS353.1
xliii
==PAGE:109==
Figure 57: MALDI spectrum of KAS353.2
Figure 58: MALDI spectrum of KAS354.2
xliv
==PAGE:110==
Figure 59: MALDI spectrum of KAS355.1
Figure 60: MALDI spectrum of KAS355.2
xlv
==PAGE:111==
H
HLPC Spectra of Crude Products
Figure 61: HPLC spectrum of KAS352.1
Figure 62: HPLC spectrum of KAS352.2
xlvi
==PAGE:112==
Figure 63: HPLC spectrum of KAS353.1
Figure 64: HPLC spectrum of KAS353.3
xlvii
==PAGE:113==
Figure 65: HPLC spectrum of KAS354.1
Figure 66: HPLC spectrum of KAS354.2
xlviii
==PAGE:114==
Figure 67: HPLC spectrum of KAS355.1
Figure 68: HPLC spectrum of KAS355.2
xlix
==PAGE:115==
I
Comparison Between NUPACK Models and Theoretical
Folding
(a) 21oC
(b) 37oC
(c) The folding of Li-sequence, as seen in the article by Li et. al. [55]. The guide-
sequence correspond to: GUGAUAAGUGGAAUGCCAUG
Figure 69: Li sgRNA tested in NUPACK in both 21oC and 37oC compared with the actual folding
of Li sgRNA.
l
==PAGE:116==
(a) 21oC
(b) 37oC
(c) The folding of Nishimasu sequence, as seen in the article by Nishimasu et. al. [6].
Figure 70: Nishimasu sgRNA tested in NUPACK in both 21oC and 37oC compared with the actual
folding of Nishimasu sgRNA.
li
==PAGE:117==
J
Lab Journals
J.1
Uridine Modified with Thiophene
Date
Task
2023-02-15
25 mL rounded flask and magnet was placed in the oven at 130oC to
dry for 3 hours
Cooled the 25 mL rounded flask under vacuum
Weighted 97.4 mg og 5-Iodo-2-deoxyuridine (Starting material)
Set up the system by adding the reflux tube to the rounded flask, and
flush the entire system with Argon
Weighted 6.4 mg of Tetrakis triphenylphosphine Palladium (0) catalyst
and added it to the system, and flushed with argon
Measured 5 mL dry THF, added it to the system, and flushed with
argon
Measured 0.11 mL of 2-tributylstannyl-thiophene (Sn-compound),
added it to the system, and flushed with argon
Marked my rounded flask with the label ”M1” (For Marie-Louise 1)
The system was lowered into an oil bath at 80oC to secure that the
mixture reach the boiling temperature of 65oC to initiate refluxing
The set-up was left to reflux over night
2023-02-16
Checked the set-up, to ensure the argon ballon was filled and the
temperature was at 80oC. Everything was intact
To prepare for TLCs; 2 vials was filled respectively with crude product
and starting material both vials had 1 mL DCM added to them
The eluent was made up by methanol:DCM (7:93)
TLCs were made and stained with H3Mo12O10P with EtOH
New eluent was made; methanol:DCM (1:9), as the stains on the TLC
needed better separation
The TLC implied that there were unreacted starting material left
Added Pd(0)-cat (6.5 mg, 0.02 eq.) and Sn-coumpound (47 mg, 0.126
mmol, 0.4 eq.)
The system was flushed with argon and left overnight to react
2023-02-17
TLCs were made with eluent; methanol:DCM (1:9) and used 5%
H2SO4/MeOH as a dye
The TLC showed no trace of starting material, so the mixture was
ready for work up
The set-up was removed from the oil bath to cool to rt
lii
==PAGE:118==
Approximately 1,5 cm of celite was measured in the filter, and after-
wards poured into a 100 mL beaker. DCM was added to the beaker
until the mixture was liquid. The celite mixture was poured back into
the filter, and was dried by the use of vacuum
By pipet the crude was transferred unto the filter and the rounded flask
(used as reaction chamber) was washed twice with 12.5 mL DCM
2023-02-17
A 10% Ammonium Hydroxide solution was made
The filtered crude product was added to a separation funnel and the
flask was washed twice with 2 mL DCM, the 10% Ammonium Hydrox-
ide solution was also added to the separation funnel
The separation funnel was run twice with 25 mL DCM
The organic phase was collected and dried with NaSO4
The dry organic phase was filtered by filter paper into a 100 mL
rounded flask
The rotary evaporator (rotovap) was used to evaporate the solvent
(The temperature was first kept at 24oC to evaporate DCM and there-
after raised to 58oC to evaporate THF
The product was collected as a yellow oil and it the compound plus
flask weighted: 69248 mg
Placed the compound in the freezer over the weekend
2023-02-22
Packed a column, 1,5 cm in diameter, with silica gel (The eluent was
methanol:DCM (4:96)). Length of the column was 6 cm.
Added the compound using 5 ml eluent
Ran the column with a gradient (starting with a MeOH conc. of 4%
and the percentage was raised by 0.5% after each 30 mL of eluent
added)
Made TLCs after every five fractions collected, there was 10 fractions
in total.
Fraction ”1” looked like it contained the Sn-compound as it had a dot
at the very end of the TLC papaer. Nothing was seen on fraction ”2”
Fraction ”3,4,5,6,7,8” was collected as their TLCs showed traces of the
product.
The fraction was transferred to a 100 mL rounded flask (the fraction
tubes was washed twice with DCM, to ensure as much product was
transferred and placed on the rotovap and afterwards put in the freezer
overnight
liii
==PAGE:119==
2023-02-23
The 100 mL rounded flask was too big so the product was transferred,
by a mix of DCM and MeOH, to a smaller 22 mL sample vial and the
sample vial was placed on the rotovap for 45 min.
The product was weighted; 27 mg of product (corresponding to 31%
of the theoretical yield) and put it on nitrogen flow over night.
2023-02-24
Weigthed the compound; 16.3 mg (18.8% of the theoretical yield)
made a H-NMR sample by weighting 5 mg of product and adding 0.5
mL DMSO, and transferring it to a NMR-tube label ”MLW01”
Did H-NMR analysis and after the analysis i placed the NMR-tube
with the compound and DMSO in the freezer over the weekend.
2023-03-01
Took the NMR-tube out of the freezer to defrost
When the solution was defrosted it was poured into an eppendorf tube
and placed over nitrogen flow to dry overnight
2023-03-02
The solution was not dry yet, so the eppendorf tube was placed on the
speed vacuum centrifuge at 60oC
The NMR-spectrum showed some impurities, traces of the starting
material and Sn-compound, so it was decided to run the column one
more time to eliminate impurities.
The column gradient started at heptane:DCM (2:8), to ensure that
the Sn-coumond would be removed, the gradient was lowered to 10%
heptane, then 6% heptane, then 3% heptane, all the way to 0% hep-
tane, changed every 30 mL of eluent. After that the gradient (starting
with a MeOH conc. of 0% and the percentage was raised by 0.5% after
each 30 mL of eluent added)
Collected 34 fractions, and the compound was identified by TLC (elu-
ent: MeOH:acetic acid:DCM (10:0,5:89,5)) in fractions ”21” to ”33”
The aforementioned fraction was poured in a 22 mL sample tube, one
by one, and solvents were evaporated on the rotovap.
The product weighted 14 mg, and was put on vacuum over the week-
end.
2023-03-06
vial was taken off the vacuum (weight: 9.8 mg), and placed in freezer
2023-03-08
Made H- and C-NMR sample by using all 9.8 mg of product adding
0.5 mL of DMSO (The compound color was neon blue here, because
some ink from my marker got into the sample)
2023-03-09
The NMR-tube with compound and DMSO was placed in freezer over
the weekend
liv
==PAGE:120==
2023-03-15
the NMR still showed the same impurities, so it was decided to repeat
the entire synthesis, so a 25 mL rounded flask and magnet was placed
in the oven for 3 h
took the starting material, Sn-compound, and Pd(0)-catalyst out of
the freezer to warm to rt
Cooled the 25 mL rounded flask from the oven under vacuum to rt,
then the flask was reheated with a heat gun (under vacuum), and again
cooled to room temp
Connected the reflux tube to the rounded flask, and flushed the system
with argon
101.8 mg of 5-Iodo-2-deoxyuridine was added, and the system was
flushed with argon
10.1 mg of Pd(0)-catalyst, and flushed with argon
Added 5 mL of dry THF
Added 1.11 mL Sn-compound, and lowered the rounded flask into an
80oC oil bath.
Took the NMR-tube out of the freezer and poured its content into an
eppendorf tube and placed on the speed vacuum centrifuge at 60oC
overnight.
2023-03-16
Weigthed the content of the NMR-sample eppendorf tube: 9.1 mg of
compound was retrieved
2023-03-17
Made eluent for TLC MeOH:acetic acid:DCM (10:0,5:89,5).
The TLC showed a trace of starting material so the reaction was left
to continue reacting, and taken of the heat later and placed in freezer
over the weekend
2023-03-20
Took the 25 ml rounded falsk out of the freezer to warm to rt
Did TLC with eluent MeOH:acetic acid:DCM (10:0,5:89,5)
Looked like there was a very vague starting material dot but the
rounded flask was placed back in freezer, ready to column.
2023-03-22
Packed a column with silica gel (eluent heptane:DCM (5:5)) 11cm in
length
Made eluent for the column with the gradient starting at 50% heptane
(lowering the percentage by 10% every 60 mL of eluent until it reaches
0%, after that the percentage of MeOH is increased by 0.5 % after
every 60 mL eluent used.
Faction ”17” overflown while running the column
During the column air-pockets appeared in the silica gel, but was
reduced by applying more pressure
lv
==PAGE:121==
Factions ”58” to ”64” was collected in a 22 mL sample tube and placed
on rotovap
Sample tube was placed under vacuum over night to dry completely
2023-03-23
Weighted the sample tube with product in it after vacuum: 26.5 mg
product (corresponding to 30.5% yield)
Made a NMR-sample and labeled it ”MLW03” by measurring 10 mg
of product and adding 0.5 mL DMSO.
After NMR analysis the content of the NMR tube was transferred to
an eppendorf tub to go on the speed vacuum centrifuge at 60oC over
night.
2023-03-30
Weighted the product: 9.5 mg was retrieved. So in total 26 mg product
29.9 % of theoretical yield
2023-06-05
Weighted a 2.3 mg of the final product to perform 2D H-NMR on it.
The 2.3 mg were dissolved in 180 µL, and send away for analysis with
the label ”MLW03”
J.2
Uridine Modified with Thiazole
Date
Task
2023-02-15
A 25 mL round bottom flask and a small magnet is put into the oven
at 140oC to dry for 3h and 15 minutes.
To cool down, flush with
nitrogen.
Reflux tubes is set up, fitted with the 25 mL round bottom flask and
the magnet. Flush with argon.
99.7 mg of 5-Iodo-Uridine into the flask, flush with argon
7.7 mg of tetrakis triphenyl phosphine palladium into the flask, flush
with argon
5 mL Tetrahydrofuran (THF) into the flask with a syringe, flush with
argon
0.11 mL of 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiazole with a syringe into the flask,
flush with argon
Start the reaction with reflux over oilbath for 18h and 15 min
2023-02-16
TLC with 7% Methanol (MeOH) in DCM of crude mixture was made,
using 5% H2SO4 in MeOH as dye
The spots didn’t run long enough, why another mixture of 10% MeOH
in DCM was used to run TLC a second time, using 5% H2SO4 in MeOH
as dye. 4 spots from crude showed, including starting material peak.
lvi
==PAGE:122==
A third TLC with 0.5% Triethylamine (TEA), 10% MeOH in DCM,
using 5% H2SO4 in MeOH as dye, was run. Still too many spots.
Due
to
starting
material
was
left,
0.04
mL
of
2-
(Tributylstannyl)thiazole was added along with 6.5 mg of Pd-
compound.
Refluxed for 16h and 30 minutes
2023-02-17
TLC with 0.5% Triethylamine (TEA), 10% MeOH in DCM was run,
using 5% H2SO4 in MeOH as dye.
Too diluted TLC resulted in another TLC with 0.5% Triethylamine
(TEA), 10% MeOH in DCM was run, using 5% H2SO4 in MeOH as
dye.
Dryness of THF was checked = 283.8 ppm of water.
5 mL THF and 0.6 eq of 2-(Tributylstannyl)thiazole was added. The
mixture was left to reflux for 5h and 30min
The mixture was put into freezer for storage.
2023-03-01
Mixture was taken out of the freezer.
Celite filter was prepared with DCM
The crude mixture was transferred onto the filter using a pipette
50 mL 5% MeOH in DCM was prepared. The mixture was used to
flush the filter 4 times, 12.5 mL each time.
The solution was collected, a bright, yellow-ish green
TLC of crude compared to starting material with 0.5% Triethylamine
(TEA), 10% MeOH in DCM was run, using 5% H2SO4 in MeOH as
dye. No more starting material showed.
The flask was put onto the rotary evaporator, but it wasn’t dry, and a
couple of water droplets made it into the mixture. These were removed
carefully with a pipette
The flask was put onto the rotary evaporator, until a yellow-oil ap-
peared.
The mixture was put into the freezer for storage purposes.
2023-03-02
The mixture was taken out of the freezer.
A column was prepared using 20% heptane in DCM
6 mL 5% MeOH in DCM into the oily crude along with silica gel. This
was put onto the rotary evaporator for impregnation.
The column was set up with the crude, and run with the total of
57 fractions, and 17 solutions with the concentration gradient of 20%
heptane to 0% heptane, and 0.5% MeOH to 10% MeOH.
Fractions 44 to 50 were evaporated on the rotary evaporator.
lvii
==PAGE:123==
A dry yellow solid showed, and stored in the freezer.
2023-03-06
The flask was taken out of the freezer to defrost.
100mL solution of 5% MeOH in DCM was created. It did not dissolve
the oily product, why 2mL extra MeOH was added to create a 7%
MeOH solution.
A 22mL sample vial was put into the oven to dry.
The vial was flushed with nitrogen to cool down. Weight = 24901.4mg
with lid.
Solution was put into the vial to fill it halfway, and evaporated the
solvent. This was done until all solvent was evaporated.
The round bottom flask was washed 3 times with 10mL 7% MeOH in
DCM, which was evaporated with the product.
The temperature was upped to 40oC to dry the compound
The vial weight = 24945.5 mg = 44.1 mg of wet compound
The vial was put under vacuum to dry completely
2023-03-08
The vial was taken off vaccum, now weighing 24928.8mg = 27.4mg dry
product.
10.4mg in 0.5 mL DMSO into NMR-tube for both 1H-NMR and 13C-
NMR. The tube was stored in the freezer due to technical difficulties
along with rest of the product.
2023-03-09
NMR was run, and the tube stored in the freezer for later extraction.
2023-03-15
An empty eppendorff tube was weighed = 1.3685g
The NMR mixture was put into the tube, and dried overnight on
speedvac at 60oC for 18h.
2023-03-16
The eppendorff weighed 1.3773g = 8.8mg product was retained, and
put into the freezer.
2023-03-22
A new column was prepared with 60 % heptane.
The product (the vial and the eppendorff) was taken out of the freezer
to defrost.
Product was dissolved in 10% MeOH in DCM, silica was added, and
the solvent was evaporated to impregnate the silica.
The now impregnated silica was dry-loaded onto the column, which
was run with 60% heptane in DCM to 0% heptane, downsizing 10%
per eluent, followed by 0.5% MeOH in DCM to 8% MeOH, upsizing
0.5% per eluent.
Fractions 76-95 were evaporated in a 250mL round bottom flask.
The dry, white solid was stored in the freezer.
2023-03-23
Product was taken out of the freezer.
lviii
==PAGE:124==
A 22mL sample vial was put into the oven to dry.
THe vial was cooled down with nitrogen, weight = 25080.6mg with
lid.
The product was dissolved in 50mL 7% MeOH in DCM
The vial was filled half way, and the solvent was evaporated, until all
of the product was in the vial.
The round bottom flask was washed once with 50 mL 7% MeOH in
DCM, which was evaporated in the vial with the product.
The white product was put under vacuum to dry.
2023-03-27
The vial was already taken off vacuum...
The weight was 25097.3 mg = 16.7mg of product.
7.6 mg was used for NMR in DMSO.
The NMR tube and the product was put into the freezer.
2023-03-29
The NMR tube was taken out of the freezer.
An eppendorff weighed 989.1 mg.
The NMR-solution was put into the eppendorff an put under Nitrogen
flow for evaporation.
2023-03-30
As the product wasn’t dry, 0.5mL of demineralized water was added
,and the eppendorff was put on the speedvac
The vial weighed 996.0 mg = 6.9mg retained.
2023-04-19
The product was taken out of the freezer, but as the centrifuge was
occupied, nothing was done today, and the product was put back into
the freezer.
2023-04-26
Took the product out of the freezer.
In biolab: The product was put into a 15mL falcon tube along with
diethylether up to the 10mL mark.
The tube was shaken on the vortex to mix and break up larger lumps.
The ether-mixture was put into a centrifuge to push everything down.
The ether was removed carefully with a pipette.
The last 4 points were done 3 times.
After the last removal of ether, the product was dissolved in 10mL
10% MeOH ind DCM, in a dry, nitrogen-flushed 22mL vial weighing
25011.5 mg with lid.
The solvent was evaporated
The vial was put under vacuum to dry overnight.
2023-04-27
The vial was taken off vacuum and put into the freezer by a colleague.
2023-05-10
The vial was taken out of the freezer.
Somehow, the weight was 24974.6mg, so something’s wrong.
lix
==PAGE:125==
Only 5.3 mg was used for H-NMR in DMSO.
The NMR tube was put into the freezer.
2023-05-11
An eppendorff was weighed = 1180.4 mg
The product was put into the eppendorff and on the speedvac to evap-
orate the DMSO.
After 3h not much was evaporated, so the vial was set aside under
nitrogen-flow to evaporate over the weekend.
2023-05-15
The eppendorff was taken off nitrogen flow, and the weight was
1185.2mg, meaning 4.8 mg was retained.
The tube was stored in the freezer.
2023-05-17
The product was taken out of the freezer.
The product from the 22mL vial was transferred to the eppendorff
from the NMR extraction.
In biolab: 1.5mL ether was put into the eppendorff with a pipette.
The tube was shaken on vortex, and centrifuged on small centrifuge.
The ether was carefully removed with a syringe.
The last 3 points was done 2 times in total.
The eppendorff was stored in the freezer.
2023-05-24
The eppendorff with the product was taken out of the freezer.
It
looked dry.
The product was put on the speedvac at 45o for 4h to dry completely.
The weight was 1191.3 mg = 6.1mg
Both 1H-NMR and 13C-NMR were obtained over night using DMSO
as solvent.
2023-05-25
The NMR tube was emptied into the eppendorff, since the weight was
already known.
The eppendorff was put onto the speedvac at 45oC to evaporate the
solvent.
After 6h and 10min, only 1/3 of the DMSO was evaporated. The tube
was put under Nitrogen-flow to evaporate fully dry.
2023-05-30
The eppendorf was taken off nitrogen. The weight was 1189.9mg =
4.7mg
2023-06-04
1.8mg of the product was dissolved in 180 µL DMSO for COSY, HMBC
and HSQC experiments
lx
==PAGE:126==
J.3
Control gRNA synthesis via. SPOS
Date
Task
2023-06-07
Primed the system (The by Clicking ”prime” on the machine, selecting
the ”prime Reagents, 3”, then select Column ”1” (or the one you want
to prime, the one you are going to insert your column in), then click
OK twice. There will be a failure pop up window in the computer,
this is to be ignored. When a prime is done, click ”cycle” and it will
be repeated, this was done thrice.
lig1 NSD is called KAS353, mod was noted with X on machine.
Same for lig2 which was called KAS 354, and lig3 called KAS355. All
these sequences were saved on the computer.
Added labels to two columns, ”KAS355.1” and ”KAS355.2”.
The columns for KAS355.1 and .2 were already prepared with 28 mg
of solid support (CUTAG CPG universial)
Startet det SPOS reaction of KAS355.1 and KAS355.2 (at 10:40)
When then machine put the synthesis on hold i started detritylation
on column 1.
While waiting for detritylation to happen a 1 uM solution of 2AP
in dry ACN and Activator (300 uL 0.25g 2AP in ACN and 700 uL
of Activator (DCI Activator, 0.25 M 1H-Imidazole-dicarbonitrile in
ACN) was prepared.
Started 14:30 with handcoupling
1 mL 2AP and Activatore solution was added over 20 min (50 uL/min)
Made more rA and rU solutions as we were running low on the machine
2023-06-08
Measured 27.6 mg CUTAG CPG Universial for the column labeld
”KAS354.1” and 28.3 mg CUTAG CPG Universial for the column
labeled ”KAS354.2”
The synthesis of KAS355.1 and .2 were finished at roughly 10:30, and
there columns were dried with ”Gas A” (which is N2) ten times.
The column of KAS355 was removed and placed in vials and stored in
the freezer.
The Expedite system was primed with reagents thrice
The old column were ”aborted” from the system, and the new columns
were added
The Sequence of KAS354 was found on the computer and the sequence
was downloaded.
The SPOS was started at 11:20
lxi
==PAGE:127==
2023-06-09
Hand-coupling of 2AP was started.
The syntheses were done around 15:30
Each column was dried with ”Gas A” ten times.
The columns with KAS354 were removed and placed in vials, and
stored in the freezer.
Two new columns were prepared with 27.8 mg and 28.6 mg CUTAG
CPG Universial. They were labeled KAS353.1 and KAS353.2, respec-
tively.
The Expedite was primed thrice.
The old column were ”aborted” from the system, and the new columns
were added
The sequence of KAS353 was found on the computer and the sequence
was downloaded.
SPOS for KAS353 was started around 17:00
2023-06-10
Hand-coupling of 2AP was started at 14:00. Noticed that the label on
KAS353.2 had turned yellow and was sticky
The synthesis was done around
The columns were dried with ”Gas A” ten times
The columns were put into vials, and in the freezer for storage
2023-06-12
Took the vials with the columns out of the freezer, and took the 33
wt % methyl-amine in absolute ethanol out of the fridge
The columns were emptied into their vials and 1 mL of 33 wt % methyl-
amine in absolute ethanol was added to each vial.
All vials were placed in the oven at 65oC for 2 hours.
After 2 hours the vials with the oligo-solution were taken out and
cooled to room temperature
A solution of 50:50 (Absolute Ethanol: MiliQ water) were made
When the solution in the vials reached rt, the oligo-solution was fil-
trated into sterile eppendorf tubes, and the vial and filter were washed
with 0,5 mL of the Ethanol: MiliQ water-solution
Added lids with holes to the eppendorf tubes, and placed them placed
on the speecvac on 45oC overnight
2023-06-12
The eppendorf tubes were taken out of the speedvac
100 µL Desilylation reagent (46:23:31, Dry N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone
(NMP):Dry
Triethylamine:Triethylamine
trihydrofluorid
4Et3N ·
3HF)), were added to each eppendorf tube.
lxii
==PAGE:128==
The eppendorf tubes were moved back and forth between the ther-
momixer at 67oC and the vortex to try getting the oligos dissolved in
the Desilylation reagent
As the above method did not work, small micro-pipette tips were
added in the eppendorf tubes, to mix the solution on the thermomixer
to help dissolving the solution
The eppendorf tubes were left on the thermomixer at 67oC for 4 hours
with the small micro-pipette tips.
After 4 hours the eppendorf tubes were removed from the thermomixer
and the micro-pipette tips were removed from the solution.
10 µL of quenching solution (consisting of 1000 µL 3M Sodiumacetate
(NaOAC) and 1 µL Diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEP)) was added to the
eppendorf tubes and were afterwards mixed in the vortex - this was
repeated for all 8 eppendorf tubes.
After votex it was observed that the solutions became cloudy.
15 µL of 5M Sodiumperchlorate (NaClO4) was added to each eppen-
dorf tube and vortexed.
1 mL of acetone was added to the precipitate of each eppendorf tube
and the tubes were put in the freezer for 30 min
Each tube was vortexed and placed in the centrifuge for 10 min
The acetone was removed form the eppendorf tube and another mL
acetone was added for washing and vortexed and placed on centrifuge
for 10 min (this was repeated 2 more times)
After the final wash, the acetone was removed and the eppendorf tube
was placed on the speecvac at 45oC until all acetone was evaporated,
it took approx. 5 min.
The oligo-pelette was dissolved in 1 mL MiliQ water and vortexed
The oligo-solution was then filted into new eppendorf tubes, and 25
µL were taken from each sample to run RP-HPLC, and the remaining
oligo-solution was placed in the freezer.
14-06-2023
5 µL of each of the oligo-solutions were placed in PCR-tubes for anal-
ysis on the NanoDrop ND-1000 is a full-spectrum spectrophotometer
(MiliQ water was used as a blank), only 2 µL of the oligo solution was
used for the analysis.
MALDI-TOF samples was created by making 100 ng/µL oligo-
solutions in miliQ water.
lxiii
==PAGE:129==
0.5 µL of each oligo-solution was spotted and mixed with 0.5 µL Matrix
3-hydroxypicolinic acid twice on a MALDI-TOF MTP AnchorChip
target plate.
MALDI-TOF spectra were obtained
lxiv
