==PAGE:1==
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data:
Insights into Heart Failure
Master’s Thesis
Puck Quarles van Ufford
July 1, 2023
==PAGE:2==
ii
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was written as a completion of the Master of Science in Engineering (Quanti-
tative Biology and Disease Modelling) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and
the University of Copenhagen (KU). The project was carried out at the Lundby Cardiac
Proteomics Lab at the department of biomedical sciences at KU. The project was done
under supervision from Alicia Lundby. The project work period spanned from the 15th of
January 2023 to the 1st of July 2023, and it constitutes 32.5 ECTS points. I would like to
thank everyone working at the Lundby group for their contributions to the project and for
their support of my work, with special thanks to John Mulvey for giving me great guidance
and support throughout this project.
Puck Quarles van Ufford
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Heart failure (HF) is a condition that is characterized by the heart’s inability to pump
enough blood and affects about 1–2% of the population. Current knowledge on the cellular
and molecular processes involved in HF is limited. The aim of this project is to gain insight
into cardiac cell type changes in HF by means of intersecting tissue proteomics data and
single-cell or single-nucleus transcriptomics data. The data were collected from human
cardiac tissue samples from 9 failing and 7 non-failing hearts, where the expression of
6,825 proteins and 22,587 genes was measured. Four methods were described, which
utilize the cell type resolved transcriptomics data to define cell type-specific marker genes.
The methods evaluate how these marker genes are distributed over the differentially ex-
pressed proteins between the two sample groups. First, normalized marker counting
(NMC) uses a simple fraction of marker genes in a set of proteins of interest, such as pro-
teins that are up-regulated in HF samples. Next, the over-representation analysis (ORA)
was used to measure statistically significant over-representation of a set of marker genes
in a list of proteins of interest, based on the fraction of marker genes in the whole data
set. Thirdly, the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to evaluate how a set of
marker genes is distributed over a ranking of all proteins in the data. Finally, I developed
the marker-weighted gene set enrichment analysis (MWGSEA), which is an expansion on
the GSEA. The MWGSEA allows for more emphasis to be placed on marker genes that
are more specific for a certain cell type. When evaluating the data with the MWGSEA, no
set of cell type-specific markers was found to be significantly enriched when comparing
expression in failing and non-failing hearts. Advantages and disadvantages of the meth-
ods were compared in the discussion. Furthermore, future suggestions for research were
discussed, such as evaluating the methods with different data sets.
iv
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Pathology of Heart Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Quantitative Cardiac Tissue Proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Single-Cell and Single-Nucleus Transcriptomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Cell Types in Heart Failure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Thesis Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methods
6
2.1
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Normalized Marker Counting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Over-Representation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Marker-Weighted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Multiple Hypothesis Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.7
Cell Type Composition Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results
12
3.1
Method Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Analysis of Heart Failure Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Discussion
28
4.1
Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Abbreviations
31
A Data Generation
39
A.1 Shotgun Proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.2 Single-Nucleus RNA Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
B Appendix: R Code
42
B.1 Normalized Marker Counting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
B.2 Over-Representation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
B.3 Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
B.4 Marker-Weighted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Pathology of Heart Failure
Heart failure (HF) is a progressive clinical syndrome that is characterized by the heart’s
inability to provide adequate cardiac output to meet the hemodynamic demands of the
body [1, 2, 3]. Although data varies across countries and studies, there is a consensus
that the heart failure epidemic affects approximately 1-2% of the general adult population.
HF disproportionately affects older individuals, but there has been a rise in incidences
among younger populations in recent years [4, 5]. Together with the growing and aging
population, this has lead to an increasing global disease burden. HF is associated with
high morbidity and mortality. The annual mortality rate is 10%, with the main causes of
death being sudden cardiac death and organ dysfunction, secondary to hypoperfusion
[3].
HF is caused by a loss of functional myocardium after injury to the heart. The cardiac
output can be affected by changes in the stroke volume, heart rate, synergistic ventricular
contraction, ventricular wall integrity, and valvular competence. HF can be secondary to a
wide variety of conditions, such as an ischemic event, coronary heart disease, cardiomy-
opathies, valvular disease, myocarditis, and chronic pulmonary disease. Risk factors
include hypertension, obesity, diabetes, metabolic disease, chronic infection and inflam-
mation, and the use of cardiotoxic substances, including alcohol and chemotherapy [1, 3].
Signs and symptoms of HF include congestion, dyspnea, other respiratory symptoms,
angina, cyanosis, fatigue, exercise intolerance, mental confusion, fluid retention and
edema, cachexia, malnutrition, diaphoresis, non-specific systemic symptoms, palpita-
tions, tachycardia, arrythmias, and sudden cardiac death. Commonly, there is also a
strong presence of compensatory mechanisms that aim to maintain cardiac output, but
actually contribute to worsening of the condition [1, 6]. The severity of HF can be classified
according to guidelines by the New York Heart Association (NYHA) (Table 1.1).
Table 1.1: NYHA classifications of heart failure.
NYHA classification
Class I
No symptoms with ordinary activity.
Class II
Slight limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest, but ordinary
physical activity results in fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or angina.
Class III
Marked limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest, but less than
ordinary physical activity results in fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or angina.
Class IV
Unable to carry out any physical activity without discomfort. Symptoms
of cardiac insufficiency may be present even at rest.
Note: Adapted from The pathophysiology of heart failure by Kemp and Conte (2012) [1].
2
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:7==
HF is a heterogeneous syndrome that can present itself in several forms. HF can mainly
affect the left or right side of the heart. HF can also be classified as diastolic or heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) and systolic or heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction (HFrEF) [7, 8]. Mixed form of left- and right-sided or diastolic and systolic heart
failure also occur. Finally, HF can be classified as high output failure (normal cardiac
output with increased metabolic demand) or low output failure (low cardiac output with
normal metabolic demand) [1, 6].
There is currently no cure available for HF. Lifestyle changes are recommended to pre-
vent the development and progression of the disease. Most importantly, physical activity,
maintaining a healthy weight, managing blood pressure, regulating blood glucose in dia-
betes, a healthy low-sodium diet, and not smoking are recommended. In earlier stages of
HF, pharmacological therapy, such as inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system and beta
blockers, can help slow disease progression. In end-stage HF, mechanical circulatory
support, such as a ventricular assist device, and heart transplantation may be necessary
[9].
Current insights into the cellular and molecular processes involved in HF are limited. Gain-
ing a better understanding of the changes in individual cardiac cell types would lead to
more insight into the mechanisms underlying HF. This may reveal new therapeutic targets,
help us better understand how HF develops, and could possibly help in the prevention of
the disease. This would lead to improved patient outcomes and a smaller disease burden
overall.
1.2
Quantitative Cardiac Tissue Proteomics
Proteomics is a rapidly advancing field that involves the expression, interaction, and mod-
ification of proteins in a biological system. Proteins are the essential functional molecules
in an organism that directly carry out the majority of cellular and molecular processes.
Unlike with DNA and RNA expression, the study of proteins is a more direct measure of
the dynamic state of a biological system.
One of the major objectives in proteomics is the evaluation of proteomes, or the set of all
proteins in a given system under certain conditions. In comparing proteomes, changes
in protein expression can be identified and lead to insights into the mechanisms that dis-
tinguish for example tissues, developmental stages, or disease states. In biomedical
research, these results can contribute to discovering biomarkers and drug targets, under-
standing mechanisms of disease, and developing personalized medicine approaches.
The proteomics data was acquired using a shotgun proteomics methodology. In shot-
gun proteomics, a protein sample is lysed into peptides, which are analysed using liquid
chromatography and mass spectrometry. Peptides are then identified using a library and
their measurements are quantified. The quantitative protein content of the sample is de-
termined, based on the peptides that uniquely map to a protein [10].
This project involves tissue proteomics, which aims to analyse protein expression on a
tissue level. Currently, the field of single-cell proteomics is still being developed and there
are no established single-cell proteomics methods available yet [11]. This means that
to gain insight into cell type-specific protein changes, bulk proteomics data needs to be
intersected with another type of data on a single-cell resolution, such as transcriptomics
data.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
3
==PAGE:8==
1.3
Single-Cell and Single-Nucleus Transcriptomics
Single-cell transcriptomics and single-nucleus transcriptomics involve the study of RNA
expression. RNA expression profiles with an individual cell or nucleus resolution can be
used to bridge the gap between tissue proteomics and inferring information about different
cell types. As the central dogma describes, DNA is transcribed to RNA, which is trans-
lated to proteins, meaning a protein can be associated with a gene. This allows for the
intersection of proteomics and transcriptomics data sets. A drawback of this technique is
that the correlation between RNA and protein expression is not perfect. A study in human
tissues and cells found a Pearson’s correlation range from 0.39 to 0.79 when assessing
the direct correlation between RNA and protein levels [12].
The transcriptomics data used in this project consisted of single-nucleus RNA sequenc-
ing (snRNA-seq) data. To acquire these data, a set number of nuclei were isolated from
a tissue sample. A next generation sequencing technique (Illumina) was used to gener-
ate quantitative gene expression measurements for each nucleus. These measurements
were then used to cluster the nuclei and annotate cell types, using a reference data set
[13, 14, 15, 16].
1.4
Cell Types in Heart Failure
Although this thesis aims at exploring the cardiac cell type landscape as a whole, individual
cell types have been the subject of heart failure research for a long time. Most importantly,
cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells have been of interest in the field. This
section provides a brief overview on what is known about these cell types.
1.4.1
Cardiomyocytes
Cardiomyocytes are the contractile muscle cells of the heart. Current research has un-
veiled a relationship between cardiomyocyte alterations and HF have on a cellular and
sub-cellular level. On the cellular level, changes in cardiomyocyte morphology are strongly
linked to HF. HF has been associated with cardiomyocyte loss [17, 18, 19] and hypertro-
phy [18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. There have also been gene expression changes identified in car-
diomyocytes related to HF. This includes alterations in RNA expression that are applicable
to all forms of HF, but also etiology-specific changes [23], and stage-specific changes [24].
Furthermore, there are certain sub-cellular structures in cardiomyocytes that are specifi-
cally affected in HF. For instance, HF is associated with a loss of t-tubules, which leads to
reduced efficiency in calcium-mediated excitation-contraction coupling [25, 26, 27]. An-
other sub-cellular structure that is affected in HF is the calveola, which is a membrane
micro-domain involved in cell signaling, endocytosis and transcytosis. Here, the sodium/-
calcium exchanger is up-regulated in HF, which leads to dysfunctional ion transport and
causes arrythmias [28]. Finally, significant changes in cell adhesion molecules have been
identified in cardiomyocytes of patients with HF [29].
1.4.2
Fibroblasts
Fibroblasts are responsible for generating and degrading the extracellular matrix. Addi-
tionally, fibroblasts are involved in regulation of other cardiac cells [30]. Upon injury or
stress, fibroblasts are transformed into myofibroblasts, which are contractile cells that se-
crete excessive amounts of collagen into the extracellular matrix, contributing to fibrosis
[31, 32]. Fibrosis is an initial reparative response that aims to replace lost cardiomyocytes
and ensure the integrity of the heart. However, the continuous accumulation of extracel-
lular matrix leads to impaired cardiac function [33]. Fibrosis is strongly associated with
worsening HF, as it leads to ventricular stiffness, which impairs myocardial contraction
and relaxation [32, 18, 19, 34, 33, 35]. The effect of fibrosis on the electric conductivity in
4
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:9==
the heart is poorly understood. Fibrosis can lead to the formation of non-excitable patches
that are electrically insulated, but there is also evidence for trans-scar conduction [36, 34].
Finally, major differences in RNA expression of fibroblasts have been found associated
with HF [23].
1.4.3
Endothelial Cells
Endothelial cells line the blood vessels, heart chambers, and valves. They are responsi-
ble for vascular homeostasis, angiogenesis and blood flow [37]. Furthermore, endothelial
cells have a regulatory function and are involved in cell-to-cell signaling, affecting among
other things cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, and immune cells [38, 39, 37, 40]. Abnormali-
ties in endothelial cell signaling has been linked to cardiac remodeling and heart failure
[39, 40]. Endothelial dysfunction in the peripheral circulation [41, 42] and the coronary
arteries [43] has also been associated with HF and predicts worsening clinical outcomes
and increased mortality [44, 45]. Furthermore, endothelial cells express cell adhesion
molecules that are crucial for the recruitment of immune cells into the tissue. Conse-
quently, endothelial cell dysfunction may lead to increased inflammation [46]. Addition-
ally, endothelial cells may transition to mesenchymal cells under stress, leading to cells
similar to myofibroblasts. This plays a role in the progression of cardiac fibrosis and the
pathogenesis of HF and other cardiovascular diseases [47]. Finally, differences in RNA
expression of endothelial cells have been found associated with HF [23].
1.5
Thesis Aim
The aim of this project is to gain insight into cardiac cell type changes in heart failure
by means of tissue proteomics data. Protein expression in cardiac tissue from failing
and non-failing human hearts were compared. These data were intersected with single-
nucleus transcriptomics data sets in order to deduce which cell types are likely contributing
to the differential protein expression.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
5
==PAGE:10==
2
Methods
2.1
Data Generation
The shotgun proteomics data and snRNA-seq data were generated as described in Ap-
pendix A. Flash-frozen cardiac tissue samples from patients with HF and control hearts
were collected from the Cardiovascular Biorepository at the University of Kentucky, ac-
cording to the protocol by Blair et al. [48]. These samples were processed further at the
University of Copenhagen. The proteomics analysis of these samples was conducted
by Estefania Vega and Andrea Sorrentino, the transcriptomics analysis was conducted
by Seçil Erbil Bilir, and the data from these experiments were further processed by John
Mulvey and Konstantin Kahnert. The pre-processed data sets for this project consisted
of an overview of the average protein expression for each sample and the average gene
expression profiles for each cell type.
2.1.1
Defining Cell Type-Specific Markers
The annotation of cell types to the snRNA-seq data involved assigning 12 cell types,
namely B-cells, cardiomyocytes, endocardial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, lymphatic
endothelial cells, mast cells, myeloid cells, neuronal cells, natural killer T-cells, pericytes,
and smooth muscle cells. The gene expression data was then used to define cell type-
specific marker genes for each of these cell types. These marker genes were selected,
based on quantitative metrics indicating the specificity of the expression of a gene for a
given cell type. These metrics include the z-score of gene expression and the area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve.
Gene Expression Z-Score
One method for defining cell type-specific marker genes is based on the gene expression
profiles for each cell type. For each gene in a data set, the average expression among the
12 cell types is compared by calculating a z-score. The z-score is a statistic that indicates
if the gene is expressed more or less than average in a certain cell type, calculated by
zij = xij −µj
σj
,
(2.1)
where xij is the expression of the gene j in cell type i, µj is the average expression of gene
j among the 12 cell types, and σj is the standard deviation. A higher z-score indicates
that the gene is more specific for the given cell type. Cell type-specific marker genes are
defined based on a cut-off value of the z-score. As a default, genes with a z-score higher
than 3 are considered marker genes.
Receiver Operating Characteristic
Another method for defining marker genes is by building a classifier to distinguish between
two groups of cells by using the expression value of a gene. A receiver operating char-
acteristic (ROC) curve is the plot of the true positive rate against the false positive rate
for this classifier, and the area under the curve (AUC) is a measure of the how well this
classifier predicts the cell type. An AUC of 0 or 1 indicates that the gene can be used to
perfectly classify between the two groups of cells. An AUC of 0.5 implies that the classifier
has no predictive power. As a default, genes with an AUC higher than 0.7 are considered
marker genes.
6
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Normalized Marker Counting
Normalized Marker Counting (NMC) is a method that was recently described by Kahnert
et al. (under submission) [49] for evaluating similar tissue proteomics data. NMC is a
simple method for evaluating how many cell type-specific marker genes are found in a
specified set of proteins. The differential expression between two experimental groups
in a proteomics data set is used to determine two sets of proteins of interest, namely
the sets of significantly up- and down-regulated proteins. These two sets will be eval-
uated separately in this method. The markers are determined by one of the methods
described in section 2.1.1. In this method, the total amount of marker genes for all cell
types in the transcriptomics data set is counted (n_specific_genes_all). Next, the number
of cell-type specific markers is counted in the specified set of proteins that is being eval-
uated (n_specific_genes). Finally, this count is normalized by dividing n_specific_genes
by n_specific_genes_all, to get the normalized count of cell type-specific markers in the
set of interest (n_specific_genes_norm). This normalized marker count can be used to
evaluate if up- or down-regulated proteins are predominantly associated with specific cell
types.
2.3
Over-Representation Analysis
The Over-Representation Analysis (ORA) was originally described by Boyle et al. in 2004
[50] for evaluating transcriptomics data. Specifically, the aim of the analysis is to deter-
mine whether genes that share a common theme (e.g. genes involved in one biological
process, genes with a common molecular function, or genes found in the same cellular
component) would appear in a specified list of genes more frequently that would be ex-
pected by chance. The hypergeometric distribution is used do determine this probability,
given the ratio of those genes in the background distribution.
I adapted the approach of the ORA to evaluate tissue proteomics data. The differential
expression in a proteomics data set is used to determine the significantly up- and down-
regulated proteins. As in the NMC, these two sets will be evaluated separately. Also
similar to the NMC, sets of cell-type specific marker genes are determined as described
in section 2.1.1. Using one set of markers at a time, all genes in the intersection of the pro-
teomics and transcriptomics data sets are placed in a contingency table (Table 2.1), based
on if they are found in the list of the proteins of interest and if they are a cell type-specific
marker. The values in the table are used to do a Fisher’s exact test, which evaluates if
the two categorical variables are statistically independent. The p-value is calculated by
p = 1 −
k−1
∑
i=0
(M
i
)(N−M
n−i
)
(N
i
)
,
(2.2)
where N is the total number of genes in the data, M is the number of marker genes, n is
the number of proteins of interest, and k is number of marker genes in the set of proteins
of interest.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
7
==PAGE:12==
Table 2.1: Contingency table for an over-representation analysis.
Marker
Not
Total
Of interest
k
n-k
n
Not
M-k
N-M-n+k
N-n
Total
M
N-M
N
2.4
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
The Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was originally introduced by Subramanian et
al. in 2005 [51] and was intended to evaluate transcriptomics data and identify differences
between two groups of samples. In the GSEA, genes are ranked based on their differential
expression between the two groups. The aim of the analysis is to determine if a set of
genes tends to occur toward the top or bottom of this ranking, which would indicate that
the set correlates to the distinction between these groups.
I adjusted the GSEA to evaluate proteomics data sets. The steps in the algorithm re-
mained unchanged in essence, but the code was modified to accommodate both pro-
teomics and snRNA-seq data. The proteins in the proteomics data set are ranked based
on the difference in expression between two experimental groups. The cell-type specific
marker genes are again determined as described in section 2.1.1. The following algorithm
describes how the GSEA was executed.
1. The proteins in the proteomics data set are ranked using a metric that indicates the
differential expression between the two experimental groups, such as the logFC.
This results in ranked list of proteins (L) of length N.
2. For each cell type x in the snRNA-seq data a set of marker genes Sx of length kx
is defined. This set is compared to list L and it is noted where the genes fall in the
ranking.
3. An enrichment score (ESx) is calculated, reflecting the degree to which a set Sx is
over-represented at the extremes of list L. This score is calculated by walking down
L and calculating a running enrichment score (RESx). For each gene i in L, RESx
is increased or decreased, based on if gene i is in set Sx. Each increase in RESx is
weighted by the absolute value of the metric used to rank the protein list (wi). The
increases and decreases in RESx are normalized using the sum of the weight for
the increases (TWx = ∑N
i=1 wi) and the number of decreases, such that RESx(N)
is equal to zero. The calculation of RESx is given by:
RESx(i) =





0
if i = 0,
RESx(i −1) +
wi
TWx
if 1 ≤i ≤N and i ∈Sx,
RESx(i −1) −
1
N−kx
if 1 ≤i ≤N and i ̸∈Sx.
(2.3)
The enrichment score (ESx) is the maximum deviation from zero in RESx, such that
ESx = RESx(i∗), where i∗= arg max
i
|RESx(i)|.
(2.4)
The running enrichment score was visualised in Figure 2.1, where the point that the
enrichment score is reached was indicated by the red dashed lines.
8
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Visualisation of the running enrichment score (RESx(i)) in the GSEA, where the en-
richment score is the furthest deviation from zero, as indicated by the horizontal red dashed line.
4. The p-value is estimated using a permutation test, where 1,000 gene sets of length
kx are randomly generated. Enrichment scores are calculated for each random gene
set to form a null distribution (ESNULL,x). The p-value is the fraction of enrichment
scores in ESNULL,x that are more extreme than ESx. For a positive ESx, the positive
fraction of ESNULL,x is used for this calculation, and vice versa for a negative ESx.
An example of this is shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Histogram of an example background distribution (ESNULL,x) in the GSEA, where the
enrichment score is indicated by the red dashed line. The p-value is equal to the fraction of scores
to the left of the line, divided by the total number of scores lower than zero.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
9
==PAGE:14==
5. Since ESx depends on the size of gene set Sx, a normalized enrichment score
(NESx) is calculated by dividing ESx by the expected value of ESNULL,x. Again,
the positive fraction of ESNULL,x is used for a positive ESx and vice versa.
6. A set of leading edge genes is generated. These are the genes in Sx that appear
on the more extreme end of the ranked list L compared to the point where RESx
reaches its maximum deviation from zero (i.e. before a positive ESx or after a neg-
ative ESx). This subset of genes can be interpreted as the genes that contribute the
most to the enrichment. In figure 2.1, these are the marker genes that are ranked
to the right of the vertical dashed line.
2.5
Marker-Weighted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
I developed the Marker-Weighted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (MWGSEA) as an ex-
pansion of the GSEA. The algorithm remains largely the same, but a change in the RES
calculation (Step 3) is introduced. In the GSEA, every time a marker gene is encountered
in the ranked list L, the increase in the RES is weighted by the absolute value of the
ranking metric (wi). In the MWGSEA, this weight is multiplied with a second weight that
indicates the specificity of that marker gene (Wi). Since the marker genes in this thesis
are determined by a numeric metric (e.g. the z-score), this metric can be used to evalu-
ate specificity of the marker. Markers with a higher marker metric are more specific for
the cell type and should thus be weighted to have a stronger impact on the enrichment
score. This was not possible in the original GSEA, since the markers in a gene set are not
ranked as more or less specific. To maintain the normalization, TWx is now calculated by
∑N
i=1 wi × Wi. The running enrichment score is now calculated by:
RESx(i) =





0
if i = 0,
RESx(i −1) + wi×Wi
TWx
if 1 ≤i ≤N and i ∈Sx,
RESx(i −1) −
1
N−kx
if 1 ≤i ≤N and i ̸∈Sx.
(2.5)
Code for executing each of the four methods described can be found in Appendix B.
2.6
Multiple Hypothesis Testing
A p-value indicates the chance of the observed result occurring if the null hypothesis
were true. The false discovery rate (FDR) is the expected proportion of false rejections of
the null hypothesis out of all rejections. An adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing is
required for the ORA, GSEA, and MWGSEA, since they evaluate multiple cell types. The
Benjamini-Hochberg procedure [52] is used to control for the FDR and generate adjusted
p-values. The p-values for each cell type are ordered and ranked such that the smallest
p-value has a rank of 1. The adjusted p-values are calculated, starting at the largest p-
value, which will remain the same. Next, the second largest p-value will be adjusted to be
the smallest of two values: (1) the adjusted p-value of the next in the ranking, or (2) the
current p-value multiplied by the total number of p-values divided by the rank. Walking up
the ranked list, this procedure is repeated to generate an adjusted p-value for each of the
cell types.
10
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:15==
2.7
Cell Type Composition Data
One way that cell types can change in HF is that the cell type composition is effected.
Therefore it is valuable to evaluate the abundance of the different cell types in the samples.
The average abundance of the different cell types in the snRNA-seq data for the failing
and non-failing hearts was calculated, according to a paper by Petukhov et al. from 2022
[53], which accounts for the compositional nature of the samples.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
11
==PAGE:16==
3
Results
3.1
Method Development
3.1.1
Proteomics Data for Cardiomyocytes and Fibroblasts
To find the most appropriate method for inferring changes in cardiac cell types in heart
failure, the four methods described in section 2 were first evaluated on a simpler data set.
The Poulsen data set was published by Poulsen et al. in 2020 [54], in which the protein
expression profiles of isolated cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts in adult rats were com-
pared. The data set contains measurements of 6,454 proteins in 6 biological replicates
of isolated cardiomyocytes and 6 replicates of isolated cardiac fibroblasts. The genes
associated with the proteins were directly mapped to human genes, which allowed for the
intersection with human snRNA-seq data sets.
Figure 3.1 shows a summary of the Poulsen data set. The principle component analysis
(Fig. 3.1a) shows that cardiomyocyte and fibroblast samples separate well along princi-
ple component 1, which explains 55% of the variation in the data set. The volcano plot
(Fig. 3.1b) visualizes the differentially expressed proteins between the two experimental
groups, based on a FDR of 5% and a log2 fold change cut-off of 2. 1,066 (17%) proteins
are significantly more expressed in cardiomyocyte samples and 3,337 (52%) proteins are
significantly more expressed in fibroblast samples.
Figure 3.1: Summary of the Poulsen proteomics data set.
(a) Principle component analysis (PCA), separating samples from isolated cardiomyocytes (CM)
and isolated fibroblasts (FB). Each data point represents a sample and is colored by experimental
group. (b) Volcano plot showing the differential protein expression between isolated cardiomy-
ocytes and isolated fibroblasts. Each protein in the data set is shown on a scatter plot, where
the x-axis represents the fold change of expression between the two experimental groups and the
y-axis represents the statistical significance of the differential expression. Color is used to indicate
significantly up- (red) and down-regulated (blue) proteins, based on a false discovery rate of 5%
and a logFC cut-off of 2. Up-regulated proteins are more highly expressed in isolated cardiomy-
ocytes.
12
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:17==
3.1.2
Human Cardiac Single-Nucleus Transcriptomics Data
The Tucker data set was published by Tucker et al. in 2020 [55], in which single-nucleus
RNA sequencing data was collected from healthy human cardiac tissue samples, obtained
from 7 donors. The data set contains measurements of 29,456 genes in 287,269 nuclei.
To intersect the proteomics and transcriptomics data sets, only genes that were found in
both data sets were used in the analyses. This means that in intersecting the Poulsen
and Tucker data sets, 5,767 genes are used for the analyses (Fig. 3.2).
Figure 3.2: Comparison of proteins and genes in the Poulsen proteomics and Tucker
snRNA-seq data sets.
Venn diagram, where the overlapping circles depict the number of proteins in the Poulsen data
and the number of genes in the Tucker data.
Figure 3.3 shows a summary of the Tucker data set. Mapped cell types are visualised
on a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) plot to show their underlying
structure (Fig. 3.3a). The 12 cell types are plotted with different colors. The axes are
arbitrary and do not represent specific features of the data set. The heatmap (Fig. 3.3b)
shows the z-score of the RNA expression of 5,767 genes for the 12 cell types, where a
higher z-score indicates a gene being expressed more in a certain cell type. Finally, the
marker plot (Fig. 3.3c) shows that if marker genes are defined by a z-score higher than 3,
each cell type has between 5 (pericytes) and 263 (cardiomyocytes) marker genes, which
are each unique for one cell type.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
13
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.3: Summary of the Tucker snRNA-seq data set.
(a) Two-dimensional t-SNE visualization of cells in the data set. The data points are colored by
cell type. Plot generated by John Mulvey. (b) Heatmap illustrating RNA expression of 5,767 genes
across different cell types. The colors indicate the z-score for average gene expression, relative
to expression levels in the other cell types. (c) Marker plot, visualising the number of cell-type
specific marker genes identified in the data set. Marker genes were defined based on a z-score
cut-off of 3, indicating a relatively high expression level compared to other cell types. The plot
shows that there is no overlap of marker genes between different cell types.
14
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:19==
3.1.3
Normalized Marker Counting
The Poulsen proteomics data set was analysed with the NMC method, as described in
section 2.2, using the Tucker snRNA-seq data set to define cell type-specific markers (Fig.
3.4). For the proteins that were significantly more expressed in isolated cardiomyocytes,
the cardiomyocyte marker genes have a clearly higher normalized count (0.03) than the
marker genes for the other cell types (Fig. 3.4a). For the proteins that were significantly
more expressed in isolated fibroblasts, the difference between the sets cell type marker
genes is less clear (Fig. 3.4b). Myeloid markers have the highest normalized count (0.01),
followed by fibroblasts markers (0.004). Since NMC does not include a way of evaluating
significance, such as a p-value, there is no way of telling how much confidence one can
have in these results.
Figure 3.4: NMC of Poulsen proteomics data, with Tucker snRNA-seq data.
(a) Bar graph showing results of an normalized marker counting (NMC) performed on the proteins
in the Poulsen proteomics data that were significantly up-regulated in isolated cardiomyocytes
compared to fibroblasts. Marker genes were obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq data and de-
fined by a z-score larger than 3. The bars are ordered by n_specific_genes_norm. (b) Bar graph
showing results of an normalized marker counting (NMC) performed on the proteins in the Poulsen
proteomics data that were significantly up-regulated in isolated fibroblasts compared to cardiomy-
ocytes. Marker genes were obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq data and defined by a z-score
larger than 3. The bars are ordered by n_specific_genes_norm.
3.1.4
Over-Representation Analysis
To introduce a measure of statistical significance, the ORA, as described in section 2.3,
was used next to analyse the same data. In this method, a p-value can be calculated,
which addresses the problem of not being able to assess confidence levels in the NMC
method. Additionally, the normalized count of the marker genes is now replaced by a
measure of over-representation, that is equal to the number of cell-type specific marker
genes in the set of interest, divided by the number of cell-type specific markers genes in
the total filtered snRNA-seq data set. This has the added advantage that you can account
for the different number of marker genes that is available for each cell type. Furthermore,
only genes that are found in both the snRNA-seq and proteomics data sets are used in
the ORA.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
15
==PAGE:20==
The results of the ORA are shown in figure 3.5. For the proteins that were significantly
more expressed in isolated fibroblasts, no set of marker genes was significantly over-
represented in the data (Fig. 3.5a). Myeloid marker genes were found to be the most
significant (adj. p = 0.52). Fibroblasts markers were not found to be significant (adj. p =
1.00). For the proteins that were significantly more expressed in isolated cardiomyocytes,
the cardiomyocytes marker genes were significantly over-represented in the data (adj. p
< 0.001) (Fig. 3.5b).
Figure 3.5: ORA of Poulsen proteomics data, with Tucker snRNA-seq data.
(a) Bar graph showing results of an over-representation analysis (ORA) performed on the pro-
teins in the Poulsen proteomics data that were significantly up-regulated in isolated fibroblasts
compared to cardiomyocytes. Marker genes were obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq data and
defined by a z-score larger than 3. The bars are ordered and colored, based on their correspond-
ing p-value. (b) Bar graph showing results of an over-representation analysis (ORA) performed
on the proteins in the Poulsen proteomics data that were significantly up-regulated in isolated car-
diomyocytes compared to fibroblasts. Marker genes were obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq
data and defined by a z-score larger than 3. The bars are ordered and colored, based on their
corresponding p-value.
16
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:21==
3.1.5
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
The GSEA, as described in section 2.4, was used to analyse the data next. In comparison
to the NMC and the ORA, the GSEA does not require the selection of significantly up- and
down-regulated proteins. In this method, the genes are ranked according to the differential
expression in the proteomics data, which accommodates the analysis of up- and down-
regulated proteins together. It also means that there is no need for arbitrary cut-off values
to define up- and down-regulated genes.
The results of the GSEA are shown in figure 3.6. Figure 3.6a shows the normalized en-
richment score and significance level for each cell type in the data. Cardiomyocyte marker
genes were found to be significantly enriched in isolated cardiomyocytes (NES = 2.09, adj.
p < 0.001). In isolated fibroblasts, myeloid (NES = -1.49, adj. p < 0.001), fibroblast (NES
= -1.56, adj. p = 0.01), natural killer T cell (NES = -1.66, adj. p = 0.03), and endocar-
dial (NES = -1,43, adj. p = 0.04) marker genes were found to be significantly enriched.
The running enrichment score for the cardiomyocyte marker genes was visualised (Fig.
3.6b), along with the differential protein expression of the ranked protein list (Fig. 3.6d)
and the localization of the marker genes on that ranked list (Fig. 3.6f). Similar plots were
generated for the fibroblast marker genes (Fig. 3.6c, 3.6e, and 3.6g).
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.6: GSEA of Poulsen proteomics data, with Tucker snRNA-seq data.
(a) Bar graph showing results of a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) performed on the Poulsen
proteomics data, using marker genes obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq data. Markers were
defined by a z-score larger than 3. A positive normalized enrichment scores indicate the enrich-
ment of a set of cell type markers in isolated cardiomyocytes, compared to isolated fibroblasts.
The bars are ordered and colored, based on their corresponding p-value. (b) Line graph showing
the running enrichment score for the set of cardiomyocyte marker genes, where the x-axis rep-
resents the list of ranked proteins and the y-axis represents the running enrichment score. The
horizontal dashed red line indicates the enrichment score (ES = 0.72). (c) Line graph showing
the running enrichment score for the set of fibroblast marker genes, where the x-axis represents
the list of ranked proteins and the y-axis represents the running enrichment score. The horizontal
dashed red line indicates the enrichment score (ES = -0.41). (d) Bar graphs of differential pro-
tein expression in the data, where the x-axis represents the list of ranked proteins and the y-axis
represents the fold change of expression between the isolated cardiomyocytes (positive logFC)
and the fibroblasts (negative logFC). (e) Bar graphs of differential protein expression in the data,
where the x-axis represents the list of ranked proteins and the y-axis represents the fold change
of expression between the isolated cardiomyocytes (positive logFC) and the fibroblasts (negative
logFC). (f) Plot depicting where cardiomyocyte marker genes fall on the ranked protein list. (g)
Plot depicting where fibroblast marker genes fall on the ranked protein list.
==PAGE:23==
3.1.6
Marker-Weighted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
As described in section 2.5, the MWGSEA was developed as an expansion of the GSEA,
which allows the inclusion of a metric, indicating how specific a marker gene is. The results
of the MWGSEA are shown in figure 3.7. Figure 3.7a shows the normalized enrichment
score and significance level for each cell type in the data. Cardiomyocyte marker genes
were found to be significantly enriched in isolated cardiomyocytes (NES = 1.15, adj. p <
0.001) and no marker gene set were found to be significantly enriched in isolated fibrob-
lasts. The running enrichment score for the cardiomyocyte marker genes was visualised
(Fig. 3.7b), as well as the differential protein expression of the ranked gene list (Fig. 3.7d).
Figure 3.7f shows where the marker genes are localized on the ranked gene list and the
z-score of those markers, indicating how specific they are for cardiomyocytes. Similar
plots were generated for the fibroblast marker genes (Fig. 3.7c, 3.7e, and 3.7g).
The MWGSEA was chosen as the method to analyse the data further, because of the
aforementioned reasoning. Furthermore, it was chosen because the results did not in-
clude any false positives and provide the most clear and accurate reflection of the data
out of all the methods.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.7: MWGSEA of Poulsen proteomics data, with Tucker snRNA-seq data.
(a) Bar graph showing results of a marker-weighted gene set enrichment analysis (MWGSEA) per-
formed on the Poulsen proteomics data, using marker genes obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq
data. Markers were defined by a z-score larger than 3. A positive normalized enrichment scores
indicate the enrichment of a set of cell type markers in isolated cardiomyocytes, compared to iso-
lated fibroblasts. The bars are ordered and colored, based on their corresponding p-value. (b) Line
graph showing the running enrichment score for the set of cardiomyocyte marker genes, where
the x-axis represents the list of ranked proteins and the y-axis represents the running enrichment
score. The horizontal dashed red line indicates the enrichment score (ES = 0.72). (c) Line graph
showing the running enrichment score for the set of fibroblast marker genes, where the x-axis
represents the list of ranked proteins and the y-axis represents the running enrichment score. The
horizontal dashed red line indicates the enrichment score (ES = -0.41). (d) Bar graphs of differ-
ential protein expression in the data, where the x-axis represents the list of ranked proteins and
the y-axis represents the fold change of expression between the isolated cardiomyocytes (positive
logFC) and the fibroblasts (negative logFC). (e) Bar graphs of differential protein expression in the
data, where the x-axis represents the list of ranked proteins and the y-axis represents the fold
change of expression between the isolated cardiomyocytes (positive logFC) and the fibroblasts
(negative logFC). (f) Scatterplot, where the x-axis depicts where cardiomyocyte marker genes fall
on the ranked protein list, and the y-axis depicts the z-score of the marker gene, indicating the
relative expression level compared to other cell types. (g) Scatterplot, where the x-axis depicts
where fibroblast marker genes fall on the ranked protein list, and the y-axis depicts the z-score of
the marker gene, indicating the relative expression level compared to other cell types.
==PAGE:25==
3.1.7
Defining Cell Type-Specific Marker Genes
There are several metrics available to quantify the specificity of a marker gene, two of
which are describe in section 2.1.1. Above, the four methods were evaluated using mark-
ers that were defined based on a z-score higher than 3. To optimize the method, this
was compared to defining marker genes based on the ROC. Markers were defined based
on an AUC higher than 0.7 and the MWGSEA was used to analyse the data. Figure 3.8
shows the normalized enrichment score and significance level for each cell type in the
data. Cardiomyocyte marker genes were found to be significantly enriched in isolated
cardiomyocytes (NES = 3.13, adj. p < 0.001). In isolated fibroblasts, myeloid (NES =
-1.71, adj. p < 0.001), fibroblast (NES = -1.71, adj. p < 0.001), endocardial (NES = -1.68,
adj. p = 0.001), and endothelial (NES = -1.60, adj. p = 0.002) marker genes were found
to be significantly enriched. Compared to the results in Figure 3.7, there were more false
positives in this analysis. Thus, moving forward the markers will remain being defined
using the z-score.
Figure 3.8: MWGSEA of Poulsen proteomics data, with Tucker snRNA-seq data.
Bar graph showing results of a marker-weighted gene set enrichment analysis (MWGSEA) per-
formed on the Poulsen proteomics data, using marker genes obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq
data. Markers were defined by the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve being
larger than 0.7. A positive normalized enrichment score indicates the enrichment of a set of cell
type markers in isolated cardiomyocytes, compared to isolated fibroblasts. The bars are ordered
and colored, based on their corresponding p-value.
3.2
Analysis of Heart Failure Data
3.2.1
Proteomics Data Description
After the four methods were tested on a simpler data set, the HF data sets were analysed.
The HF proteomics data set was generated as described in Appendix A.1. Ventricular
tissue samples were collected from 9 hearts from HF patients and 7 donor hearts that
showed no signs of cardiac disease. The HF patient samples were primarily collected
from explanted hearts, but one sample was collected during a ventricular assist device
implantation. The data set contains measurements of 6,825 proteins. The clinical data of
the patients and donors is summarized in Table 3.1.
Figure 3.9 shows a summary of the HF proteomics data set. The principle component
analysis (Fig. 3.9a) shows that failing and non-failing cardiac tissue separates well along
principle component 1, which explains 20.8% of the variation in the data set. The vol-
cano plot (Fig. 3.9b) visualizes the differentially expressed proteins between the two ex-
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
21
==PAGE:26==
perimental groups, based on a FDR of 5%. 904 (13%) proteins are significantly more
expressed in HF samples and 1,098 (16%) proteins are significantly more expressed in
control samples.
Table 3.1: Clinical data of patients and donors in heart failure data sets. Abbreviations: HF =
heart failure, N = number of subjects, BMI = body mass index, LV = left ventricle.
Characteristic
Control1
HF1
p-value
N
7
9
>0.92
Sex
>0.9 3
Female
3(43%)
4 (44%)
Male
4(57%)
5(56%)
BMI
30.2 (28.9, 31.2)
24.6 (23.0, 26.5)
0.025* 4
Unknown
1
0
Ejection fraction (% )
55 (45, 55)
20 (19, 20)
0.002** 4
Unknown
1
0
LV internal diameter diastole (cm)
4.20 (4.10, 4.20)
6.00 (5.40, 6.60)
0.008** 4
Unknown
2
0
LV internal diameter systole (cm)
3.00 (2.90, 3.40)
5.70 (4.60, 6.20)
0.002** 2
Unknown
2
0
Prescribed HF medication
2 (29 %)
9 (100 %)
0.005** 3
1Median (IQR); n(%)
2Wilcoxon rank sum exact test
3Fisher’s exact test
4Wilcoxon rank sum test
Figure 3.9: Summary of the heart failure proteomics data set.
(a) Principle component analysis (PCA), separating samples from failing (HF) and non-failing
hearts (Cntrl). Each data point represents a sample and is colored by experimental group. (b)
Volcano plot showing the differential protein expression between heart failure (HF) and control
samples (Cntrl). Each protein in the data set is shown on a scatter plot, where the x-axis represents
the fold change of expression between the two experimental groups and the y-axis represents the
statistical significance of the differential expression. Color is used to indicate significantly up- (red)
and down-regulated (blue) proteins, based on a false discovery rate of 5%.
22
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:27==
3.2.2
Single-Nucleus Transcriptomics Data Description
The HF single-nucleus transcriptomics data set was generated from the same samples
as in the HF proteomics data set, as described in Appendix A.2. The data set contains
measurements of 22,587 genes. After intersecting with the HF proteomics data set, 6,206
genes remain in the data set.
Figure 3.11 shows a summary of the HF transcriptomics data set. Mapped cell types are
visualised on a t-SNE (Fig. 3.11a) to show the underlying structure of the 12 cell types in
the data. The heatmap (Fig. 3.11b) shows the z-score of the RNA expression of 6,206
genes for the 12 cell type. The marker plot (Fig. 3.11c) shows that if marker genes are
defined by a z-score higher than 3, each cell type has between 7 (natural killer T-cells and
smooth muscle cells) and 388 (cardiomyocytes) marker genes, which are each unique
for one cell type. The size and distribution of the marker genes in the HF transcriptomics
data set is comparable to that of the Tucker data set, but the markers that are found for
each cell type are not identical, as is illustrated for cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts in figure
3.10.
Figure 3.10: Comparison of cardiomyocyte and fibroblast marker genes in the Tucker and
heart failure (HF) snRNA-seq data sets.
Marker genes were defined based on a z-score cut-off of 3, indicating a relatively high expression
level in the given cell type, compared to other cell types. (a) Venn diagram, where the overlapping
circles depict the number of cardiomyocyte-specific marker genes in the two data set. (b) Venn
diagram, where the overlapping circles depict the number of fibroblast-specific marker genes in
the two data set.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.11: Summary of the heart failure snRNA-seq data set.
(a) Two-dimensional t-SNE visualization of cells in the data set. The data points are colored by
cell type. Plot generated by John Mulvey. (b) Heatmap illustrating RNA expression of 6,206 genes
across different cell types. The colors indicate the z-score for average gene expression, relative
to expression levels in the other cell types. (c) Marker plot, visualising the number of cell-type
specific marker genes identified in the data set. Marker genes were defined based on a z-score
cut-off of 3, indicating a relatively high expression level compared to other cell types. The plot
shows that there is no overlap of marker genes between different cell types.
24
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:29==
3.2.3
Results
The MWGSEA was used to analyse the HF proteomics data with both the Tucker data
(Fig. 3.12) and the HF snRNA-seq data (Fig. 3.13). The results for both analyses are
comparable in that no set of cell type-specific markers was found to be significantly en-
riched in the HF proteomics data set. In the analysis with the Tucker data set, the cell
types with the lowest p-values were endocardial cells (NES = 1.35, adj. p = 0.40), car-
diomyocytes (NES = -1.10, adj. p = 0.40), and B-cells (NES = 1.34, adj. p = 0.40). In the
analysis with the HF snRNA-seq data set, they were B-cells (NES = 1.48, adj. p = 0.27),
followed by myeloid cells (NES = 1.15, adj. p = 0.54), endothelial cells (NES = -1.20,
adj. p = 0.54), endocardial cells (NES = 1.25, adj. p = 0.54), and cardiomyocytes (NES =
-1.07, adj. p = 0.54).
Figure 3.12: MWGSEA of heart failure proteomics data, with Tucker snRNA-seq data.
Bar graph showing results of a marker-weighted gene set enrichment analysis (MWGSEA) per-
formed on heart failure proteomics data, using marker genes obtained from the Tucker snRNA-seq
data. Markers were defined by a z-score larger than 3. A positive normalized enrichment score
indicates the enrichment of a set of cell type markers in failing hearts, compared to non-failing
hearts. The bars are ordered and colored, based on their corresponding p-value.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
25
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.13: MWGSEA of heart failure proteomics data, with heart failure snRNA-seq data.
Bar graph showing results of a marker-weighted gene set enrichment analysis (MWGSEA) per-
formed on heart failure proteomics data, using marker genes obtained from the heart failure
snRNA-seq data. Markers were defined by a z-score larger than 3. A positive normalized en-
richment score indicates the enrichment of a set of cell type markers in failing hearts, compared
to non-failing hearts. The bars are ordered and colored, based on their corresponding p-value.
3.2.4
Comparison to Cell Type Composition Data
As stated in section 2.7, changes in cell type composition are one explanation for cell
type changes in HF. Hence, the results of the MWGSEA were compared to the cell type
composition data. The cell type composition data was shown in figure 3.14a, where the
average loading indicates if a cell type is more or less abundant in HF samples, com-
pared to control samples. In order to compare these data to the MWGSEA results, the
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (rho) was used to assess how well the normalized
enrichment score can be used to predict the quantitative abundance of cell types in the
data. The results of the MWGSEA with the HF snRNA-seq data set was poorly correlated
with the cell type composition data (rho = 0.17, p = 0.59) (Fig. 3.14b). The correlation with
the analysis the Tucker data set was less correlated (rho = -0.05, p = 0.89) (Fig. 3.14c).
26
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.14: Comparison of MWGSEA results to cell type composition data.
(a) Bar graph, illustrating changes cell type abundance between failing and non-failing hearts.
Positive average loading indicates a higher abundance of the cell type in failing hearts compared
to non-failing hearts. The bars are ordered and colored, based on their corresponding p-value.
(b) Scatter plot, where the x-axis represents the average loading in the cell type composition data
and the y-axis represents the normalized enrichment score in the MWGSEA results, obtained from
analysing the heart failure proteomics data and the heart failure snRNA-seq data. The data points
are colored by cell type. The Spearman correlation between the two variables was 0.17 (p = 0.59).
(c) Scatter plot, where the x-axis represents the average loading in the cell type composition data
and the y-axis represents the normalized enrichment score in the MWGSEA results, obtained from
analysing the heart failure proteomics data and the Tucker snRNA-seq data. The data points are
colored by cell type. The Spearman correlation between the two variables was -0.05 (p = 0.89).
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
27
==PAGE:32==
4
Discussion
The aim of this thesis was to evaluate if it would be possible to infer information on cell
type changes in HF from quantitative tissue proteomics data, integrated with cell type
resolved transcriptomics data. Four methods were used to intersect proteomics data with
single-nucleus transcriptomics data and gain insight into the cell types. First, the NMC
was used to evaluate the data. This method provides a normalized count of the amount of
cell type-specific marker genes in a specified set. However, this method lacks a measure
of statistical significance. Next, the ORA was conducted and a p-value was introduced,
allowing the assessment of statistical significance. Furthermore, the normalization of the
marker genes in the specified set was changed, so it takes into account that different cell
types have different numbers of marker genes. The new normalization also considers
that not all marker genes that are found in the transcriptomics data set are present in
the proteomics data. A downside of the ORA is that up- and down-regulated proteins
cannot be assessed simultaneously. In the GSEA, the proteins are ranked based on their
differential expression between experimental groups, instead of defining sets of up- and
down-regulated proteins. This means that there is no need for an arbitrary cut-off value to
define these sets. It also means that there is more statistical power behind this analysis,
since all data are considered at once. Finally, the MWGSEA was introduced as a new
method in this thesis. The MWGSEA is similar to the GSEA, but places more importance
on marker genes that are more specific for a cell type. This can be done in the context
of this research, since marker genes are determined based on a numeric value, such as
the z-score or the area under the ROC curve.
One of the benefits of all four techniques is that the transcriptomics data can be generated
from the same samples that were used for the proteomics data, or a published reference
data set can be used. The benefit of using a reference data set is that it reduced the
experimental work load for a project. It also can be beneficial when comparing results of
multiple proteomics experiments to consistently use the same reference data. However,
a disadvantage of using a reference data set such at the Tucker data set is that they often
only include samples from healthy patients. This could mean that disease-specific genes
are not detected in those samples and will not be considered in the analysis.
When evaluating the heart failure proteomics data with the MWGSEA, no cell types were
found to be significantly enriched. However, the results may still be valuable for future
research, as a set of leading edge genes was generated for each cell type. These are the
marker genes that contributed most the the enrichment scores and may be of interest for
further investigations. For instance, the first leading edge gene that was identified for car-
diomyocytes when analysing the HF proteomics and snRNA-seq data was alpha kinase
2 (ALPK2). This means that ALPK2 was highly expressed in cardiomyocytes compared
to other cell types. Additionally, ALPK2 had the greatest fold change increase in expres-
sion in tissue from failing hearts compared to non-failing hearts among all cardiomyocyte
markers. Thus, this is a compelling argument for investigating the role of ALPK2 in the
heart and heart failure. Current knowledge regarding cardiac ALPK2 is limited. Whilst one
study in zebra fish and human stem cells has found ALPK2 to be important for cardiac
function and cardiomyocyte differentiation [56], a second study failed to replicate these
findings in a mouse model [57]. Further investigation into the function of ALPK2 in heart
failure is necessary to get a good understanding of its role in the disease.
28
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:33==
One of the major challenges in writing this thesis involved evaluating the results of each
method. To address this challenge, a relatively simple data set was used, in which two ex-
perimental groups were compared that aimed to isolate one cell type. However, it should
be noted that the Poulsen data was generated with a relatively large chance that the sam-
ples were contaminated. In order to evaluate the results in a simple and understandable
manner, the assumption was made that the isolated cell populations were pure, but that
likelihood is small. Therefore, it would be immensely valuable to evaluate each method
in the thesis with a new data set comprising purified cell types. These cell types can
be mixed in different known proportions to test the accuracy of the methods for cellular
deconvolution. This would improve the reliability and confidence of the results.
Due to the small number of samples available in the HF data, the null distribution for the
enrichment scores in the GSEA and MWGSEA was generated by gene set permutation.
That is to say that random gene sets were generated to compare a set of marker genes
to. A consequence of this technique is that gene-to-gene correlations in the data will not
be preserved when calculating a p-value. An alternative method that leaves the integrity
of the data more intact is phenotype permutation, where the sample labels are rearranged
to calculate the null distribution [51]. Because this requires a large number of samples it
may not be relevant to most proteomics data sets. However, in a similar project where
enough samples are available, this alternative method should be taken into consideration.
In this projects, cell types were clustered at a relatively low level, resulting in the annotation
of only 12 major cell types. While this approach provided a broad overview of the cardiac
cellular landscape, a more fine-grained approach may reveal insights into cell sub-types
and potentially uncover more subtle variations in the data set. By clustering on a low level,
changes in some cell sub-types can become undetectable and can be overlooked in anal-
yses. For example, it is possible that there would be no significant changes detected in
the broader cardiomyocyte population, even when different cardiomyocyte sub-types may
be changing. Therefore, it would be valuable to explore how different levels of granularity
affect the results of the analyses in this paper.
Moreover, the methods for defining cell type markers can be further optimized in the fu-
ture. In this thesis, I employed z-scores that reflected the average expression of a gene
within a specific cell type. However, it is crucial to acknowledge the variability in gene
expression that can exist within a single cell type. In the case where a gene exhibits high
expression levels in only a fraction of the cells measured, the average expression may
appear substantially high, but it may not represent the majority of cells of that type. In-
vestigating alternative approaches to defining cell type markers would be beneficial. The
thesis briefly touched on this subject by including the area under the ROC curve, but
more methods should be considered in the future. In addition, the method of incorpo-
rating marker weights in the MWGSEA should be further explored. The current method
incorporates the weight by using the absolute value of a metric that measures the marker
specificity, but variations on this method were not explored further. Alternative methods
of transforming the weight are relevant to explore, to optimize the accuracy or sensitivity
of the MWGSEA.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
29
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Future Perspectives
One of the core drawbacks of the methods used in this thesis is that they all rely on the
intersection of proteomics and transcriptomics data. In essence, proteins are mapped
onto genes, to allow the comparison between tissue protein expression and single cell
RNA expression. The problem with this technique is the imperfect correlation between
RNA and protein expression, as mentioned in section 1.3. One way of addressing this
issue in future research is to incorporate a metric into the analyses that takes into account
the correlation between the expression of a certain gene and protein. This would require
a reference data base that measures the protein and RNA expression in the tissue that is
being researched, such as the one published by Wang et al. in 2019 [58].
Cellular deconvolution techniques are used to estimate cell type composition in tissue
samples. In this thesis, a reference-based method was used, where reference gene ex-
pression profiles for each cell type were generated from RNA sequencing data. For fu-
ture research, it may be valuable to further explore reference free methods, such as the
CIBERSORTx tool [59]. This tool was originally developed for the deconvolution of bulk
transcriptomics data, but has been used in the analysis of proteomics data in COVID19
[60], glioblastoma [61], and gastric cancer [62] research, among others. Reference free
methods have the benefit that they do not rely on intersecting proteomics with transcrip-
tomics data sets, addressing the correlation problem.
Finally, the development of an established single-cell proteomics technique would be in-
credibly valuable in gaining insight into protein changes on a cellular level. Whilst single-
cell proteomics is technically possible, it is not yet at a stage where the accuracy and
reproducibility of the results are good enough to establish a dominant, reliable technique
[63]. However, this area of research is under rapid development and will likely be available
in the future [64, 65, 66, 11].
30
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:35==
Abbreviations
AUC
area under the curve.
FDR
false discovery rate.
GSEA
gene set enrichment analysis.
HF
heart failure.
MWGSEA
marker-weighted gene set enrichment analysis.
NMC
normalized marker counting.
ORA
over-representation analysis.
ROC
receiver operating characteristic.
snRNA-seq
single-nucleus RNA sequencing.
t-SNE
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
31
==PAGE:36==
Bibliography
[1] C. D. Kemp and J. V. Conte, “The pathophysiology of heart failure,” Cardiovascular
Pathology, vol. 21, pp. 365–371, 9 2012.
[2] B. Bozkurt, A. J. Coats, H. Tsutsui, C. M. Abdelhamid, S. Adamopoulos, N. Albert,
S. D. Anker, J. Atherton, M. Böhm, J. Butler, M. H. Drazner, G. Michael Felker, G. Fil-
ippatos, M. Fiuzat, G. C. Fonarow, J. Gomez￿Mesa, P. Heidenreich, T. Imamura,
E. A. Jankowska, J. Januzzi, P. Khazanie, K. Kinugawa, C. S. Lam, Y. Matsue,
M. Metra, T. Ohtani, M. Francesco Piepoli, P. Ponikowski, G. M. Rosano, Y. Sakata,
P. Seferović, R. C. Starling, J. R. Teerlink, O. Vardeny, K. Yamamoto, C. Yancy,
J. Zhang, and S. Zieroth, “Universal definition and classification of heart failure: a
report of the Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the Eu-
ropean Society of Cardiology, Japanese Heart Failure Society and Writing Commit-
tee of the Universal Definition of Heart Failure,” European Journal of Heart Failure,
vol. 23, pp. 352–380, 3 2021.
[3] R. H. Schwinger, “Pathophysiology of heart failure,” Cardiovascular Diagnosis and
Therapy, vol. 11, p. 263, 2 2021.
[4] A. Groenewegen, F. H. Rutten, A. Mosterd, and A. W. Hoes, “Epidemiology of heart
failure,” European Journal of Heart Failure, vol. 22, pp. 1342–1356, 8 2020.
[5] S. Emmons-Bell, C. Johnson, and G. Roth, “Prevalence, incidence and survival of
heart failure: a systematic review,” Heart, vol. 108, pp. 1351–1360, 9 2022.
[6] T. L. Norris, “Disorders of Cardiac Function, and Heart Failure, and Circulatory
Shock,” in Porth’s Essentials of Pathophysiology, Wolters Kluwer, 5 ed., 2020.
[7] D. Strassheim, E. C. Dempsey, E. Gerasimovskaya, K. Stenmark, and V. Karoor,
“Role of inflammatory cell subtypes in heart failure,” Journal of Immunology Re-
search, vol. 2019, 2019.
[8] S. Besse, S. Nadaud, E. Balse, and C. Pavoine, “Early Protective Role of Inflam-
mation in Cardiac Remodeling and Heart Failure: Focus on TNFα and Resident
Macrophages,” Cells, vol. 11, 4 2022.
[9] P. A. Heidenreich, B. Bozkurt, D. Aguilar, L. A. Allen, J. J. Byun, M. M. Colvin,
A. Deswal, M. H. Drazner, S. M. Dunlay, L. R. Evers, J. C. Fang, S. E. Fedson, G. C.
Fonarow, S. S. Hayek, A. F. Hernandez, P. Khazanie, M. M. Kittleson, C. S. Lee,
M. S. Link, C. A. Milano, L. C. Nnacheta, A. T. Sandhu, L. W. Stevenson, O. Vardeny,
A. R. Vest, and C. W. Yancy, “2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management
of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines,” Circulation, vol. 145,
5 2022.
[10] J. G. Meyer, “Qualitative and Quantitative Shotgun Proteomics Data Analysis from
Data-Dependent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry,” pp. 297–308, Humana, New York,
NY, 2021.
[11] L. F. Vistain and S. Tay, “Single-Cell Proteomics,” Trends in Biochemical Sciences,
vol. 46, pp. 661–672, 8 2021.
32
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:37==
[12] F. Edfors, F. Danielsson, B. M. Hallström, L. Käll, E. Lundberg, F. Pontén,
B. Forsström, and M. Uhlén, “Gene￿specific correlation of <scp>RNA</scp> and
protein levels in human cells and tissues,” Molecular Systems Biology, vol. 12, 10
2016.
[13] M. Litviňuková, C. Talavera-López, H. Maatz, D. Reichart, C. L. Worth, E. L. Lindberg,
M. Kanda, K. Polanski, M. Heinig, M. Lee, E. R. Nadelmann, K. Roberts, L. Tuck,
E. S. Fasouli, D. M. DeLaughter, B. McDonough, H. Wakimoto, J. M. Gorham,
S. Samari, K. T. Mahbubani, K. Saeb-Parsy, G. Patone, J. J. Boyle, H. Zhang,
H. Zhang, A. Viveiros, G. Y. Oudit, O. A. Bayraktar, J. G. Seidman, C. E. Seid-
man, M. Noseda, N. Hubner, and S. A. Teichmann, “Cells of the adult human heart,”
Nature 2020 588:7838, vol. 588, pp. 466–472, 9 2020.
[14] J. D. Hocker, O. B. Poirion, F. Zhu, J. Buchanan, K. Zhang, J. Chiou, T.-M. Wang,
Q. Zhang, X. Hou, Y. E. Li, Y. Zhang, E. N. Farah, A. Wang, A. D. McCulloch, K. J.
Gaulton, B. Ren, N. C. Chi, and S. Preissl, “Cardiac cell type–specific gene regulatory
programs and disease risk association,” Science Advances, vol. 7, 5 2021.
[15] A. L. Koenig, I. Shchukina, J. Amrute, P. S. Andhey, K. Zaitsev, L. Lai, G. Bajpai,
A. Bredemeyer, G. Smith, C. Jones, E. Terrebonne, S. L. Rentschler, M. N. Artyomov,
and K. J. Lavine, “Single-cell transcriptomics reveals cell-type-specific diversification
in human heart failure,” Nature cardiovascular research, vol. 1, pp. 263–280, 3 2022.
[16] S. Lab, “Azimuth Reference - Human Heart,” 8 2022.
[17] A. Saraste, K. Pulkki, M. Kallajoki, P. Heikkilä, P. Laine, S. Mattila, M. S. Nieminen,
M. Parvinen, and L. M. Voipio-Pulkki, “Cardiomyocyte apoptosis and progression of
heart failure to transplantation,” European Journal of Clinical Investigation, vol. 29,
pp. 380–386, 5 1999.
[18] C. A. Beltrami, N. Finato, M. Rocco, G. A. Feruglio, C. Puricelli, E. Cigola, F. Quaini,
E. H. Sonnenblick, G. Olivetti, and P. Anversa, “Structural basis of end-stage failure
in ischemic cardiomyopathy in humans.,” Circulation, vol. 89, pp. 151–63, 1 1994.
[19] J. Schaper, R. Froede, S. Hein, A. Buck, H. Hashizume, B. Speiser, A. Friedl, and
N. Bleese, “Impairment of the myocardial ultrastructure and changes of the cytoskele-
ton in dilated cardiomyopathy.,” Circulation, vol. 83, pp. 504–14, 2 1991.
[20] A. M. Gerdes, “Cardiac myocyte remodeling in hypertrophy and progression to fail-
ure,” Journal of Cardiac Failure, vol. 8, pp. S264–S268, 12 2002.
[21] A. Zafeiridis, V. Jeevanandam, S. R. Houser, and K. B. Margulies, “Regression
of Cellular Hypertrophy After Left Ventricular Assist Device Support,” Circulation,
vol. 98, pp. 656–662, 8 1998.
[22] A. M. Gerdes, S. E. Kellerman, J. A. Moore, K. E. Muffly, L. C. Clark, P. Y. Reaves,
K. B. Malec, P. P. McKeown, and D. D. Schocken, “Structural remodeling of car-
diac myocytes in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.,” Circulation, vol. 86, no. 2,
pp. 426–430, 1992.
[23] L. Wang, P. Yu, B. Zhou, J. Song, Z. Li, M. Zhang, G. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Chen, L. Han,
and S. Hu, “Single-cell reconstruction of the adult human heart during heart failure
and recovery reveals the cellular landscape underlying cardiac function,” Nature cell
biology, vol. 22, pp. 108–119, 1 2020.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
33
==PAGE:38==
[24] S. Nomura, M. Satoh, T. Fujita, T. Higo, T. Sumida, T. Ko, T. Yamaguchi, T. Tobita,
A. T. Naito, M. Ito, K. Fujita, M. Harada, H. Toko, Y. Kobayashi, K. Ito, E. Takimoto,
H. Akazawa, H. Morita, H. Aburatani, and I. Komuro, “Cardiomyocyte gene programs
encoding morphological and functional signatures in cardiac hypertrophy and failure,”
Nature Communications, vol. 9, p. 4435, 10 2018.
[25] A. R. Lyon, K. T. MacLeod, Y. Zhang, E. Garcia, G. K. Kanda, M. J. Lab, Y. E.
Korchev, S. E. Harding, and J. Gorelik, “Loss of T-tubules and other changes to sur-
face topography in ventricular myocytes from failing human and rat heart,” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 106,
pp. 6854–6859, 4 2009.
[26] W. E. Louch, V. Bito, F. R. Heinzel, R. Macianskiene, J. Vanhaecke, W. Flameng,
K. Mubagwa, and K. R. Sipido, “Reduced synchrony of Ca2+ release with loss of
T-tubules-a comparison to Ca2+ release in human failing cardiomyocytes.,” Cardio-
vascular research, vol. 62, pp. 63–73, 4 2004.
[27] D. J. Crossman, P. R. Ruygrok, C. Soeller, and M. B. Cannell, “Changes in the or-
ganization of excitation-contraction coupling structures in failing human heart,” PloS
one, vol. 6, no. 3, 2011.
[28] R. C. Balijepalli and T. J. Kamp, “Caveolae, ion channels and cardiac arrhythmias,”
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, vol. 98, pp. 149–160, 10 2008.
[29] A. Ortega, E. Tarazón, C. Gil-Cayuela, M. García-Manzanares, L. Martínez-Dolz,
F. Lago, J. R. González-Juanatey, J. Cinca, E. Jorge, M. Portolés, E. Roselló-Lletí,
and M. Rivera, “Intercalated disc in failing hearts from patients with dilated car-
diomyopathy: Its role in the depressed left ventricular function,” PLOS ONE, vol. 12,
p. e0185062, 9 2017.
[30] C. A. Souders, S. L. Bowers, and T. A. Baudino, “Cardiac Fibroblast,” Circulation
Research, vol. 105, pp. 1164–1176, 12 2009.
[31] N. G. Frangogiannis,
“Cardiac fibrosis,”
Cardiovascular Research,
vol. 117,
pp. 1450–1488, 5 2021.
[32] P. Camelliti, T. K. Borg, and P. Kohl, “Structural and functional characterisation of
cardiac fibroblasts,” Cardiovascular Research, vol. 65, pp. 40–51, 1 2005.
[33] L. A. Murtha, M. J. Schuliga, N. S. Mabotuwana, S. A. Hardy, D. W. Waters, J. K.
Burgess, D. A. Knight, and A. J. Boyle, “The Processes and Mechanisms of Cardiac
and Pulmonary Fibrosis,” Frontiers in Physiology, vol. 8, p. 777, 10 2017.
[34] J. G. Travers, F. A. Kamal, J. Robbins, K. E. Yutzey, and B. C. Blaxall, “Cardiac
Fibrosis: The Fibroblast Awakens,” Circulation research, vol. 118, pp. 1021–1040, 3
2016.
[35] J. C. Bachmann, S. J. Baumgart, A. K. Uryga, M. H. Bosteen, G. Borghetti, M. Ny-
berg, and K. M. Herum, “Fibrotic Signaling in Cardiac Fibroblasts and Vascular
Smooth Muscle Cells: The Dual Roles of Fibrosis in HFpEF and CAD,” Cells, vol. 11,
5 2022.
[36] E. A. Rog-Zielinska, R. A. Norris, P. Kohl, and R. Markwald, “The Living Scar –
Cardiac Fibroblasts and the Injured Heart,” Trends in Molecular Medicine, vol. 22,
pp. 99–114, 2 2016.
34
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:39==
[37] G. Gray, I. Toor, R. Castellan, M. Crisan, and M. Meloni, “Resident cells of the my-
ocardium: more than spectators in cardiac injury, repair and regeneration,” Current
Opinion in Physiology, vol. 1, pp. 46–51, 2 2018.
[38] J. U. Wagner and S. Dimmeler, “The endothelial niche in heart failure: from devel-
opment to regeneration,” European Heart Journal, vol. 42, pp. 4277–4279, 11 2021.
[39] V. F. M. Segers, D. L. Brutsaert, and G. W. De Keulenaer, “Cardiac Remodeling:
Endothelial Cells Have More to Say Than Just NO,” Frontiers in Physiology, vol. 9,
p. 382, 4 2018.
[40] A. E. Berezin and A. A. Berezin, “Extracellular Endothelial Cell-Derived Vesicles:
Emerging Role in Cardiac and Vascular Remodeling in Heart Failure,” Frontiers in
cardiovascular medicine, vol. 7, 4 2020.
[41] S. D. Katz, L. Biasucci, C. Sabba, J. A. Strom, G. Jondeau, M. Galvao, S. Solomon,
S. D. Nikolic, R. Forman, and T. H. LeJemtel, “Impaired endothelium-mediated va-
sodilation in the peripheral vasculature of patients with congestive heart failure,” Jour-
nal of the American College of Cardiology, vol. 19, pp. 918–925, 4 1992.
[42] S. H. Kubo, T. S. Rector, A. J. Bank, R. E. Williams, and S. M. Heifetz, “Endothelium-
dependent vasodilation is attenuated in patients with heart failure.,” Circulation,
vol. 84, pp. 1589–1596, 10 1991.
[43] C. B. Treasure, J. A. Vita, D. A. Cox, R. D. Fish, J. B. Gordon, G. H. Mudge, W. S.
Colucci, M. G. Sutton, A. P. Selwyn, and R. W. Alexander, “Endothelium-dependent
dilation of the coronary microvasculature is impaired in dilated cardiomyopathy.,” Cir-
culation, vol. 81, pp. 772–779, 3 1990.
[44] D. Fischer, S. Rossa, U. Landmesser, S. Spiekermann, N. Engberding, B. Hornig,
and H. Drexler, “Endothelial dysfunction in patients with chronic heart failure is inde-
pendently associated with increased incidence of hospitalization, cardiac transplan-
tation, or death,” European Heart Journal, vol. 26, pp. 65–69, 1 2005.
[45] S. D. Katz, K. Hryniewicz, I. Hriljac, K. Balidemaj, C. Dimayuga, A. Hudaihed, and
A. Yasskiy, “Vascular Endothelial Dysfunction and Mortality Risk in Patients With
Chronic Heart Failure,” Circulation, vol. 111, pp. 310–314, 1 2005.
[46] K. Fujiu and R. Nagai, “Contributions of cardiomyocyte-cardiac fibroblast-immune
cell interactions in heart failure development,” Basic research in cardiology, vol. 108,
7 2013.
[47] W. Cheng, X. Li, D. Liu, C. Cui, and X. Wang, “Endothelial-to-Mesenchymal Transi-
tion: Role in Cardiac Fibrosis,” Journal of Cardiovascular Pharmacology and Thera-
peutics, vol. 26, pp. 3–11, 1 2021.
[48] C. A. Blair, P. Haynes, S. G. Campbell, C. Chung, M. I. Mitov, D. Dennis, M. R.
Bonnell, C. W. Hoopes, M. Guglin, and K. S. Campbell, “A Protocol for Collecting
Human Cardiac Tissue for Research.,” The VAD journal : the journal of mechanical
assisted circulation and heart failure, vol. 2, no. 1, 2016.
[49] K. Kahnert, L. Soattin, R. W. Mills, C. Wilson, S. Maurya, A. Sorrentino, Y. J. Van de
Vegte, F. B. Hansen, J. Achter, W. Hu, M. Zi, M. Smith, P. Van der Harst, M. S. Ole-
sen, K. B. Olsen, J. Banner, T. H. Jensen, H. Zhang, M. R. Boyett, A. D’Souza, and
A. Lundby, “Proteomics Couples Electrical Remodeling to Inflammation in a Murine
Model of Heart Failure with Sinus Node Dysfunction.”.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
35
==PAGE:40==
[50] E. I. Boyle, S. Weng, J. Gollub, H. Jin, D. Botstein, J. M. Cherry, and G. Sher-
lock, “GO::TermFinder—open source software for accessing Gene Ontology infor-
mation and finding significantly enriched Gene Ontology terms associated with a list
of genes,” Bioinformatics, vol. 20, pp. 3710–3715, 12 2004.
[51] A. Subramanian, P. Tamayo, V. K. Mootha, S. Mukherjee, B. L. Ebert, M. A. Gillette,
A. Paulovich, S. L. Pomeroy, T. R. Golub, E. S. Lander, and J. P. Mesirov, “Gene set
enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide
expression profiles,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 102,
pp. 15545–15550, 10 2005.
[52] W. Haynes, “Benjamini–Hochberg Method,” in Encyclopedia of Systems Biology,
pp. 78–78, New York, NY: Springer New York, 2013.
[53] V. Petukhov, A. Igolkina, R. Rydbirk, S. Mei, L. Christoffersen, K. Khodosevich, and
P. V. Kharchenko, “Case-control analysis of single-cell RNA-seq studies,” bioRxiv,
p. 2022.03.15.484475, 3 2022.
[54] P. Poulsen, M. Schrölkamp, N. Bagwan, U. Leurs, E. Humphries, S. Bomholzt,
M. Nielsen, B. Bentzen, J. Olsen, and A. Lundby, “Quantitative proteomics character-
ization of acutely isolated primary adult rat cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts,” Journal
of molecular and cellular cardiology, vol. 143, 2020.
[55] N. R. Tucker, M. Chaffin, S. J. Fleming, A. W. Hall, V. A. Parsons, K. C. Bedi, A. D.
Akkad, C. N. Herndon, A. Arduini, I. Papangeli, C. Roselli, F. Aguet, S. H. Choi, K. G.
Ardlie, M. Babadi, K. B. Margulies, C. M. Stegmann, and P. T. Ellinor, “Transcriptional
and Cellular Diversity of the Human Heart,” Circulation, vol. 142, pp. 466–482, 8
2020.
[56] P. Hofsteen, A. M. Robitaille, N. Strash, N. Palpant, R. T. Moon, L. Pabon, and C. E.
Murry, “ALPK2 Promotes Cardiogenesis in Zebrafish and Human Pluripotent Stem
Cells,” iScience, vol. 2, p. 88, 4 2018.
[57] J. Bogomolovas, W. Feng, M. D. Yu, S. Huang, L. Zhang, C. Trexler, Y. Gu,
S. Spinozzi, and J. Chen, “Atypical ALPK2 kinase is not essential for cardiac devel-
opment and function,” American Journal of Physiology-Heart and Circulatory Physi-
ology, vol. 318, pp. H1509–H1515, 6 2020.
[58] D. Wang, B. Eraslan, T. Wieland, B. Hallström, T. Hopf, D. P. Zolg, J. Zecha, A. As-
plund, L. Li, C. Meng, M. Frejno, T. Schmidt, K. Schnatbaum, M. Wilhelm, F. Ponten,
M. Uhlen, J. Gagneur, H. Hahne, and B. Kuster, “A deep proteome and transcriptome
abundance atlas of 29 healthy human tissues,” Molecular Systems Biology, vol. 15,
2 2019.
[59] A. M. Newman, C. B. Steen, C. L. Liu, A. J. Gentles, A. A. Chaudhuri, F. Scherer,
M. S. Khodadoust, M. S. Esfahani, B. A. Luca, D. Steiner, M. Diehn, and A. A. Al-
izadeh, “Determining cell type abundance and expression from bulk tissues with dig-
ital cytometry.,” Nature biotechnology, vol. 37, pp. 773–782, 7 2019.
[60] J. Okendo, D. Okanda, P. Mwangi, and M. Nyaga, “Proteomic deconvolution reveals
distinct immune cell fractions in different body sites in SARS-Cov-2 positive individ-
uals,” medRxiv, p. 2022.01.21.22269631, 1 2022.
[61] L.-B. Wang, A. Karpova, M. A. Gritsenko, J. E. Kyle, S. Cao, Y. Li, D. Rykunov,
A. Colaprico, J. H. Rothstein, R. Hong, V. Stathias, M. Cornwell, F. Petralia, Y. Wu,
B. Reva, K. Krug, P. Pugliese, E. Kawaler, L. K. Olsen, W.-W. Liang, X. Song, Y. Dou,
36
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:41==
M. C. Wendl, W. Caravan, W. Liu, D. Cui Zhou, J. Ji, C.-F. Tsai, V. A. Petyuk, J. Moon,
W. Ma, R. K. Chu, K. K. Weitz, R. J. Moore, M. E. Monroe, R. Zhao, X. Yang, S. Yoo,
A. Krek, A. Demopoulos, H. Zhu, M. A. Wyczalkowski, J. F. McMichael, B. L. Hender-
son, C. M. Lindgren, H. Boekweg, S. Lu, J. Baral, L. Yao, K. G. Stratton, L. M. Bramer,
E. Zink, S. P. Couvillion, K. J. Bloodsworth, S. Satpathy, W. Sieh, S. M. Boca,
S. Schürer, F. Chen, M. Wiznerowicz, K. A. Ketchum, E. S. Boja, C. R. Kinsinger, A. I.
Robles, T. Hiltke, M. Thiagarajan, A. I. Nesvizhskii, B. Zhang, D. Mani, M. Ceccarelli,
X. S. Chen, S. L. Cottingham, Q. K. Li, A. H. Kim, D. Fenyö, K. V. Ruggles, H. Ro-
driguez, M. Mesri, S. H. Payne, A. C. Resnick, P. Wang, R. D. Smith, A. Iavarone,
M. G. Chheda, J. S. Barnholtz-Sloan, K. D. Rodland, T. Liu, L. Ding, A. Agarwal,
M. Amin, E. An, M. L. Anderson, D. W. Andrews, T. Bauer, C. Birger, M. J. Birrer,
L. Blumenberg, W. E. Bocik, U. Borate, M. Borucki, M. C. Burke, S. Cai, A. P. Cali-
nawan, S. A. Carr, S. Cerda, D. W. Chan, A. Charamut, L. S. Chen, D. Chesla, A. M.
Chinnaiyan, S. Chowdhury, M. P. Cieślik, D. J. Clark, H. Culpepper, T. Czernicki,
F. D’Angelo, J. Day, S. De Young, E. Demir, S. M. Dhanasekaran, R. Dhir, M. J. Do-
magalski, B. Druker, E. Duffy, M. Dyer, N. J. Edwards, R. Edwards, K. Elburn, M. J.
Ellis, J. Eschbacher, A. Francis, S. Gabriel, N. Gabrovski, L. Garofano, G. Getz,
M. A. Gillette, A. K. Godwin, D. Golbin, Z. Hanhan, L. I. Hannick, P. Hariharan,
B. Hindenach, K. A. Hoadley, G. Hostetter, C. Huang, E. Jaehnig, S. D. Jewell, N. Ji,
C. D. Jones, A. Karz, W. Kaspera, L. Kim, R. B. Kothadia, C. Kumar-Sinha, J. Lei,
F. D. Leprevost, K. Li, Y. Liao, J. Lilly, H. Liu, J. Lubínski, R. Madan, W. Maggio,
E. Malc, A. Malovannaya, S. Mareedu, S. P. Markey, A. Marrero-Oliveras, N. Mar-
tinez, N. Maunganidze, J. E. McDermott, P. B. McGarvey, J. McGee, P. Mieczkowski,
S. Migliozzi, F. Modugno, R. Montgomery, C. J. Newton, G. S. Omenn, U. Ozbek,
O. V. Paklina, A. G. Paulovich, A. M. Perou, A. R. Pico, P. D. Piehowski, D. G. Placan-
tonakis, L. Polonskaya, O. Potapova, B. Pruetz, L. Qi, S. Ramkissoon, A. Resnick,
S. Richey, G. Riggins, K. Robinson, N. Roche, D. C. Rohrer, B. R. Rood, L. Rossell,
S. R. Savage, E. E. Schadt, Y. Shi, Z. Shi, Y. Shutack, S. Singh, T. Skelly, L. J.
Sokoll, J. Stawicki, S. E. Stein, J. Suh, W. Szopa, D. Tabor, D. Tan, D. Tansil, R. R.
Thangudu, C. Tognon, E. Traer, S. Tsang, J. Tyner, K. S. Um, D. R. Valley, S. Va-
saikar, N. Vatanian, U. Velvulou, M. Vernon, W. Wan, J. Wang, A. Webster, B. Wen,
J. R. Whiteaker, G. D. Wilson, Y. Zakhartsev, R. Zelt, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhang,
G. Zhao, and J. Zhu, “Proteogenomic and metabolomic characterization of human
glioblastoma,” Cancer Cell, vol. 39, pp. 509–528, 4 2021.
[62] Y. Chen, G. Cai, J. Jiang, C. He, Y. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Lu, W. Zhao, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang,
G. Wu, H. Wang, Z. Zhou, and L. Teng, “Proteomic profiling of gastric cancer with
peritoneal metastasis identifies a protein signature associated with immune microen-
vironment and patient outcome,” Gastric Cancer, vol. 26, pp. 504–516, 7 2023.
[63] L. Gatto, R. Aebersold, J. Cox, V. Demichev, J. Derks, E. Emmott, A. M. Franks, A. R.
Ivanov, R. T. Kelly, L. Khoury, A. Leduc, M. J. MacCoss, P. Nemes, D. H. Perlman,
A. A. Petelski, C. M. Rose, E. M. Schoof, J. Van Eyk, C. Vanderaa, J. R. Yates,
and N. Slavov, “Initial recommendations for performing, benchmarking and reporting
single-cell proteomics experiments,” Nature Methods, vol. 20, pp. 375–386, 3 2023.
[64] S. T. Gebreyesus, A. A. Siyal, R. B. Kitata, E. S.-W. Chen, B. Enkhbayar, T. An-
gata, K.-I. Lin, Y.-J. Chen, and H.-L. Tu, “Streamlined single-cell proteomics by an
integrated microfluidic chip and data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry,”
Nature Communications, vol. 13, p. 37, 1 2022.
[65] Z. Ye, T. S. Batth, P. Rüther, and J. V. Olsen, “A deeper look at carrier proteome
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
37
==PAGE:42==
effects for single-cell proteomics,” Communications Biology, vol. 5, p. 150, 2 2022.
[66] N. Slavov, “Counting protein molecules for single-cell proteomics,” Cell, vol. 185,
pp. 232–234, 1 2022.
[67] M. Pérez-Hernández, C. J. van Opbergen, N. Bagwan, C. R. Vissing, G. M. Marrón-
Liñares, M. Zhang, E. Torres Vega, A. Sorrentino, L. Drici, K. Sulek, R. Zhai, F. B.
Hansen, A. H. Christensen, S. Boesgaard, F. Gustafsson, K. Rossing, E. M. Small,
M. J. Davies, E. Rothenberg, P. Y. Sato, M. Cerrone, T. H. L. Jensen, K. Qvortrup,
H. Bundgaard, M. Delmar, and A. Lundby, “Loss of Nuclear Envelope Integrity and In-
creased Oxidant Production Cause DNA Damage in Adult Hearts Deficient in PKP2:
A Molecular Substrate of ARVC,” Circulation, vol. 146, pp. 851–867, 9 2022.
[68] J. Cox and M. Mann, “MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individual-
ized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification,” Nature
Biotechnology 2008 26:12, vol. 26, pp. 1367–1372, 11 2008.
[69] M. E. Ritchie, B. Phipson, D. Wu, Y. Hu, C. W. Law, W. Shi, and G. K. Smyth, “limma
powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray stud-
ies,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 43, pp. e47–e47, 4 2015.
[70] S. J. Fleming, M. D. Chaffin, A. Arduini, A.-D. Akkad, E. Banks, J. C. Marioni, A. A.
Philippakis, P. T. Ellinor, and M. Babadi, “Unsupervised removal of systematic back-
ground noise from droplet-based single-cell experiments using CellBender,” bioRxiv,
p. 791699, 7 2022.
[71] D. Neavin, A. Senabouth, J. T. H. Lee, A. Ripoll, s.-e. Consortium, L. Franke, S. Prab-
hakar, C. J. Ye, D. J. McCarthy, M. Melé, M. Hemberg, and J. E. Powell, “Demuxafy:
Improvement in droplet assignment by integrating multiple single-cell demultiplexing
and doublet detection methods,” bioRxiv, p. 2022.03.07.483367, 3 2022.
[72] Y. Hao, S. Hao, E. Andersen-Nissen, W. M. Mauck, S. Zheng, A. Butler, M. J. Lee,
A. J. Wilk, C. Darby, M. Zager, P. Hoffman, M. Stoeckius, E. Papalexi, E. P. Mimitou,
J. Jain, A. Srivastava, T. Stuart, L. M. Fleming, B. Yeung, A. J. Rogers, J. M. McElrath,
C. A. Blish, R. Gottardo, P. Smibert, and R. Satija, “Integrated analysis of multimodal
single-cell data,” Cell, vol. 184, pp. 3573–3587, 6 2021.
[73] C. Hafemeister and R. Satija, “Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell
RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression,” Genome Biology,
vol. 20, p. 296, 12 2019.
38
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:43==
A
Data Generation
A.1
Shotgun Proteomics
The samples were prepared according to the methods published by Pérez-Hernández et
al. in 2022 [67]. The tissue was lysed in a buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM
NaCl, 10 mM KCl, and 1% Triton X-100, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail
(Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and phosphatase inhibitors: 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5mM
sodium fluoride, and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (Sigma)). Tissue and enough lysis
buffer to cover was homogenised in tubes containing ceramic beads for 25s at 5500 rpm
(Precellys 24, Bertin Technologies). Lysates were then incubated 2h at 4 ◦C followed by
centrifugation at 10,000g for 10 min 4 ◦C. Protein concentration of the supernatant was
determined by using PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 1 mg of protein
from each samples was precipitated with ice cold acetone (1:4 v/v) by incubation for 120
min at 4 ◦C and pelleted by centrifugation at 2000g for 2 min. Precipitated proteins were
re-suspended in 6M guanidine-HCl 100mM Tris pH 8.5 (Sigma), then reduced with 5mM
tris (2-carboxyethil) phosphine (TCEP, Sigma) and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide
(CAA, Sigma) for 15 min at RT in the dark. Lysates were diluted to 2M guanidine-HCl using
50mM Tris pH 8.5 and digested by 1:50 Lys-C (w/w) (Sequencing grade, Wako) for 2h at
37 ◦C, 750 rpm. Following further diluted to 0.5M guanidine-HCl with 50mM Tris pH 8.5,
proteins were again digested with trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega) 1:100 (w/w) by
incubation over night at 37 ◦C, 750 rpm. Digestion was quenched by acidification to 1%
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH 2. Samples were centrifuged to pellet insoluble matter
(14,000g for 10 min) and resulting peptide mixture was concentrated on C18 Sep-Pak
(1cc, 50mg, Waters Corp), washed twice with 0.1% TFA and then twice with 0.1% FA,
and eluted with 40% and then 60% acetonitrile.
Desalted peptides were first concentrated under vacuum and their concentration was de-
termined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 100 μg of peptides from
each sample were re-suspended in 50 mM HEPES at pH 8.5 and 100μg of 16-plex tan-
dem mass tag (TMT) reagents were added from the stocks dissolved in 100% anhydrous
ACN (Thermo Scientific). The final reaction conditions were as follows: TMT-to-peptide
ratio 2:1, 4 μg/μl peptide concentration, 20% ACN, 50mM HEPES pH 8.0. The reagents
was incubated for 1 h at 25 ◦C, and then quenched with 5% hydroxylamine (final con-
centration 1%) for 15 min at RT shaken at 1000 rpm. All the samples were combined,
acidified to pH 2-3 with 10% TFA, and desalted on C18 Sep-Pak column as previously
described. ACN was dried by centrifugation under vacuum at 60 ◦C.
Fractionation of TMT labelled peptides was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo
Scientific, USA) coupled to an OT2 (Opentron, USA) liquid handling system. Peptides
were separated at high pH in reverse phase at a constant flow rate of 1.5 µL/min using
a 150 x 0.3 mm Kinetex® EVO LC column (Phenomenex, USA) packed with C18 beads
(2.6 µm). Solvent A was 10 mM TEAB and solvent B 10 mM TEAB in 80% ACN. These
were mixed in a piece-wise linear gradient as follows: 3-40% B for 57 min, 40-60% B for
5 min, 60-95% B for 10 min, 95% B for 10 min, 95-3% B for 10 min, 3% B for 8 min. The
collection of 24 fractions was performed automatically by connecting the column outlet
via a nanoViper (Thermo Scientific, USA) to an Opentron P200 tip. Fractions were dried
under vacuum and stored at -20◦C before subsequent analysis. Prior to LC-MS/MS mea-
surements, samples were re-suspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA to a final concentration of
200 ng/µL.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
39
==PAGE:44==
The samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant
(version: 2.0.3.0) [68] with proteins identified using the Andromeda search engine by com-
parison against an in silico tryptic digest of a database containing all reviewed SwissProt
protein entries for the human proteome (downloaded on 14/12/2021). Carbamidomethyl
was included as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) and acetylation of protein N-termini
as variable modifications. The match-between-runs option was enabled with default pa-
rameters. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and maximum to 40,
with a maximum peptide mass of 4600 Da. Peptides and proteins were both identified
with a false discovery rate of 1%. Proteins in addition required at least 1 unique peptide.
Protein intensities were log 2 transformed and normalised by the median intensity of each
sample. Missing values were imputed using the mean of the 5 nearest neighbours. Dif-
ferential abundance of proteins between experimental groups was calculated using an
empirical Bayes moderated t-statistic using the method described by Ritchie et al. in
2015 [69].
A.2
Single-Nucleus RNA Sequencing
Single nuclei were obtained from flash frozen donor heart tissues using mechanical stress
as described by Litviňuková et al. in 2020 [13]. Pooled tissue samples were first pow-
dered in a mortar on dry ice. Next, they were homogenized using a 7ml dounce ho-
mogenizer (Sigma-Aldrich) in homogenization buffer (250mM sucrose, 25mM KCl, 5mM
MgCl2, 10mM Tris-HCl, 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1x protease inhibitor, 0.4 U/µl RNa-
seIn (Invitrogen), 0.2 U/µl SUPERaseIn (Invitrogen), 0.1% Triton X-100 in nuclease free
water) with 8 loose strokes with pestle A, followed by 8 tight strokes with pestle B. The
homogenate was filtered through 40 µm cell strainer (pluriSelect) and centrifuged (500g, 5
min, 4 ◦C) to obtain the nuclei pellet. The supernatant was removed and the nuclei pellet
was re-suspended in storage buffer (1x PBS -Mg/Ca, 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA),
0.2 U/µl Protector RNaseIn (Roche)). Isolated nuclei were stained with NucBlue Live
ready Probes reagent (ThermoFisher) and nuclei integrity was checked under a fluores-
cent microscope. Hoechst 33342 positive nuclei were purified by fluorescent activated cell
sorting (BD FACSymphony™S6, nozzle Size: 70 µm, amplitude: 8.1 Volts, frequency:
87kHz). Nuclei purity was checked under a fluorescent microscope. Purified nuclei were
further processed with 10X Genomics Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3‘ Kit according
to manufacturer instructions.
Nuclei were counted automatically by using a NucleoCounter® NC-202™(Chemometec)
and a Countess II (Life Technologies) at two separate counts and loaded on the Chromium
Controller (10X Genomics) with a targeted nuclei recovery of 10.000 per sample. 3′ cDNA
libraries were prepared using 10X genomics Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3‘ Reagent
Kits v3.1 (Dual Index) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Quality control of
cDNA and final libraries was performed using a TapeStation System (Agilent). Libraries
were quantified using Kapa Library Quantification Kit (Roche) and were pooled for se-
quencing. Pooled cDNA libraries were sequenced using a NovaSeq platform (Illumina)
with a mean depth of 52,639 read pairs per nucleus.
CellRanger (7.0.1, 10x Genomics) was used to demultiplex the BCL files and count ex-
pression, with intronic reads included but otherwise default parameters using the Human
reference file obtained from 10x (version 2020-A (July 7, 2020)). Ambient RNA was re-
moved using CellBender [70]. Demuxafy [71] was used to both remove droplets contain-
ing multiple nuclei and demultiplex our pooled samples into the individual patient samples.
Seurat 4.3 [72] was used for quality control and downstream analysis. Droplets with data
pertaining to <800 transcripts, <500 genes, >20% transcripts mapping to mitochondrial
40
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:45==
genes, and an average ratio of transcripts per genes of <6 were excluded from further
analysis. The data were normalised using SCTransform [73], scaled and the first 50 prin-
cipal components were used to create a t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding.
To annotate cell types gene expression profiles were integrated with the composite human
heart reference data set provided by Azimuth [13, 14, 15, 16]. Cells were annotated by
L1 cell type.
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
41
==PAGE:46==
B
Appendix: R Code
B.1
Normalized Marker Counting
1
NMC <- function(ProteomicsData ,
2
MarkerGenes ,
3
MarkerGenesUnfiltered ,
4
LogFCCutoff = 0,
5
pModCutoff = 0.05){
6
# This is a function for executing the Normalized Marker Counting method.
7
## ProteomicsData is a data frame containing columns "Gene", "logFC" and "
pMod".
8
## Markergenes is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "CellType".
9
## MarkergenesUnfiltered is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "
CellType".
10
11
# Define cell types:
12
CellTypes <- unique(MarkerGenes$CellType)
13
14
# Define all unfiltered markers:
15
n_specific_genes_all <- length(unique(MarkerGenesUnfiltered$Gene))
16
17
# Define up- and down-regulated genes:
18
Upregulated_Genes <- subset(ProteomicsData , logFC > LogFCCutoff)
19
Upregulated_Genes <- subset(Upregulated_Genes, pMod < pModCutoff)$Gene
20
Downregulated_Genes <- subset(ProteomicsData , logFC < -LogFCCutoff)
21
Downregulated_Genes <- subset(Downregulated_Genes, pMod < pModCutoff)$Gene
22
23
# Create results table:
24
Results <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 5, nrow = 0))
25
26
# Execute calculations:
27
for (i in CellTypes){
28
specific_genes <- dplyr::filter(MarkerGenes , CellType == i)$Gene
29
n_specific_genes <- length(unique(specific_genes))
30
n_specific_genes_norm <- n_specific_genes/n_specific_genes_all
31
n_specific_genes_norm_up <- length(unique(intersect(specific_genes,
Upregulated_Genes)))/n_specific_genes_all
32
n_specific_genes_norm_down <- length(unique(intersect(specific_genes,
Downregulated_Genes)))/n_specific_genes_all
33
Results[nrow(Results)+1,] <- c(i, n_specific_genes, n_specific_genes_norm,
n_specific_genes_norm_up, n_specific_genes_norm_down)
34
}
35
36
# Format results tables:
37
colnames(Results) <- c("CellType","n_specific_genes","n_specific_genes_norm"
, "n_specific_genes_norm_up", "n_specific_genes_norm_down")
38
Results$n_specific_genes <- as.numeric(Results$n_specific_genes)
39
Results$n_specific_genes_norm <- as.numeric(Results$n_specific_genes_norm)
40
Results$n_specific_genes_norm_up <- as.numeric(Results$n_specific_genes_norm
_up)
41
Results$n_specific_genes_norm_down <- as.numeric(Results$n_specific_genes_
norm_down)
42
43
return(Results)
44
}
42
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:47==
B.2
Over-Representation Analysis
1
ORA <- function(ProteomicsData ,
2
MarkerGenes ,
3
LogFCCutoff = 0,
4
pModCutoff = 0.05){
5
# This is a function for executing an Over-Representation Analysis.
6
## ProteomicsData is a data frame containing columns "Gene", "logFC" and "
pMod".
7
## Markergenes is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "CellType".
8
9
# Define cell types:
10
CellTypes <- unique(MarkerGenes$CellType)
11
12
# Define up- and down-regulated genes:
13
Upregulated_Genes <- subset(ProteomicsData , logFC > LogFCCutoff)
14
Upregulated_Genes <- subset(Upregulated_Genes, pMod < pModCutoff)$Gene
15
Downregulated_Genes <- subset(ProteomicsData , logFC < -LogFCCutoff)
16
Downregulated_Genes <- subset(Downregulated_Genes, pMod < pModCutoff)$Gene
17
18
# Create results tables:
19
Results_Up <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 11, nrow = 0))
20
Results_Down <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 11, nrow = 0))
21
22
# ORA up-regulated genes:
23
for (i in CellTypes){
24
# Filter markers for cell type:
25
CellMarkers <- dplyr::filter(MarkerGenes , CellType == i)$Gene
26
27
# Create contingency table:
28
TotalGenes <- length(unique(ProteomicsData$Gene))
29
TotalMarkers <- length(unique(CellMarkers))
30
Genes_of_Interest <- length(unique(Upregulated_Genes))
31
Markers_of_Interest <- length(unique(intersect(CellMarkers , Upregulated_
Genes)))
32
ContingencyTable <- data.frame(
33
"Of interest" = c(Markers_of_Interest , Genes_of_Interest -Markers_of_
Interest),
34
"Not" = c(TotalMarkers -Markers_of_Interest , TotalGenes -Genes_of_Interest
-TotalMarkers+Markers_of_Interest),
35
row.names = c("Marker", "Not"))
36
37
# Fisher 's exact test:
38
FisherResults <- fisher.test(ContingencyTable , alternative = "g")
39
40
# Append results table:
41
Results_Up[nrow(Results_Up)+1,] <- c(i, Markers_of_Interest , Genes_of_
Interest , Markers_of_Interest/Genes_of_Interest , TotalMarkers ,
TotalGenes , TotalMarkers/TotalGenes , FisherResults$p.value,
FisherResults$estimate , FisherResults$conf.int)
42
}
43
44
# ORA down-regulated genes:
45
for (i in CellTypes){
46
# Filter markers for cell type:
47
CellMarkers <- dplyr::filter(MarkerGenes , CellType == i)$Gene
48
49
# Create contingency table:
50
TotalGenes <- length(unique(ProteomicsData$Gene))
51
TotalMarkers <- length(unique(CellMarkers))
52
Genes_of_Interest <- length(unique(Downregulated_Genes))
53
Markers_of_Interest <- length(unique(intersect(CellMarkers , Downregulated_
Genes)))
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
43
==PAGE:48==
54
ContingencyTable <- data.frame(
55
"Of interest" = c(Markers_of_Interest , Genes_of_Interest -Markers_of_
Interest),
56
"Not" = c(TotalMarkers -Markers_of_Interest , TotalGenes -Genes_of_Interest
-TotalMarkers+Markers_of_Interest),
57
row.names = c("Marker", "Not"))
58
59
# Fisher 's exact test:
60
FisherResults <- fisher.test(ContingencyTable , alternative = "g")
61
62
# Append results table:
63
Results_Down[nrow(Results_Down)+1,] <- c(i, Markers_of_Interest , Genes_of_
Interest , Markers_of_Interest/Genes_of_Interest , TotalMarkers ,
TotalGenes , TotalMarkers/TotalGenes , FisherResults$p.value,
FisherResults$estimate , FisherResults$conf.int)
64
}
65
66
# Format results tables:
67
Columns <- c("CellType", "Markers_of_Interest", "Genes_of_Interest", "
GeneRatio", "TotalMarkers", "TotalGenes", "BgRatio", "pval", "estimate",
"lowerCI", "upperCI")
68
colnames(Results_Up) <- Columns
69
colnames(Results_Down) <- Columns
70
NumericColumns <- c("Markers_of_Interest", "Genes_of_Interest", "GeneRatio",
"TotalMarkers", "TotalGenes", "BgRatio", "pval", "estimate", "lowerCI",
"upperCI")
71
Results_Up <- Results_Up %>% mutate_at(NumericColumns , as.numeric)
72
Results_Down <- Results_Down %>% mutate_at(NumericColumns , as.numeric)
73
74
# BH-adjusted p-values:
75
Results_Up$padj <- p.adjust(Results_Up$pval, method = "BH", n = nrow(Results
_Up))
76
Results_Down$padj <- p.adjust(Results_Down$pval, method = "BH", n = nrow(
Results_Down))
77
78
return(list(Up = Results_Up, Down = Results_Down))
79
}
B.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
1
EnrichmentScore <- function(RankedGenes , GeneSet){
2
# This is a function for calculating the enrichment score for a GSEA.
3
## RankedGenes is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "Rank".
4
## GeneSet is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "CellType".
5
6
# Create GSEA table:
7
RankedGenes$row <- 1:nrow(RankedGenes)
8
GSEATable <- merge(x=RankedGenes , y=GeneSet , by="Gene", all.x=TRUE)
9
GSEATable <- GSEATable[order(GSEATable$row, decreasing=FALSE),]
10
TotalGenes <- nrow(GSEATable)
11
12
# Find hits:
13
GSEATable$Hit <- ifelse(is.na(GSEATable$CellType)==TRUE, FALSE, TRUE)
14
Hits <- nrow(dplyr::filter(GSEATable , Hit == TRUE))
15
16
# Each hit is weighted:
17
GSEATable$Weight <- ifelse(GSEATable$Hit == TRUE, abs(GSEATable$Rank), NA)
18
19
# The steps up and down will be calculated and normalized:
20
TotalUp <- sum(GSEATable$Weight, na.rm = TRUE)
44
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:49==
21
GSEATable$Step <- ifelse(GSEATable$Hit == TRUE, GSEATable$Weight/TotalUp , -1
/(TotalGenes -Hits))
22
23
# Cumulative sum of the steps:
24
GSEATable$CumulativeSum <- cumsum(GSEATable$Step)
25
26
# Calculate Enrichment score:
27
MinES <- min(GSEATable$CumulativeSum)
28
MaxES <- max(GSEATable$CumulativeSum)
29
ES <- ifelse(MaxES>abs(MinES), MaxES, MinES)
30
31
# Return results:
32
return(list(ES = ES, Table = data.frame(GSEATable)))
33
}
34
35
GSEA <- function(ProteomicsData ,
36
MarkerGenes ,
37
RankMetric = "logFC",
38
ESFunction = EnrichmentScore ,
39
Permutations = 1000){
40
# This is a function for executing a Gene-Set Enrichment Analysis.
41
## ProteomicsData is a data frame containing a column "Gene" and a column
with the ranking metric.
42
## Markergenes is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "CellType".
43
## RankMetric is the name of the column in ProteomicsData that contains the
chosen ranking metric.
44
## ESFunction is a function for calculating the enrichment scores.
45
46
# Define cell types:
47
CellTypes <- unique(MarkerGenes$CellType)
48
49
# Generating ranked gene list:
50
RankedGenes <- dplyr::select(ProteomicsData , Gene, RankMetric)
51
colnames(RankedGenes) <- c("Gene", "Rank")
52
RankedGenes <- RankedGenes[order(RankedGenes$Rank, decreasing=TRUE),]
53
RankedGenes <- RankedGenes[duplicated(RankedGenes$Gene) == FALSE ,]
54
55
# Defining gene sets:
56
GeneSets <- list()
57
SizesGeneSets <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 2, nrow = 0))
58
for (i in CellTypes){
59
Genes <- subset(MarkerGenes , CellType == i, select = Gene)
60
SizesGeneSets <- rbind(SizesGeneSets , c(i, nrow(Genes)))
61
Genes <- as.character(t(Genes))
62
GeneSets <- append(GeneSets , list(i = Genes))
63
}
64
names(GeneSets) <- CellTypes
65
colnames(SizesGeneSets) <- c("CellType", "Size")
66
SizesGeneSets$Size <- as.numeric(SizesGeneSets$Size)
67
68
# Calculate enrichment scores:
69
EnrichmentScores <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 2, nrow = 0))
70
ES_Tables <- list()
71
for (i in CellTypes){
72
GeneSet <- data.frame(unlist(GeneSets[i]))
73
GeneSet$CellType <- i
74
colnames(GeneSet) <- c("Gene", "CellType")
75
EnrichmentScore <- ESFunction(RankedGenes , GeneSet)
76
EnrichmentScores[nrow(EnrichmentScores) + 1,] <- c(i, EnrichmentScore$ES)
77
ES_Tables[[i]] <- EnrichmentScore$Table
78
}
79
colnames(EnrichmentScores) <- c("CellType", "ES")
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
45
==PAGE:50==
80
EnrichmentScores$ES <- as.numeric(EnrichmentScores$ES)
81
82
# Calculate p-values and NES:
83
pvalues <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 5, nrow = 0))
84
for (i in CellTypes){
85
Background <- c()
86
ES <- EnrichmentScores$ES[EnrichmentScores$CellType == i]
87
Size <- SizesGeneSets$Size[SizesGeneSets$CellType == i]
88
for (j in seq(1, Permutations)){
89
RandomGeneSet <- MarkerGenes[sample.int(nrow(MarkerGenes),
90
size=Size, replace=FALSE),]
91
RandomES <- ESFunction(RankedGenes , RandomGeneSet)$ES
92
Background <- append(Background , RandomES)
93
}
94
pvalue <- ifelse(ES > 0, length(Background[Background >=ES])/length(
Background[Background >0]), length(Background[Background <=ES])/length(
Background[Background <0]))
95
CIpos <- binconf(length(Background[Background >=ES]),length(Background[
Background >0]), method = "wilson", return.df = TRUE)
96
CIneg <- binconf(length(Background[Background <=ES]),length(Background[
Background <0]), method = "wilson", return.df = TRUE)
97
LowerCI <- ifelse(ES > 0, CIpos$Lower, CIneg$Lower)
98
UpperCI <- ifelse(ES > 0, CIpos$Upper, CIneg$Upper)
99
NES <- ifelse(ES > 0, ES/mean(Background[Background >0]), -ES/mean(
Background[Background <0]))
100
pvalues[nrow(pvalues) + 1,] <- c(i, pvalue , NES, LowerCI , UpperCI)
101
}
102
colnames(pvalues) <- c("CellType", "pval", "NES", "LowerCI", "UpperCI")
103
104
# Finding leading edge genes:
105
GenerateLE <- function(GSEAtable){
106
# Find MinES and MaxES:
107
MinES <- min(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
108
MaxES <- max(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
109
# Determine if the ES is positive:
110
if (MaxES>abs(MinES)){
111
# In case of positive ES:
112
ES_row <- which.max(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
113
RankCutoff <- GSEAtable$Rank[ES_row]
114
# Remove rows with a lower logFC and misses:
115
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Rank >= RankCutoff)
116
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Hit == TRUE)
117
# Return leading edge genes:
118
return(GSEAtable$Gene)}
119
else {
120
# In case of negative ES:
121
ES_row <- which.min(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
122
RankCutoff <- GSEAtable$Rank[ES_row]
123
# Remove rows with a higher logFC and misses:
124
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Rank <= RankCutoff)
125
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Hit == TRUE)
126
# Return leading edge genes:
127
return(GSEAtable$Gene)}
128
}
129
LeadingEdges <- list()
130
for (i in ES_Tables){
131
LeadingEdge <- GenerateLE(i)
132
LeadingEdge <- list(i = LeadingEdge)
133
LeadingEdges <- append(LeadingEdges , LeadingEdge)
134
}
135
names(LeadingEdges) <- CellTypes
136
LeadingEdgeTable <- enframe(LeadingEdges)
46
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:51==
137
colnames(LeadingEdgeTable) <- c("CellType", "LeadingEdge")
138
139
# Format results table and BH-adjusted p-values:
140
Results <- merge(x=EnrichmentScores , y=SizesGeneSets , by="CellType", all.x=
TRUE)
141
Results <- merge(x=Results ,
y=pvalues , by="CellType", all.x=TRUE)
142
Results <- merge(x=Results , y=LeadingEdgeTable , by="CellType", all.x=TRUE)
143
Results$padj <- p.adjust(as.numeric(Results$pval),
144
method = "BH",
145
n = nrow(Results))
146
Results$pval <- as.numeric(Results$pval)
147
Results$NES <- as.numeric(Results$NES)
148
Results <- Results[, c("CellType", "pval", "LowerCI", "UpperCI", "padj", "ES
", "NES", "Size", "LeadingEdge")]
149
150
return(Results)
151
}
B.4
Marker-Weighted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
1
WeightedEnrichmentScore <- function(RankedGenes , GeneSet){
2
# This is a function for calculating the enrichment score for a MWGSEA ,
where each increase in the running enrichment score is weighted by the
absolute value of the ranking metric multiplied by the absolute value of
the marker metric.
3
## RankedGenes is a data frame containing columns "Gene", "Rank" and "
MarkerMetric".
4
## GeneSet is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "CellType".
5
6
# Create GSEA table:
7
RankedGenes$row <- 1:nrow(RankedGenes)
8
GSEATable <- merge(x=RankedGenes , y=GeneSet , by="Gene", all.x=TRUE)
9
GSEATable <- GSEATable[order(GSEATable$row, decreasing=FALSE),]
10
TotalGenes <- nrow(GSEATable)
11
12
# Find hits:
13
GSEATable$Hit <- ifelse(is.na(GSEATable$CellType)==TRUE, FALSE, TRUE)
14
Hits <- nrow(dplyr::filter(GSEATable , Hit == TRUE))
15
16
# Each hit is weighted:
17
GSEATable$Weight <- ifelse(GSEATable$Hit == TRUE, abs(GSEATable$Rank)*abs(
GSEATable$MarkerMetric), NA)
18
19
# The steps up and down will be calculated and normalized:
20
TotalUp <- sum(GSEATable$Weight , na.rm = TRUE)
21
GSEATable$Step <- ifelse(GSEATable$Hit == TRUE, GSEATable$Weight/TotalUp , -1
/(TotalGenes -Hits))
22
23
# Cumulative sum of the steps:
24
GSEATable$CumulativeSum <- cumsum(GSEATable$Step)
25
26
# Calculate Enrichment score:
27
MinES <- min(GSEATable$CumulativeSum)
28
MaxES <- max(GSEATable$CumulativeSum)
29
ES <- ifelse(MaxES>abs(MinES), MaxES, MinES)
30
31
# Return results:
32
return(list(ES = ES, Table = data.frame(GSEATable)))
33
}
34
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
47
==PAGE:52==
35
MWGSEA <- function(ProteomicsData ,
36
MarkerGenes ,
37
UnfilteredMarkerGenes ,
38
RankMetric = "logFC",
39
ESFunction = WeightedEnrichmentScore ,
40
Permutations = 1000){
41
# This is a function for executing a Marker -Weighted Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis.
42
## ProteomicsData is a data frame containing a column "Gene" and a column
with the ranking metric.
43
## MarkerGenes is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "CellType".
44
## UnfilteredMarkerGenes is a data frame containing columns "Gene" and "
CellType".
45
## Rankmetric is the name of the column in ProteomicsData that contains the
chosen ranking metric.
46
## ESFunction is a function for calculating the enrichment scores.
47
48
# Define cell types:
49
CellTypes <- unique(MarkerGenes$CellType)
50
51
# Generating ranked gene list:
52
RankedGenes <- dplyr::select(ProteomicsData , Gene, RankMetric)
53
colnames(RankedGenes) <- c("Gene", "Rank")
54
RankedGenes <- RankedGenes[order(RankedGenes$Rank, decreasing=TRUE),]
55
RankedGenes <- RankedGenes[duplicated(RankedGenes$Gene) == FALSE ,]
56
RankedGenes <- merge(RankedGenes , UnfilteredMarkerGenes , by = "Gene")
57
colnames(RankedGenes) <- c("Gene", "Rank", "CellType","MarkerMetric")
58
59
# Defining gene sets:
60
GeneSets <- list()
61
SizesGeneSets <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 2, nrow = 0))
62
for (i in CellTypes){
63
Genes <- subset(MarkerGenes , CellType == i, select = Gene)
64
SizesGeneSets <- rbind(SizesGeneSets , c(i, nrow(Genes)))
65
Genes <- as.character(t(Genes))
66
GeneSets <- append(GeneSets , list(i = Genes))
67
}
68
names(GeneSets) <- CellTypes
69
colnames(SizesGeneSets) <- c("CellType", "Size")
70
SizesGeneSets$Size <- as.numeric(SizesGeneSets$Size)
71
72
# Calculate enrichment scores:
73
EnrichmentScores <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 2, nrow = 0))
74
ES_Tables <- list()
75
for (i in CellTypes){
76
GeneSet <- data.frame(unlist(GeneSets[i]))
77
GeneSet$CellType <- i
78
colnames(GeneSet) <- c("Gene", "CellType")
79
GeneList <- dplyr::filter(RankedGenes , CellType == i)
80
GeneList <- GeneList[,-3]
81
GeneList <- GeneList[order(GeneList$Rank, decreasing = TRUE),]
82
EnrichmentScore <- ESFunction(GeneList , GeneSet)
83
EnrichmentScores[nrow(EnrichmentScores) + 1,] <- c(i, EnrichmentScore$ES)
84
ES_Tables[[i]] <- EnrichmentScore$Table
85
}
86
colnames(EnrichmentScores) <- c("CellType", "ES")
87
EnrichmentScores$ES <- as.numeric(EnrichmentScores$ES)
88
89
pvalues <- data.frame(matrix(ncol = 5, nrow = 0))
90
for (i in CellTypes){
91
Background <- c()
92
ES <- EnrichmentScores$ES[EnrichmentScores$CellType == i]
48
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
==PAGE:53==
93
Size <- SizesGeneSets$Size[SizesGeneSets$CellType == i]
94
for (j in seq(1, Permutations)){
95
RandomGeneSet <- MarkerGenes[sample.int(nrow(MarkerGenes),
96
size=Size, replace=FALSE),]
97
RandomGeneSet <- RandomGeneSet[,-3]
98
GeneList <- dplyr::filter(RankedGenes , CellType == i)
99
GeneList <- GeneList[,-3]
100
GeneList <- GeneList[order(GeneList$Rank, decreasing = TRUE),]
101
RandomES <- ESFunction(GeneList , RandomGeneSet)$ES
102
Background <- append(Background , RandomES)
103
}
104
pvalue <- ifelse(ES > 0, length(Background[Background >=ES])/length(
Background[Background >0]), length(Background[Background <=ES])/length(
Background[Background <0]))
105
CIpos <- binconf(length(Background[Background >=ES]),length(Background[
Background >0]), method = "wilson", return.df = TRUE)
106
CIneg <- binconf(length(Background[Background <=ES]),length(Background[
Background <0]), method = "wilson", return.df = TRUE)
107
LowerCI <- ifelse(ES > 0, CIpos$Lower, CIneg$Lower)
108
UpperCI <- ifelse(ES > 0, CIpos$Upper, CIneg$Upper)
109
NES <- ifelse(ES > 0, ES/mean(Background[Background >0]), -ES/mean(
Background[Background <0]))
110
pvalues[nrow(pvalues) + 1,] <- c(i, pvalue , NES, LowerCI , UpperCI)
111
}
112
colnames(pvalues) <- c("CellType", "pval", "NES", "LowerCI", "UpperCI")
113
114
# Finding leading edge genes:
115
GenerateLE <- function(GSEAtable){
116
# Find MinES and MaxES:
117
MinES <- min(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
118
MaxES <- max(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
119
# Determine if the ES is positive:
120
if (MaxES>abs(MinES)){
121
# In case of positive ES:
122
ES_row <- which.max(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
123
RankCutoff <- GSEAtable$Rank[ES_row]
124
# Remove rows with a lower logFC and misses:
125
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Rank >= RankCutoff)
126
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Hit == TRUE)
127
# Return leading edge genes:
128
return(GSEAtable$Gene)}
129
else {
130
# In case of negative ES:
131
ES_row <- which.min(GSEAtable$CumulativeSum)
132
RankCutoff <- GSEAtable$Rank[ES_row]
133
# Remove rows with a higher logFC and misses:
134
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Rank <= RankCutoff)
135
GSEAtable <- dplyr::filter(GSEAtable , Hit == TRUE)
136
# Return leading edge genes:
137
return(GSEAtable$Gene)}
138
}
139
LeadingEdges <- list()
140
for (i in ES_Tables){
141
LeadingEdge <- GenerateLE(i)
142
LeadingEdge <- list(i = LeadingEdge)
143
LeadingEdges <- append(LeadingEdges , LeadingEdge)
144
}
145
names(LeadingEdges) <- CellTypes
146
LeadingEdgeTable <- enframe(LeadingEdges)
147
colnames(LeadingEdgeTable) <- c("CellType", "LeadingEdge")
148
149
# Format results table and BH-adjusted p-values:
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
49
==PAGE:54==
150
Results <- merge(x=EnrichmentScores ,y=SizesGeneSets , by="CellType", all.x=
TRUE)
151
Results <- merge(x=Results ,y=pvalues , by="CellType", all.x=TRUE)
152
Results <- merge(x=Results ,y=LeadingEdgeTable , by="CellType", all.x=TRUE)
153
Results$padj <- p.adjust(as.numeric(Results$pval),
154
method = "BH",
155
n = nrow(Results))
156
Results$pval <- as.numeric(Results$pval)
157
Results$NES <- as.numeric(Results$NES)
158
Results <- Results[, c("CellType", "pval", "LowerCI", "UpperCI", "padj","ES"
, "NES", "Size", "LeadingEdge")]
159
160
return(Results)
161
}
50
Inferring Cell Type Changes from Proteomics Data: Insights into Heart Failure
