==PAGE:1==
Exploring energy harvesting sources to
feed industrial IoT devices
Master’s Thesis
Author
Fernando Ramiro González - s214134
Supervisor
Rasmus Bjørk - DTU Energy
Submission Date
July 1st, 2023.
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Internet of Things (IoT) will reach an estimated total of 50 billion devices by 2030. [1]
With that, some challenges arise when deploying a high-scale IoT network, which involves power
consumption, size-constrained applications, and high costs. [2] Currently, IoT devices are mostly
powered by batteries, which need maintenance and periodic replacements, as well as taking up space
within the device and causing negative environmental consequences. To solve that, the goal of this
thesis is to explore different energy harvesting sources to power these IoT devices.
The procedure taken first involved the analysis of the state of the art of energy harvesting within IoT,
which included the analysis of several products currently on the market within IoT as well as their
challenges encountered. Several energy sources and their harvesting technologies were discussed,
stating their typical power output, efficiencies, and other important information. A high-level in-
troduction to the electronics side of the solution was done, covering the whole IoT architecture,
including communication protocols, System-on-Chips (SoCs), storage, and Power Management In-
tegrated Circuits (PMICs). Sequentially, an experiment was done that involved several harvesting
technologies, a PMIC, and devices that attempted to power. Afterward, three IoT use cases were
introduced (Road sign tracking, Electronic Shelf Labels, and Livestock Monitoring) stating their
environmental conditions and energy needs before designing an energy harvesting solution for each,
along with a macroeconomic analysis of it.
Following this procedure, viable solutions were obtained to implement energy harvesting in all use
cases, satisfying their data needs in terms of transmission frequency and consumption. In the case
of Electronic Shelf Labels, it encountered challenges regarding miniaturization, where the harvester
is not as small as desired, while in the case of Livestock Monitoring, due to their high transmission
frequency needed, too much storage size is required. Those issues are foreseen to be fixed in the
future with efficient multiple-source energy harvesting. However, from the experiment performed,
multiple energy source harvesting showed low efficiency, which makes it not adequate nor reliable
for implementation in the present IoT. Setting the limit to a single energy source energy harvest-
ing, solar energy via photovoltaic cells appeared as the only energy harvesting source with enough
reliability to be included in a current IoT energy harvesting solution.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to the following individuals and groups, without
whom this thesis would not have been possible:
First and foremost, I would like to thank Rasmus Bjørk from the Danish Technical University
(DTU) for his exceptional guidance, insightful discussions, and unwavering support throughout the
entire process. His expertise and dedication have been instrumental in completing this thesis. I am
also grateful to Dennis Valbjørn for his valuable insights and recommendations.
I am immensely grateful to Silicon Laboratories, specifically Chong Li, Levente Nagy, Olfert Paulsen,
and Tristan Cool, for their amazing contributions, thoughtful feedback, and fruitful collaboration.
Their willingness to share their expertise has greatly enhanced the quality of my research and deep-
ened my understanding of the subject matter.
I would like to extend my heartfelt appreciation to my family and friends for their support during
this journey. Their belief in my abilities, encouragement, and willingness to lend a helping hand
have been a constant source of inspiration and motivation.
I extend my deepest gratitude to all those mentioned above, as well as to anyone else who has
contributed to my academic and personal growth. Your support, guidance, and encouragement
have been indispensable, and I am truly grateful for the opportunities and knowledge I have gained
through your assistance.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Sustainability - Sustainable Development Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
State of the art
7
2.1
How is energy harvesting currently involved in IoT? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
ANDS, by Murata, NOWI and Deutsche Telekom . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
NOWI’s PMIC for Electronic Shelf Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Light Switch, by Silicon Labs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.4
Atmosic System-On-Chip (SoC) Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Current challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Energy harvesting sources: Possibilities and limitations
19
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
Light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Thermal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.3
Mechanical
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.4
Electromagnetic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.5
Chemical
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Electronics and communication
37
4.1
Communication Protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Energy Storage: Supercapacitors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Power Management Integrated Circuit (PMIC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
System-on-chip (SoC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
IoT architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Experimenting with energy harvesting
49
6
Implementation of energy harvesting in IoT applications
58
6.1
What to know when implementing energy harvesting
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Road signs tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2.1
Introduction and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2.2
Finding the best fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2.3
Macroeconomic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3.1
Introduction and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3.2
Finding the best fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.3.3
Macroeconomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.4
Livestock monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.4.1
Introduction and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.4.2
Finding the best fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.4.3
Macroeconomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6
==PAGE:8==
6.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7
Future work and conclusion
95
References
98
==PAGE:9==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
1
Introduction
For the past decade, the Internet of Things (IoT) has had a huge protagonism and impact
in many different industries throughout the globe. IoT has changed the way humans inter-
act with technology and various devices. Nowadays, most humans are interconnected, and
decision-making is increasingly more data-driven, both in professional and personal settings.
IoT has emerged as a disruptive force, offering unprecedented opportunities for innovation
and transforming industries and lives across the globe. But, what is the actual definition of
IoT? McKinsey describes IoT as physical objects embedded with sensors and actuators that
communicate with computing systems via wired or wireless networks, allowing the physical
world to be digitally monitored or even controlled. [3] IoT uses a variety of technologies to
connect the digital and physical worlds. Physical objects are embedded with sensors, which
can monitor things like temperature or motion, or any change in environment, and actuators,
which receive signals from sensors and then do something in response to those changes. The
sensors and actuators communicate via wired or wireless networks with computing systems
that can monitor or manage the health and actions of connected objects and machines. The
physical objects being monitored do not have to be manufactured, they can include objects
in nature, as well as people and animals.[3]
To cope with these circumstances, most devices that are manufactured at present have
the option to be connected to different devices via IoT. Figure 1, which reflects forecasts
made in 2019 regarding IoT vs non-IoT devices, shows the tendency, where the non-IoT
devices are forecasted to barely grow in the future years, as opposed to IoT devices, which
are estimated to triple the amount of non-IoT devices by 2025.
Figure 1: IoT devices vs Non-IoT devices from 2010 to 2025.[4]
Despite the huge advancement for IoT shown in figure 1, its growth expectations esti-
Page 1 of 104
==PAGE:10==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
mated almost ten years ago have not been met. Currently, it is still at a stage where proof
of concept IoT projects are being evaluated, and relatively small implementations are being
undertaken. This is still a long way from what had been originally hoped for in IoT [2].
Figure 2 shows the contrast of the forecasts made in 2014 regarding several IoT devices,
compared to the actual number of devices by 2021.
Figure 2: IoT forecasts for 2015 to 2021 vs what has been achieved.[2]
There are several reasons, shown in figure 3, why IoT has not reached its potential
estimated.
One of them is cost and return on investment (ROI), where along with the
huge growth of devices, comes a bigger amount of money that needs to be invested. The
costs associated with building an IoT network not only involve the cost of the sensors and
the hardware but maintaining the IoT network operations. This has proven to be difficult
for companies to accurately estimate what their ROI will be and within what time frame
they are likely to see the actual benefit of any financial outlay made on IoT infrastructure. [2]
Other challenges involve security within the connections, remote access affecting mainte-
nance and connectivity, and size constraints, where there is a desire to miniaturize IoT
devices to reduce the cost of manufacturing the chip and facilitating implementation. But
on the other hand, it is difficult to do so without sacrificing the functionality that can be
utilized or shortening the lifetime over which the device can remain operational since bat-
teries will most likely need to be smaller. [2]
Page 2 of 104
==PAGE:11==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
Figure 3: Challenges in IoT[2]
The main challenge on which this thesis will focus is how to power IoT devices, solving
this challenge helps and fixes some of the challenges mentioned before, such as miniaturiza-
tion, cost, or remote access, where removing the battery benefits those matters. As seen in
figure 4, there are three different ways to power an IoT device: through storage (batteries,
supercapacitors, etc), wired connections, or energy harvesting.
Figure 4: Power sources for IoT devices[5]. IoT devices can obtain power from three different
power sources: distribution, storage, or energy harvesting
Page 3 of 104
==PAGE:12==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
A vast majority of the IoT devices are powered by batteries. The goal of this thesis is to
explore energy-harvesting power sources to feed IoT devices, achieving IoT battery-less ap-
plications. Removing the battery from IoT devices comes with many benefits. If a long-term
operation is to be maintained then the batteries of IoT nodes will need to be replaced peri-
odically. This can present a huge logistical challenge, however, as the costs associated with
sending technicians out to swap batteries will almost certainly make the running of IoT net-
works consisting of thousands of nodes financially unviable, especially if nodes are situated
in remote locations that are difficult to reach. [2] Furthermore, battery replacement has en-
vironmental repercussions, as many of the materials used in them are pollutants. A constant
replacement and disposal of batteries have very negative effects in terms of sustainability. [2]
The logistical and environmental issues that battery-based IoT devices present have driven
research into alternative methods of powering devices, where instead of being completely
dependent on batteries that will need to be replaced over time, the energy required can be
extracted directly from the surrounding environment and transformed into electricity. If
less room is needed for the energy storage unit, it benefits the challenge regarding device
miniaturization.[2] Implementing energy harvesting in an IoT application can lead to IoT
devices that can operate indefinitely, with technicians no longer having to replace batteries
when they run out.
Figure 5: IoT Energy harvesting solution diagram based on a Texas Instruments figure. [6]
Figure 5 shows a diagram of an IoT energy harvesting solution. Within this diagram,
four main blocks are key when implementing energy harvesting in an IoT application:
• Energy source, which will be energy harvesting in this thesis.
Page 4 of 104
==PAGE:13==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
1.1
Sustainability - Sustainable Development Goals
• Energy storage, a supercapacitor, specifically.
• Power conversion management with a Power Management Integrated Circuit (PMIC).
• Energy consumption, which comes from connectivity protocols, micro-controllers, or
chips, and from different measurements taken by various sensors. These vastly depend
on the use case or application IoT is implemented since each application has different
requirements which affect power consumption.
All blocks will be covered during this thesis. Initially, the state of the art of energy har-
vesting within IoT will be discussed, to leverage how developed this powering solution is in
the present IoT industry. Sequentially, different energy sources, along with their harvesting
technologies, will be reviewed, extracting their different important characteristics such as
power output or efficiency. Furthermore, an electronics chapter will be introduced, which
includes a discussion regarding communication protocols, energy storage, and power man-
agement by PMIC and SoCs. Silicon Labs [7], a global IoT company, is a collaborator of
this thesis. Therefore, the communication protocols and SoCs will be discussed and related
to the company’s product catalog.
Afterward, some IoT use cases will be introduced and proposed to implement an energy
harvesting solution. How each IoT use case can be implemented with an energy harvesting
solution in this thesis depends on several aspects, such as data requirements or ambient
conditions, and their fit with Silicon Labs products. The main objective is to find the best
fit for all blocks mentioned previously for each use case, focusing on Silicon Laboratories
connectivity and SoCs. For each use case, there will be a decision on which is the best
harvesting technology/s, storage, protocol, and SoC (both preferably supported by Silicon
Labs), and lastly, a given PMIC, which was experimented with and assessed. This could be
done thanks to Silicon Labs, facilitating an energy harvesting product from a confidential
company. In this experiment, there was the chance to try different harvesting methods to
assess their performance and attempt to power a couple of the Silicon Labs’ SoCs using
energy harvesting. Finally, there will be an economic discussion for each solution regarding
economic viability and market size.
1.1
Sustainability - Sustainable Development Goals
Implementing energy harvesting solutions to power IoT devices shows a compromise
between sustainability and the environment. The present situation, where the vast majority
of IoT devices are powered by batteries is unsustainable and needs to be altered. Society
growing dependence on portable technology has driven up battery usage acutely over the
last two decades. This has led to an increase in the mining of raw materials, such as lithium,
zinc, cobalt, or manganese in recent years. The mining, processing, and eventual disposal
of these materials all have unwanted ecological impacts. Billions of primary batteries are
thrown away each year and these are a major contributor to the global e-waste problem
Page 5 of 104
==PAGE:14==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
1.1
Sustainability - Sustainable Development Goals
already being experienced. If IoT networks are going to be reliant on batteries, then the
damage done to the environment will be even greater, and the rate at which the reserves of
rare metals employed in them are depleted is going to be dramatically accelerated. [2]
Figure 6: Sustainable Development Goals by United Nations. [8]
Powering IoT devices with ambient energy align with two of the Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals (SDG) by the United Nations shown in figure 6. Goal 7 is about ensuring access
to clean and affordable energy, which is key to the development of agriculture, business,
communications, education, healthcare, and transportation. Goal 9 seeks to build resilient
infrastructure, promote sustainable industrialization and foster innovation. [8]
Grasping energy from the surroundings is a clean, affordable, and innovative way of ob-
taining energy. Energy sources such as sunlight or wind flow are sustainable and reusable.
Furthermore, removing the battery and safe promotion of sensor implementation shows great
innovation in many industrial processes, leading to sustainable industrialization.
Page 6 of 104
==PAGE:15==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2
State of the art
In the IoT world, implementing energy harvesting within IoT products is a key goal for
all the stakeholders involved, from manufacturers to customers. Reaching that goal would
bring many benefits to all parties involved. However, there are many challenges to achiev-
ing a battery-less IoT device, which is challenging the path toward the objective. Some of
these challenges are related to what is discussed in section 1, like the device’s power con-
sumption or its size constraint. On one hand, power consumption advancements in the IoT
industry are helping the inclusion of energy harvesting, by lowering the power demands of
some devices and making them more accessible to harvested power. But on the other hand,
miniaturizing the devices is making it harder for energy harvesting implementation, since it
affects negatively how much power can be grasped from the environment.
Even with some of these challenges, added to COVID-19, the energy harvesting market
for IoT in Europe, Asia, and North America was USD 136M and is estimated to be USD
235M by 2025, over USD 100M bigger[9], which shows that there is still advancement against
these challenges. This will be discussed in more detail in subsection 2.1.
In this section, energy harvesting in IoT’s state of the art will be covered. Beginning from
the current involvement of energy harvesting in IoT devices; what products are there in the
market, with which price and energy source, and for what use cases, to the current chal-
lenges that are slowing down an increased involvement of energy harvesting in current IoT
products.
2.1
How is energy harvesting currently involved in IoT?
The IoT market worldwide is huge as tens of billions of devices are connected nowadays,
and the number does not stop growing as the internet has a bigger role every day in our
lives. It is estimated there will be around 50 billion devices connected to the internet by
2030. [1]Furthermore, it is estimated that 200 things per person could be connected, poten-
tially leading to several hundred billion devices through IoT.[9]
Within the IoT market, there are multiple applications and use cases, but in just a few
cases, energy harvesting can be applied. That is due to a lot of factors, such as how much
data does it need to be transmitted, how often is transmitted, the environment, etc. That
will be discussed along the thesis, starting from subsection 2.2.
As mentioned before, there is a limited number of applications energy harvesting can be
implemented which does not make energy harvesting a big player within the IoT market.
IoT market size was USD 212b by the end of 2019[10], compared to the energy harvesting
market seen previously, which was USD 136M. That is just below 0.001%. By 2025, the
IoT market is estimated to be USD 1.6tr, compared to USD 235M, which is an irrelevant
part of the whole IoT market. Even though those numbers trigger anyone to think that
energy harvesting is not worth investing in or investigating, as seen in section 1, there are a
Page 7 of 104
==PAGE:16==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.1
How is energy harvesting currently involved in IoT?
lot of economic, logistic, and sustainable benefits for implementing energy harvesting in IoT
devices.
At the moment, many products are battery-less and implement energy-harvesting meth-
ods to power the device. Four different devices will be presented in this section. These
are:
• ANDS, by Murata, NOWI and Deutsche telekom [2].
• Energy Harvesting Solution for Electronic Shelf Labels by NOWI[11].
• Light Switch by Silicon Labs [12].
• Atmosic System-On-Chip (SoC) Devices [13].
2.1.1
ANDS, by Murata, NOWI and Deutsche Telekom
Murata, NOWI, and Deutsche Telekom have each applied their specific expertise and
presented the Autonomous NB-IoT Development Solution (ANDS). ANDS combines:
• Murata’s chip, implementing NB-IoT (Narrow Band - Internet of Things) technology.
• NOWI’s PMIC for Electronic Shelf Labels.
• Deutsche Telekom integrated SIM.
• A small outdoor photovoltaic panel with a rechargeable battery to collect and store
ambient energy.
This device’s main highlight is its size, which reduces its Bill of Material (BoM) drastically
compared to other devices. The sizes of this device are described in more detail in the next
subsection 2.2 when discussing the miniaturization challenge. The device is shown in figure
7.
Figure 7: The ANDS featuring a Murata module (nuSIM inside) plus NOWI’s PMIC, on a
1 cm x 2 cm board[2]
Page 8 of 104
==PAGE:17==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.1
How is energy harvesting currently involved in IoT?
Unlike the next devices that will be discussed, this product is yet still to be applied
to a specific use case or application. All though, since the energy harvesting source of the
product is an outdoor small photovoltaic, the use case will possibly be an outdoor application.
Regarding the performance of the ANDS, when performing, the charging current is 1.1
mA at 3000 lux, which represents a very cloudy outdoor environment. Having that environ-
ment for 6 hours, with an average power of 2mWh when the device is in high power mode
and operating at maximum efficiency, makes it 12 mWh per day of harvested energy. That
compared to 0.19 mWh, shown in figure 8 for an NB-IoT transmission allows the device to
have the capacity of supporting up to 60 NB-IoT transmissions per day, which is a high level
of autonomy.
This device is a game changer due to its size and BoM, but it has limitations on how many
transmissions can be done per day, which limits its usage for some applications.
Figure 8: ANDS measurements in experimental board showing the different modes of the
device and its performance in each one.
*The energy consumption is highly dependent on the quality of the network and the trans-
mission power.[2]
2.1.2
NOWI’s PMIC for Electronic Shelf Labels
In another device, NOWI combined its own PMIC and miniature indoor solar cell har-
vesters to harvest ambient light in a supermarket to compensate for the consumption of the
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESL).
On one hand, it is important to note that throughout a whole supermarket, there are differ-
ent light intensities depending on which section each item is in, going from 200 lux to 1200
Page 9 of 104
==PAGE:18==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.1
How is energy harvesting currently involved in IoT?
lux.[11]
On the other hand, NOWI analyzes the ESL consumption and found that when idle mode
(standby), the daily consumption is 0.377 mWh and when updating, considering 2 updates
per day, the total daily consumption is around 0.413 mWh per day.
Moreover, once the light intensity and device’s consumption are known, the energy har-
vester’s requirements need to be taken into account to harvest enough energy to power the
device. For that, the PV cell’s size needs to be estimated, depending on which spot of the
supermarket each device is at, the size varies. The estimations are shown in the next figure.
Figure 9: PV size estimation for ESL at different LUX levels assuming fluorescent light for
15 hours a day. PV is in cm2.[11]
NOWI estimated that at the lowest light intensity possible, 200 lux, a 5 cm2 PV cell
was required assuming 15 hours of fluorescent light. It shows the possibility of compensating
the basic ESL consumption but limiting the application to just 2 updates a day unless there
is a bigger PV cell or a higher light intensity supplied to the device.
2.1.3
Light Switch, by Silicon Labs
Another product is Silicon Labs’ light switch which uses its chip, along with Zigbee
Green Power technology and energy harvesting.
The goal of the device is to turn on a
light without running a wire between the switch and the light fixture. It is aimed to be
accomplished using an energy harvesting generator which is mechanical.
Its functioning
can be seen in figure 10. This figure shows the effect of the mechanical actuation of the
switch, which has a magnet with two poles. Pushing the switch down creates a magnetic
field through the core and back to the other pole. Then when the user releases the switch,
the field changes and goes in the opposite direction through the core. Maxwell’s Equation
tells us that this changing magnetic field will produce a current, and this is the energy that
can be harvested.
Page 10 of 104
==PAGE:19==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.1
How is energy harvesting currently involved in IoT?
Figure 10: Silicon Labs’ Smart Switch energy harvesting generator.[12]
There is no performance data for this product, but it is desired to fit into a smart
home environment, where with one switch, there is a possibility of controlling different light
sources.
2.1.4
Atmosic System-On-Chip (SoC) Devices.
Finally, the last product on the market that will be analyzed is the Atmosic SoC. These
SoC combine extremely low power consumption with direct use of harvested energy to create
superior energy harvesting solution[13].
Traditional energy harvesting solutions require an external energy harvesting Power Man-
agement Unit (PMU), separated from the wireless SoC so there is a storage element. This
separation leads to a lower overall efficiency on voltage regulation, which can be around 70%.
The traditional solution is illustrated in figure 11.
In the same figure 11, in contrast to the traditional solution, Atmosic offers an integrated
solution that reduces the overall number of components. This reduces the cost of the end
product. This solution uses energy directly from the harvesting source to supply the imme-
diate power needs of the device without going to storage which creates losses. Only excess
harvested energy is stored for later use in a rechargeable battery or a hybrid supercar.
Page 11 of 104
==PAGE:20==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.1
How is energy harvesting currently involved in IoT?
Figure 11: Traditional Energy Harvesting Approach with an external PMU vs Atmosic
Integrated Energy Harvesting solution[13]
Atmosic applied their solution to an energy-harvesting remote control. They modeled a
12 cm2 PV cell that was capable of harvesting energy in indoor environments with intensity
levels of 0 and 400 lux. The outcome of that application is seen in figure 12.
Atmosic assumed only a few hours of bright light(400 lux), and no light from 9 PM to 6 AM.
They assumed that the remote is being used for 10 hours per day, with 500 daily button
presses and 20 voice searches, which is a heavy amount of TV viewing
Page 12 of 104
==PAGE:21==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.2
Current challenges
Figure 12: Energy usage of a PV-powered remote control vs Atmosic’s and the competition’s
energy stored, showing the light level energy throughout the day.[13]
As it appears in figure 12, Atmosic states that their remote control can be powered
throughout a heavy usage day just by harvesting indoor light, with a positive net energy
stored, while it appears that the competition is not able to power the remote control for the
entire daily usage, having a negative net energy stored.
This product is a good solution when there is not a scheduled data transmission period
or not many time constraints regarding usage or data transmission. This solution may find
itself limited when coming into worse environments with less lighting or with applications
that need the device to be ready to transmit anytime during the 24 hours of the day.
After looking at some of the different products involving energy harvesting in IoT, while
seeing great advances and functionalities within these products, there are some limitations
to them. These limitations are linked to various challenges in the IoT world. In the next
subsection, they will be described.
2.2
Current challenges
The main challenge that stops energy harvesting from being vastly used in present IoT
devices is the power requirements of IoT devices. The rest of the challenges that affect
energy harvesting involvement growing in IoT end up deriving the same consequence. Due
to that, they will be called sub-challenges in the paper.
Regarding the main challenge, as is shown in the table in figure 40, in the next section, the
power demands of an IoT device are quite variable, going from some microwatts to several
milliwatts[14]. The power demand that an IoT device requests depends on:
• Date type, it varies if the desired data to be sent is an image, a video, or just data
from a sensor of temperature.
Page 13 of 104
==PAGE:22==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.2
Current challenges
• Data frequency, constant data transmission such as continuous GPS location data
consumes more data than sending a sensor data once a day.
• Transmission range, as seen in figure 13, the further the data wants to be transmitted,
the more power it consumes.
• Communication protocol/technology, In figure 13, there are many wireless protocols or
technologies used in IoT to transmit data. Depending on which one is used, the data
consumption varies, just like with the range and the cost. As seen in the figure cited,
the power consumption changes if you are using Bluetooth or WiFi.
• Technical structure of the device, each IoT device has different internal power demands
to be able to turn on and keep power. T The application in which the device is varies
the data consumption. For example, if the device is told to go on sleep mode when it is
not being used, consumes much less than an application where it makes it to be turned
on the whole time. There have been great advances in creating LE (Low energy), for
example, as seen in the table in figure 13, the transition from standard Bluetooth to
BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) devices, for low rates, the consumption can be up to
one hundred times less. This advancement helps energy harvesting implementation by
reducing the internal demands of IoT devices, and it will certainly be advancing more
in the future.
Page 14 of 104
==PAGE:23==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.2
Current challenges
Figure 13: Comparison between data rate and consumption vs range differentiating protocol
and cost. In the table above, all units in mW.[14]
Having gone through the main challenge of the energy harvesting IoT advancement, as
mentioned previously, many sub-challenges end up falling into the same main challenge.
However, they are worth slightly digging in. These sub-challenges are:
• Environment
The environment in which the energy is being harvested to power the device is
key to determining if the power demands are going to be met. Even though it will be
Page 15 of 104
==PAGE:24==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.2
Current challenges
discussed in further detail in section 3, it is important to mention that there are two
types of environments, controlled and uncontrolled environment[15]. In this section,
only the uncontrolled environments are relevant for discussion since they are, typi-
cally, the type of environments which are challenging for this matter. Uncontrolled
environments are typically seen outdoors and, as its name indicates, it is impossible
to control. Those kinds of environments are the ones that currently set back a lot of
energy harvesting processes in IoT. Controlled environments, since they can be altered
in specific conditions, are easier to know which conditions will there be and how much
energy can be harvested. For example, for an electronic shelf label use case, using an
indoor photovoltaic cell, it is easy to know how much time the lights will be turned
on and with how much intensity, therefore, how much energy will be harvested. On
the other hand, in uncontrolled environments, there is much variation in how much
energy is present over time, which makes it hard for energy harvesting to be reliable
when powering a device. A situation may take place where the IoT device is supposed
to transmit data, but there is not enough energy in the environment to be harvested
and is not able to perform. Due to that, storage such as super caps or rechargeable
batteries, discussed in section 4.2, take a huge role in energy harvesting. But in a lot of
cases, even with energy stored, depending on the environment, it is impossible to oper-
ate. There is a method called transient computing [15] which just uses the device when
there is plenty of energy and does not have periodic data transmission programmed.
This is used in some products on the market such as Atmosic SoC devices[13], reviewed
in the previous subsection.
• Miniaturization of IoT devices
As mentioned in section 1, there is a desire from the IoT industry to make devices
smaller to make implementation easier and costs smaller. On the other hand, with a
smaller size, functionality is sacrificed[2], which is a consequence of energy harvesting
performance.
In an example involving solar energy, the smaller the solar panel is,
naturally, the less energy is being harvested, which makes it harder to reach the power
demands of a device.
To make a device smaller, since an IoT device has different
parts such as the MCU, PMIC4.3, storage4.2, etc, size can be a constraint in any
of the device’s parts while probably sacrificing that single functionality. In some of
the newer and most modern products, reducing their size has been one of the most
important requirements when designing parts of the IoT device. For example, in one of
the products mentioned in the previous section 2.1, the ANDS[2] designed by Murata,
NOWI, and Deutsche Telekom demonstrate two different ways of miniaturizing an IoT
device, reducing the size of the module and the PMIC. Firstly, its NB-IoT module’s
dimensions are just 12.6 mm x 10.6 mm x 1.8 mm, which makes it the smallest BB-IoT
module in the world. This could be possible by switching from a conventional SIM to
an integrated SIM, or iSIM developed by Deutsche Telekom. As seen in figure 14, it is
called nuSIM.
Page 16 of 104
==PAGE:25==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.2
Current challenges
Figure 14: Process of going from separate SiM to iSiM[2]
Lastly. the other example of miniaturization of a part of an IoT device is NOWI’s
PMIC[2]. They have been able to convert and reduce the dimensions of the PMIC to
3 mm x 3 mm. It only requires a single low-cost capacitor to be placed alongside it.
This made this PMIC have a cost advantage of more than $0.50. As seen in figure 15,
NOWI’s PMIC is almost thirty times smaller than other PMICs.
Figure 15: Inductor-based PMIC compared to NOWI’s PMIC[2]
• Efficiency and material cost
Improving the efficiency of energy harvesting is greatly advancing in the past years.
However, if there is a desire of miniaturizing the devices implying less energy harvest-
ing material size to perform, there is a big need of improving the efficiency so that
even sacrificing energy harvesting material size, sufficient power would be harvested.
Normally, the materials with the best energy conversion efficiency are the most expen-
sive ones, or the development of more efficient processes, which would rocket the bill of
material (BoM) of the device. In energy harvesting methods like solar panels, since it is
the most advanced, there is currently a good balance between material cost - efficiency,
but in the rest of the methods, there is still room for improvement. There will be a
deeper discussion on efficiencies and cost within energy harvesting going forward, but
Page 17 of 104
==PAGE:26==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
2.2
Current challenges
to quantify the efficiencies and costs of each energy harvesting method, take a look at
table 2.
After discussing the state of the art of energy harvesting in IoT, and explaining how the
combination and integration of both together is impacting the market and products at the
moment, it is important to dig deeper into each part that influences the whole matter. These
parts are the different energy sources, the electronics, which is the protocol being used, or
what kind of PMIC or storage. It is essential to choose and analyze some use cases or ap-
plications that set the standards and constraints when designing an IoT device since there
are many different environments or data requirements.
All that will be covered in this thesis in the following sections.
In the next section, there will be a literature review on energy sources for harvesting. It
will contain a high-level discussion on different energy sources and their different harvesting
methods, stating each method’s power output and any other valuable information that has
been found, such as efficiency or cost.
Finally, after having a general overview of some of the energy sources reviewed in the liter-
ature, to choose which harvesting methods are fitter for IoT applications, different criteria
will be presented as well as which methods are indeed fitter for IoT use cases.
Page 18 of 104
==PAGE:27==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3
Energy harvesting sources:
Possibilities and limita-
tions
Energy is the capacity to do work and in the context of a sensor, work is performing
diverse operations such as reading a measurement, transmitting data, or making a calcu-
lation. Those operations consume energy. Power is the rate at which energy is produced
or consumed and is measured in energy units per time. Energy harvesting sensors harvest
energy from the surrounding environment, and either consume that energy to perform an
operation or store the energy locally to consume it some other time. [16] This process is
reflected in figure 16.
Figure 16: The energy harvested from the environment is either consumed directly or stored.
[16]
Depending on which harvester is being used, there is a different power supplied by the
harvester. Some factors make the power supply fluctuate within a range, such as which spe-
cific type of harvester. As an example, it is different to harvest with one type of photovoltaic
or with another one, since the efficiency changes. Moreover, as mentioned in subsection 2.2,
each technology or protocol has its power requirements. Depending on which use case the
harvester wants to be applied in, the power demands vary.
Combining all three factors, it may look simple to the picture which harvester, protocol,
and use case needs to be matched to have an IoT energy harvesting solution. But, in reality,
it is complex to do that. Due to the environment, the power harvested may not be as much
as expected, or on a particular day, the power demands for a use case needs are higher. This
creates unreliability around battery-less IoT devices, which the stakeholders despise since it
is unfeasible to buy or sell a device that may turn off when it’s needed.
In figure 17, an overview of the range of how much energy can be obtained from using
different energy harvesting devices is shown. Depending on which exact harvesting device
Page 19 of 104
==PAGE:28==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
is being used, the power output is different, even using the same harvesting method. The
objective of figure 17 is to show the range of the harvesting technologies. The definition and
functioning of the different harvesting technologies are explained in more detail in subsections
3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, and 3.1.4.
Figure 17: Power densities supplied by various energy harvesting technologies Units are
W/cm2 for photovoltaic(PV), thermoelectric, and triboelectric. For piezoelectrics, the units
are W/cm3. [17]
In this section, several different energy sources will be reviewed, stating which kind of
environments are they harvested from, their power outputs, and other information such as
efficiency or cost.
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
There are several different sources to harvest energy from, one kind of energy source
can be harvested in multiple ways. For example, using light as an energy source, energy can
be harvested using photovoltaics or applying photosynthesis technology. Another example
is wind energy, which can be harvested using wind turbines or using piezoelectric materials
when strong wind causes a strain on them.[15]
The spectrum of energy sources gives a huge variety in terms of where to harvest the en-
ergy from. But on the other hand, all of these different energy sources have environmental
requirements that make them hard to be complemented other energy sources or obtain an
optimal power input continuously. Due to that, the environment that the device is located
in acts a huge role in how much energy can be harvested.
Regarding the environment, in this thesis, there will be a differentiation between uncontrolled
environments and controlled environments.[15] The terms are uncontrolled and controlled en-
vironments were briefly mentioned when talking about the environmental challenges within
IoT in subsection 2.2. In this section, it is important to explain in further detail these terms.
Each environment brings individual constraints in terms of available forms of energy and
their accessibility.[15] These constraints’ type is what defines the environment to be con-
trolled or uncontrolled.
For an uncontrolled environment, which is mostly in outdoor settings, these constraints are
Page 20 of 104
==PAGE:29==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
set by nature, like the incident light or wind speed. So any device that is within an uncon-
trolled environment must deal with the unreliable conditions of an uncontrolled environment.
An example of an uncontrolled environment can be a farm where intelligent farming wants
to be implemented, or a wind farm, where it is unknown the wind there will be. These
environments, as seen in subsection 3, are the most challenging, but are able, in most cases,
to supply energy with no limit in terms of quantity or cost, for instance, sunlight or wind
energy. Some examples of uncontrolled environments energy sources as shown in figure 18.
Figure 18: Examples of energy sources in uncontrolled environments. To the right of the
energy sources, it shows the harvesting technologies and what characteristic of the energy
source is used in that technology. [15]
Controlled environments, on the other hand, are vastly found in indoor settings. In
this environment, the constraints faced are normally set by a human being. This makes the
conditions more predictable, and with that, the power that can be obtained. Sometimes,
in controlled environments, not enough energy is available to harvest. In that case, unlike
Page 21 of 104
==PAGE:30==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
in uncontrolled environments, there is the possibility to alter the environment and increase
the amount of available energy, for example, artificial lighting or injecting radio frequency
waves across the room. Unfortunately, this normally comes with a cost or some kind of limit,
in contrast with uncontrolled environments. Due to that, energy harvested in uncontrolled
environments is usually preferred.
After defining the environment in an energy harvesting context and its types, it is time
to discuss each energy source and the harvesting methods that can be used for each source.
In each one, the discussion will be around how energy is converted, its efficiency, and most
importantly its power output. Naturally, there will be a deeper discussion in the ones that
are more known and where there is more information, such as light. The information given
for all of them will be a mixture extracted from multiple sources, to find a correlation be-
tween all of them, to make the data reliable.
The harvesting methods that will be presented are those the author has considered rele-
vant for the thesis, which is applying the energy harvested to an IoT application. What
has been considered relevant is, to have an estimated power output high enough that it can
power an IoT device (between several microwatts to a few milliwatts[1]), to have decent
maturity within its research and experimentation, and that it can be used in environments
where an IoT device can realistically be placed.
The energy sources and their harvesting method that will be presented are stated in ta-
ble 1.
Energy Source
Harvesting method
Light
Photovoltaic
Thermal
Thermoelectric
Pyroelectric
Mechanical
Static Fluid Movement
Piezoelectric
Electromagnetic harvester
Triboelectric
Electromagnetic
Radio Frequency
Chemical
Microbial
Chemical Potential
Table 1: Energy sources and their harvesting methods.
3.1.1
Light
Ambient light is the source of energy that is almost always present in both uncontrolled
and controlled environments. The unit in which light is measured in lux. The quantity
of energy that can be extracted depends on the source of incident light and its intensity,
which essentially dictates how many lux the harvester receives. As an example, under direct
Page 22 of 104
==PAGE:31==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
sunlight, depending on the location on the earth, about 130,000+ lux reach the solar panel,
which can derive kilowatts of power. On the other hand, in a typical home illuminance levels
are in the range of 30-50 lux, which results in microwatt power outputs. [18] Specifically in
indoor settings, the light sources are primarily fluorescent and light emitting diodes (LED),
which are low power, so not so much power can be obtained from them.[17]
Figure 20 shows how many lux are there for different environments.
Even though uncontrolled environments are quite unpredictable, sunlight has a slight ad-
vantage, which is that it can be somewhat predictable. Depending on the season of the year,
the average number of hours of sunlight is known. The values for the worst-case scenario
in sunlight, which is overcast, are known. That creates a safe way of estimating the energy
that could be available within an application, designing the IoT device assuming that every
day is overcast. In the case of sunnier days, the excess energy obtained can be stored.
Figure 19: Cell output from solar energy depending on the ambient and solar cell type.[18]
The only harvesting method with light as an energy source discussed in this thesis is
photovoltaic. This includes both outdoor and indoor settings.
Photovoltaics
Photovoltaic(PV) systems are perhaps the most prevalent energy harvest-
ing source used in the current age.[15] The way PV harvest energy is from their cells. These
Page 23 of 104
==PAGE:32==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
cells absorb the incoming light and are made of a semiconductor material, usually silicon.
When absorbing the incoming light, electrons begin flowing, creating an electrical current.
Lastly, wires capture the electrical current and combine current from all cells of a solar
panel.[19]
As cells are the key part of a PV, the better and more efficient cells within a PV, the
more energy will be harvested. The cells most used in IoT applications are monocrystalline
or polycrystalline solar cells. Monocrystalline solar cells are more efficient at between 17%
and 18% under outdoor conditions, however, they are typically more expensive due to smaller
tolerances in the manufacturing process. Polycrystalline cells are slightly less expensive to
fabricate, and this is reflected in their wholesale price, but offer much lower efficiencies, from
12% to 14%.[15]. Other types of cells can reach efficiencies up to 40% but cannot yet justify
their price vs efficiency balance.[15]
As seen in figure 20, for indoor settings, monocrystalline cells do not reach as big of power
outputs as in outdoor settings. There are other and newer types of cells that are designed for
indoor settings that can reach up to 10% efficiencies.[15] For example, amorphous silicon solar
cells are better at harvesting the visible portion of the light spectrum while crystalline solar
cells are more efficient typically in the red and near-infra-red parts of the spectrum. This is
especially important when designing systems for indoor use, as the output of the solar cell
under indoor light conditions can change almost two times depending on the source of light.
For example, an indoor amorphous silicon solar cell at 150 lux level can produce 2x more
output under LED light compared to a halogen light source with the same light incidence[18].
The different PV technologies require impedance matching to ensure that devices are al-
ways operating at their maximum power point.
This is most commonly achieved using
maximum power point tracking.[15] This technique can be implemented in many different
ways, most commonly as part of a system-on-chip module[20]. This leads to the creation
of MPPT systems with very low energy consumption, which maximizes and optimizes the
active time of photovoltaic cells for IoT applications.
The power output obtained by PV in direct sunlight can reach up to 50 mW/cm2 using
monocrystalline and polycrystalline cells. For indoor environments, as seen in the figure the
energy obtained can be up to 40/cm2 for high light intensities.[15][18][21]
Page 24 of 104
==PAGE:33==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
Figure 20: Indoor light intensities along with typical power outputs[21]
Finally, as mentioned before, photovoltaic technology is the most advanced energy har-
vesting method at present. Due to it and its maturity, there exists the possibility to buy
solar panels easily. The price for monocrystalline is on average $1 to $1.50 per watt while
for polycrystalline, the price is $0.90 to $1 per watt.[22]
3.1.2
Thermal
Thermal energy harvesting has been available for embedded systems for almost 70 years
and has found home in a wide variety of technologies from large-scale satellites to small
sensors.[15] The way that energy is harvested from thermal energy sources is from tempera-
ture gradients.
Moreover, thermal energy can be found in both uncontrolled and controlled environments.
In uncontrolled environments, the ambient influences the temperature of the air and the
ground.
Especially in the summer, in places where it gets hot, there is a big potential
for thermal energy harvesting. For example, when the heat rises, so does the temperature
of the asphalt or the street, and it can become more than 10◦C higher than the ambient
temperature.[23] In controlled environments, thermal energy can be obtained for the waste
energy in different machines, which heat up during their operation.
For the thermal energy source, there will be a discussion in further detail about thermo-
electrics and pyroelectrics harvesting methods.
Thermoelectrics
Thermoelectrics generate energy when a thermal gradient is placed
across them. A device normally consists of a semiconductor material with high electrical
conductivity and low thermal conductivity and a cold side that must be kept cold, typically
using a heat sink.[15] The Seebeck effect[24] causes the generation of a potential genera-
tion from a temperature gradient. A scheme of how power is generated in a thermoelectric
Page 25 of 104
==PAGE:34==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
generator (TEG) is shown in figure 21.
Figure 21: Generation of power in a TEG.[25]
This harvesting method is typically used in controlled environments as there are pre-
ferred power outputs and efficiency results from solar energy in outdoor settings. All though,
on the smaller scale of sensor devices, studies have shown that gradients between surfaces
heated by the sun and the ground can be effectively utilized to provide enough energy to
power sensors.[26] For solar applications, a temperature gradient of 10◦C can produce up to
1.6 mW/cm2.[15]
In the context of controlled energy harvesting for the IoT, this effect can be used to harvest
energy from waste heat found in typical places like a home or industry spaces. For example,
waste heat from boilers, radiators, ovens, and high-temperature machinery.[17] Additionally,
in recent years there has been advancement in applying this harvesting method in wearable,
powering sensors for the bodily metrics, using the gradient between the human skin and the
air temperature. In this application, thermoelectrics have been shown to provide up to 20
µW/cm2.[15] Lastly, it is possible to buy TEGs online with no difficulties. The price varies
depending on the size and power provided by the device. The efficiencies of these devices
can reach up to 7.5% with a difference of 10 degrees, and cost from $1 to $100.[27]
Power outputs from TEGs depending on the temperature gradient can be found in figure
22. To conclude, the biggest challenges with thermal energy harvesting are maintaining the
temperature difference over the thermoelectric generator which typically requires large heat
sinks resulting in a bulky product.[18] That being said, TEGs can provide enough power to
power an IoT device, which makes thermoelectrics an important player in energy harvesting
for IoT devices.
Page 26 of 104
==PAGE:35==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
Figure 22: Temperature gradient vs Power output in TEGs.[18]
Pyroelectrics
Pyroelectrics utilize the fluctuation of temperature gradients to generate
energy. This is useful in a variety of environments where temperature and pressures fluctuate
rapidly, such as outdoors in uncontrolled environments and nearby machinery in controlled
environments. [15]
Its main difference compared to thermoelectric technologies is its reduced heat sinking re-
quirements and higher thermodynamic efficiency. For instance, using a limited temperature
gradient due to the limited heat exchange, a maximum efficiency of 1.7% of Carnot efficiency
can be expected using a thermoelectric module. On the contrary, a pyroelectric device may
reach an efficiency up to 50% of Carnot’s efficiency.[28] As thermoelectric, the output power
depends on the thermal gradient and the frequency of temperature variation.
For controlled environments, temperature variations in the order of Hertz are difficult to
generate, especially in industrial environments where heat generation is typically constant.
There is the possibility of introducing a micro heat engine, where the expansion and con-
traction of a working fluid introduces a temperature variation, producing 3 µW/cm2. An
optimization on this type of device can lead to a power output of 9 mW/cm2.[15]
On the other hand, in uncontrolled environments, the temperature fluctuations appear only
for long periods which makes it hard to be used.
Lastly, even though pyroelectrics have a much higher efficiency than thermoelectrics [?]
and has a huge potential, in existing implementations, the power output is still lower than
the thermoelectric. For wearable applications, power outputs are of 0.034 µW/cm2 with
fluctuations of 30 degrees.[29]
Page 27 of 104
==PAGE:36==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
3.1.3
Mechanical
Mechanical energy is a much more ample energy source compared to the ones explained
previously. Mechanical involves a lot of different kinds of particular sub-energy sources within
mechanics. These can be, for example, fluid movement or vibration, which are measured
quite differently. Due to the differences between these two individual sources, in this thesis,
they will be discussed separately.
Firstly, fluid movement involves air and water movement. These can be measured in distance
per unit of time or volume per unit of time. The most relevant harvesting method within
the fluid movement is turbines that generate energy from static fluid movement.
Static fluid movement
The main method used for harvesting power using fluid move-
ment is a turbine. The turbine extracts energy from air or water movement and the faster
this movement is, the more energy is harvested. This type of harvesting method is really
common but is mainly present in applications where it can take a large area. Therefore,
for small-scale sensors, there still needs to be further development, where the desire is to
implement microturbines.[15]
Within uncontrolled environments, microturbines are difficult to implement. [15] They are
not able to operate at the lower airflow speeds that are typically found in the environment.
They have a high degree of moving parts which ends up wearing out the device and requiring
replacement. All these issues restrict the turbines to be a larger size. There exists a micro-
turbines solution in the order of 300 cm3 volume that, with a wind speed of 4.5 m/s, can
produce up to 10 mW. Of course, there still needs to be a smaller scale for a future within
IoT devices.[15]
On the other hand, in controlled environments, where the sources are air on ventilation
dust or liquid movements in pipes, microturbines have a more viable solution. [15] An ex-
ample that has been proved to be self-powered by a microturbine is the integration of a
microturbine into micro-sprinklers as part of an irrigation system, due to its high water
flow.[30]
In conclusion, fluid movement harvesting through microturbines still needs advancement
in the coming years but is showing great potential, especially in controlled environments,
where with an airflow of just 1.5 m/s, the power output has proven to be of 20 µW [31] in
a horizontal airflow energy harvester, as seen in figure 23.
Page 28 of 104
==PAGE:37==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
Figure 23: Power output vs wind speed in horizontal airflow energy harvester[31]
Vibration is another type of mechanical movement that is the source of harvesting meth-
ods. Vibrations are usually measured in Hertz and can be found in both uncontrolled and
controlled environments. In uncontrolled environments, there are many sources of vibra-
tional energy. The wind, apart from being a source for turbines as seen previously, causes
vibration in objects. Vehicles on the road or humans walking in the street can cause vibra-
tion. For controlled environments, vibrations can be obtained from machinery operation.
The harvesting methods found relevant within vibrational energy sources are piezoelectric,
electrostatic, and triboelectric.
Piezoelectric
Piezoelectric energy generators (PEG) convert mechanical vibrations into
electrical energy using piezoelectric materials. These are based on the direct piezoelectric
effect, where piezoelectric materials generate electrical energy when under external stress.
[1] The operation of a PEG requires a moving part, which when vibrating, stresses the
piezoelectric material. For instance, actuation can be provided by body motion or ambient
vibrations, like walking or the operation of home appliances and industrial machinery. , as
mentioned before, fluid flow can move along with the stress that piezoelectrics can harvest
energy.
One of the downsides of piezoelectrics is that if the PEG is not in good contact with the
moving part, it may cause friction and therefore lose efficiency.[17] This does not happen in
PV or radio frequency harvesting.[1]
Page 29 of 104
==PAGE:38==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
Moreover, average power densities typically reported for piezoelectric generators are in the
range of 100 nW to 1000 µW, with efficiencies that are around 20%, depending on the config-
uration of the piezoelectric material.[17] [1] But some studies have shown a bigger potential
for piezoelectrics. For example, integrating this technology in clothing and footwear can lead
to up to 8.8 mW of energy harvested from the human walking cycle. [32]
Another example is the rain, where the energy that can be harvested is proportional to the
size and velocity of its droplets, the larger, the more movement caused to the PEG, therefore
more stress. Under optimal conditions, up to 12.5 mW can be harvested.[33]
Lastly, nowadays, PEGs can be bought from various suppliers and manufacturers. [34] The
price is variable depending on the size of the material and on the amount of power output
that can be obtained. There exists the possibility to buy parts of the PEG individually, for
instance only the actuator (moving part) or just the harvester. The prices depend on which
part of the piezoelectric is desired, their performance or the bulk of the purchase can vary
from only tens of dollars to hundreds of dollars.
Electromagnetic energy harvester from mechanical vibrations
This harvesting
method consists of turning mechanical energy, specifically vibrational, into electrical energy
through electromagnetic radiation. For this method, the harvester used is an electromag-
netic energy harvester (EMEH).
The fundamentals of an EMEH are that ambient vibrations cause a permanent magnet
to vibrate through a coil. This creates a time-varying magnetic flux density through the coil
which results in an induced electromotive force. [1]
Two examples of an EMEH are shown in figure 24. Device a) shows the simplest way of
building an EMEH. It consists of a permanent magnet mounted on a spring and surrounded
by a coil. After suffering ambient vibrations, the magnet moves up and down through the
coil, ending up in electromotive force. The main issue with this design is the tear and wear of
the spring. To avoid this, device b) shown on the right consists of three coaxial permanent
magnets, facing each other in a way that their polarities make the magnet in the middle
levitate and go up and down through the coil when suffering a vibration. [1]
Page 30 of 104
==PAGE:39==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
Figure 24: Examples of Electromagnetic Energy Harvesters.[1]
A challenge that arises within this harvesting method is linked to the miniaturization
desire by the IoT industry, discussed in subsection 2.2. Due to that, the magnets need to be
manually handled and positioned which is a more complex process. [1] On the other hand,
micro coils are easier to implement in an EMEH. They can be fabricated on silicon or printed
circuit boards.
Lastly, studies are comparing the two technologies which harvest vibrational energy, piezo-
electric and EMEH. It has been proven that the efficiency of piezoelectric generators is quite
lower, as is their power density, compared to EMEH. [35] During the past decade, EMEH
has been able to produce up to 8 mW/cm3. When miniaturizing the device, hundreds of
microwatts to a couple of milliwatts can be produced.[1] This harvesting method has great
potential since there is no wear on the device and the mechanism is simple. However, there
is still a need to tackle its miniaturization issue.
Triboelectrics
Triboelectric energy harvesting for IoT applications involves the use of tri-
boelectric nanogenerators (TENGs), which convert ambient mechanical energy into electricity.[17]
TENGs utilize a very specific phenomenon called the triboelectric effect. This effect becomes
apparent when certain materials are brought together and subsequently separated, leaving
an electric charge on the surfaces that were previously in contact. This can be exploited to
harvest energy from scenarios where mechanical movement is present, for instance as part
of wearable technology. [1]
Similar to the case of piezoelectric energy harvesters, TENGs require the presence of an
actuator for them to supply electrical power and direct mechanical contact to it to fully
exploit the available energy. Due to that, their applicability to power indoor IoT devices
Page 31 of 104
==PAGE:40==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
is specific to those cases in which actuation is available, like human motion or vibrations. [17]
For controlled environments, TENGs show a high potential to power nodes of body sen-
sor networks, as needed for health and wellness monitoring.
Regarding its power output, average power densities typically reported for TENGs are in
the range of 400 nW to 50 mWcm/2. The electrical power output of a TENG depends on
the force applied.[1] Specifically, from human movement, the power that can be extracted
can be up to 3 mW/cm2. [15]
3.1.4
Electromagnetic
Electromagnetic energy sources can be obtained from various electromagnetic waves.
These waves can be from radios or any device that sends out any kind of signal. The unit
of power or intensity of electromagnetic waves is the watt. However, due to the wide range
of power levels encountered in different applications, it is common to use logarithmic units
such as decibel-milliwatts (dBm) or decibels relative to a reference level (dB).
This energy source can be found in either controlled or uncontrolled environments. It is
typically found more in controlled environments because there are multiple signal-emitting
devices, for example, within a household or an industrial place. Different examples are tele-
visions, WiFi routers, cell phones, etc. In uncontrolled environments, there are multiple
electromagnetic sources such as antennas or noise but this is not as promising in the energy
harvesting matter since the long distances affect its performance negatively.
The main electromagnetic energy source is radio frequency, which harvests energy from
radio frequency waves from the environment.
Radio Frequency
Ambient Radio Frequency(RF) energy harvesting involves the conver-
sion of ambient RF into electricity. The frequencies that are relevant to RF energy harvesting
often come from TVs, radios, cellular networks, or WiFi routers.[17]
RF energy is widespread in both controlled and uncontrolled environments but is signifi-
cantly more present in controlled environments, where there is a bigger presence of wireless
devices that emit such radiation, like WiFi routers or TVs. For uncontrolled environments,
the scope focuses more on low-frequency RF energy, since it can be harvested over much
larger distances compared to high-frequency, such as WiFi. [15]
Researchers have found a medium-frequency energy harvester that can supply up to 10
µW and occupies just 0.54mm2 in silicon, which is promising for energy harvesting in IoT,
aligned with the miniaturization desire. [36]
Regarding power outputs in controlled environments, within two meters of distance, RF en-
ergy harvesting can provide around 10 mW. This is promising within indoor environments,
Page 32 of 104
==PAGE:41==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
where the sensor network is smaller and sensors are closer to radio-transmitting devices.
[15] Moreover, another study has found an antenna presented capable of operating at 2.45
and 5.8 GHz, simultaneously, providing 2.6 V output with efficiencies up to 65% and power
densities up to 10 mW/cm2.[37]
RF energy harvesting has huge potential but is yet to overcome some challenges such as
longer distances, limitations with physical objects, or stealing the signal from other prod-
ucts, like laptops trying to get WiFi. For example, a device called PowerCast can provide
up to 16.115 mW at a 0.6 meters distance with an appropriate antenna, but this drops off
rapidly to 26 µW at a 4 meters distance. The price as of today is $99. [38]
In figure 25, an overview of most of the harvesting technologies discussed until now is shown.
Figure 25: Overview of harvesting technologies[15]
3.1.5
Chemical
Chemical energy sources might be less common sources for energy harvesting but are
never the less essential for powering devices nowadays. This is because batteries are based
on chemical energy sources.
The new scope for chemical energy sources is to be able to harvest energy without a battery
involved in the process. The two harvesting technologies within chemical energy sources that
Page 33 of 104
==PAGE:42==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.1
Energy sources and their harvesting technologies
will be reviewed in this thesis are microbial and chemical potential energy harvesting. These
two methods utilize and extract energy from chemical reactions and can be found especially
in uncontrolled environments.
Microbial
Microbial power sources for IoT devices utilize biological reactions to digest
reactants, producing an electrical potential in the process, which is grasped by microbial
fuel cells. They capture the energy being released when the chemical reaction occurs.[15]
This method has the advantage that it can operate without a light present.
In controlled environments, for example, microbial fuel cells can be useful as a stable source
of energy when utilized as a part of wastewater treatment. A study [39] developed a sensor
network for wastewater monitoring, showing the potential of using microbial fuel cells to
power the network. It showed a high power density of up to 7 W/m2.
In uncontrolled environments, microbial fuel cells have proven to be a viable source of energy
for deep-sea sensing, where the maintenance of a sensor network is much more complex and
it makes use of a unique source of energy, one of very few available at such a depth below the
sea surface. Another study found that microbial fuel cells could be used to power a deep-sea
sensing device with power outputs of up to 10 mW/m2 at small depths of 5 m and up to
0.5 µW/m2 of anode area at 1000 meters depth. [40] Apart from deep-sea use cases, this
technology has proved to supply 0.5 - 3 mW/cm2 in other use cases on land using land as
substrate. [15]
In conclusion, the use of this technology on land could enable many new projects able to
operate in new uncontrolled environments, specifically where sunlight is not available. On
the other hand, more study needs to be conducted into their longevity for powering sensors.
Chemical Potential
An alternative chemical method of energy harvesting for microbial
fuel cells is electrochemical harvesting. This technology utilizes the transfer of electrons by
electrochemical means to effect a usable potential. [15] This technology has been present for
many years. It essentially works similarly to battery technology, where chemical energy is
transformed into electrical potential.
For the past years, much research has been conducted into the use of the natural corrosion
of steel structures to produce energy. The corrosion of steel is essentially an electrochem-
ical process, which releases energy, which can later be harvested.[15] This leads to a great
potential for long-term monitoring of steel structures. Additionally, the natural corrosion of
other metallic compounds can be used for powering sensors.
Regarding power outputs, studies have shown that this technology can supply within the
range of 200 µW to 3 mW from steel corrosion or when soaking cement in seawater, sim-
ulating operation in an uncontrolled marine environment. [41] That shows that the use of
chemical potential is reliable to power an IoT device. This technology could be useful in
Page 34 of 104
==PAGE:43==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.2
Summary
many environments, both controlled and uncontrolled, where corrosion is present, including
as part of infrastructure and marine applications.[15] But, on the other hand, does not have
much future in the rest of IoT applications, due to its really specific scope.
3.2
Summary
Table 2 summarizes the most valuable information collected from the literature review
on the different harvesting technologies. It includes typical power outputs for each harvest-
ing method, along with additional valuable information described during this chapter, such
as efficiency, cost, or ambient conditions required to obtain those energy outputs.
As seen in the table, energy harvesters based on photovoltaics have been present in our
modern world for years and have the most advanced technology in terms of power output
compared to the other harvesting technologies. But on the other hand, in the past years,
a lot of new modern methods have shown great improvements. These improvements have
mainly come in terms of higher efficiency when grasping the energy available.
Thermal energy harvesters have seen large advancements in recent years.
Conventional
thermoelectric generators have been available for a long time but pyroelectrics devices allow
energy to be extracted far more efficiently from heat sources, from 7.5% to up to 50% as
seen in table 2, and even offer a lower carbon footprint.[15] Mechanical energy harvesters
have seen a large shift towards the micro-scale in recent years resulting in considerable power
outputs, but still struggling regarding size and mechanical wear, slowing their development
and implementation in energy harvesting devices.
Radio frequency shows potential for energy harvesting with high power outputs and effi-
ciency, as reflected in the table, but finds difficulties when it comes to long distances or
taking the signal from other receiving devices. Chemical means of energy harvesting are
promising for energy harvesting in IoT. Even though their power outputs are not vastly
high, their availability where local power or any other type of energy source is difficult to
obtain, makes them important for the use cases that suffer those circumstances.
After discussing the different relevant energy sources and harvesting technologies along with
their capabilities, it is important to speak about the electronics side of things. As seen in
the introduction in section 1, after grasping energy from the environment, the whole pic-
ture of energy harvesting of IoT is complete with the communication protocol, System on
Chip (SoC), storage, and Power Management Integrated Circuit. These will be described in
section 4. Having discussed the electronics side of things, three use cases will be presented
in section 6 and there will be an analysis regarding how these use cases can be powered
battery-less and implement the harvesting methods discussed previously.
Page 35 of 104
==PAGE:44==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
3.2
Summary
Source
Harvesting
technology
Typical
power output
Efficiency
Cost
Ambient
Conditions
Reference
Light
Photovoltaic
(Outdoor)
<50,000 µW/cm2
12 - 18 %
$0.045 - 0.075 / cm2
<130,000 lx
[15] [19] [18]
[22] [20]
Photovoltaic
(Indoor)
<40 µW/cm2
<10 %
$0.2 / cm2
<1000 lx fluorescent
[15] [19] [18]
[22] [20]
Thermal
Thermoelectrics
20 - 1,600 µW/cm2
<7.5 %
<$4 / cm2
<10◦
[15] [24] [25]
[26] [17] [18]
Pyroelectrics
0.04 - 3 µW/cm2
<50 %
**
<30◦
[15] [28] [29]
Mechanical
Static Fluid
Movement
20 - 90 µW
*
**
1.5 - 2 m/s
[15] [30] [31]
Piezoelectric
0.1 - 1,000 µW
∼20 %
$10 - 40 / cm2
5 - 500 Hz
[1] [17] [32]
[33] [34]
Electromagnetic
harvester
700 - 8,000 µW/cm3
>20 %
**
Small
vibrations
[1] [35]
Triboelectric
400 - 3,000 µW/cm2
*
**
Human
movement
[17] [1] [15]
Electromagnetic
Radio
Frequency
<10,000 µW/cm2
<65 %
$99
2 - 6 GHz
[17] [15] [36]
[37] [38]
Chemical
Microbial
<1 µW/cm2
*
**
< 1000 m
seawater depth
[15] [39] [40]
Chemical
Potential
200 - 3000 µW
*
**
Steel
corrosion
[15] [41]
Table 2: Literature review summary of various energy harvesting technologies
* - Efficiency data not found during the literature review.
** - Commercial product not available on the market.
Page 36 of 104
==PAGE:45==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4
Electronics and communication
In this section, the focus is the electronics side of things within energy harvesting imple-
mentation in IoT devices as well as how IoT devices communicate with each other and the
rest of the world via communication protocols. Firstly, the communication protocols will be
reviewed, stating the different types that are available currently as well as important charac-
teristics from them, such as power consumption or range. Sequentially, the system-on-chips
(SoCs), storage, and power management integrated circuits (PMICs) will be discussed and
described to understand at a high level their involvement within energy harvesting imple-
mentation in IoT. This section will be concluded with a summary of how IoT architecture
is designed and how each of the parts described in this section connects and integrates an
IoT application.
4.1
Communication Protocols
Connectivity is key to any IoT deployment. Many different communication protocols
have been created over the years, allowing devices and servers to send each other data in
new, interconnected ways. Each technology has its strengths and weaknesses in terms of
coverage, range, scalability, cost, and network requirements that will address specific IoT
use cases and application needs. When selecting a wireless technology for an IoT device, a
few considerations must be taken into account: the distance range, the maximum output
supported, and the power consumption, the last one is key when implementing an energy-
harvesting IoT solution.[42] Regarding distance, protocols can have a range from a few
centimeters to several kilometers.
As seen in figure 27 Bluetooth, ZigBee, or WiFi are
ideal for short to medium-range communication like home or indoor applications. On the
other hand, when it comes to higher range, Cellular (3G/4G and 5G), NB-IoT, LoRa, and
MIOTY, among others, are best suited for long-range communication such as smart meters,
and animal or asset tracking.[42] When it comes to power consumption and data rates,
communication protocols can be grouped into five categories:
• Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN)
– Technologies included in this category do not exceed a maximum range of 100
meters. Bluetooth, Zigbee, and Z-wave are among these categories. Devices using
this application are mostly used in home applications such as building control
systems, smart alarms, or smart thermostats but Industry 4.0 applications. [42]
While having an average consumption profile considered to be in the medium
scale, their transmission time for those protocols is longer than others, with a
data rate of 250 Kb/s.
• Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN)
– Protocols among WLAN networks provide connectivity of up to 1 kilometer. In
this category, WiFi is the most common standard. The technology is supporting
devices such as home assistants, smart TVs, and smart speakers and is sometimes
Page 37 of 104
==PAGE:46==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.1
Communication Protocols
used in industrial settings like factories. New generation, low-power WiFi operates
at much higher data rates ranging from 1 Mb/s to 54 Mb/s. This allows WiFi-
enabled sensors to spend very little time with actual transmission or reception
which reduces overall power consumption. [42]
• Low Power Wide Area Networks (LPWAN)
– Low Power Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) are expected to experience a massive
growth in the number of IoT devices connected through them.
According to
McKinsey, 100 percent of the population should have LPWAN coverage by 2022,
and by 2025, it is expected that more than 2 billion devices will be connected
through LPWAN. [42] This is because this technology offers low power, and long-
range (up to 10-50 km in rural zones and 1-10 km in urban zones) together with
low-cost specifications. Four main competing standards are currently sharing the
market: Sigfox, LoRa, LTE-M, and NB-IoT. They are presently being rolled out
worldwide with more than 25 million devices already connected, the majority of
which are smart meters.
• Cellular technology (3G, 4G and 5G)
– Before LPWAN, cellular technology (2G, 3G, and 4G) was the only option for
long-range remote device connectivity (up to 100km).
The newest feature of
cellular is 5G technology, which offers a massive data rate of 600 Mbps.
[42]
Cellular connectivity has historically been focused on range and bandwidth at
the expense of power consumption. However, 5G, which transmits data about 10
times faster than 4G, provides a lower power consumption.
• Wireless Neighborhood Area Networks (WNAN)
– Wireless Neighborhood Area Networks (WNAN) is a medium-range technology
that covers areas between 5-10 km. Wi-Sun is included in this type of technology.
WNAN networks are generally high-energy consumers but can provide high data
rates and low latency.[42]
Figures 26 and 27 show a summary of what has been discussed up to this point.
Figure 26: Comparison between different protocols’ range, maximum data rate, and power
consumption [42]
Page 38 of 104
==PAGE:47==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.1
Communication Protocols
Figure 27: Comparison between data rate and consumption vs range differentiating protocol
and cost. In the table above, all units are in mW.[14]
After introducing the different communication protocols available in the present, the
objective of this thesis is to analyze and discuss which protocols are most fit for the energy
harvesting use cases selected in section 6. To be fit for one of the use cases, the protocol’s
characteristics need to match with the harvesting technologies implemented for that use case,
as well as with the IoT device used, in terms of compatibility and data consumption.
All this will be covered in section 6.
Page 39 of 104
==PAGE:48==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.2
Energy Storage: Supercapacitors
4.2
Energy Storage: Supercapacitors
IoT devices can be powered through a wired connection in a few cases, but a vast
majority do not have that opportunity, in the case of wireless sensors. Powering them is a
problem, so storing energy as efficiently as possible is quite important for the matter.
When using energy harvesting, two different architectures can be implemented, including
storage or where the device does not contain storage space and immediately uses the energy
being harvested the moment it is being grasped. [17]
Both architectures are shown in figure 28.
Figure 28: Two different architectures when grasping energy.[17]
In this thesis, the initial desire is to use the Harvest-Store-Use architecture shown in
the lower part of figure 28. Depending on the use cases, which will be discussed in section 6,
one architecture may be a better fit than another, but an architecture without storage may
cause that when an IoT device needs to perform, there is not enough power to function.
The environment has abundant energy but energy harvesters mostly can only deliver it
at very low power, so a popular solution when powering wireless sensors is a supercapacitor.
A supercapacitor is an ideal power buffer that is charged at low power from the environment
and delivers peak power for data collection and transmission. [43] In short, supercapacitors
are high-capacity capacitors. They have higher capacitance and lower voltage limits than
other types of capacitors. Their main characteristics are: [44]
• Much faster charging than batteries.
• Greater storing capacity than standard capacitors.
• Bigger lifespan than rechargeable batteries, having at least over ten times more cycles
going from charged to discharged.
• Wide-ranging operating temperatures, from roughly -40 degrees Celsius to 65.
Page 40 of 104
==PAGE:49==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.2
Energy Storage: Supercapacitors
Moreover, supercapacitors cannot store as much energy as a comparably sized lithium-ion
battery (roughly one-quarter of the energy by weight), supercapacitors can compensate for
that with the speed of charge. In some cases, they are nearly 1,000x faster than the charge
time for a similar-capacity battery. [44]
On the other hand, supercapacitors have some disadvantages such as: [44]
• They are not suited for long-term energy storage. The discharge rate of supercapacitors
is significantly higher than lithium batteries, losing as much as 10% - 20% of their
charge per day due to self-discharge.
• Gradual voltage loss. While batteries provide a constant voltage output until they are
discharged, the voltage output of capacitors declines linearly with their charge.
Given these circumstances, supercapacitors are mostly considered the best-suited storage
element for wireless IoT solutions powered by energy harvesting, which has led to their im-
plementation together nowadays. There is a vast state of the art for supercapacitors, with
good performances, even within energy harvesting solutions. For instance, a company called
Cap-XX [43] released in 2021 the thinnest high-power supercapacitor, 0.4 mm. It can be
charged at low power and deliver much more power, over two thousand times more than a
lithium battery. It stores over six hundred times more energy than a standard capacitor and
has over one million cycles, giving it over a ten-year life span.
Moreover, supercapacitors can be coupled with coin cells, batteries, or energy harvesters,
being the last one the most relevant in this thesis. In the case of Cap-XX, they coupled
two of their supercapacitors to two energy harvesters, a solar cell, and a vibrational energy
harvester. As seen in figure 29, their supercapacitor was able to charge up to maximum
voltage (around 2.7V) within 22 hours when faced with a 400 lux solar intensity. Naturally,
the higher the light intensity, the more voltage can be reached and therefore more energy
stored. The energy stored is calculated with the equation: Estored = 1
2 ×C ×V 2. Typically, A
capacitor charges 63% of the supply voltage that is charging it after one time period. After
5 time periods, a capacitor charges up to over 99% of its supply voltage. Therefore, it is safe
to say that the time it takes for a capacitor to charge up to the supply voltage is 5 times
constant. To calculate the time constant of a capacitor, the formula is T = R × C, being R
the resistance of the load. Therefore, the formula to calculate how long it takes a capacitor
to charge is T = 5 × R × C. [45]
To set a scale, the capacitors in figure 29 have a capacitance of 240 mF and, as said before,
are exposed to 400 lux light intensity. As seen in section 3, 400 lux is not a high light
intensity in outdoor settings, where an overcast sky has a light intensity of around 50,000
lux [18]. That will most likely derive in more energy being stored and reaching quicker the
point when the supercapacitor has enough energy to supply the load.
Page 41 of 104
==PAGE:50==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.3
Power Management Integrated Circuit (PMIC)
Figure 29: Two similar Cap-XX supercapacitors charging profiles when coupled to a solar
cell.[43]
To conclude, the goal of this thesis is to include a supercapacitor solution in terms
of storing and powering the device. In section 6, once gone through the use cases where
energy harvesting wants to be implemented along with their requirements in terms of data
load and recurrence, there will be a discussion on which supercapacitor to include, where
there will need to be a balance found in terms of capacitance and charging times to satisfy
the requirements from the IoT application. That will be done by attempting to align the
energy being stored by the environment, communication protocol and the data requirements
indicated previously.
4.3
Power Management Integrated Circuit (PMIC)
Once initially gone through how power is obtained in an IoT energy harvesting solution
via harvesting technologies and, sequentially, how it is stored in the device via a supercapac-
itor, it is time to present how all this power is managed and optimized. Power consumption
for IoT devices can be reduced if a proper and efficient power management integrated circuit
(PMIC) is used. Selection of energy transducer, and estimated power calculation related
to the generation values and power consumption, these constraints must be fulfilled for the
PMIC. Many PMICs are already developed, which can provide a complete solution for en-
ergy harvesting. Some of these manufacturers are Texas Instruments, E-Peas, NOWI, and
Trameto. [46]
As mentioned before, to maintain the bias of the conditioning circuit in this optimal range,
Page 42 of 104
==PAGE:51==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.3
Power Management Integrated Circuit (PMIC)
a PMIC is required. The role of this circuit is to extract the energy from the conditioning
circuit at a controlled rate, to maintain the optimal voltage interval. The extracted energy
is transferred to a low voltage reservoir, Cbuff in figure 30, and supplies the load as long as
there is enough energy in Cbuff. To be compatible with the microwatts level of input power,
the interface is implemented as an integrated circuit. [47]
Figure 30: PMIC structure integrated into a kinetic energy harvester.[47]
A PMIC has different working modes and is specific to each PMIC. In section 5, these
phases or modes will be discussed in further detail for the specific PMIC used in the ex-
periment. Related to the specific PMIC from figure 30, the initial working mode is a cold
start, which is common to all PMICs, and happens when the device first starts harvesting
energy and is yet to satisfy the internal power needs of the chip. After being able to do so,
Vres grows as energy is being harvested and collected in Cbuff, and once enough energy has
been collected, it is transferred to the load and an operation is performed. Those phases will
remain operating in a cycle without going back to cold start mode as long there is enough
energy to satisfy the internal power needs.[47]
Lastly, one of the main advantages of PMICs is to convert each type of energy input by
an energy harvester into readily available energy. Each type of energy harvester has differ-
Page 43 of 104
==PAGE:52==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.4
System-on-chip (SoC)
ent electrical characteristics. Depending on which harvesting method, the current input may
be in direct current (DC) or alternate current (AC). Most EH PMICs are designed with a
single input and to connect to a single type of harvester, so due to the different character-
istics, readily available energy may be wasted. [14] Currently, some different PMICs allow
multiple input energy harvesting sources and can combine them despite their different elec-
trical characteristics, which is a huge advancement for energy harvesting since it increases
the amount of energy available that can be grasped simultaneously. All though with the
disadvantage of losing overall efficiency that may affect negatively its performance.
In section 5, there will be further exposure to how PMICs work and perform for energy
harvesting implementation in IoT.
4.4
System-on-chip (SoC)
A system on a chip, known as an SoC, is essentially an integrated circuit (IC) that takes
a single platform and integrates an entire electronic or computer system onto it. Depending
on the kind of system that has been reduced to the size of a chip, it can perform a variety
of functions including signal processing or wireless communication. [48]
SoCs have several benefits such as improving compatibility and efficiency while reducing
space requirements and speed of development. In IoT, including the wireless technology in
the SoC helps to overcome implementation. This makes it easier and cheaper to connect to
other external networks in addition to reducing complexity, cost, and energy consumption.
[49] As discussed previously in subsection 4.1, there are many types of networks and protocols
in IoT. When it comes to connecting different sensors using various protocols and network
technologies such as the ones mentioned before, ZigBee, WiFi, cellular, Bluetooth, etc., the
deployment may face some incompatibility challenges, such as data rates or range. [49] That
will be a challenge that will arise in section 6 when designing an energy harvesting solution
for each of the applications selected, where it is a must to comply with a communication
protocol and SoC.
The main components of a typical wireless SoC, among others, are: [48]
• Central processing unit (CPU).
• Memory.
• Input and Output ports.
• Security.
• Power Management Unit (PMU).
• Connectivity.
Page 44 of 104
==PAGE:53==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.4
System-on-chip (SoC)
Two examples of two different System-on-chip structures developed by the company Atmosic
and Redspine Signals, respectively, are shown in figures 31 and 32. The examples of SoC
show the main components mentioned previously, both with ROM and RAM, as well as with
their PMU. In addition, the connectivity used by Atmosic is Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
and in the case of Redspines, it is reflected that it can support Radio, Bluetooth, or Zigbee.
Those connectivities will send and receive the necessary data and signals from and to the
chip.
Regarding the PMU, it plays a huge role in the matter of this thesis. The energy efficiency of
IoT sensors is critical since in an energy harvesting solution, the power is most likely limited.
Optimizing the designs improves the efficiencies, hence improving power usage in the IoT
device. The SoC with built-in wireless connectivity features usually includes power-saving
algorithms that allow them to use only a few microamperes. Those few microamperes, plus
the data consumption that comes from transmitting the data, is the energy that needs to be
grasped by a harvester for a fulfilled IoT energy harvesting solution. In a typical application,
the factors that determine the SoC power requirements are the efficiency of its radio part,
the sensitivity of the receiver, as well as the energy consumption by the other components.
[49]
Figure 31: Atmosic System-on-chip structure.[50]
Page 45 of 104
==PAGE:54==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.4
System-on-chip (SoC)
Figure 32: Redspine Signals System-on-chip structure.[49]
There are a few considerations when selecting the SoC IoT chip for certain applications.
These include power consumption, the physical size of the device, data throughput, latency,
etc. The three most critical issues are the range, data rate, and power. As seen in previous
chapters, these parameters are interrelated since the data rate and range depend on the
protocol. [49]
This thesis aims to implement energy harvesting solutions to three different IoT use cases
and, naturally, part of the solution is the SoC. Due to the collaboration on this thesis from
the company Silicon Labs, the desire is to analyze the compatibility between the company’s
SoCs with the rest of the different parts of the energy harvesting solution, which are the use
cases, communication protocols, and harvesting technology.
Silicon Labs’ wireless products support several different technologies, shown in figure 33.
All the protocols shown in figure 33 are standard protocols that were introduced previously
in subsection 4.1 except for one of them, proprietary. Proprietary protocols are the ones
designed and made by a single organization, in this case, Silicon Labs. They are not open
source or free to use for anyone. Therefore, Silicon Labs has the right to change the protocol
design and implementation and enforce restrictions on the usage. [51] Silicon Labs’ propri-
etary protocol offers solutions within the Sub-GHz domain, where long range is possible, as
well as the 2.4 GHz domain, where the cost is lower at the expense of lower range.
Statement of Silicon Labs regarding their proprietary protocols:
"Our proprietary wireless portfolio ranges from transceivers to multi-band wireless SoCs for
IoT applications. Our devices offer ultra-low power, longest range, up to 20 dBm output
power, and several modulation schemes, while covering major frequency bands. Our Dy-
namic Multi-protocol (DMP) enables smartphone connectivity to long-range solutions, and
easy-to-use SDKs accelerate proprietary protocol development." [52]
Page 46 of 104
==PAGE:55==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.5
IoT architecture
Figure 33: Redspine Signals System-on-chip structure.[7]
In conclusion, the goal is to find the best fit between an SoC that supports one of the
communication protocols shown above, along with an energy harvesting method, for each of
the selected use cases in section 6.
4.5
IoT architecture
To conclude the electronics section, it is important to briefly discuss how what has been
explained up to this point connects to making an IoT product. In figure 34, there is a simple
diagram of how an IoT architecture is structured.
Figure 34: IoT architecture.[53]
The part of sensors and controllers gather each of the electronic components discussed
Page 47 of 104
==PAGE:56==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
4.5
IoT architecture
in this section except the communication protocols. It gathers the SoCs, where sensors are
implemented to gather various types of data, depending on the specific application in which
it is used, and it gathers all the power-related electronics discussed. These are the storage,
PMIC, and the power source, in the specific case of this thesis, a supercapacitor is the storage
and the power source is an energy harvester.
Once the data is collected, it is transmitted using a communication protocol that is compat-
ible with the SoC. That is when the IoT gateways are introduced. Once the sensors send in
the data, it has to be aggregated and converted into digital form so that it can be processed.
This stage of the IoT architecture is what makes this happen. It essentially gets the data
ready for processing and connects the sensors and the third and last phase of IoT, which
figure 34 calls the Internet. [53]
This third phase is essentially when the processed data by the IoT gateways is sent to
the Internet or any cloud service. These can be in the form of a mobile app, software, or
any kind of front-end module.
After reviewing the electronics matter of energy harvesting in IoT and going through en-
ergy harvesting sources and technologies, in section 5, a practical case where an IoT energy
harvesting product was examined will be presented.
Page 48 of 104
==PAGE:57==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
5
Experimenting with energy harvesting
In this section, the procedure and results of an energy harvesting experiment executed
with a facilitated PMIC will be explained. Making use of Silicon Labs’ (SL) help, an opportu-
nity arose to experiment with a PMIC’s behavior and performance within energy harvesting.
To fulfill that, various changes were implemented across different scenarios. For example,
the ambient conditions such as the light intensity, or the number of energy harvesters being
used. Before going into much detail, it is important to mention that the company that
facilitated the PMIC that was used, due to confidentiality issues, will not be displayed. It
is an industrially relevant company within PMIC development and it will be referred to as
company "X". Along with this PMIC, some energy harvesters were facilitated by company
X to be able to evaluate the performance of the PMIC. These harvesters were:
• Indoor photovoltaic cell, which mainly extracts energy from indoor light sources such
as fluorescent, halogen, or LED lights.
• Outdoor photovoltaic cell, which mainly extracts energy from outdoor light sources.
• Thermoelectric generator, which extracts energy from a gradient of temperature by
keeping a cold side and warming up the other side. In this case, the hot side was
stimulated with the help of a current supply.
• Piezoelectric generator, which extracts energy from strains created across its surface.
Particularly, for this scenario, the strains were caused by vibration from a motor con-
nected to a voltage supply.
These harvesters’ functioning is explained in further detail in section 3.
Additionally, to test the energy harvested by the harvesters and managed by the PMIC,
a load was facilitated, in the form of an LED light. This load was turned on when the
PMIC supplied a constant output of 1.8 V. Company X developed a PMIC that was able
to harvest energy from up to four different inputs. The energy sources harvested from these
multiple harvesters can be from the same energy source or various ones. Due to this range
of possibilities, there was a vast amount of different variations of experiments that could be
implemented. A sketch of the PMIC’s flow is shown in figure 35:
Figure 35: Company X’s PMIC power flow. From left to right, it shows the multiple inputs
where the energy is harvested, then stored, and finally used in a selected load
Page 49 of 104
==PAGE:58==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
Moving forward from that, the aimed procedure to implement during the experimen-
tation was to first experiment with both company X’s energy harvesters and company X’s
load. Afterward, company X’s load was substituted for an SL’s load. Lastly, an energy
harvester facilitated by DTU was introduced as an energy input, mixing it with company
X’s harvesters. This harvester was an electromagnetic harvester that worked with vibration
from hand movement with a frequency of a few Hz. The output given by this harvester was
a 5V output in AC. Lastly, the load changed from company X’s load and SL’s load.
The procedure is summarized in Table 3:
Scenario
X Harvesters
DTU Harvester
X Load
SL Load
1
X
X
2
X
X
3
X
X
X
4
X
X
X
Table 3: Procedure for PMIC experimentation
This PMIC had five different work phases: cold start, phase 0, phase 1, phase 2, and
phase 3. The period from cold start to phase 2 is the initialization period of the PMIC,
where the internal voltage needs to reach a certain voltage Vint. After initializing, phase 2
and phase 3 keep switching, depending on the storage, where if it reaches a certain voltage
Vst, the load is switched on for a time, which normally varies between 10 to 20 seconds in
the case where using the company X’s load. If at some point, the internal voltage is not at
least Vint, the device will go back to a cold start after suffering a brownout.
As mentioned previously, many different scenarios can experiment with the PMIC and its
multiple harvester inputs. Table 4 will summarize every case that was experimented within
scenario 1 (company X’s harvesters and load) stating what harvesters were used, under what
ambient conditions (measured by a Silicon Labs device called Thunderboard [54][55]) and
how much power input is being extracted from them at some point during the experiment.
Furthermore, the table indicates how much power was being stored in the storage, which
compares it with the total power input, stating the efficiency of the experiment. Lastly, in
each scenario, there will be an analysis of how long it took from cold start to phase 3 and,
once the PMIC has initialized, how often it changes between phase 2 and phase 3 when the
load is on.
Page 50 of 104
==PAGE:59==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
Scenario
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Energy Harvesters
Indoor PV
2,100 lx (H)
2.6 mW
-
-
820 lx
1.5 mW
820 lx
1.5 mW
-
17,000 lx
6.4 mW
200 lx (L)
6,4 mW
Outdoor PV
345 lx
1 mW
-
820 lx
?
820 lux
2 mW
820 lx
2.3 mW
17,000 lx
5.4 mW
17,000 lx
5.2 mW
200 lx(L)
?
Thermoelectric
***◦
1.4 mW
***◦
1 mW
-
-
***◦
1 mW
-
-
-
Piezoelectric
*** Hz
1 mW
-
-
-
*** Hz
0.8 mW
-
-
-
Results
Total Input
6 mW
1 mW
?
3.5 mW
5.6 mW
5.4 mW
11.6 mW
?
Total stored
1 mW
0.3 mW
?
1.5 mW
1.1 mW
1.9 mW
**
?
Efficiency
17%
26%
?
30%
2’%
28%
**
?
Initialization time
1 min
5 min
Inf*
30 s
30 s
30 s
**
Inf*
Phase 2-3
30 s
5 min
-
30 s
25 s
30 s
0
-
H - Halogen lighting
L - LED lighting
? - Since it never reached phase 2, there was no information on power input.
– - Not used in corresponding scenario.
Rows corresponding to the initial section "Energy Harvesters" firstly state the ambient conditions in which each harvester is faced in
each scenario, below it indicates the amount of power being gathered by that harvester.
Degrees in thermoelectrics are in Celsius.
Phase 2-3 indicates the period the PMIC took from just starting phase 2 and harvesting energy to being able to supply 1.8 V in phase
3
*Infinity - it never got enough power to exit the cold start phase.
**There was plenty of energy fast and there was no time to note the power being stored. It stayed in phase 3 indefinitely.
***Not measured during the experiment.
Table 4: Scenarios experimented with company X’s harvesters and load (1)
Page 51 of 104
==PAGE:60==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
As is shown in Table 4, most of the scenarios were successful and it was possible to
harvest enough energy to reach phase 3 and supply a fixed output of 1.8 V. The efficiencies
reached at most 30% in the successful scenarios. Additionally, as it is indicated in table
5, both indoor and outdoor photovoltaic cells are the harvesters that take the most power
input, which aligns with the literature reviewed and what it is stated in section 3.
Energy Harvester
Average power input (mW)
Indoor PV
3
Outdoor PV
3.2
Thermoelectric
1.1
Piezoelectric
0.9
Table 5: Average power inputs by the energy harvester for Scenario 1
Regarding scenario 2, where loads from Silicon Labs were introduced, different exper-
iments took place. Four different loads were used, split into two different types of devices.
These devices were:
• Thunderboard, both Thunderboard react [55] and the newer generation Thunderboard
BG22 [54] were used, both devices with a 3,3 V voltage demand.
• Silicon Labs xG27 [56], with two different applications. It has a 3.3 V voltage demand.
As mentioned before, the PMIC gives a fixed 1.8 V output. Since the loads facilitated by
Silicon Labs demand 3.3 V, a DC-DC converter needed to be used. For all four loads, the
same energy harvesters were used, only the indoor light and outdoor light energy sources.
The ambient conditions and the result for each scenario are reflected in table 6. The scenarios
that were done are summarized in table 6.
Scenario
Load
Ambient conditions
Result
2.1
Thunderboard React
600 lx (F)
Failure
2.2
Thunderboard BG22
600 lx (F)
Failure
2.3
xG27 app. 1
900 lx (F & H)
Successful
2.4
xG27 app. 2
900 lx (F & H)
Successful
H - Halogen lighting
F - Fluorescent lighting
Table 6: Scenarios experimented with company X’s harvesters and SL’s loads (2)
In scenarios 2.1 and 2.2, the experiment was a failure because, once reached phase 3
of the PMIC, its output instead of lasting between 15 and 20 seconds as in the previous
scenario with company X’s load, only lasted around 2 or 3 seconds. As shown in figures 36
and 37, the output never even got to 3.3 V, marked as an orange mark in both figures. This
is a clear example of a brownout of the device, where it completely turns off after not being
able to feed it enough power to maintain it turned on, even without transmitting. This was
mostly caused due to two different reasons:
Page 52 of 104
==PAGE:61==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
• Even though that looking at the documentation from both Silicon Labs Thunderboard
[55] [54] and Company X states that the current that exits the PMIC is greater than
what both Thunderboards demand at their most demanding phase, which is trans-
mitting, the Thunderboard has various kind of sensors, such as light, temperature or
humidity sensor for example. So, even though it is thought to be a low-energy device,
there is still a need to increase the output power from this PMIC or lower the demands
from the Thunderboard or any future device.
• The initialization time comes in handy with the previous reason and is much greater
than the LED since it contains many features within the device.
Figure 36: Oscilloscope in scenario 2.1 with Thunderboard React.
The measurements obtained are measured from the output of the DC-DC converter. As it
shows, it does not reach the 3.3 V marked in orange and, after 250 ms, it goes down to 1.8
V, which is the original output from the PMIC. After just 3 seconds, the PMIC goes back
to phase 2 and stops supplying power to the load.
Page 53 of 104
==PAGE:62==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
Figure 37: Oscilloscope in scenario 2.2 with Thunderboard BG22.
The measurements obtained are measured from the output of the DC-DC converter. As it
is shown, it reaches around 2.8 V for about 4 seconds, where there is vast volatility in the
supply from the converter, where it goes down to 1.8 after 1 second. After 4 seconds, the
PMIC goes back to phase 2 and stops supplying power to the load.
As an important note, the Thunderboard connects to a mobile phone app via Bluetooth.
The period in which the PMIC was providing the output was so short that there was not
enough time for the Thunderboard device to appear on the app to be able to connect to it.
The time intervals from the oscilloscope in figures 36 and 37 was of 500 milliseconds. For the
Thunderboard react, the converted output was concluded after just around 250 milliseconds,
while for the BG22, the output is volatile and it first hits the 1.8 V mark after 1 second
but keeps fighting and reaching 2.8 V until after the 4-second mark, where it stops getting
power from the converter. The Thunderboard React, after just 3 seconds, stops getting any
power from the PMIC. Since the latter is a newer version, its energy demands are most likely
improved from the former version developed in React. Both cases are not even enough to
appear on the mobile app and of course, transmit any data from its sensors.
Furthermore, scenarios 2.3 and 2.4 were successful.
As it is shown in figure 38, which
was the same output for both scenarios reflected in the oscilloscope, the PMIC can reach 3.3
V, but keeps it and supply it continuously.
Page 54 of 104
==PAGE:63==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
Figure 38: Oscilloscope in scenario 2.3 and 2.4 with xG27.
As it shows, the PMIC can supply 1.8 V for an undefined period. After going through the
converter, the output reaches 3.3 V and is steady throughout the whole experiment duration.
Silicon Labs’ xG27’s applications experimented in both scenarios, are beneficial to the
PMIC’s output capabilities. Both applications are developed in a way where there are numer-
ous and constant changes in the working phases of the device. The xG27 switches between
sleep mode, initialization mode, and transmitting mode in a really fast way so each phase
takes short periods, around the milliseconds scale. This allows the current demand to not
be too high during a too long period. That way, the PMIC can feed the xG27 continuously
while harvesting just indoor and outdoor light, which was around 2 milliwatts during the
experiment. It does not experience any brown-out unlike the previous scenarios 2.1 and 2.2.
Lastly, the last scenarios, 3 and 4, involved using DTU’s energy harvester, which was an
electromagnetic harvester. After going through the procedure of the PMIC experimenta-
tion, it realized that scenario 4, which involved DTU’s harvester and Silicon Labs’ load, was
not worth studying due to the fact once enough energy is harvested from the PMIC side, it
would be the same behavior from the load side as scenario 2.
After reaching that point, the last thing that needed to be done was to try if the energy
harvester from DTU was able to harvest enough energy to reach the PMIC’s phase 3 and
supply 1.8 V. The device that was used is shown in figure 39. Thanks to two magnets on
both ends of the device, with the same polarity as the floating magnet in the middle, energy
is created as the magnet goes through both coils when the device is given a vibration.
Page 55 of 104
==PAGE:64==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
Figure 39: DTU’s electromagnetic energy harvester.
Measuring the output in an oscilloscope, the electromagnetic harvester gave a 5 V out-
put in AC with a frequency of a few Hz. After plugging the harvester into the PMIC, its
power harvested supported the rest of the harvesters for a faster transition from phase to
phase 3. But on the other hand, by itself, it was never close to being able to power the board
the needed amount to reach its phase 3 and supply 1.8 V.
A reason that mostly caused that is that there was not a constant vibration frequency given
to the harvester since the vibration given to it was a manual hand movement. This devel-
oped in a huge increase in the impedance of the harvester input, in the order of hundreds of
kiloohms, which did not let the harvester power enough amount of energy into the PMIC.
Along with this harvester and both photovoltaic harvesters(indoor and outdoor) it was easy
to reach phase 3 of the board. Once stopped harvesting from the electromagnetic device, the
period from phase 2 to back to phase 3 was slower than when the electromagnetic harvester
was being executed, which means that the electromagnetic harvester was effective and sup-
ported the rest of the harvester when harvesting the energy.
To conclude this section, the key conclusions and takeaways from experimenting with com-
pany X are:
• The most efficient energy harvesters are the photovoltaic cells, both indoor and out-
door, which aligns with the literature reviewed.
• The indoor photovoltaic cells, under more realistic circumstances, do not involve direct
lighting or high lux, where it normally is on average around 400 or 500 lux. With those
conditions, the indoor photovoltaic cell would not be able to power the board alone
since the experiments mostly higher intensity and or direct lighting.
Page 56 of 104
==PAGE:65==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
• Having multiple harvesters is mostly useful when there is not a dominant energy source,
like in use cases that are outdoor and vastly harvest energy from the sunlight. Use
cases such as predictive maintenance where there is not a dominant energy source can
benefit from multiple input harvesting, for example, indoor light and vibration energy.
• While having a PMIC with multiple harvesters is such an amazing advancement toward
the goal of battery-less IoT devices and maximizing energy harvesting in IoT, this
experiment has proved the fact that there is a huge potential improvement in this
matter.
There have been many signs of inconsistency throughout the PMIC’s experimentation.
For example, getting much different power inputs where conditions were the same, or
like in Table 4, where in scenario 1.5 there is a bigger power input but less power being
stored than in scenario 1.6, with a lower power input. Additionally, going through the
Silicon Labs documentation [54] [55] [56], the xG27 has bigger current demands than
the Thunderboards, while the first one can be powered indefinitely, the latter one is
not able to initialize.
Making PMICs more consistent with their efficiency and power output, while advancing into
even lower energy IoT devices, energy harvesting in IoT will grow exponentially within a
vast amount of different use cases or applications. The industry requires improvement in
every part of the process, from better energy harvesting, and lower consuming devices, to
better power management and storage.
After reviewing in this section how a Power Management Integrated Circuit works and
how it behaves depending on ambient conditions or which energy sources are used, in the
next section there will be an analysis of some selected use cases within IoT and a discussion
on how energy harvesting can be implemented within them, matching all the information
collected up until this point with the requirements from these use cases.
Page 57 of 104
==PAGE:66==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6
Implementation of energy harvesting in IoT applica-
tions
In this section, the IoT use cases that will be analyzed for energy harvesting implemen-
tation will be presented. These use cases have been selected based on a consideration where
some potential is foreseen for a satisfactory implementation of energy harvesting, in addition
to having different circumstances to ample the exploration scope of this thesis.
The use cases are:
• Road signs tracking.
• Electronic shelf labels (ESL).
• Livestock monitoring.
For each application, there will be a discussion that will lay out different aspects that are
important to know when implementing energy harvesting. These will be described and each
use case will be analyzed in these aspects. After doing so, for each use case, the goal is to
find the fittest energy harvesting solution that can be implemented, using all the information
collected and discussed up until this point. For each use case, the goal is to find the best fit
and match these elements:
• Communication protocols.
• Silicon Lab’s SoCs.
• Energy harvesting technologies.
• The multiple input PMIC that was used in the experiment is discussed in section 5.
After finding the match, for each case, there will be a macroeconomic analysis, which de-
pending on the use case, may include market size estimation or cost of implementation. This
will be helpful when deliberating if an energy-harvesting solution for each case is worth going
for and investing in.
Before discussing each use case, as mentioned before, it is important to study what aspects
are important when introducing an energy harvester within any IoT use case.
6.1
What to know when implementing energy harvesting
As mentioned in the section 1, it is important to consider several facets within an IoT
application before considering implementing an energy harvesting solution.
These aspects are:
• Recurrence of data transmission.
Page 58 of 104
==PAGE:67==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.1
What to know when implementing energy harvesting
– How often the data needs to be transmitted is key when considering driving an
energy harvesting solution into an IoT application. If an application needs to send
data in real-time, it is quite complex to apply energy harvesting to power an IoT
device that can support that requirement. As much energy as can be harvested, it
is unrealistic that there would be enough power being harvested to have constant
communication from the IoT device.
An example of this can be an application where the GPS location of someone or
something needs to be transmitted, in real-time and continuously.
Energy harvesting is fitter to be applied in applications where the data trans-
mission recurrence is much lower. This can be daily, or weekly or it is possible to
send data only when the device has been able to grasp enough energy to make a
transmission.
• Data load and energy consumption.
– Data load is crucial in energy harvesting. Energy harvesting can only reach a
considerable amount of power obtained as seen in section 3, so applications that
have power consumption much greater than what is obtained by energy harvest-
ing sources are unviable for an energy harvesting implementation. For example,
traffic cameras that record what is happening on the road and send it to other
devices, could not be able to be powered by energy harvesting since video images
consume a vast amount of data. They are usually wired and powered through
those.
To help quantify energy consumption rates, in figure 40, some energy consump-
tion for household and personal devices are shown.
Lastly, other factors such as which communication protocol is used, the distance
of transmission, the SoC, and which sensors are used are important.
Page 59 of 104
==PAGE:68==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.1
What to know when implementing energy harvesting
Figure 40: Power consumption of several household and personal devices compared to com-
munication protocol[17]
• Ambient conditions.
– The environment settings of an IoT application are quite important, mainly the
energy availability. As seen in section 3, ambient conditions are probably the most
important matter when it comes to energy harvesting. It is essential to know in
which conditions the IoT application will be implemented. There are individual
optimal conditions for each energy harvesting technology. The power outputs can
change drastically depending on the energy available to harvest within the sur-
roundings of the device.
Table 2 in section 3 showed how ample the power output ranges are for some en-
ergy harvesting technologies. That is mostly caused by ambient conditions, such
as light incidence for PV or wind speed for wind turbines.
The locations of the IoT device are quite important. There are some use cases,
such as marine livestock monitoring, that are very complex to maintain and in
case of running out of battery, it is really hard to replace it since the location
might be unknown, or it is far away, or just difficult to get to. Making these types
of applications autonomous and self-sufficient would solve many logistic issues in
many cases.
• Demand and needs from the user.
Page 60 of 104
==PAGE:69==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
– The last aspect needed to be taken into consideration is how demanded or needed
the implementation of energy harvesting within an application is. Linked to what
was described in the previous point, in some remote applications where mainte-
nance is arduous work, an energy harvesting solution has huge market value since
it can save up huge amounts of costs and complexities. In those cases, it is worth
investigating and implementing an energy harvesting solution since, in case of a
successful implementation, can turn out to be a positive business case, along with
a great economic benefit.
Sequentially, as mentioned in the introduction, sustainability plays a huge role in
energy harvesting implementation within IoT applications. Normally, there are a
lot of benefits and economic support from several governments when it comes to
sustainability. For example, the European Union offers economic help, through
their EU Solar PV Industry Alliance [57], when implementing PV cells. Depend-
ing on which country, it may be more beneficial to drive an energy harvesting
initiative in some IoT applications in a specific country than others.
6.2
Road signs tracking
6.2.1
Introduction and Analysis
Road signs are key when it comes to ensuring safe circulation throughout every road.
There are several types of road signs, such as stop signs or school nearby signs. When these
signs get stolen, hit, or vandalized in a way and are not able to be seen anymore, leads to a
high risk of accidents that can have severe consequences.
Back in 2017, a Hungarian road maintenance company called Magya Kozut had to replace
22,000 different road signs, compared to 21,000 the prior year.[58] These signs were replaced
due to the reasons described previously, either theft, damage, or vandalism. The issue with
this circumstance is not the fact that traffic signs get stolen or damaged since that will most
likely keep happening and is uncontrollable. The biggest concern is the gap between the
time the traffic sign is not operational anymore and the time it is replaced.
Nowadays, the process of notifying when a road sign is altered is quite outdated. In the
case of road maintenance companies like the Hungarian mentioned previously or in North
Carolina [59], people are responsible for reporting when a road sign is missing via a website.
This is the same case in other countries like the United Kingdom or Spain as well. This
practice, apart from being outdated, is not vastly reliable, especially when it comes to more
remote roads where traffic flow is not as high.
Page 61 of 104
==PAGE:70==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
Figure 41: Nonoperational road sign after being hit by a car.
To solve this problem, a use case for energy harvesting emerged, an IoT solution that
provided a real-time notification in case of a road sign being altered. As mentioned in pre-
vious sections, data recurrence is a key aspect of an energy harvesting use case for IoT. In
this case, the data recurrence depends on how much energy can be harvested and stored.
Some sensors, such as the Thunderboard [54] which was discussed previously, provide data
regarding position and movement. This gives the possibility of knowing when a road sign
has been tilted or removed. The feature that is included in the Thunderboard is called a
3-axis gyroscope and it is developed by TDK InvenSense. [60] The goal is when there is
enough energy stored, to transmit a signal with the GPS coordinates and the data from the
gyroscope, which will tell the owner if a road sign is in good condition. Implementing this
solution could have another meaningful use case, such as measuring temperature or humid-
ity, which states when the road ices and needs salt to be operational. This can be done by
implementing the temperature and humidity sensor included in the Thunderboard. [61]
Regarding data consumption, as mentioned before, there are multiple items of an energy
harvesting solution in IoT which consumes energy. On one hand, the chip used has its par-
ticular consumptions, as well as the sensors that may be included to take measurements.
Additionally, the PMIC consumes power when harvesting energy or in standby mode. And
lastly, what is being transmitted (bytes), the rate at which is being sent (bytes per second),
and how far is sent, consume energy. Figure 13, in subsection 2.2, showed that when the
data rate of what needs to be transmitted is known, as well as the distance, can be con-
verted into power consumption. However, these power consumptions relate to current IoT
solutions, where the data is often transmitted and received continuously. On the contrary,
energy harvesting in IoT mostly relates to applications where data is transmitted much less
often, due to power limitation. Transmitting every second consumes energy which is unlikely
to be supported by grasping energy from the environment. Therefore, to obtain how much
power is consumed regarding the data being transmitted, data loads need to be assigned to
what is being sent, in bytes, and a data rate needs to be chosen, in bytes per second (bps).
Page 62 of 104
==PAGE:71==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
, a communication protocol needs to be chosen as well which consumes more or less energy
depending on which is it.
In this concrete use case, since the assumption is that a receiver could be available every
10 kilometers, there needs to be a long-range communication protocol, leading to sub-GHz
protocols such as cellular, LoRa, or 5G, as seen in subsection 4.1. Regarding data loads,
GPS coordinates have a data load of 4 bytes and a temperature sensor of 1.5 bytes. [62]It
will be assumed that due to string similarity (GPS coordinates are 12 digits, 6 latitude, and
6 longitude, and temperature 2 digits), the gyroscope will have a data load of 4 bytes and
the humidify sensor of 1.5 bytes. Since power is limited and using the data obtained in
figure 13, the assumption will be that these will be sent with a data rate of 100 bps, which
reduces the power consumption of transmission. In addition to the data transmission, the
internal power consumption of the SoC, with their sensors, and from the PMIC will need to
be satisfied and that will depend on which SoC is used.
Moreover, ambient conditions for this application are outdoor, where sunlight plays a huge
role in energy harvesting. However, other harvesting technologies such as thermoelectrics or
piezoelectric may have an impact on this application and be able to harvest energy to power
such devices. Specifically for solar energy, the device should be able to be implemented in
a way that it can store the energy during the day, when there is sunlight, to perform if an
incident happens during the night, satisfying the internal power demand of the device and
the data transmission if it occurs.
This solution is mainly aimed for road maintenance companies, where successful implemen-
tation of this solution could seek economical and logistics benefits for them.
6.2.2
Finding the best fit
With the information explained previously, it is time to design a solution in which energy
needs are met to transmit the information needed and a communication protocol that can
support such transmission. As mentioned previously, the range in this application needs to
be on the kilometer range, therefore technologies like WiFi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, or Z-wave
must be ruled out since their range is in the meters scale.
There will be an assumption that an IoT gateway will be present, in the worst cases of
remote roads, at least every ten kilometers. So the communication protocols that can be
considered so far are:
Page 63 of 104
==PAGE:72==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
Protocol
Range (km)
Power Consumption
NB_IoT
1 - 15
Low
Cellular
<100
Medium to High
LTE - M
1 - 11
Low to medium
MIOTY
∼10
Low
LoRa
2 - 15
Low to medium
Sigfox
∼10
Low to medium
Wi-Sun
5 - 10
Medium to high
SL Proprietary
Long
Low
Table 7: Possible communication protocols for energy harvesting implementation in road
signs tracking application
Moreover, as seen in table 7, while cellular seems to be the safest option in terms of
range, apart from being a secure and established technology for the past years, some eco-
nomic issues come with using cellular for this application. Establishing communication via
cellular technology implicates integrating a sim card or somewhat similar, which derives into
a monthly cost. That summed monthly cost for each of the road signs in which this solu-
tion could be implemented is a vast amount of money in total. This concern, along with a
greater power consumption (low to medium in figure 26) than other compatible protocols
rules cellular out as a protocol for this IoT use case.
The next step is figuring out which protocols SL devices support since the SoC will be one
from their product catalog. Looking back at subsection 4.4, where the protocols supported
by SL were presented, only their proprietary protocol is an option within the long-range
options presented in table 7. Additionally, a positive note about when using proprietary
protocols is their flexibility to adapt to a specific use case or application. As mentioned
before, in most cases, proprietary protocols are protocols owned by a specific company or
individual, and most of their technical characteristics are kept confidential. Due to that,
there will be an assumption that Silicon Labs can support long-range connectivity of at least
10 kilometers and low power consumption with similar levels as the unlicensed LPWAN,
such as MIOTY, LoRa, or Sigfox, as reflected in table 7
Therefore, SL proprietary will be the selected protocol for the road signs tracking use case.
Looking back at figure 27, there is power consumption data for LoRa, Sigfox, and MIOTY,
where SL proprietary is assumed to be located at. Table 8 shows actual data and estimations
for power consumption for LPWAN protocols, where SL’s proprietary is assumed to be.
Page 64 of 104
==PAGE:73==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
Range \Data Rate
100 bps
1 m
0.5
50 m
0.5
1 km
30
10 km
300
- Numbers are in mW
- Numbers with gray background is data extracted from figure 27, the final number is estimated based
on it.
Table 8: Estimations of power consumption for road sign tracking use cases.
The estimations are based on actual data from figure 27, and the only important value
from the table is 100 bps, which only the value for 10 km is missing. From 1 km to 10 km,
proportional values are estimated, multiplying by 10 the values for 1 km, therefore 300 mW.
Furthermore, to know the total energy, the time it takes to communicate the data is needed.
As mentioned before, both GPS and gyroscope are assumed to have the same data load of
4 bytes, as well as the temperature and humidity sensor with a data load of 1.5 bytes. [62].
Therefore if a total of 11 bytes is sent with a data rate of 100 bps, the total transmission
time is
11
100 = 0.11 seconds.
Furthermore, a Silicon Labs SoC from their proprietary protocol is elected to use its technical
documentation regarding power consumption, the FG25.[63] This SoC characterizes by low
consumption and long range, as described on SL’s website. Its average current consumption
when transmitting data is approximately 107 mA at low frequency (high range) and will
consume that for 0.11 seconds for each transmission. Additionally, the sensors included in
the FG25, which are the gyroscope, GPS, and temperature and humidity sensors have a
power consumption. The gyroscope has 2.6 mA current consumption with a voltage of 1.8
V (fixed from the PMIC) [60] and both temperature and humidity sensors have a power
consumption of 0.9 µW.[61]. Finally, a GPS has a current consumption of 2.5 mA, with a
1.8 V voltage from the PMIC.[64]
Aggregating all values and taking into consideration the 1.8 V fixed output from the PMIC,
the total energy consumed when transmitting the data is:
• Communication protocol: 300 mW ×0.11s = 33 mJ.
• FG25: 107 mA, with a 1.8V fixed output from the PMIC, 107 mA ×1.8V × 0.11s =
21.19 mJ.
• Sensors: with a 1.8V fixed output from the PMIC, (5.1mA × 1.8V + 0.0009mW × 2) ×
0.11s = 1.01 mJ.
That is a total of 55.2 mJ per transmission.
This energy consumption happens in just 0.11 seconds, so other energy consumptions occur
the rest of the day that need to be taken into account. Assuming that this use case would
Page 65 of 104
==PAGE:74==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
use solar energy as the only energy intake, the PMIC would only be able to harvest energy
during daylight hours and would need to satisfy the energy needs during the rest of the day.
The assumption will be that there will be energy availability on times when there is daylight,
but taking away sunrise and sunset, where the light intensity is much lower, so 8 hours. In
an example of sunlight from 10 AM to 6 PM, the device in "harvesting mode" will consume
energy for 8 hours (28,800 seconds). When harvesting, the SoC is assumed to stay in sleep
mode, where, using the documentation for the FG25, has an average current consumption of
3.6 µA. , in harvesting mode, the PMIC has a current consumption of 165 µA, in addition
to the SoC consumption. This consumption needs to be taken into account and added to
the total power needed to harvest.:
• FG25: 3.6µA × 1.8V × 28, 800s = 187 mJ.
• PMIC: 165µA × 1.8V × 28, 800s =8,554 mJ.
That is a total of 8,741 mJ.
Finally, the consumption during the hours outside harvesting mode needs to be grasped
and harvested, from 6 PM to 10 AM (57,600 seconds). During these hours, the consumption
is just from the SoC in sleep mode, 3.6 mA. Therefore, the total power that needs to be
harvested from 10 AM to 6 PM is
• FG25: 3.6µA × 1.8V × 57, 600s =374 mJ.
All the values are aggregated in table 10, assuming that a transmission is done four times
per day, or every two hours during harvesting mode (from 10 AM to 6 PM).
Mode
Energy Consumption (mJ)
Time (s)
Transmission (x4)
221
0.44
Harvesting
8,741
28,800
Sleep
374
57,600
Total
9,336
Table 9: Energy consumptions of the different modes in ESL use case.
The total energy consumption of a day is 9,336 mJ and it needs to be harvested by an
outdoor PV cell. The power output needs to be:9,336mJ
28,800s = 324µW.
Going back to table 2, a typical power output of an outdoor PV cell is at most 50,000
µW per cm2, this was during the best conditions possible, at 130,000 lux, which is direct
sunlight. That, of course, is unrealistic, where in reality, there is no direct sunlight all the
time and it may rain or be overcast. Looking at an outdoor PV cell catalog from Panasonic
Industry [65], for a 50,000 lux intensity, which corresponds to an overcast environment, an
output of around 2,000 µW per cm2 is obtained. Using that as value as a reference, and
taking into account that a single-input efficiency has a typical efficiency of 80% of power con-
version, in contrast to what experimented with the multiple input PMIC in section 5, where
Page 66 of 104
==PAGE:75==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
the highest efficiency was 55%, the PV cell size needed would be:
324µW
2,000 µW
cm2 ×0.8 = 0.2cm2.
Since there is a margin regarding size, the possibility of transmitting much more opens up.
And, transmitting during sleep mode is a good possibility in case, for example, an issue
happens at 6.30 PM, there would not be any news until 10 PM. Therefore, an hourly update
for the whole day could be designed.
Then, the transmission quantity is now 24.
Mode
Energy Consumption (mJ)
Time (s)
Transmission (x24)
1,325
3
Harvesting
8,741
28,800
Sleep
374
57,600
Total
10,440
86,400
Table 10: Energy consumptions of the different modes in ESL use case.
The total energy consumption of a day is 9,336 mJ and it needs to be harvested by an
outdoor PV cell. The power output needs to be:10,440mJ
28,800s
= 362.5µW. Following what was
discussed previously regarding the typical power output, the PMIC’s efficiency, and setting
a safety factor of 50, in the cases, there may be less light intensity since it can go as low as
1,000 lux [18], the PV size needed is:
PV size:
362.5µW×50
2,000 µW
cm2 ×0.8 = 11.33cm2.
Therefore, a PV cell of 11 cm2 is enough to transmit the data hourly and ensure opera-
tion even at the lowest light intensities.
On the other hand, a supercapacitor is needed to store the energy consumption during
non-harvesting period hours and store it when harvesting. Energy consumption during the
non-harvesting period now includes 16 transmissions, which will increase a lot the capaci-
tance needed by the supercapacitor. The updated energy consumption is: 374 mJ + 16 ×
55.2 mJ = 1,257 mJ.
To satisfy that energy demand, and with a voltage of 1.8 V, the capacitance needed in
the supercapacitor is at least of:
C ≥2×1257mJ
1.82
≥776mF.
Therefore, a standard capacitance of 800 mF [66] is enough to store the energy needed
for the non-harvesting period.
figure 42 shows how a daily energy usage would look like in an example where the aver-
age light intensity is 50,000 lux and performing hourly transmissions. As seen, if the average
light intensity is 50,000 lux, there is plenty of storage room and it gets full instantly, but in
the worst cases of 1,000 lux, there would not be that huge margin.
Page 67 of 104
==PAGE:76==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
Figure 42: Example of daily energy usage of an energy harvesting solution for road sign
tracking with hourly transmissions.
This energy harvesting solution is viable in terms of power outputs obtained and power
consumption of the different items in the solution, as well as the PV size and supercapacitor
size, which are viable and aligned with the miniaturization challenge that exists within IoT.
Continuing, a macroeconomic analysis within this use case will be done to explore the market
opportunities of implementing this solution and its implementation costs. This added to the
electronic and energy viability discussed, will be valuable to examine the chance of execution.
6.2.3
Macroeconomic analysis
As mentioned before, this use case would be a novelty within IoT. Therefore, it is quite
hard to make an estimation of the market size for an energy harvesting implementation for
this use case. The natural transition would be to know the market performance of this
use case, using the current powering solution with batteries, and then deliberate a possible
implementation of energy harvesting. So in this case, there will be many estimations and
assumptions to reach a market size figure for energy harvesting market size in road sign
tracking.
Page 68 of 104
==PAGE:77==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
As stated in Verified Market Research, [67] the road maintenance market includes a range of
services, such as routine maintenance, emergency repairs, and major rehabilitation projects.
Routine maintenance services include activities such as road sweeping, pothole repairs, crack
sealing, and line striping. Emergency repairs may be required in response to accidents, severe
weather events, or other unexpected incidents that damage roadways. Major rehabilitation
projects involve more extensive work, such as repaving, widening, or restructuring roads and
highways. In addition to these services, the road maintenance market encompasses a variety
of products and equipment used to perform maintenance and repair tasks. These may in-
clude asphalt and concrete mixes, patching materials, traffic control devices, road signs, and
equipment such as graders, rollers, and paving machines. The road sign tracking use case
may be included in this last part mentioned.
The Road Maintenance market size was valued at USD 86.1b in 2022 and is expected to
expand at a CAGR of 4.14% during the forecast period, reaching USD 119.1b by 2030.
Furthermore, based on the type, the market is bifurcated into: [68]
• Pavement Management.
• Maintenance to Road Fixtures.
• Litter Control.
• Vegetation Management.
• Other
Pavement management accounted for the largest market share of 77.95% in 2022, projected
to grow at the highest Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 4.17% during the fore-
cast period. Road fixtures was the second largest market in 2022, valued at USD 18.9M in
2022 and it is projected to grow at a CAGR of 2.38%. [67]
Moreover, road sign tracking is assumed to be included in the road fixture type.
From
this point, assumptions and estimations need to be taken since there is no data regarding
a more specific type, as would be road sign maintenance. Since road fixture supposedly
includes lighting (actual lighting and traffic lights), barriers, and road signs, among other
things, since this application is not existing, or at least major in the current IoT market, a
5% of the global Road Fixtures market size is estimated to belong to this use case from 2023
in this section, before energy harvesting implementation.
The 5% estimated for road sign tracking, which is a USD 2.65b market size, is assumed to
grow with a 1% CAGR, since it is nonexistent, it will be harder to implement it shortly.
That leads to an 8% market share of the global road fixtures market and a size of USD 1.83b
market size by 2030. In the case energy harvesting would be implemented, it is estimated to
have quite a big market share within the road signs tracking market size in the beginning,
since a battery-powered solution is not yet developed. Therefore, from around a 60% market
Page 69 of 104
==PAGE:78==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
share of the Road Sign Tracking market in 2023, assuming the well functioning of that im-
plementation, there would be an ascending growth, a 2.5% bigger growth is assumed every
year until 2030, which would lead to a market share of 77.5% within the road sign tracking
market and a USD 1.42 market size.
Figure 43 shows a graph of the estimations made in this thesis for the road sign tracking
energy harvesting market size.
Figure 43: Energy harvesting implementation for road sign tracking market size estimation
2022-2030.
Furthermore, regarding implementation costs, many costs need to be covered. As men-
tioned before, implementing an energy harvesting solution for every road sign may lead to
a total cost that could be unviable to invest in. The main costs that need to be taken into
account are:
• The SoC, which in this use case is the FG25 [63], with a price of $54.8.
• The harvester, in this use case is an outdoor PV cell of 11 cm2. This item could have
a price of around 2.2$, following table 2.
• The PMIC, where due to confidentiality, the price of the PMIC selected cannot be
disclosed. But, for instance, an energy harvesting PMIC from the company Nexperia
has a price of around 3$ per unit. [69]
• The storage, in this case, a supercapacitor from Cap-XX such as the one chosen, has
a price of 19$ per unit. [70]
Page 70 of 104
==PAGE:79==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.2
Road signs tracking
• The price of the IoT network, gateways, antennas, etc.
– The communication has a price of 0.04$ per megabyte or some companies offer a
6$ annual tuition per device. [71] So annual tuition is used to estimate.
– A gateway costs about $300-$400. [72]
– Management software, a general fee is about $500, which often includes the main-
tenance fee.
Summing all of the costs, it sums up to around $85 per device. When implementing this use
case, it is assumed that it will be on a high scale, for example, 1,000 units. That would come
for example with a price decrease per unit. For instance, in the case of the supercapacitor,
when purchasing 1,000 units, the price per unit decreases to $7. Or in the case of the PMIC,
goes down to $1.44. The decrease is on average 50%, so there will be an assumption that
it will be the same for the outdoor PVs. , it will be assumed that within the cost of the
communication, gateways would be included as part of the communication service, included
in the 6$ annual tuition per device.
Aggregating all those values and discounts, the total price of implementing a road sign
tracking energy harvesting solution for 1,000 devices is $76,300. The costs regarding instal-
lation or other costs that may be included in an IoT installation are not taken into account,
such as logistics, workforce, or product design.
Item
Price (x1)
Price (x1,000)
FG25
54.8
54,800
11 cm2 outdoor PV
2.2
1,100
PMIC
3
1,500
800 mF supercapacitor
19
7,000
IoT network
6
6,500
Total
$94
$70,900
Table 11: Price estimation table for an energy harvesting implementation of road sign track-
ing for 1,000 units.
After going through a technical and economical analysis of a hypothetical implementa-
tion of an energy harvesting solution for road sign tracking, the main takeaways are:
• Viable solution with an appropriate PV cell size and secure in case of environment
unpredictability.
• Able to transmit hourly.
• A huge market to enter, where with a few market share, there is a big possible gain.
• An investment of $70,900 to implement energy harvesting to 1,000 road signs.
Page 71 of 104
==PAGE:80==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
6.3.1
Introduction and analysis
Electronic shelf labels (ESL) are a commonly used application within IoT and it has
been in the market for the past 20 years. In 5 years, ESL will have become one of the
most pervasive digital communication networks in history with 2.3 billion displays by 2027,
reflected in figure 44. [73]
Figure 44: Electronic Shelf Labels, 2010 - 2027. [73]
ESLs enable retailers to update prices automatically, in real-time across the store, elim-
inating days of tedious and manual work. With ESL, retailers can increase pricing efficiency
and accuracy, optimize click and collect, and simplify replenishment. Store operators can
quickly react to market prices and easily synchronize pricing to keep up with the online
competition. ESLs allow customers to immediately see the correct price, with flexible cus-
tomization and a shopping experience with price transparency. [?]
ESLs consist of a few main components, figure 46: an e-ink display, radio, microcontroller,
and batteries for most cases, the rest are wired locally. In this thesis, the goal is to remove
the battery and explore the option to power ESLs via energy harvesting.
Page 72 of 104
==PAGE:81==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
Figure 45: Electronic Shelf Labels diagram. [?]
As seen in the state of the art, in section 2, energy harvesting has been implemented
for this use case, for instance by NOWI [11], in subsection 2.1.2. In that solution by NOWI,
indoor light is being used to harvest ambient energy, in this thesis, the aim is to attempt to
combine multiple indoor energy harvesting sources that can power an SL’s SoC and the data
transmissions required, to emulate NOWI’s solution with SL’s products. Apart from indoor
light, radio frequency energy harvesting could be useful when grasping ambient energy for
ESL applications.
In terms of data consumption, the more updates required, the more data consumption there
will be. Looking back at the ESL application note by NOWI, [11] the device had a daily
consumption, just from stand-by mode, of 0.377 mWh and each update consumed 0.036
mWh. In this thesis implementation, the consumption will depend on the communication
protocol used and the range, and as in the previous use case, the internal consumption of
the SoC and the PMIC need to be taken into account.
6.3.2
Finding the best fit
As opposed to road sign tracking, Silicon Labs already develops products for this target
application. Therefore, the goal is to keep what is already developed but substitute the bat-
teries for an energy-harvesting powering solution. SL has two SoCs for ESLs applications,
BG22 and FG22, which both support Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) and their 2.4GHz pro-
prietary protocol. [?] For ESLs, short-medium range protocols are enough to operate ESLs
transmissions, 10 meters will be the targeted range for this application.
Currently, to reach a 5-10 year lifetime for the ESL on batteries, SL’s current budget is
an average current consumption of typically below 10 µA. This budget needs to cover e-ink
Page 73 of 104
==PAGE:82==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
display updates, wireless communication, and other features like flashing LEDs. Silicon Labs’
FG22 or BG22 SoC can meet these requirements as they have industry-leading low power
consumption at 3.6 mA when transmitting and 2.5 mA when receiving the data, along with
ultra-low power (0.17 µA -1.8 µA) sleep modes. FG22 and BG22 feature a wake-on radio
feature which allows the device to remain in its lowest power sleep mode until it receives a
dedicated radio single to wake it up. This helps to preserve battery life. [?]
Figure 46: Electronic Shelf Label. [?]
As done with road sign tracking, the total power consumption needs to be calculated
to design an energy harvesting solution.
The device will be receiving data to update the information of the e-ink display, which leads
to a power consumption from the BG22 of 2.5 mA at 1.8V. Regarding the data that needs
to be sent, as seen in figure 46, that is the type of information that is communicated in an
ESLs use case. The assumption will be that, compared to GPS coordinates, which are 12
digits, the e-ink display has a greater size and will have 64 bits, therefore 8 bytes.
Lastly, regarding the energy consumption of the e-ink display, following the state-of-the-art
energy harvesting solution for ESLs made by NOWI [11], their ESL had a total daily con-
sumption of 1.48 J. That value included two transmissions, with a consumption of 65 mJ each.
As the application is short range and the SoC are supported by BLE and assuming a range
of 50 meters, BLE, Zigbee, and Z-Wave consume 20 mW with a 100 data rate, assumed as
in the previous use case. Since the total data load is 8 bytes, and the data rate is 100 bps,
the total transmission time will be of 0.08 seconds.
Therefore, the total energy consumption per update (receiving) is:
• Communication protocol: 20 mW ×0.08s = 1.6 mJ.
• BG22: 2.5 mA, with a 1.8V fixed output from the PMIC, 2.5 mA ×1.8V × 0.08s =
0.36 mJ.
• E-ink display: 65 mJ.
That is a total of 66.96 mJ energy consumption per update.
Page 74 of 104
==PAGE:83==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
NOWI used a 7 AM to 10 PM schedule, therefore, the device can harvest indoor light
for 15 hours. On the other hand, the lowest light intensity found in the experiment was 200
lux, so that will be the light intensity assumed that can be harvested to have a safe design.
As in the previous use case, there will be three different modes: communication (update),
harvesting, and sleep mode. Firstly, the harvesting period is 15 hours (54,000 seconds),
when harvesting, the SoC is assumed to stay in sleep mode, where, using the documentation
for the BG22, it has an average current consumption of 1.6 µA. , in harvesting mode, as
mentioned before, the PMIC has a current consumption of 165 µA, in addition to the SoC
consumption. Lastly, the idle (stand-by) consumption from the e-ink display in a day, found
by NOWI, is 1.35 J. Therefore,
1.35J
24×60×60 = 15.63µW. Then, the total energy consumption
when harvesting is:
• PMIC: 165µA × 1.8V × 54, 000s = 16,038 mJ.
• BG22: 1.6µA × 1.8V × 54, 000s = 156 mJ.
• E-ink display: 15.63µW × 54, 000s = 844 mJ.
That is a total of 17,038 mJ energy consumption in harvesting mode.
Lastly, in sleep mode, the consumption during the hours outside harvesting mode needs
to be grasped and harvested, from 10 PM to 7 AM (32,400 seconds). During these hours,
the consumption is just from the SoC in sleep mode, and the ESL in standby mode. There-
fore, the total power that needs to be harvested from 7 AM to 10 PM is:
• BG22: 1.6µA × 1.8V × 32, 400s = 94 mJ.
• E-ink display: 15.63µW × 32, 400s = 506 mJ.
That is a total of 600 mJ energy consumption in sleep mode.
Mode
Energy Consumption (mJ)
Time (s)
Transmission (x2)
134
0.16
Harvesting
17,037
54,000
Sleep
600
32,400
Total
17,770
Table 12: Energy consumptions of the different modes in ESL use case.
Since the total energy consumption of the day is 17,770 mJ, and that energy needs to
be harvested during 15 hours, the power output while harvesting needs to be of
17,770mJ
54,000seconds
= 329 µW.
Since an indoor PV cell is used as in NOWI’s experiment, looking at the indoor PV cell
catalog by Panasonic Industry [74], their PV cells have a typical power output of 6µW per
cm2. In this use case, it is not considered necessary to set a safety factor, since an indoor
Page 75 of 104
==PAGE:84==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
environment is considered predictable, and already the lowest light intensity registered is the
one used, as a safety measure. But the PMIC’s efficiency is still taken into account at 80%.
Therefore, the PV size needed is:
329µW
6 µW
cm2 ×0.8 = 68.54 cm2
As opposed to the previous use case, the PV size is already too big, and there is no margin
for more updates. All though, the update energy consumption is not what mostly consumes
energy, so adding a few more cm2, the number of updates could grow. To complete the
design, the supercapacitor capacitance needs to be set. The supercapacitor needs to keep
the device on stand-by during the night hours when harvesting is not possible. As calculated
before, the total energy consumption at night during sleep mode is 599.72 mJ. Therefore,
the supercapacitor needs to store that amount of energy. With a voltage of 1.8 V, the ca-
pacitance needs to be: 2×599.72mJ
1.82
≥370.2mF.
In conclusion, a supercapacitor with a capacitance of 400 mF can be selected.
Lastly, figure 47 shows an example of a daily usage where two updates are made, one at
10 AM and the other one at 6 PM.
Page 76 of 104
==PAGE:85==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
Figure 47: Example of daily energy usage of an energy harvesting solution for ESLs with
two updates.
To sum up, this energy harvesting solution is viable in terms of power outputs obtained
and power consumption of the different items in the solution.
All though, a PV cell of
68.54 cm2 is not ideal and does not align with a solution to the challenge of miniaturization.
Ensuring a greater light intensity, as seen in NOWI’s experiment, where on average was 500
lux, would decrease the size of the PV and help the miniaturization cause within IoT.
Sequentially, a macroeconomic analysis within this use case to explore the economic benefits
of implementing this solution and its costs associated. This information, along with what
was discussed until now regarding this solution, will be valuable to assess the possibility of
implementation.
6.3.3
Macroeconomics
Opposed to road sign tracking, ESLs have been part of the IoT market for quite some
time. In 2021, the market size of ESL was USD 825.1M and is estimated to grow every year
15.5% to reach USD 3b market by 2030. This market includes all types of ESLs, wired and
wireless, where the targeted market size is for wireless ESLs. In figure 48, the wired-wireless
Page 77 of 104
==PAGE:86==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
ratio was previously forecasted and estimated a vast part of ESLs to be wireless throughout
the years. As seen in the figure, a modern updated forecast shows that the proportion of
wireless ESLs may not even reach half of the total amount in the next coming years.
Figure 48: Forecasted Electronic Shelf Labels Wired-Wireless ratio 2023-2030. [73]
Looking at figure 48 and making some assumptions, the proportion of ESL wireless is
50% until 2024, where it drops to 25%, and then from 2026 to 2030 is 40%. Making those
assumptions, the market size in 2021 for wireless ESLs was USD 412.55M and is estimated
to be USD 1.2b by 2030.
On the other hand, the energy harvesting solution described in this section falls into the
wireless category. The solution aims to remove batteries from wireless ESLs, so the market
size of an energy harvesting solution for ESLs will be part of the wireless ESL market size.
Even though there are already some solutions developed, such as the one discussed by NOWI
[11], there are a vast number of ESLs throughout the world, as opposed to the road sign
tracking use case. Therefore, its initial market share within wireless ESLs, if implemented
in 2023, is estimated to be quite low, 0.25%. The first years are assumed to be the years
where this solution could be tested in some isolated use cases. If there is a positive outcome
from them, in the following years, its growth spikes and turns this solution into a major part
of wireless ESLs. Its growth is assumed to be lower than in the previous use case due to a
much bigger market size, therefore, it is assumed to grow 1% higher each year, reaching by
2030 a market share of 28% of the wireless ESL market and a market size of USD 341M.
Figure 49 shows a graph with market size data and estimations from 2021 to 2030.
Page 78 of 104
==PAGE:87==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.3
Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs)
Figure 49: ESL market size estimation 2021 - 2030.
Moreover, regarding implementation cost, the intent would be to obtain a current ESL
solution, powered by batteries, and implement an energy harvesting solution. That operation
would have the additional costs of a harvester (indoor PV cell), a PMIC, and the 400 mF
supercapacitor.
• The harvester, in this use case is an indoor PV cell of 68.54 cm2. This item could have
a price of around $14, following table 2.
• The PMIC, same as road sign tracking, the price of the PMIC selected cannot be
disclosed. But, the energy harvesting PMIC from the company Nexperia is a reference
and has a price of around 3$ per unit. [69]
• The storage, in this case, a supercapacitor from Cap-XX such with a capacitance of
400 mF, has a price of 18$ per unit. [70]
Aggregating all those values, the added price per unit is around $35. Furthermore, in a
1,000 m2 retail store, the number of single items is commonly around 10,000, [72] which
means 10,000 electronic price tags, so a cost estimation of the solution will be based on a
10,000 unit implementation. These prices are added to the previous prices mentioned, and
taking into account that, for 10,000 pieces, as done previously, there is a discount of around
50% on the price of PVs, supercapacitors, and PMICs for a batch purchase, the total price
of an implementation of this solution in a current ESL network in a 1,000 m2 retail store
with 10,000 ESLs is $160,000. The costs regarding installation or other costs that may be
Page 79 of 104
==PAGE:88==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
included in an IoT installation are not taken into account, such as logistics, workforce, or
product design.
Item
Price (x1)
Price (x10,000)
68.54 cm2 indoor PV
14
70,000
PMIC
3
15,000
400 mF supercapacitor
18
75,000
Total
$35
$160,000
Table 13: Price estimation table for an energy harvesting solution in a 1,000 m2 retail store
with 10,000 units.
After going through a technical and economical analysis of a possible implementation
of an energy harvesting solution in ESLs, the main takeaways are:
• Viable solution but with an undesired PV cell size.
• Able to update twice per day.
• A vast market to enter, where with a few market share, there is a big possible gain.
• An investment of $160,000 to implement energy harvesting to an existing 10,000 unit
ESL network.
6.4
Livestock monitoring
6.4.1
Introduction and analysis
As the previous application, livestock monitoring is a familiar use case within the IoT
market. Livestock monitoring refers to a method that uses IoT sensors to track and monitor
animals’ health, mostly cattle. This use case ensures the well-being of animals, keeping an
eye on specific body measurements, location, and other various measurements.[75]
Moreover, keeping track of farm animals and other livestock is essential due to the expanding
scale of the livestock business. This solution uses sensors, GPS, and other tools and tech-
niques, as well as integrating them with a communication protocol for information sharing.
As mentioned before, tracking devices provide information on the whereabouts and physical
condition of the animals rather than solely relying on farmer observation. Farmers may
monitor the general health of their animals, including reproduction, feeding routines, and
hygiene, with the help of hardware sensors. Farmers can be alerted when an illness is barely
starting by monitoring their heart rate, blood pressure, digestion, respiration, temperature,
and other bodily functions with the help of connected sensors and wearable technologies. IoT
technologies would make it easier for animal owners to improve agricultural productivity.
A significant increase in animal disease outbreaks in recent years has increased the need for
animal tracking solutions. Farmers will be able to quickly treat and stop the spread of fatal
diseases as a result. This solution may be implemented with the adoption of useful hardware
options like injectable tags and collar tags. [76]
Page 80 of 104
==PAGE:89==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
In figure 50, some of the different applications within livestock monitoring are shown, along
with their contribution to the global market size. Milk harvesting, breeding management,
and feeding management are the key applications targeted by the customers within livestock
monitoring.
Figure 50: Global livestock monitoring market by application. [77]
In the case of most ESLs, the IoT sensors are powered by batteries. Likewise, the goal of
this thesis is to remove the battery and power the sensors via ambient energy. As mentioned
previously, livestock monitoring is really broad and include a lot of applications, so it is easy
to imagine that many different energy harvesting solution could be fit for this ample use
case. But on the other hand, there are many applications that due to their data demands
or ambient conditions, are not able to be implemented with an energy harvesting solution.
The specific applications that will be detailed in this thesis, within livestock monitoring, are
tracking devices that provide information on the whereabouts and physical condition of the
animals.
The ambient conditions for these two applications are mostly outdoor where the sun will
most likely be the most important energy source, but the movement of the animals and the
temperatures to which they are exposed give other harvesting methods a chance to be imple-
mented. In the case of location tracking, the aim is to include sea animals, where conditions
are drastically different from land animals, where light is almost not present, and chemical
harvesting methods play a huge role.
Regarding consumption, as seen in the road signs use case and in figure 51, an example of
physical condition measurements appear, many different important measurements such as
body temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure, etc. along their data load are shown.
Page 81 of 104
==PAGE:90==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
Figure 51: Typical sensor data rates. [62]
Taking temperature, pulse rate, and respiration readings can help when assessing an
animal’s overall health.
[78] Therefore, those three measurements will be taken in this
energy harvesting solution, in addition to the GPS coordinates. As seen in figure 51, all
three measurements have a data load of 12 bits, while GPS coordinates have a data load of
32 bits. This power consumption will be taken into account when the device transmits the
data with a corresponding protocol and range, which needs to be long. , when transmitting,
power consumption from the SoC and their sensors are added to the total power consumption
per transmission. This value will need to be supplied by the energy intake.
6.4.2
Finding the best fit
This use case, similar to the road sign tracking use case, has a range constraint. Figure
52 shows average farm sizes back in the year 2000.
Assuming that farm sizes have not
vastly changed since that year, this energy harvesting solution will be implemented in a 100
hectares farm, which means a 1 km2 farm.
Page 82 of 104
==PAGE:91==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
Figure 52: Average farm size map in the world[79]
Assuming a square farm, the communication protocol needs to have at least a kilometer
range. This rules out, as in the road sign tracking use case, technologies like Bluetooth or
WiFi. The same communication protocols as in the road sign tracking use are left, so as in the
other use case, SL proprietary protocol will be used, as well as the FG25 SoC. As mentioned
previously, the FG25 had an average current consumption of 107 mA when transmitting. In
addition to the transmission current by the SoC, the communication consumption and the
consumption of the sensor needs to be covered. Regarding the sensors, as in the road signs
tracking use case, a GPS sensor has a current consumption of 2.5 mA[64], a temperature
sensor of 0.9 µW, and the other sensors regarding respiratory rate and pulse rate will be
assumed to have the same current consumption as a temperature sensor.
Transmission
consumption and time are affected by the protocol and the range. Since the assumption
was to implement this solution in a 1 km2 farm, a 1 km range would be enough for the
protocol to satisfy distance needs. As in the road sign tracking use case, the SL proprietary
protocol could be an option to support the communication. As reviewed, with an assumed
100 bps data rate, for a range of 1 km, the power consumption is 30 mW (Table 8). Then,
the transmission time would be
3×12+32bits
8bytes×100bps = 0.085seconds. , the FG25 has an average
consumption of 107 mA when transmitting, therefore the total power consumption of one
transmission is:
• Communication protocol: 30 mW ×0.085s = 2.55 mJ.
• FG25: 107 mA, with a 1.8V fixed output from the PMIC, 107 mA ×1.8V × 0.085s =
16.37 mJ.
• Sensors: (3 × 0.0009mA + 2.5mA × 1.8V ) × 0.085s = 0.383 mJ.
Page 83 of 104
==PAGE:92==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
That is a total of a 19.31 mJ energy consumption per transmission.
As in the previous use cases, there is power consumption when the device is harvesting
energy, and when the device is in sleep mode. But on the contrary, this case involves ani-
mals’ health monitoring, which can worsen quickly and at all times of the day. Consequently,
the device should transmit as frequently as possible, such as every minute or a few minutes.
There are two options considered to proceed:
• Harvesting period of 8 hours (when it is considered to be sunlight, as in the first
application) + Sleep mode for 16 hours.
– It would have the usual power consumption, 165 µA from the PMIC and 3.6 µA
from the SoC in stand-by mode, harvesting from an outdoor PV cell. Sleep mode
would have the consumption just from the SoC in standby mode.
• Harvesting at all times.
– Include an EMEH, in addition to solar energy, which will be able to harvest from
movement at night, when there is no sunlight, and therefore, no energy availability.
The characteristic of this option is that a motion sensor would be included during
non-sunlight periods so, every time it detects movement, the PMIC could be in
harvesting mode and harvest the vibrational energy. The energy consumption for
harvesting mode differentiates between the sunlight period and the non-sunlight
period in this option. When there is sunlight, it would have the usual power
consumption, 165 µA from the PMIC and 3.6 µA from the SoC in stand-by
mode, harvesting from an outdoor PV cell, for 8 hours. While on non-harvesting
periods, the previous consumption would be added to the current consumption
from the motion sensor of 75 µ A. For all 16 hours, the motion sensor consumption
and the SoCs need to be taken into account. But the PMIC’s consumption, which
is the largest, would only be during the time the animal is moving.
Regarding the first option, setting a transmission every minute, the power consumption is:
Mode
Energy Consumption (mJ)
Time (s)
Transmission (x1,440)
27,805
115
Harvesting
8,740
28,800
Sleep
373
57,600
Total
36,918
Table 14: Energy consumptions of the different modes in Livestock monitoring use case -
Option 1.
Regarding the second option, setting a transmission every minute and assuming that
the animal is moving 10% of the time during non-sunlight periods, the power consumption
is:
Page 84 of 104
==PAGE:93==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
Mode
Energy Consumption (mJ)
Time (s)
Transmission (x1,440)
27,805
115
Harvesting - sunlight
8,740
28,800
Harvesting - non-sunlight
2,525
5,760
Sleep
7,334
51,840
Total
46,405
Table 15: Energy consumptions of the different modes in ESL use case - Option 2.
With option 1, the average power intake needed is 36,918mJ
8×60×60s = 1, 289µW.
Following the same assumptions as in the road sign tracking use cases, with a PMIC effi-
ciency of 80%, an average 2,000 µW per cm2 input with a 50,000 lux environment and a
safety factor of 50.
The PV size needed is:
1,289µW×50
2,000 µW
cm2 ×0.8 = 40cm2.
Apart from a quite big PV cell, since there is no energy intake during non-harvesting hours,
the supercapacitor needs to have enough capacity to store energy to keep the device on
standby and perform all the transmissions in that period, since the nonharvesting period is
from 6 PM to 10 AM, there are 16 hours of the non-harvesting period, with a transmission
every minute, 960 transmissions, so 960 × 19.31 mJ →18,538 mJ energy consumption.
Adding that to the energy consumption of 373.25 mJ from the SoC in sleep mode, as in the
road sign tracking use case, is a total of 18,911 mJ. With a 1.8 V voltage, the capacitance
needed is:
2×18,911mJ
1.82
≥11, 673mF.
To satisfy that huge capacitance and still keep a viable size, by looking at the catalog from
Cap-XX, their hybrid supercapacitors, which achieve big capacitance with small sizes. For
instance, a 25F supercapacitor with a cylindrical size, an 8 mm diameter, and a 20 mm
length.[66]
But on the other hand, in option 2, to calculate the power intake needed, it is necessary
again to divide the two harvesting periods and how much energy is consumed in each.
• During sunlight hours, the power consumption is from the corresponding number of
transmissions and the data from the harvesting - sunlight period in table 15: 27,805
mJ ×16
24 + 8, 740s = 18,008 mJ.
– Therefore, during sunlight, the power intake needed is 18,008mJ
51,840s = 625µW.
• During non-sunlight hours, the power consumption is from the corresponding number
of transmissions and the data from the harvesting - a non-sunlight period in table 15:
27,805 mJ × 8
24+ 2,525 mJ + 7,334 mJ = 28,395 mJ.
– During non-sunlight hours, the power intake needed is: 28,395mJ
5,7640s = 4, 930µW.
Page 85 of 104
==PAGE:94==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
The downside of option 2 is that, as seen in section 5, the highest efficiency seen in the
multiple input PMIC, was 55%, which is a decent loss compared to the 80% seen up until
this point.
Therefore, during sunlight hours, taking into account all the circumstances, the PV size
needed is
625µW×50
2,000 µW
cm2 ×0.55 = 28 cm2.
But, on the other hand, even though in table 2, EMEH shows a typical power output
from 700 to 8,000 µW per cm3, as seen in section 5, the device requires a constant and high
vibration to reach that power output. Considering the lowest power range, which is 700 µW
per cm3, the PMIC’s efficiency, and a safety factor of 5, the device needed would need to
have a size of 26 cm3.
Grasping all the information discussed up until this point, even though option 2 solves
the need of having to store a huge amount of energy, it does not show much reliability. Ani-
mal movement is quite unpredictable compared to sunlight, which still being unpredictable,
is easier to estimate. Moreover, PV cells are way more advanced and are on the market,
and have been for a long time. EMEHs are still yet to advance and find more information
regarding their performance or cost. Finally, a 55% efficiency from a multiple input PMIC
affects the viability of this option, reducing almost by half the power obtained.
Due to the circumstances mentioned, Option 1 seems as a more reasonable option to imple-
ment. All though, reducing the data frequency from 1 minute to 5 minutes may solve the
extra stored energy needed, as well as its capacitance, which involves bigger internal con-
sumptions and charging times. With a 5 minutes frequency, the power consumption would
be:
Mode
Energy Consumption (mJ)
Time (s)
Transmission (x288)
5,561
24
Harvesting
8,740
28,800
Sleep
373
57,600
Total
14,674
Table 16: Energy consumptions of the different modes in Livestock monitoring use case -
Option 1.
The average power intake needed would be
14,674mJ
28,800s
= 510µW. Following the same
assumptions, the PV cell size needed would be
510µW×50
2,000 µW
cm2 ×0.8 = 16 cm2.
Regarding the energy needed to store for the non-harvesting period: 5, 561 × 16
24 + 373
mJ = 4,080 mJ. Then, the capacitance needed would be of: C ≥2×4,080mJ
1.82
≥2, 318mF.
The supercapacitor’s capacitance needed would then need to be 2.4 F.
Figure 53 shows an example of a daily energy profile of this use case when updating ev-
ery 5 minutes and harvesting from 10 AM to 6 PM 50,000 lux environment. As seen, due
Page 86 of 104
==PAGE:95==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
to the need for transmission during non-harvesting hours and a safe design in case of lower
light intensities, in this case, there is a huge margin of energy during the harvesting period,
but as seen, there is just enough energy stored in the supercapacitor to keep up with energy
demands the rest of the time.
Figure 53: Example of daily energy usage of an energy harvesting solution for livestock
monitoring with transmissions every 5 minutes.
This energy harvesting solution is viable in terms of power outputs obtained and power
consumption of the different items in the solution. Since this PV cell would go in an animal’s
collar, as seen in figure 54, there exists the possibility that 16 cm2 is too big of a size.
Page 87 of 104
==PAGE:96==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
Figure 54: Example of a cattle’s collar.[80]
This issue can be solved by reducing the frequency of transmission, which would be a
problem in terms of health matters, or lowering the safety factor from 50 to 10 since a 5,000
lux environment is still a pessimistic one.
Furthermore, as with the other use cases, an analysis will be done regarding the macroeco-
nomics of livestock monitoring.
6.4.3
Macroeconomics
The livestock monitoring global size is estimated to reach over USD 16b by 2030, which
shows great potential for this use case in the future. But as in the previous use cases, the
energy harvesting solution cannot be implemented in the whole market size. Figure 55 shows
the market size estimation for livestock monitoring until 2030.
Figure 55: Livestock monitoring global market size. 2021 - 2030. In billions of dollars. [76]
Going back to figure 50, in the introduction subsection of this use case, since the energy
Page 88 of 104
==PAGE:97==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
harvesting solution involves health monitoring, such as temperature, pulse rate or respiratory
rate, and location monitoring, it could fit into the applications "Animal Health Monitoring
and Comfort", as well as "Behaviour Monitoring" in figure 50. Looking at the figure, those
two applications aggregate to more or less a 20% of the global livestock monitoring market
size. That market share would lead to a USD 3.28b market size for the target application
discussed.
Moreover, regarding the market share of a hypothetical energy harvesting implementation
for this target application, it is quite complex to estimate a market share. On the other
hand, the global market size for livestock monitoring is the biggest out of all three use cases
discussed and is already advanced in the IoT market, this causes a quite low market share
at the beginning of an energy harvesting implementation. Since ESLs had an initial market
share of 0.25%, the assumption will be that this use case will start with a little lower market
share due to its size, 0.1%, and market size of USD 1.48M. , following the logic, its market
share will grow 0.5% more every year, compared to 1% of ESLs. By 2030, it is estimated
that an energy harvesting solution for livestock monitoring would have a 14% market share
of the Health, Comfort, and Behaviour monitoring market and a market size of USD 462M.
Figure 56 shows the market size estimations until 2030. As seen, the market share remains
quite low throughout the years and is only visible for the last few years, but it is still a vast
amount of money.
Figure 56: Livestock monitoring market size estimation 2021 - 2030.
Furthermore, regarding implementation cost, for this solution, there was not a definite
solution that was viable, so to make some kind of estimation of the implementation cost, the
Page 89 of 104
==PAGE:98==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
solution will be one of the alternatives mentioned, consisting of just the outdoor PV cell of
16cm2 and a 320 mF supercapacitor. Now, the costs can be structured as before:
• The SoC, which in this use case, is the FG25 [54], with a unit price of $54.8.
• The harvester, in this use case is an outdoor PV cell of 16 cm2. This item could have
a price of around $3.2, following table 2.
• The PMIC, at the other use cases, the price of the PMIC selected cannot be disclosed.
The energy harvesting PMIC with a price of around 3$ per unit. [69]
• The storage, in this case, a supercapacitor from Cap-XX of 2.4 F, has a price of $14
per unit. [70]
• The price of the IoT network, gateways, antennas, etc. - $6 annual tuition per device.
• Management software - $500.
Summing all those values, the cost per unit is $78. To implement this solution, naturally,
it would be necessary to implement it on a bigger scale, for example, the 1 km2 farm that
was assumed before to estimate the needed range. Since the communication protocol used
is long-range, only one gateway should be necessary. The harder part when estimating a
high-scale implementation in this solution is estimating the number of animals that will be
monitored. An estimate of 1,000 animals will be assumed to be in a 1 km2 farm, so 1,000
units would be needed to implement this solution. Again, both the supercapacitor and the
PMIC lower their price at 50% when buying 1,000 units, applying that to the PV cell, the
prices into account the total price to implement this energy harvesting solution in a 1 km2
farm with 100 animals is of:
Item
Price (x1)
Price (x1,000)
FG25
54.8
54,800
16 cm2 outdoor PV
3.2
1,600
PMIC
3
1,500
2.4 F supercapacitor
14
6,000
IoT network
6
6,500
Total
$78
$70,400
Table 17: Price estimation table for an energy harvesting implementation of livestock mon-
itoring in a farm with 1,000 animals. Values are in $.
Since, as ESLs, this use case is already developed within IoT, the costs of implementing
this energy harvesting solution to an existing one are the same but taking away the SoC and
the IoT network costs.
Page 90 of 104
==PAGE:99==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.4
Livestock monitoring
Item
Price (x1)
Price (x1,000)
16 cm2 outdoor PV
3.2
1,600
PMIC
3
1,500
2.4 F supercapacitor
14
6,000
Total
$20.2
$9,100
Table 18: Price estimation table for an energy harvesting implementation of livestock mon-
itoring in an existing solution with 1,000 animals. Values are in $.
After reviewing the technical and economical analysis of an implementation of an energy
harvesting solution for livestock monitoring, the main takeaways are:
• Viable solution with room for improvement regarding PV cell size but ensuring per-
formance in case of a worse environment.
• Able to transmit every 5 minutes, with a big capacitance.
• A huge market to enter, where with a few market share, there is a big possible gain.
• An investment of $70,400 to implement energy harvesting to 1,000 animals.
After going through a high-level exploration of energy harvesting implementation in all three
cases, in the next subsection, there will be a discussion on the results obtained regarding
technical results and economic analysis.
Page 91 of 104
==PAGE:100==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.5
Discussion
6.5
Discussion
In this subsection, the results of each analysis will be discussed. Figure 57 shows some
criteria that should be taken into account when analyzing an energy harvesting implemen-
tation in an IoT application.
Figure 57: Considerations when implementing energy harvesting in an IoT device.[15]
For all three cases, monetary costs, as well as the market size and market share, were
estimated. Table 19 shows a summary of all the economic aspects discussed within the three
use cases.
Use case
Implementation
cost per 1,000 units
Market
share by 2030
Market
size by 2030
Road Sign Tracking
$70,900
78%
$1,420 M
Electronic Shelf Labels
$16,000
28%
$341 M
Livestock monitoring
$9,100
14%
$462 M
Table 19: Summary of the macroeconomic analysis of all three use cases.
Comparing the market size estimations with the implement cost estimations, the road
sign tracking energy harvesting solution seems to be the best option to invest in due to its
possible big market size and market share due to its novelty within the IoT space. All though,
being a novelty involves the risk of not obtaining demand or support from the market, and
failing to create an impact. The concept of road sign tracking, if desired by the industry,
would go in hand with its energy harvesting implementation, gaining a huge market share.
Lastly, its higher implementation cost is a cause of its novelty, since there is not an existing
Page 92 of 104
==PAGE:101==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.5
Discussion
application in which energy harvesting can already be implemented and save the costs of
SoCs and an IoT network.
The other two use cases offer a much cheaper option of implementing an energy harvest-
ing solution because existing battery-powered solutions are already in the market. Just the
items regarding the energy harvesting solution, like the harvester, PMIC, and supercapac-
itor, could be added and, consequently, reduce the costs of implementation. Performing a
ratio between market size and implementation cost: Road sign tracking, 0.02; ESLs, 0.021;
Livestock monitoring, 0.05. The last one appears to be the best one to invest in since is
estimated to have the best cost-benefit ratio. While the other two have similar ratios, road
signs tracking suffers the risk of failing since there is not an existing IoT deployment for it,
and may not be a successful deployment.
When deliberating if an implementation is worth investing in in the case of existing IoT
solutions such as ESL or livestock monitoring, it is important to take into account the price
that involves maintenance of existing solutions regarding battery replacement. At the mo-
ment, most ESLs have an operational life of over 10 years, while the batteries that power
them last 2 years or less. The result is multiple battery replacements, with the consequent
economic and environmental drawbacks related to the fact that hundreds of millions of bat-
teries need to be manufactured and disposed of every day. [81]It is a huge logistic challenge,
as the costs associated with sending technicians out to swap batteries can make financially
unviable the running of thousands of IoT devices. [2] In the case of a big company such as
Walmart, which uses thousands of ESLs, has hundreds of thousands of ESLs and would need
to replace all of them. Walmart announced plans to expand electronic shelf pricing technol-
ogy in the next 18 months to 500 more stores for 60 million shelf labels. [82] That amount
of ESLs aggregates to a huge amount of periodic money expense in long-run maintenance.
That applies to livestock monitoring, where replacement is even more complex in the case of
remote locations of farms or animals. In conclusion, not needing to replace or worry about
battery replacement and contributing to a more sustainable world may be enough reasons
for a company to invest in this solution.
, if a livestock monitoring solution is desired to start from scratch, the designed solution
had an implementation cost of $70,000, whereas products in the market such as a GPS
tracker for livestock monitoring from the company Digitanimal [83], has a price of $1,500
per 10 units, which is equivalent to $150,000, which is more than double the estimated im-
plementation cost.
Regarding the storage required and the environmental compatibility, there was a good match
for all three use cases. Supercapacitors are a great fit for the implementations described due
to their small size, big capacitance, and fast charging. There is environmental compatibil-
ity in all of the use cases, where the solutions described used worse conditions to design a
solution that could perform well where conditions are worse. All though, in the last two
use cases, it would be ideal to better predict the energy availability, since that derives to a
bigger capacitance needed as well as a bigger PV size, which increases both costs and does
not help with the miniaturization challenge.
Page 93 of 104
==PAGE:102==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
6.5
Discussion
Space availability was an issue for the second use case, where the PV size needed was almost
70 cm2. In ESLs, the space is limited, therefore implementing a PV size that big is not ideal
for a successful deployment. Apart from the space, it involves a big price increase, which
affects a high-scale implementation cost greatly. Figure 58 shows an image on an ESL, so it
is reflected how a 70 cm2 PV cell may be an issue in an ESL implementation.
Figure 58: Electronic Shelf Label.[84]
Lastly, efficiency was an important issue when designing energy harvesting solutions.
Even though there was a section dedicated to all different kinds of energy harvesting meth-
ods, the best solution for each use case involved only PV cells in two of them, and in the third
one, both PV cells and an EMEH were an option to combine as harvesters, but then it was
concluded to turn to a PV cell. Apart from having been in the market for a longer period,
which gives PV cells more reliability, another reason a multiple input harvesting solution
has a worse result when implementing it is regarding the PMIC’s efficiency. Going from 80%
with a single input harvesting solution, to at best 55% efficiency, even though increasing the
possibilities of a greater power intake, if the power conversion suffers from a big loss, it is
not meaningful to add more sources. Moreover, in the case of ESLs, instead of having one
big PV cell, an option could be to have four smaller PV cells, so there would be a better fit
of the device, but the efficiency loss may play a bad role and worsen the conditions.
In conclusion, the combination of two harvesting technologies did not obtain good results
and demonstrated that, apart from solar energy, the other energy sources are harder to es-
timate and rely on, such as vibration and movement in this use case.
In the next and last section, there will be a conclusion of the thesis, with the key take-
aways obtained as well as some milestones that could be done in the future, following a great
advancement of energy harvesting in IoT.
Page 94 of 104
==PAGE:103==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
7
Future work and conclusion
During this thesis, there has been an exploration of energy harvesting implementation
to some IoT solutions. This exploration has been done with the tools that are found today
within the IoT world.
If this analysis would have been done 10 years ago, there would
be a different outcome from the exploration. For instance, some low-power communication
protocols such as LoRa, NB-IoT, or MIOTY were introduced in 2016, and they allow and
make energy harvesting implementation more viable in long-range applications, where before
it would be much harder to do so. The same issue happens with the other items in an energy
harvesting solution, the energy harvesters’ capabilities to grasp energy have advanced as well
as power consumption from IoT devices has been reduced. Therefore, it is safe to assume
that in 10 years, the analysis would be different. At present, there is a global desire to reduce
and optimize power consumption. Figure 59 shows some of the actions done to do so.
Figure 59: Power reduction and optimization trends.[85]
Figure 59 reflects what is foreseen in the coming years. 5G represents a path towards
low-power communication protocols, while new generation sensors reduce the power con-
sumption of SoCs. Big Data and DevOps will help analyze power usage and optimize it to
reduce low power consumption. Designing low-power IoT is not only about having the most
power-efficient subsystems, such as computers, cellular modems, power delivery, and storage.
[86] It is just as much about controlling the power mode and its operations. Some tools such
Page 95 of 104
==PAGE:104==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
as PMICs help to manage and optimize energy usage and reduce total consumption. From
a 55% maximum efficiency found with a multiple input PMIC in section 5, there should
be advancement within this matter to increase the efficiency. That would allow an easier
introduction to other harvesting technologies, as opposed to just using solar energy as done
during this thesis.
Regarding harvesting technologies, as the rest of the items involved in energy harvesting,
it is expected to improve in terms of power output, efficiency, or price. As seen in figure
60, one of the most advanced harvesting technologies such as PV, has had an immense
growth regarding efficiency and cost reduction. More modern and less advanced harvesting
technologies should encounter the same situation.
Figure 60: PV evolution regarding efficiency and cost.[87]
An improvement in all these matters would introduce the possibility of introducing new
IoT cases which can use other harvesting technologies. A good example is still within live-
stock monitoring, in the case of sea animal tracking. In those conditions, sunlight is not
available, therefore other harvesting technologies such as EMEH or chemical energy harvest-
ing may be a good option when improving their capabilities. , devices and communication
protocols with longer ranges and lower consumption would be beneficial. Moreover, other
use cases with low time harvesting times such as kinetic energy for smart switches, may be
really useful if power conversion efficiencies grow.
Page 96 of 104
==PAGE:105==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
Even though this thesis is concluded, it is important to evaluate what has been done and
what actions can be done from the point reached. After analyzing many different harvesting
technologies and their appliance in three IoT use cases, it seems like only PV harvesting is
the only harvesting technology ready and reliable enough to make a realistic implementa-
tion of energy harvesting within IoT, especially in uncontrolled environments. In controlled
environments, some harvesting technologies involving vibrational energy or thermal energy
could be a serious option to implement energy harvesting.
If the chance is raised to do this thesis again, the procedure would be different and involve
more controlled environments where other technologies could be used. Apart from that, it
would involve use cases that are already developed within IoT and have a battery-powered
solution, and are preferably already supported by Silicon Labs. That would help when com-
paring implementation costs and reducing them towards a more possible implementation.
Some use cases that fit those requirements are, for example, predictive maintenance, smart
metering, or smart switches. Those involve a more predictable environment, and the possi-
bility to include other technologies. That could be a starting point for this thesis finalization.
Taking all the information grasped, from the different harvesting technologies to the elec-
tronics, could be used and implemented in one of those use cases.
To sum up, the use cases that would have been selected would still be ESLs and livestock
monitoring, but substituting road sign tracking with predictive maintenance or smart me-
tering. That would allow us to, after the analysis, and assuming positive outcomes from all
of them, have a better comparison when it comes to the macroeconomic analysis.
To conclude, this thesis has demonstrated that multiple energy source harvesting is still
not ready to be integrated into energy harvesting solutions, or at least in the use cases
chosen. Environment unpredictability along with a low conversion efficiency makes a single
input harvesting solution more reliable and safe for now. Unless the conditions are easily
estimated so the solution can be designed taking those into account as well as the low effi-
ciency, one source energy harvesting is the go-to. And within that single source, PV cells
are the most desired harvesting technology, due to their reliability and low costs. , in cases
where a high transmission frequency is desired, big storage is needed to keep the operation
going during non-harvesting hours. That is why advancing towards a more efficient multiple
input energy harvesting in the future, where other harvesting technologies available during
darker hours could be introduced, is positive towards reducing storage size and cost. Lastly,
implementing energy harvesting to current IoT solutions have demonstrated to be cheaper
and, even though a lower market share can be grasped initially, a cheaper implementation
cost can derive in an easier integration in the global IoT market, becoming a big market
value opportunity.
Page 97 of 104
==PAGE:106==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
References
References
[1] Arindom Chatterjee, Carlos Nunez Lobato, Haiwu Zhang, Achilles Bergne, Vincenzo
Esposito, Shinhee Yun, Andrea Roberto Insinga, Dennis Valbjø rn Christensen, Car-
los Imbaquingo, Rasmus Bjø rk, Hamsa Ahmed, Mariam Ahmad, Chun Yuen Ho,
Morten Madsen, Jixi Chen, Poul Norby, Francesco Maria Chiabrera, Felix Gunkel, Ziwei
Ouyang, and Nini Pryds. Powering internet-of-things from ambient energy: a review.
Journal of Physics: Energy, 5(2):022001, 2023. doi:10.1088/2515-7655/acb5e6.
[2] Shohei Kawanaka Stefan Kaliner and Simon van der Jagt. Combining technology inno-
vations to make iot implementations cost/effective and sustainable. Detusche Telekom,
Murate and Nexperia, 2021.
[3] What is the Internet of Things?
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/
mckinsey-explainers/what-is-the-internet-of-things#/. [Accessed June, 2023].
[4] Lionel
Sujay
Vailshery.
Iot
and
non-iot
connections
world-
wide
2010-2025.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1101442/
iot-number-of-connected-devices-worldwide/, 2022. [Accessed June, 2023].
[5] Abhi Raj and Dan Steingart. Review, power sources for the internet of things. Journal
of The Electrochemical Society, 165(8):B3130, 2018. doi:10.1149/2.0181808jes.
[6] Energy harvesting is possible on Mars.
https://e2e.ti.com/blogs_/archives/b/
fullycharged/posts/preparing-to-survive-on-mars. [Accesses June,2023].
[7] Wireless and RF Solutions - IoT Modules and SoCs - Silicon Labs.
https://www.
silabs.com/wireless. [Accessed June, 2023].
[8] Climate Change — un.org. https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/. [Ac-
cessed June, 2023].
[9] Market research on energy harvesting for iot device. Conflow Will Power, 2019.
[10] Lionel Sujay Valishery. Global iot end-user spending worldwide 2017-2025. 2021.
[11] NOWI. Application note: Energy harvesting solution for electronic shelf labels (ESL).
Version 1, 2020.
[12] Susnthosi Tejaswi Kothapalli.
Building a light switch with zigbee green power and
energy harvesting. Silicon Labs.
[13] Atmosic. Atmosic energy harvesting white advantage. White paper.
[14] Trameto. Guide to EH
PMIC. https://trameto.com/guide-to-eh-pmics/. [Ac-
cessed March, 2023].
[15] Joshua Curry and Nick Harris. Powering the environmental internet of things. Sensors
(Basel, Switzerland), 19(8):E1940, 2019. doi:10.3390/s19081940.
Page 98 of 104
==PAGE:107==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
References
[16] Everactive. Energy harvesting sensors 101. 2022.
[17] Vincenzo Pecunia, Luigi Occhipinti, and Robert Hoye. Emerging indoor photovoltaic
technologies for sustainable internet of things. Advanced Energy Materials, 06 2021.
doi:10.1002/aenm.202100698.
[18] Søren B. Sø rensen. Powering IoT using ambient energy. Force Technology, 2022.
[19] Jacob Marsh. How Do Solar Cells Work? Photovoltaic Cells Explained | EnergySage.
https://news.energysage.com/how-solar-photovoltaic-cells-work/. [Accessed
April, 2023].
[20] Achim Berger, Leander B. Hormann, Christian Leitner, Stefan B. Oswald, Peter Priller,
and Andreas Springer. Sustainable energy harvesting for robust wireless sensor networks
in industrial applications. pages 1–6, 2015. doi:10.1109/SAS.2015.7133585.
[21] Product. https://www.epishine.com/product. [Accessed June, 2023].
[22] Rebecca
Brill.
How
Much
Do
Solar
Panels
Cost
In
2023?
https:
//www.forbes.com/home-improvement/solar/cost-of-solar-panels/#cost_
of_solar_panels_by_type_section. [Accessed April,2023].
[23] News Team.
How Weather Affects Formula 1.
https://news.williamhill.com/
motor-racing/weather-effect-formula-one/. [Accessed April, 2023].
[24] Francis J. DiSalvo.
Thermoelectric cooling and power generation.
Science,
285(5428):703–706, 1999. doi:10.1126/science.285.5428.703.
[25] Global Power Technologies Thermoelectric Power Generators — bde-ltd.com. https:
//bde-ltd.com/global-power-technologies/. [Accessed April, 2023].
[26] Pedro
Carvalhaes
Dias,
Flavio
JosĂŠ
Oliveira
Morais,
Maria
Bernadete
de Morais Franca, Elnatan Chagas Ferreira, Andreu Cabot, and JosĂŠ A. Siqueira Dias.
Autonomous multisensor system powered by a solar thermoelectric energy harvester
with ultralow-power management circuit. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement, 64(11):2918–2925, 2015. doi:10.1109/TIM.2015.2444253.
[27] Thermoelectric Generators (TEGs) | Products | Thermoelectric Cooling | Peltier
Coolers
|
TEG
Water
Blocks
TEC
—
customthermoelectric.com.
https://
customthermoelectric.com/products/thermoelectric-power-generators.html.
[Accessed April, 2023].
[28] Gael Sebald, Daniel Guyomar, and Amen Agbossou. On thermoelectric and pyroelectric
energy harvesting. Smart Materials and Structures, 18(12):125006, 2009. doi:10.1088/
0964-1726/18/12/125006.
[29] A pyroelectric generator as a self-powered temperature sensor for sustainable thermal
energy harvesting from waste heat and human body heat. Applied Energy, 221:299–307,
2018. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.04.003.
Page 99 of 104
==PAGE:108==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
References
[30] Eduardo Ferreira Da Costa, Nestor E. De Oliveira, FlĂĄvio J. O. Morais, Pedro
Carvalhaes-Dias, Luis Fernando C. Duarte, Andreu Cabot, and J. A. Siqueira Dias.
A self-powered and autonomous fringing field capacitive sensor integrated into a mi-
cro sprinkler spinner to measure soil water content.
Sensors, 17(3), 2017.
doi:
10.3390/s17030575.
[31] Dibin Zhu, Steve P. Beeby, Michael J. Tudor, Neil M. White, and Nick R. Harris. Novel
miniature airflow energy harvester for wireless sensing applications in buildings. IEEE
Sensors Journal, 13(2):691–700, 2013. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2012.2226518.
[32] Jong Soo Rhyee, Kyu Hyoung Lee, Sang Mock Lee, Eunseog Cho, Sang Il Kim, Eun-
sung Lee, Yong Seung Kwon, Ji Hoon Shim, and Gabriel Kotliar. Peierls distortion as a
route to high thermoelectric performance in in 4se3-) crystals. Nature, 459(7249):965–
968, June 2009. Funding Information: Acknowledgements We thank D. Johnson, K.
Koumoto and B. I. Min for discussions. We also thank H. R. Choi for TEM measure-
ments. J.H.S. was supported by the WCU programme (KOSEF: R32-2008-000-10180-0).
doi:10.1038/nature08088.
[33] Inci Donmez Noyan, Marc Dolcet, Marc Salleras, Andrej Stranz, Carlos Calaza, Gerard
Gadea, Merce Pacios, Alex Morata, Albert Tarancon, and Luis Fonseca. All-silicon
thermoelectric micro/nanogenerator including a heat exchanger for harvesting applica-
tions. Journal of Power Sources, 413:125–133, 2019. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jpowsour.2018.12.029.
[34] Buy
piezo
products
online,
howpublished
=
https://piezo.com/pages/
buy-piezoelectric-products-online, year = , note = [Accessed May, 2023],.
[35] G De Pasquale, A SomĂ , and F Fraccarollo. Comparison between piezoelectric and
magnetic strategies for wearable energy harvesting. Journal of Physics: Conference Se-
ries, 476(1):012097, dec 2013. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/476/
1/012097, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/476/1/012097.
[36] T. Lee, H. R. B. Kennedy, R. A. Bodnar, and W. Redman-White. A cmos mf energy
harvesting and data demodulator receiver for wide area low duty cycle applications with
230 mv start-up voltage. pages 1–4, 2016. doi:10.1109/NORCHIP.2016.7792887.
[37] Le-Giang Tran, Hyouk-Kyu Cha, and Woo-Tae Park. Rf power harvesting: a review on
designing methodologies and applications. Micro and Nano Systems Letters, 5(1), feb
2017. doi:10.1186/s40486-017-0051-0.
[38] Los Alamos National Lab: National Security Science, powercast. https://www.lanl.
gov/. [Accessed May, 2023].
[39] Yu Chen, Christopher M. Twigg, Omowunmi A. Sadik, and Shiqiong Tong. A self-
powered adaptive wireless sensor network for wastewater treatment plants. pages 356–
359, 2011. doi:10.1109/PERCOMW.2011.5766905.
Page 100 of 104
==PAGE:109==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
References
[40] Kenneth E. Richter, Robert George, and Kevin Hardy. Autonomous, retrievable, deep
sea microbial fuel cell. In OCEANS 2015 - Genova, pages 1–5, 2015. doi:10.1109/
OCEANS-Genova.2015.7271635.
[41] Guodong Sun, Guofu Qiao, Lin Zhao, and Zhibo Chen. Events as power source: Wireless
sustainable corrosion monitoring. Sensors, 13(12):17414–17433, 2013. doi:10.3390/
s131217414.
[42] The impact of the communication technology protocol on your IoT applicationâs
power
consumption
—
saft.com.
https://www.saft.com/energizing-iot/
impact-communication-technology-protocol-your-iot-application%E2%80%
99s-power-consumption. [Accessed May, 2023].
[43] Supercapacitors enable micro power energy harvesters to power wireless sensors. http:
//www.cap-xx.com/, 2020. [Accessed May, 2023].
[44] Ultracapacitor vs supercapacitor:
Is there a difference and how do they com-
pare to batteries?
https://www.arrow.com/en/research-and-events/articles/
supercapacitor-vs-battery-ultracapacitor-pros-and-cons,
2018.
[Accessed
June, 2023].
[45] How Long Does It Take to Charge a Capacitor? http://learningaboutelectronics.
com/Articles/How-long-does-it-take-to-charge-a-capacitor.
[Accessed June,
2023].
[46] Hassan Elahi, Khushboo Munir, Marco Eugeni, Sofiane Atek, and Paolo Gaudenzi.
Energy harvesting towards self-powered iot devices.
Energies, 13(21), 2020.
URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/13/21/5528, doi:10.3390/en13215528.
[47] Abdelkrim Bessaad, Amine Rhouni, Philippe Basset, and Dimitri Galayko.
Power
management integrated circuit for electrostatic kinetic energy harvesters.
In 2020
IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pages 1–5, 2020.
doi:10.1109/ISCAS45731.2020.9180972.
[48] What is a System on Chip (SoC)? - AnySilicon — anysilicon.com.
https://
anysilicon.com/what-is-a-system-on-chip-soc/. [Accessed 06-Jun-2023].
[49] Amos
Kingatua.
Wireless
System-on-Chip
(SoC)
for
IoT
sen-
sors
—
medium.com.
https://medium.com/supplyframe-hardware/
wireless-system-on-chip-soc-for-iot-sensors-49d76dc53866.
[Accessed
06-Jun-2023].
[50] Maurizio
Di
Paolo
Emilio.
Energy-harvesting
socs
target
âforever
powerâ
for
iot
devices.
https://www.eetimes.eu/
energy-harvesting-socs-target-forever-power-for-iot-devices/,
2020.
[Accessed 07-Jun-2023].
Page 101 of 104
==PAGE:110==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
References
[51] Open
vs
proprietary
protocols
|
Infosec
Resources.
https://resources.
infosecinstitute.com/topic/open-vs-proprietary-protocols/. [Accessed June,
2023].
[52] Proprietary Wireless Protocols for Sub-GHz and 2.4 GHz - Silicon Labs. https://www.
silabs.com/wireless/proprietary?tab=learn. [Accessed June, 2023].
[53] Ian Reynolds. IOT Architecture: 3 Layers, 4 Stages Explained — zibtek.com. https:
//www.zibtek.com/blog/iot-architecture/. [Accessed 07-Jun-2023].
[54] Silicon Laboratories.
Thunderboard efr32bg22.
URL: https://www.silabs.com/
development-tools/thunderboard/thunderboard-bg22-kit?tab=overview.
[55] Silicon
Laboratories.
Thunderboard
react.
URL:
https://
silicon-labs-thunderboard.firebaseapp.com/.
[56] Silicon Laboratories.
Silicon labs xg27.
URL: https://www.hackster.io/news/
silicon-labs-xg27-introduces-tiny-bluetooth-and-zigbee-socs-5e034600b882.
[57] European Union. Eu solar pv industrial alliance. URL: https://energy.ec.europa.
eu/topics/renewable-energy/solar-energy_en.
[58] Napi.hu.
Hungarian traffic signs being replaced.
URL: https://www.napi.hu/
magyar-vallalatok/lecserelik-a-kresz-tablakat.631661.html.
[59] NCDOT. North carolina department of transportation. URL: https://www.ncdot.
gov/contact/Pages/form.aspx?UnitName=signage&sourceUrl=/contact/.
[60] ICM-20648
|
TDK
InvenSense.
https://invensense.tdk.com/products/
motion-tracking/6-axis/icm-20648/. [Accessed June, 2023].
[61] Si7006/13/20/21/34 I2C Relative Humidity and Temperature Sensors - Silicon Labs.
https://www.silabs.com/sensors/humidity/si7006-13-20-21-34. [Accessed June,
2023].
[62] Muhammad Alam.
Strategies for optimal mac parameters tuning in ieee 802.15.6
wearable wireless sensor networks.
Journal of Medical Systems, 07 2015.
doi:
10.1007/s10916-015-0277-4.
[63] EFR32FG25 Long range Sub-GHz Wireless SoCs - Silicon Labs. https://www.silabs.
com/wireless/proprietary/efr32fg25-sub-ghz-wireless-socs#. [Accessed June,
2023].
[64] Nordic Semiconductor Infocenter.
https://infocenter.nordicsemi.com/index.
jsp?topic=%2Fps_nrf9160%2F_tmp%2Falta.nRF9160%2Fautodita%2FCURRENT%
2Fparameters.id_current_gps.html. [Accessed June, 2023].
Page 102 of 104
==PAGE:111==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
References
[65] Amorton for the outdoor environment. https://industry.panasonic.eu/products/
energy-building/amorphous-solar-cells/amorton-outdoor-environment.
[Ac-
cessed June, 2023].
[66] PRISMATIC ULTRA THIN SUPERCAPS - CAP-XX Designs
Manufactures the
Thinnest, Highest Power Density Supercapacitors
Ultracapacitors.
https://www.
cap-xx.com/products/prismatic-overview/. [Accessed June, 2023].
[67] Verified Market Research. Road Maintenance Market Size, Share, Trends, Scope Fore-
cast, 2023.
[68] Road
Maintenance
Market
Size,
Current
Insights
and
Demographic
Trends
2023-2030.
https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/
road-maintenance-market-size-current-insights-and-demographic-trends-2023-2030-202
[Accessed June, 2023].
[69] NEH2000BY - Energy harvesting PMIC.
https://www.nexperia.com/products/
analog-logic-ics/power-ics/energy-harvesting-power-management-ics/
NEH2000BY.html. [Accessed June, 2023].
[70] GA230F
-
CAP-XX
Designs
Manufactures
the
Thinnest,
Highest
Power
Density
Supercapacitors
Ultracapacitors.
https://www.cap-xx.com/product/
ga230f-cap-xx-dual-cell-supercapacitor/. [Accessed June, 2023].
[71] How Much Does the Internet of Things Cost? â ITRex. https://itrexgroup.com/
blog/how-much-iot-cost-factors-challenges/. [Accessed June, 2023].
[72] SoluM Europe. Shelf Labeling 101: How Much Do Electronic Price Tags Cost? https:
//www.solumesl.com/en/insights/how-much-do-electronic-price-tags-cost.
[Accessed June, 2023].
[73] SES
Imagotag
Vision.
A
vision
for
the
future.
2022-2027
strategic
plan.
https://www.ses-imagotag.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/SES-imagotag_
VUSION27-Presentation_Final-1.pdf, 2022. [Accessed 23-May-2023].
[74] Amorton for the indoor environment. https://industry.panasonic.eu/products/
energy-building/amorphous-solar-cells/amorton-indoor-environment.
[Ac-
cessed June, 2023].
[75] The
Business
Research.
Livestock
Monitoring
Market
Size,
Trends
and
Global
Forecast
To
2032
—
thebusinessresearchcom-
pany.com.
https://www.thebusinessresearchcompany.com/report/
livestock-monitoring-global-market-report. [Accessed 25-May-2023].
[76] Precedence Research.
Livestock Monitoring Market Size, Growth, Trends, Re-
port By 2030 — precedenceresearch.com.
https://www.precedenceresearch.com/
livestock-monitoring-market. [Accessed 25-May-2023].
Page 103 of 104
==PAGE:112==
Fernando Ramiro Gonzalez
References
[77] Grand View Research.
Global Livestock Monitoring Market Size
Share Re-
port,
2030
—
grandviewresearch.com.
https://www.grandviewresearch.com/
industry-analysis/livestock-monitoring-market. [Accessed 25-May-2023].
[78] Laura Siegle Cynthia Gregg and Taylor Clark. Monitoring livestock vital signs. Virginia
Cooperative Extension, 2020.
[79] Average farm size.
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/average-farm-size?
time=latest. [Accessed June, 2023].
[80] Metodos de identificacion para el Ganadero.
https://ganaderiayagro.blogspot.
com/2020/01/metodos-de-identificacion-para-el.html. [Accessed June, 2023].
[81] Up
to
78
million
batteries
will
be
discarded
daily
by
2025,
researchers
warn.
https://cordis.europa.eu/article/id/
430457-up-to-78-million-batteries-will-be-discarded-daily-by-2025-researchers-warn
[Accessed June, 2023].
[82] Kim Souza.
The Supply Side:
Electronic shelf tags coming to 500 Walmart
stores this year - Talk Business
Politics.
https://talkbusiness.net/2023/05/
the-supply-side-electronic-shelf-tags-coming-to-500-walmart-stores-this-year/.
[Accessed June, 2023].
[83] Shop | GPS animals tracker - Tracking and monitoring livestock.
https://
digitanimal.com/shop-2/?lang=en. [Accessed June, 2023].
[84] Why
Retailers
Are
Turning
On
to
Electronic
Shelf
La-
bels.
https://www.winsightgrocerybusiness.com/technology/
why-retailers-are-turning-electronic-shelf-labels. [Accessed June, 2023].
[85] 6
exciting
IoT
power
optimization
trends
to
watch
out
for
in
2022.
https://www.saft.com/energizing-iot/
6-exciting-iot-power-optimization-trends-watch-out-2022.
[Accessed June,
2023].
[86] An
Introduction
to
Low
Power
IoT.
https://www.particle.io/
iot-guides-and-resources/low-power-iot/. [Accessed June, 2023].
[87] Efficiency of solar PV, then, now and future x2013; Solar photovoltaic. https://sites.
lafayette.edu/egrs352-sp14-pv/technology/history-of-pv-technology/.
[Ac-
cessed June, 2023].
Page 104 of 104
