==PAGE:1==
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for
Super Resolution
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Olgeir Ingi Árnason
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads , Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Visual Computing,
Department of Applied Mathematics Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of deep learning and
probability theory.
Olgeir Ingi Árnason ­ s212564
Signature
Date
ii
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Single image super resolution techniques are used to generate high resolution images
from a single low resolution image. Deep learning methods such as GANs and flow­
based models have outperformed traditional methods, achieving state of the art results.
These methods do however have known shortcomings. Namely, GANs have been shown
to be prone to mode collapse and are difficult to train whereas flow based methods are
subject to strong architectural constraints which enforces the use of models with large
footprints. These shortfalls motivate the use of different models that are able to mitigate
or eliminate these flaws.
Diffusion models have recently gained traction in the field of generative modeling due to
their impressive performance on such tasks, outperforming state of the art methods in
some cases. This motivates the use of diffusion models for tasks such as SR.
In this thesis we test multiple diffusion models with different parameters on three SR ratios
(2x, 4x, 8x) and explore the effects of said diffusion model parameters on different super
resolution ratios.
We report that the 500 step cosine schedule models achieve the best results in each SR
ratio category:
• 2x SR ratio: 36.356 HR­PSNR, 37.852 LR­PSNR and 0.950 SSIM.
• 4x SR ratio. 35.113 HR­PSNR, 35.744 LR­PSNR and 0.880 SSIM.
• 8x SR ratio: 33.708 HR­PSNR, 34.040 LR­PSNR and 0.751 SSIM.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
[Vedrana Andersen Dahl], [Associate Professor], [Supervisor]
[Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science]
[Anders Bjorholm Dahl], [Professor, Head of section], [Supervisor]
[Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science]
[Patrick Møller Jensen], [Postdoc], [Co­supervisor]
[Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science]
iv
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Significance and Expected Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Super Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Diffusion Models
9
3.1
Forward Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Reverse Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Noise schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5
Inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.6
Model Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Experimental Settings
17
4.1
Set­up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Data Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.6
Model Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Results
25
5.1
2x Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
4x Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
8x Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Final Remarks
33
6.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7
Bibliography
37
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the field of computer vision has witnessed remarkable advancements,
particularly in the domain of image super resolution (SR). SR techniques aim to enhance
the resolution and detail of low­resolution images, enabling applications in various do­
mains, including medical imaging, satellite imaging, surveillance, and consumer electron­
ics. Among the diverse approaches for SR, diffusion models have gained significant at­
tention due to their ability to generate high­quality images while preserving fine details.
Diffusion models have demonstrated impressive performance in various computer vision
tasks, including image generation, denoising, and inpainting. These models utilize iter­
ative processes to transform low­resolution images into high­resolution counterparts by
iteratively refining the pixel values. Unlike traditional SR methods, diffusion models are
data­driven and do not rely on explicit image priors or handcrafted features. Instead, they
learn the distribution of high­resolution images from a given dataset and generate real­
istic results while also mitigating some of the shortcomings of previous learning based
methods.
While diffusion models have shown promising results, there is still a need for a compre­
hensive understanding of their underlying mechanisms and the impact of various factors
on their performance. To bridge this gap, this thesis presents an ablation study on diffu­
sion models for SR on different SR ratios. The primary objective of this study is to dissect
and analyze the key components and design choices of diffusion models to identify their
strengths, weaknesses, and limitations.
1.1
Research Objectives
The main objectives of this thesis are as follows:
1.1.1
Investigation of Diffusion Model Components
• Explore different diffusion model components and describe their impact on SR per­
formance.
• Analyze the effectiveness of various diffusion model components, such as number
of forward process steps and noise schedules on different SR ratios.
1.1.2
Examination of Ill­Posed Problem Solving of Diffusion Models
• Implement various model performance metrics that capture the models ability to
solve ill­posed problems such as SR.
• Explore the effect of different SR ratios on aforementioned performance metrics and
gauge the capabilities and limitations of diffusion models to solve such problems.
1.2
Significance and Expected Contributions
The findings of this ablation study on diffusion models will provide a deeper understanding
of diffusion models’ capabilities and limitations, allowing researchers and practitioners to
make informed decisions when designing and utilizing these models.
The key contributions of this study are as follows:
• Identification of crucial architectural components for diffusion models in the context
of SR, providing insights into their impact on performance.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
1
==PAGE:10==
• Evaluation and comparison of model performance on various SR ratios to gauge
diffusion model abilities to solve ill­posed problems.
By addressing these objectives and providing insights into diffusion models for SR, this
thesis aims to pave the way for further advancements in the field, facilitating the develop­
ment of more effective diffusion model methods to solve SR problems.
2
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Super Resolution
Super resolution (SR) refers to the task of enhancing the resolution of an image or video
beyond its original low­resolution (LR) form. In this thesis, we refer to increased resolu­
tion when the pixel count is increased. The SR problem has attracted significant attention
in various fields, including computer vision, image processing, and multimedia applica­
tions. The ability to generate high­quality, high­resolution images from low­resolution in­
puts has wide­ranging practical implications, such as in surveillance, medical imaging,
satellite imaging, and digital photography. Figure 2.1 illustrates the goal of SR where a
HR image is created from its corresponding LR image.
(a) LR image.
(b) HR image.
Figure 2.1: Super resolution aims to reconstruct the HR image from the LR image.
Super resolution problems are often considered ill­posed, referring to a situation where a
problem lacks unique, stable solutions. In the context of super resolution, this means that
there are typically multiple possible HR images that could correspond to a given LR image,
and the problem of selecting the ”correct” high­resolution image becomes challenging
or impossible. In other words, the ill­posed nature of super resolution problems implies
that there is an inherent ambiguity in the mapping from low­resolution to high­resolution
images. Without additional constraints or prior knowledge, it becomes challenging to
uniquely determine the exact details and structures that were present in the original high­
resolution image.
The ill­posed nature of super resolution problems arises due to the inherent loss of infor­
mation during the process of downsampling or capturing low­resolution images. When an
image is captured or downsampled, high­frequency details and fine­grained information
are lost, resulting in a lossy representation. Consequently, the missing high­frequency
information cannot be uniquely determined from the low­resolution data alone, making it
difficult to obtain a single ground truth solution. This property is reflected visually in figure
2.2.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
3
==PAGE:12==
(a) HR image 1.
(b) HR image 2.
(c) Corresponding LR image.
Figure 2.2: Two different HR images that get downscaled to the same LR image.
In the past, several methods have been proposed to address the super resolution problem.
Early approaches were based on interpolation techniques, which aimed to estimate the
high­resolution (HR) image by upsampling the available LR data. These methods typically
employed simple interpolation algorithms, such as bilinear or bicubic interpolation. While
these techniques provided a quick and straightforward solution, they often resulted in
blurred or unrealistic HR images due to the lack of accurate information about the missing
high­frequency details.
To overcome the limitations of interpolation­based methods, researchers turned to more
sophisticated approaches, including example­based methods, regularization­based meth­
ods, and learning­based methods. Example­based methods relied on external databases
of HR images to learn the relationship between LR and HR image pairs, allowing them to
reconstruct the missing high­frequency information. These methods used techniques like
sparse coding, patch matching, and non­local self­similarity to find similar image patches
and transfer the details to the LR image.
Regularization­based methods exploited image priors and assumptions to regularize the
SR problem. Techniques like total variation regularization and sparse representation mod­
eling were used to promote sparsity and encourage the reconstruction of high­frequency
details. These methods leveraged the inherent properties of natural images to generate
more visually pleasing HR results.
However, the recent breakthroughs in deep learning have revolutionized the field of su­
4
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:13==
per resolution. Deep learning­based methods, particularly convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), have shown exceptional performance in SR tasks. These methods learn an end­
to­end mapping function from LR to HR images using large­scale datasets. The deep net­
works are trained to capture complex relationships between LR and HR images, enabling
them to generate highly realistic and visually appealing HR images. Notable architec­
tures in deep learning­based SR include PSNR oriented methods, flow based methods
and GANs. However, PSNR methods have been known to cause over smoothing of the
HR image, flow based methods suffer from very large model footprints due to strong ar­
chitectural contraints and lastly, GANs have been shown to be prone to mode collapse
and tend to be difficult to train.
Current research in super resolution continues to explore new directions and improve­
ments. Some recent advancements include attention mechanisms, which enable the net­
work to focus on relevant image regions, and GANs, which enhance perceptual quality
and texture details. Additionally, more recent methods such as diffusion models have
gained traction due to their performance and ease of training.
2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks have been shown to be very effective for generative tasks
such as Super­Resolution (SR) problems due to their ability to automatically learn and
extract relevant features from low­resolution images. The convolutional layers capture
local patterns, while pooling layers aid in reducing spatial dimensions, making them ef­
fective at learning hierarchical representations in images. By leveraging this, CNNs have
been effective at solving SR problems and significantly enhance the resolution of images,
providing sharper and more detailed results than traditional interpolation techniques.
The main idea behind convolutional CNNs as opposed to a traditional artificial neural
network (ANN) is that in CNNs each unit receives input only from a small subset of neurons
in the previous layer whereas neurons in the current layer of fully connected networks are
connected to every neuron in the previous layer. The convolution procedure is done using
kernels where each kernel has learnable weights and is slid over the input performing
element wise multiplication and summation. Put mathematically a convolution operation
is described as follows
(f ∗g)[n] =
∞
∑
m=−∞
f[m]g[n −m]
Figure 2.3 shows a visual representation of what a convolution really is computing. More­
over, in a convolutional neural network many of these convolution operations are stacked
one after the other creating multiple kernels each with learnable weights.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Convolution operation visualized.
Image source: https://brilliant.org/wiki/convolutional­neural­network/
2.2.1
Pooling
The pooling operation is used to compress the size of the convolution layers. The factor
by which the convolution layers are compressed is called the downsampling factor which
is determined by the stride of the pooling operation. Several pooling methods exist such
as average pooling and median pooling but by far the most popular pooling method is
the max pooling which essentially reduces the dimensions of the input by picking the
maximum value of a neighbourhood of the current input. The max pooling method has
also been shown to make CNNs more robust to small perturbations of the input making it
a good choice in most situations.
2.2.2
Activation functions
The activation functions purpose is to add non­linearity to the model since a series of linear
operations can be reduced to a single linear operation and limits the models ability to learn
complex functions. A plethora of different activation functions for machine learning exist
but the most popular one is the ReLU function also known as the Rectified Linear Unit
defined mathematically as ReLU(x) = max(0, x).
2.2.3
U­net architecture
The U­Net architecture is a popular CNN architecture commonly used for image segmen­
tation and generative tasks such as SR. It is also the architecture most commonly utilized
by diffusion models. The U­Net architecture gets its name from its U­shaped design, which
consists of an encoder path and a corresponding decoder path. The encoder path per­
forms a pooling operation such as max pooling (downsampling), while the decoder path
performs upsampling and reconstructs the image. The resulting network architecture has
the same input and output dimensions as illustrated by figure 2.4.
The encoder path usually consists of convolutional layers followed by activation functions
and pooling layers while the decoder path consists of upsampling operations followed by
convolutional layers and activation functions.
6
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: General U­net architecture (Ronneberger et al. 2015).
2.2.4
Embeddings
Embeddings in neural networks are most often used to incorporate additional information
in the model that cannot be used directly as input for reasons such as architectural con­
straints for example. In the context of SR, the LR image is often embedded into the model
such that it guides the convolution process from beginning to end. This technique will be
used extensively in this thesis as certain architectural constraints of diffusion models make
it difficult to take the LR image as direct input of the model.
Additionally, embeddings are often learned before being incorporated in the model. For
instance, in the case of SR, the LR image is often passed through an encoder to either
adjust the dimensionality of the LR image to the model dimensions such that it can be
embedded into the model while also making it possible for the LR encoder to learn to
better seperate different LR images and leaving less work for the U­net to do.
Two methods of embedding information into neural nets are most commonly used. The
first one consisting of adding or multiplying the values from the embedding directly into
the network at hand thus altering the output values of a certain layer of the network. The
second method involves concatenating the embedding into the model instead of adding
it directly to the output of the neurons. In this thesis we solely utilize the second method
for all models.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:17==
3
Diffusion Models
Diffusion models have gained significant attention and popularity in the field of machine
learning recently. These models provide a powerful framework for modeling complex
datasets, particularly in the context of sequential/structured data. They have shown promis­
ing results in generative modeling such as image and sound synthesis. At their core, dif­
fusion models are probabilistic models that capture the evolution of data over time. They
aim to describe the dynamics of data generation processes and provide a mechanism
for generating realistic samples from the underlying data distribution. Unlike traditional
generative models, such as autoregressive models or GANs, diffusion models focus on
modeling the transformation process from a simple distribution, often a Gaussian distri­
bution, to the target data distribution. This transformation of the data is visualized by a
stochastic differential equation for a simple 1D case in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Transformation process from an underlying data distribution to a Gaussian
distribution and back to the underlying data distribution illustrated by an SDE (Song et al.
2021).
Diffusion models are latent variable models parameterized by a Markov chain trained
using the variational lower bound of the negative log likelihood. Diffusion models can
typically be split into two parts, the first being the forward process and the latter being
the reverse process which is learned by the model. The Markov chain q(x1:T |x0) (also
called the forward process or diffusion process) is a chain of length T that incrementally
adds Gaussian noise to the data while the reverse process pθ(xt−1|xt) is also a Markov
chain of the same length as the forward process with learned transitions starting at p(xT ).
The graphical representation of diffusion models is illustrated in figure 3.2 where x0 is the
observed image and the xt are the latents.
Figure 3.2: Graphical model of diffusion models. (Ho et al. 2020)
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
9
==PAGE:18==
3.1
Forward Process
As mentioned already, the forward process q(x1:T |x0) is a Markov chain of length T that
incrementally adds gaussian noise to the data until it has been completely destroyed. The
noise added at each timestep t is determined by the noise schedule βt which are held as
constant hyperparameters. The forward process is parameterized and visualized by the
following:
q(x1:T |x0) =
T
∏
t=1
q(xt|xt−1)
(3.1)
Where
q(xt|xt−1) = N(xt;
√
1 −βtxt−1, βtI)
(3.2)
Figure 3.3: Truncated linear diffusion process in 40 step increments.
The visualized forward process clearly illustrates the importance of the noise schedule
and choice of βt since too many steps in the forward process will lead to redundant steps
that do nothing except for adding noise to an already completely gaussian image. Two
methods of defining a noise schedule are generally used which is either a linear noise
schedule as done in (Ho et al. 2020) or a cosine schedule as done in (Nichol & Dhariwal
2021).
Consequently, the choice of the amount of steps in the forward process is also of great
importance for diffusion models as each βt corresponds to a certain timestep and therefore
the amount of steps in the forward process and the noise schedule itself are closely tied
together and have been shown to greatly affect the performance of diffusion models. Both
the forward process steps and the type of noise schedule were tested for their effect on
diffusion model performance on different SR ratios in this thesis.
While the noise schedule and forward process steps have been shown to contribute to the
overall performance of diffusion models, there is a property of the forward process that
makes the training of diffusion models very efficient and in general, tractable for practical
applications. This property consists of the fact that since the forward process incremen­
tally adds Gaussian noise to the data, it therefore admits a closed form solution for sam­
pling an arbitrary step in the Markov chain. By reparameterizing such that αt = 1−βt and
¯αt = ∏t αt we have
xt = √αtxt−1 + √1 −αtϵt−1
= √αtαt−1xt−2 + √1 −αtαt−1ˆϵt−2
= …
= √¯αtx0 + √1 −¯αtϵt
10
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:19==
Where ϵ ∼N(0, I) and ˆϵ merges two Gaussian distributions. The arbitrary timestep
sample then becomes:
q(xt|x0) = N(xt; √¯αtx0, (1 −¯αt)I)
(3.3)
This property breaks up the forward process Markov chain and will make the training of
diffusion models much more efficient as will be discussed in the training section of this
chapter.
3.2
Reverse Process
The goal of diffusion models is to learn how to reverse the forward process q(xt−1|xt)
which will in turn allow us to sample the underlying distribution of the data from Gaussian
noise input xT ∼N(0, I). However, estimating q(xt−1|xt) is in general intractable since
it is a function of the entire dataset. Instead, neural networks are utilized in order to learn
how to approximate the conditional probabilities denoted by
pθ(x0:T ) = pθ(xT )
T
∏
t=1
pθ(xt−1|xt)
(3.4)
Where
pθ(xt−1|xt) = N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t))
(3.5)
It is worth noting that the reverse conditional probabilites are only tractable when condi­
tioned on x0:
q(xt−1|xt, x0) = N(xt−1; ˜µ(xt, x0), ˜βtI)
(3.6)
This means that a model can not be trained to reverse the forward process on one dataset
for example and then do it correctly on images from another dataset. Note also that in
the case of SR, since the LR image is typically embedded into the model, the conditional
probabilities in equation (3.5) change such that they include the LR image and become
pθ(xt−1|xt, LR) = N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t, LR), Σθ(xt, t, LR))
(3.7)
Figure 3.4 illustrates reverse process done by a fully trained model.
Figure 3.4: Truncated reverse process in 20 step increments.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
11
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Noise schedules
As already mentioned, the type of noise schedule has been shown to affect model perfor­
mance of diffusion models since noisier samples in the forward process contribute less to
the optimization of the negative log likelihood (NLL) (Nichol Dhariwal 2021).
Note that in diffusion models, there is a trade­off between the number of steps in the
forward process and computational resources during inference since the model will have
to do one forward pass for every step in the forward process. This means that if a model
has 1000 forward process steps, a 1000 forward passes will have to be done in order to
create a single sample.
This trade­off and the fact that noisier samples of the forward process contribute less to
the optimization of the NLL motivates the use of noise schedules beyond the constant
noise schedule where all βt are set to a constant. Ideally, the forward process has fewer
steps while the noise schedule ensures that the samples in the forward process contain
as many steps as possible that contain little noise while still completely contaminating the
data with noise by the end of the forward process. This would minimize the computational
resources during inference while also allowing for faster optimization of the NLL.
Two types of noise schedules are typically used for diffusion models, the linear noise
schedule and the cosine noise schedule. Figure 3.5 reflects the difference between the
two schedules in a 200 step forward process. Note that the difference between to two
schedules becomes more apparent in longer forward processes.
Figure 3.5: Difference between the linear noise schedule (above) and the cosine noise
schedule (below).
Recall that the forward process is parameterized by
q(xt|xt−1) = N(xt;
√
1 −βtxt−1, βtI)
The linear noise schedule uses linearly increasing βt on a pre­determined interval. The
interval [β1 = 10−4, βT = 0.02] proposed in (Ho et al. (2020)) is commonly used in the
diffusion model literature and will also be used as the linear noise schedule interval in this
thesis.
The cosine noise schedule proposed in (Nichol & Dhariwal 2021) was designed to achieve
a linear drop­off of ¯αt near the middle of the process while making small changes near
the ends of the diffusion process where t = 0 or t = T. The βt parameters of the cosine
schedule are parameterized as follows:
βt = clip(1 −
¯αt
¯αt−1
, 0.99)
(3.8)
12
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:21==
Where
¯αt = f(t)
f(0)
(3.9)
And
f(t) = cos(t/T + s
1 + s
· π
2 )2
(3.10)
Where s is a small offset set to s = 0.08 to prevent βt from being too small when t = 0.
Figure 3.6: Difference of linear and cosine noise schedules in terms of ¯αt (Nichol & Dhari­
wal 2021).
Figure 3.6 illustrates the difference between the two schedules in terms of ¯αt which ulti­
mately reflects the total noise accumulated at each timestep.
3.4
Training
Diffusion models are trained by optimizing the variational lower bound of the NLL
−log pθ(x0) ≤−log pθ(x0) + DKL(q(x1:T |x0)||pθ(x1:T |x0))
= −log pθ(x0) + Ex1:T ∼q(x1:T |x0)[log
q(x1:T |x0)
pθ(x0:T )/pθ(x0)]
= −log pθ(x0) + Eq[log q(x1:T |x0)
pθ(x0:T ) + log pθ(x0)]
= Eq[log q(x1:T |x0)
pθ(x0:T ) ]
:= LV LB
Where pθ is the approximated reverse process learned by the network. Additionally, the
objective still needs to be converted such that it can be computed in an efficient and fast
manner. The following derivations are a key step in making the training of diffusion models
efficient enough for practical applications.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
13
==PAGE:22==
LV LB = Eq[log q(x1:T |x0)
pθ(x0:T ) ]
= Eq[log
∏T
t=1 q(xt|xt−1)
pθ(xT ) ∏T
t=1 pθ(xt−1|xt)
]
= Eq[−log pθ(xT ) +
T
∑
t=1
log q(xt|xt−1)
pθ(xt−1|xt)]
= Eq[−log pθ(xT ) +
T
∑
t=2
log q(xt|xt−1)
pθ(xt−1|xt) + log q(x1|x0)
pθ(x0|x1)]
= Eq[−log pθ(xT ) +
T
∑
t=2
log(q(xt−1|xt, x0)
pθ(xt−1|xt)
·
q(xt|x0)
q(xt−1|x0)) + log q(x1|x0)
pθ(x0|x1)]
= Eq[−log pθ(xT ) +
T
∑
t=2
log q(xt−1|xt, x0)
pθ(xt−1|xt)
+
T
∑
t=2
log q(xt|x0)
q(xt−1|x0) + log q(x1|x0)
pθ(x0|x1)]
= Eq[−log pθ(xT ) +
T
∑
t=2
log q(xt−1|xt, x0)
pθ(xt−1|xt)
+ log q(xT |x0)
q(x1|x0) + log q(x1|x0)
pθ(x0|x1)]
= Eq[log q(xT |x0)
pθ(xT ) +
T
∑
t=2
log q(xt−1|xt, x0)
pθ(xt−1|xt)
−log pθ(x0|x1)]
The objective can then be further rewritten in terms of a series of KL­divergences as
follows (Sohl­Dickenstein et al. (2015)):
LV LB = Eq[DKL(q(xT |x0)||pθ(xT )) +
T
∑
t=2
DKL(q(xt−1|xt, x0)||pθ(xt−1|xt)) −log pθ(x0|x1)]
:= LT + LT−1 + · · · + L0
(3.11)
Note that both the forward process and the reverse process have the same functional
form when βt are small enough (Sohl­Dickenstein et al. (2015)). Moreover, LV LB is a se­
ries of KL divergences between pθ(xt−1|xt) and forward process posteriors q(xt−1|xt, x0)
which consequently are both Gaussian. This allows for closed form computation of the
individual terms of LV LB , allowing for more efficient training by removing any numerical
approximations needed for computing the KL­divergence.
Furthermore, the forward process property presented in equation (3.3) breaks up the for­
ward process, removing the dependence on each timestep sample from the previous
timestep sample. This property allows for further optimization of the training efficiency of
diffusion models and instead of optimizing every term of LV LB at the same time, we can
instead optimize random terms of LV LB. By reparameterizing µθ in the learned reverse
process pθ(xt−1|xt) = N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t)) the individual terms of LV LB become
Lt = Ex,ϵ[
(1 −αt)2
2αt(1 −¯αt)||Σθ(xt, t)||2
2
||ϵt −ϵθ(√¯αtx0 +
√
1 −¯αtϵt, t)||2]
(3.12)
14
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:23==
Additionally by using a simplified training objective proposed in (Ho et al. (2020)) they
found that it resulted in better visually looking samples while also making the training
more stable. Consequently, the variance term Σθ can also be ignored during training,
simplifying the training even more. The final simplified training objective is
Lt = Ex,ϵ[||ϵt −ϵθ(√¯αtx0 +
√
1 −¯αtϵt, t)||2]
(3.13)
Note that the final training objective is then just the mean squared error of the noise added
at timestep t and the noise predicted by the model at timestep t. While other training
objectives have been proposed, they will be considered out of the scope of this thesis and
all models trained in this thesis project use the simplified objective.The training sequence
of diffusion models can then be summarized by algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1 Diffusion model training
1: do
2: x0 ∼q(x0)
3: t ∼Uniform(1,2,...,T)
4: ϵ ∼N(0, I)
5: Take optimization step on the simplified training objective
6: ∇θ||ϵt −ϵθ(√¯αtx0 + √1 −¯αtϵt, t)||2
7: until done
3.5
Inference
The goal of doing inference in diffusion models is to iteratively remove noise from a com­
pletely noisy input and generate a clean and realistic sample. As mentioned already, there
is a trade­off between the number of steps in the forward process and computational re­
sources during inference. This is due to the fact that diffusion models need to do as many
forward passes of the network as there are steps in the forward process. The reason
for this is that during training, the model learns the individual transitions of the reverse
process given the randomly drawn timestep.
Inference in diffusion models for image generation then starts from a completely Gaussian
input image and iteratively removes the noise from the image until the forward process
has been completely reversed. The inference sequence of diffusion models is then sum­
marized by algorithm 2
Algorithm 2 Diffusion model inference
1: xT ∼N(0, I)
2: for t = T, T −1, ..., 1
3: if t > 1, z ∼N(0, I)
4: else z = 0
5: xt−1 =
1
√αt (xt −
1−αt
√1−¯αt ϵθ(xt, t)) + σtz
6: end for
7: return x0
By now it should be clear that since diffusion models start their sampling process from a
randomized Gaussian input, the inference is inherently stochastic. This means that SR
diffusion models can create different HR images from the same LR image as illustrated
by figure 3.7.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.7: Multiple HR images (right) created from the same LR image (left).
This property is interesting by itself but it also makes performance evaluation of diffusion
models an interesting topic since the images created by the model are different each time.
3.6
Model Embeddings
Due to the training objective of diffusion models being the mean squared error of the noise
added by the forward process at timestep t and the noise removed by the model at the
same timestep, the input of the model needs to be a sample from the forward process and
the output is then the predicted previous sample in the forward process. This imposes
certain architectural constraints on the model and other inputs such as LR images must
be embedded into the model.
While not all diffusion models are SR models and therefore do not need to embed condi­
tionals such as LR images into the model, they do all need to embed the current timestep
that is being predicted. This is due to the fact that noise schedules typically do not have
constant noise parameters βt and therefore the noise added at each timestep varies.
There are many ways to do this but in this thesis project we utilize a single hidden layer
fully connected network that takes as input the current timestep and outputs a vector that
gets rearranged and concatenated into the convolutional layers of the U­net.
In the case of SR, the LR variant of the desired HR image must bu embedded into the
model as well as the timestep. In this thesis project we utilize a LR convolutional encoder
that takes as input the LR image and ouputs an image that has the same dimensions as
the desired HR image and is embedded into the first convolutional layer of the U­net such
that it guides the diffusion process from beginning to end. Note that the architecture of
the LR encoder varies slightly for different SR ratios such that it outputs and image that
always has the same dimensions as the HR image.
16
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:25==
4
Experimental Settings
4.1
Set­up
The hardware used in this thesis was the DTU HPC which is a computing cluster owned
by DTU. More precisely, all models in this thesis were trained using the NVIDIA a100.
Additionally, all models developed in this thesis were implemented in PyTorch.
4.2
Dataset
The dataset used in this thesis project was the CelebA dataset which is a large scale
face attributes dataset with more than 200k images of celebrity faces, each with 40 binary
attribute annotations and is to be used for non­commercial use only. Each image is an
RGB colored image with dimensions 178x218. Images from the CelebA dataset also
cover a large variation of poses and background clutter of over 10k different celebrities.
The dataset is split into 3 parts, the first one being the training part which consists of
approximately 162k images, the second one being the validation part which consists of
roughly 20k images and finally the testing part which consists of the remaining 20k images.
Note that the choice of dataset is somewhat arbitrary for this thesis but we wanted a
dataset that was large and complex enough for non­trivial image synthesis and the CelebA
fit those criteria.
Figure 4.1: Images from the CelebA dataset.
Although the dataset contains 40 binary attributes corresponding to each image, those
were not used in this thesis project simply to keep the problem at hand as SR focused as
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
17
==PAGE:26==
possible.
4.3
Data Preprocessing
Before the data can be used for training the models it needs to be processed such that
architectural contraints of convolutional neural networks can be accommodated. The data
preprocessing is split into two parts, one for the HR images and the other for LR images.
Many methods for preprocessing image data exist but in our case, we only need to down­
scale images to fit model restrictions and to create the corresponding LR images to guide
the denoising process done by the model. Image downscaling is commonly done using
simple interpolation methods such as bilinear interpolation or bicubic interpolation. In this
thesis project we use bicubic interpolation for every downscaling operation of the data.
4.3.1
Bicubic Interpolation
Bicubic interpolation is a commonly used method in image processing and as a simple
method for solving SR problems. The main advantages of such interpolation methods is
that they are fast, easy to implement and have shown to be better than bilinear interpo­
lation for most tasks. Bicubic interpolation uses a 4x4 patch of pixels or 16 pixel values
when up or downscaling whereas bilinear interpolation uses only 4 pixels thus resulting in
less accurate samples compared to bicubic interpolation. Bicubic interpolation calculates
the interpolated surface as follows:
p(x, y) =
3
∑
i=0
3
∑
j=0
aijxiyj
And the problem revolves around determining the 16 different aij coefficients.
4.3.2
HR Data Preprocessing
As already mentioned, the CelebA dataset consists of RGB images of size 178x218. Be­
cause of this consistency, HR data preprocessing is technically not needed as the pixel
values of the images already have a favorable range for CNNs ([−1, 1]). However, in
the name of dimensionality reduction and model simplification, we decided to downscale
every image from 178x218 to 160x160 using bicubic interpolation. This downscaling to
160x160 is an arbitrary choice and could have been chosen differently as long as the
downscaling is not of such factor that is completely distorts the image. The 160x160
images are then considered as HR ground truth images and are diffused and denoised
in the training process. An important note here is that this downscaling of the HR data
maintains the ill­posed and ambiguous nature of the SR problem and should not affect
the comparisons of different models.
18
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.2: 178x218 CelebA image (left) and the same image downscaled to 160x160
(right).
As illustrated by figure 4.2 the HR data preprocessing of downscaling from 178x218 to
160x160 does not significantly distort the image and it is still recognizable as the same
image by the human eye.
4.3.3
LR Data Preprocessing
For the LR data, three different preprocessing methods were used, one for each resolution
ratio (2x, 4x, 8x). All of which consist of downscaling the HR images to the appropriate
dimensions in each resolution ratio case:
• For the 2x resolution ratio models, the 160x160 HR images are downscaled to 80x80
• For the 4x resolution ratio models, the 160x160 HR images are downscaled to 40x40
• For the 8x resolution ratio models, the 160x160 HR images are downscaled to 20x20
(a) 160x160 image.
(b) 80x80 image.
Figure 4.3: 160x160 CelebA image downscaled to 80x80.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
19
==PAGE:28==
(a) 160x160 image.
(b) 40x40 image.
Figure 4.4: 160x160 CelebA image downscaled to 40x40.
(a) 160x160 image.
(b) 20x20 image.
Figure 4.5: 160x160 CelebA image downscaled to 20x20.
As illustrated by figures 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 we can see that the SR problem becomes more
difficult with each factor the ratio is increased by and more HR images correspond to the
same LR image.
4.4
Models
In this thesis we want to investigate the impact of different diffusion model parameters
on model performance for increasingly harder SR problems with higher resolution ratios.
As already mentioned, the parameters we are interested in are the amount of steps in
the forward process and the corresponding noise schedule parameters βt. As a result,
we train three models with different amounts of steps (50, 200, 500) per noise schedule
per resolution ratio with two noise schedules (linear and cosine) and three resolution ra­
tios (2x, 4x, 8x) resulting in 6 models per resolution ratio and 18 models in total. More
concretely, all models trained and evaluated in this thesis are summarized in table 4.1:
20
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:29==
Steps
Noise Schedule
SR ratio
50
Linear
2x
200
Linear
2x
500
Linear
2x
50
Cosine
2x
200
Cosine
2x
500
Cosine
2x
50
Linear
4x
200
Linear
4x
500
Linear
4x
50
Cosine
4x
200
Cosine
4x
500
Cosine
4x
50
Linear
8x
200
Linear
8x
500
Linear
8x
50
Cosine
8x
200
Cosine
8x
500
Cosine
8x
Table 4.1: Summary of every model trained and evaluated in this thesis.
All models use the same baseline U­net architecture illustrated in figure 4.6 but the LR
encoder varies slightly between resolution ratios to accommodate the different dimensions
of the LR embeddings in each case such that they fit into the first convolutional block of
the U­net which is of dimensions 160x160.
Figure 4.6: Model architecture.
As illustrated by figure 4.6 the U­net is of depth 3 with the LR embedding at the first
convolutional block while the timestep embedding is concatenated at the bottom of the U­
net. Each convolutional block of the U­net consists of convolutional operations followed by
a batch normalization which is then followed by an activation function (ReLU) and finally
an up or downscaling operation such as ConvTranspose2D or max pooling.
As for the LR encoders, they consist of convolutional blocks followed by varying amounts
of ConvTranspose2D (upscaling) operations followed by the ReLU activation function
such that the dimensions of the output are 160x160 with 16 channels in total.
Note that all models trained and evaluated in this thesis have roughly 15.5 million learnable
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
21
==PAGE:30==
parameters varying slightly based on the type of LR encoder used.
4.5
Training
An important part of deep learning models such as diffusion models is how they are
trained.
Training these models typically involves many hyperparameters such as the
learning rate and the type of optimizer the training process uses. These hyperparam­
eters have been shown to impact model performance greatly and have been researched
extensively. While these hyperparameters are interesting in the context of diffusion mod­
els and SR we choose to keep them constant across all models to ensure fair model
comparison between all parameters tested in this thesis.
The training related parameters that were chosen and used for every model in this thesis
are as follows:
• The optimizer used for training is the Adam optimizer.
• The training time is set to 10 epochs which translates to roughly 100k optimization
steps and takes roughly 8 hours per model.
• Batch size is set to 16 images at a time.
• The learning rate is set to 1e−4 and is linearly decreased by a factor of 1/10 each
epoch.
4.6
Model Assessment
Assessing SR models has proven to be a difficult problem as mathematical metrics typi­
cally are not able to capture what makes an images visually appealing to our eyes. Due to
this phenomenon, the field of model assessment in the context of SR is an active research
field to this day. In this thesis we aim to assess two properties of diffusion models for SR.
The first is that we want to assess the impact of different diffusion model parameters on
general model performance for SR across different SR ratios. The second is to gauge
whether or not the HR diffusion model samples get downscaled to the same LR image
that guided the denoising process and how the different diffusion model parameters affect
that ability of the model.
By increasing the resolution ratio of the SR problem we inherently create more ambiguity
between the HR and LR images i.e. by increasing the resolution ratio, there are more HR
images that correspond to and get downscaled to the same LR image. By experimenting
with different resolution ratios we wish to gauge the capabilities of diffusion models to
handle this increased ambiguity by altering the amount of steps in the forward process
and the noise schedule parameters. In other words, we want assess the models in this
thesis using metrics that can ideally capture the models ability to create HR images that
are either very close to the original HR image and if that is too difficult or impossible for
the model, does it create HR images that correspond to the LR image that was embedded
into the model during inference.
Put mathematically, if we let h(x|LR) be the conditional probability distribution of HR im­
ages that get downscaled to the same LR image and lθ(x|LR) be the conditional distribu­
tion learned by the model, we want to assess if these distributions are the same or at least
similar. Note that the stochastic nature of diffusion model inference allows us sample the
learned distributions and get different results each time as opposed to completely deter­
ministic methods which generate the same HR image for a given LR image every time.
The conditional probabilites h(x|LR) and lθ(x|LR) are high dimensional and in general
intractable and we therefore have to assess this property in an empirical manner.
22
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:31==
The way we chose to assess this is by evaluating the models using both the peak signal­
to­noise ratio between ground truth HR images and generated HR images by the model
(HR­PSNR) and also the peak signal­to­noise ratio between the ground truth LR images
and HR images generated by the model that are downscaled to the appropriate LR di­
mensions in each SR ratio case (LR­PSNR). In this way we use the HR­PSNR to assess
the models ability to replicate HR images given the corresponding LR image which is
ultimately the goal of SR while also using the LR­PSNR to calculate how close the down­
scaled generated image is to the LR ground truth image. For instance, if the HR­PSNR of
the model is low but the LR­PSNR of the same model is high, we can infer that the model
does not do a good job of replicating the HR images as indicated by the low HR­PSNR
but the conditional distributions h(x|LR) and lθ(x|LR) seem to be similar as indicated by
the high LR­PSNR.
It is important to note that while the ratio between the LR­PSNR and HR­PSNR does in
some way reflect the similarity of the conditional distributions h(x|LR) and lθ(x|LR) it is
by no means a perfect method to do this nor the standard in general. It is simply our way
of evaluating the difference between the two distributions in an empirical manner.
4.6.1
PSNR
Peak Signal­to­Noise Ratio (PSNR) is a metric used to quantify the quality of an image by
comparing it to the original image. It measures the ratio between the maximum possible
power of a signal and the power of the noise that distorts it.
The PSNR is calculated using the following equivalent formulas:
PSNR = 10 · log10(max2
I
MSE ) = 20 · log10( maxI
√
MSE
)
Where maxI represents the maximum pixel value of the image which is typically 255 for
8­bit images and MSE is the mean squared error between the images.
The PSNR value is expressed in decibels and provides an approximation of image quality
in terms of how much noise the image contains compared to the ground truth image.
Since diffusion models create their samples by denoising a completely noisy image, the
PSNR is used to indicate how well the model achieves this. Note that a higher PSNR
indicates higher image quality whereas a lower PSNR indicates worse image quality. A
rule of thumb is that a PSNR above 30 dB is considered acceptable while values above
40 dB are considered very high.
Note that the PSNR is a pixel wise difference metric and does therefore in many cases
not accurately reflect the perceptual quality of images.
4.6.2
Structural Similarity
The structural similarity (SSIM) is another image quality metric that measures the similar­
ity between two images while taking into account both pixel wise differences and structural
information of images. Unlike the PSNR, the SSIM aims to evaluate perceptual aspects
of images. The SSIM measures similarity between images by evaluating luminance, con­
trast and structure on a scale from ­1 to 1 where ­1 denotes complete dissimilarity and 1
represents complete similarity (identical images).
• Luminance represents the overall brightness of an image which is the same as pixel
value intensity. The SSIM compares the mean pixel values of both images which is
then used to calculate the luminance similarity of the images.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
23
==PAGE:32==
• Contrast represents the differences in texture and sharpness between the two im­
ages. The SSIM evaluates the standard deviation of pixel intensities which is then
used to calculate the contrast similarity.
• Structure represents the correlations between neighboring pixels which captures the
image’s texture and organization. The SSIM calculates the structural similarity by
comparing the covariance of pixel intensities of the two images.
Additionally, the SSIM can only be calculated on a single channel of an image and since
the images of the CelebA dataset are RGB images, they need to be transformed before
calculating the SSIM. Two methods are typically used to solve this problem and the first
one is converting the RGB image to a grayscale image and calculate the SSIM between
the grayscale images and the second is converting the RGB image to the YCbCr format
and calculate the SSIM using the Y channel. In this thesis we explicitly use the first
method i.e. we convert the images to grayscale and calculate the SSIM using the following
formula:
SSIM =
(2µxµy + c1)(2σxy + c2)
(µ2x + µ2y + c1)(σ2x + σ2y) + c2
24
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:33==
5
Results
In this chapter we present all models trained in this thesis and their corresponding per­
formance metrics. As already mentioned, we train 6 models for each SR ratio with 3
different amounts of steps (50, 200, 500) for each noise schedule (linear, cosine). The
models are then evaluated using the HR­PSNR, LR­PSNR and SSIM performance met­
rics to be compared against one another. In this thesis we are mainly interested in how
well the models are able to replicate the HR images which is captured by the HR­PSNR
and the SSIM. Additionally we look at whether or not the samples created by the models
have a strong consistency with the LR images i.e. whether or not the model samples get
downscaled to the same LR image even though they are not identical to the HR ground
truth image. This property is reflected in the ratio between the HR­PSNR and LR­PSNR
where a low HR­PSNR paired with a high LR­PSNR indicates a model possesses this
property for instance.
All performance metrics across all SR ratios tested in this thesis were evaluated using the
average of 1000 model samples.
5.1
2x Models
In this section we present the results for the 2x models and show samples from these
models.
Steps
Noise Schedule
HR­PSNR
LR­PSNR
LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR
SSIM
50
Linear
32.366
32.115
0.992
0.658
200
Linear
36.011
37.482
1.041
0.944
500
Linear
36.070
37.621
1.043
0.943
50
Cosine
33.418
33.723
1.009
0.827
200
Cosine
35.346
36.473
1.032
0.933
500
Cosine
36.356
37.852
1.041
0.950
Table 5.1: Performance metrics of all 2x models.
As expressed by table 5.1, model performance increases with increased amounts of steps
in the forward process and the best models across all performance metrics are the 500
step models. This is consistant with findings of other diffusion model papers such as (Ho
et al. 2020) which investigates diffusion models in general and is not specified to SR.
Moreover, the noise schedule significantly affects the performance of the models and the
cosine schedule positively impacts the metrics in all cases models except for the 200
step models. The positive impact of the cosine schedule is also consistent with findings
of other research papers such as (Nichol & Dhariwal 2021) which investigates the impact
of the noise schedule in diffusion models not specified to SR.
As for the models ability to create samples that get downscaled to the correct LR image
we direct our attention to the differences in the HR­PSNR and LR­PSNR. Interestingly, the
noise schedule seems to have little impact on the models ability in this regard whereas
the amount of steps in the forward process seems to greatly affect this property for the 2x
models and especially so when going from 50 to 200 steps.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.1: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 2x 50
step linear noise schedule model.
Figure 5.2: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 2x
200 step linear noise schedule model.
Figure 5.3: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 2x
500 step linear noise schedule model.
26
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.4: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 2x 50
step cosine noise schedule model.
Figure 5.5: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 2x
200 step cosine noise schedule model.
Figure 5.6: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 2x
500 step cosine noise schedule model.
5.2
4x Models
In this section we present the results for the 4x models and samples from selected models.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
27
==PAGE:36==
Steps
Noise Schedule
HR­PSNR
LR­PSNR
LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR
SSIM
50
Linear
31.988
31.578
0.987
0.512
200
Linear
33.894
34.453
1.017
0.835
500
Linear
34.913
35.626
1.020
0.873
50
Cosine
33.163
33.324
1.005
0.746
200
Cosine
34.222
34.841
1.018
0.841
500
Cosine
35.113
35.744
1.018
0.880
Table 5.2: Performance metrics of all 4x models.
Table 5.2 contains all the performance metrics and models for the 4x resolution ratio and
the general performance trend of these models in terms of replicating the HR image seems
to increase with the increased amount of steps in the forward process which again is
consistent with results of other diffusion model papers and the 2x models. The 4x models
also show an increase in performance when going from the linear noise schedule to the
cosine schedule. The impact of the noise schedule is consistent across all the different
step models as opposed to the 2x models.
The 4x models also possess similar characteristics when it comes to creating images that
get downscaled to the correct LR image. The 50 step models are especially bad at this and
the linear 50 step models in both 2x and 4x resolution ratios have worse LR­PSNR metrics
compared to the HR­PSNR. In contrast, the 200 and 500 step models have higher LR­
PSNR than HR­PSNR indicating that the learned conditional distributions of those models
more closely resemble the conditional distribution of the HR images that correspond to a
certain LR image. The ratio between the HR­PSNR and LR­PSNR does however indicate
that the 4x models are worse at this than the 2x models.
Figure 5.7: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 4x 50
step linear noise schedule model.
28
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.8: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 4x
200 step linear noise schedule model.
Figure 5.9: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 4x
500 step linear noise schedule model.
Figure 5.10: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 4x
50 step cosine noise schedule model.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.11: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 4x
200 step cosine noise schedule model.
Figure 5.12: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 4x
500 step cosine noise schedule model.
5.3
8x Models
In this section we present the results for the 8x models and samples from selected models.
Steps
Noise Schedule
HR­PSNR
LR­PSNR
LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR
SSIM
50
Linear
31.877
31.600
0.991
0.463
200
Linear
33.351
33.606
1.008
0.738
500
Linear
33.381
33.466
1.003
0.750
50
Cosine
32.100
31.870
0.993
0.526
200
Cosine
33.559
33.811
1.008
0.750
500
Cosine
33.708
34.040
1.010
0.751
Table 5.3: Performance metrics of all 8x models.
Table 5.3 summarizes the performance of the 8x models and these models follow a similar
trend to the 4x and 2x models when it comes to the impact of the amount of steps in the
forward process on replicating HR images. In general, more steps lead to increased
performance across all metrics but the diminishing returns on model performance with
more steps is more apparent in the 8x models and especially so when going from 200 to
500 steps. Interestingly, the noise schedule does impact model performance as it does
for the 4x and 2x models where in general the cosine schedule performs better than the
linear noise schedule. However, while the cosine noise schedule does impact the PSNR
metrics of the 8x models it has less impact on the SSIM in the 200 and 500 step models.
30
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:39==
The 8x models are the worst out of the bunch when it comes to creating images that get
downscaled to the correct image as indicated by the LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR ratio. They do
however have similar characteristics to the 4x and 2x models where the 50 step models
are the worst at this and are the only models that have a lower LR­PSNR than HR­PSNR.
Furthermore, the 200 and 500 step models have a higher LR­PSNR when compared to
the HR­PSNR but very marginally so, especially when compared to the 2x models.
Figure 5.13: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 8x
50 step linear noise schedule model.
Figure 5.14: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 8x
200 step linear noise schedule model.
Figure 5.15: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 8x
500 step linear noise schedule model.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.16: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 8x
50 step cosine noise schedule model.
Figure 5.17: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 8x
200 step cosine noise schedule model.
Figure 5.18: LR image (left), HR image (middle) and predicted image (right) from the 8x
500 step cosine noise schedule model.
32
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:41==
6
Final Remarks
In this chapter we discuss our findings in this thesis and conclude the report. Finally, we
discuss where there is room for improvement and further research.
6.1
Discussion
6.1.1
Results
Overall, the results are consistant with findings of other diffusion model research papers
where the amount of forward steps positively affects model performance across all perfor­
mance metrics tested in this thesis. Moreover, the noise schedule also affects the models
ability to replicate HR images which results in improved metrics with the exception of the
LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR ratio. This means that the cosine noise schedule does increase both
the HR­PSNR and the LR­PSNR but it does so such that it has little effect on the ratio
between the two.
A surprising finding in this thesis is that there seems to be a trend where the LR­PSNR/HR­
PSNR ratio gets worse with increased resolution ratios. Increasing the resolution ratio
inherently creates more ambiguity in the SR problem and intuitively one might think that
this would make it easier to create HR images that get downscaled to the same LR im­
age since there are more HR images that get downscaled to the same LR image. This
is however not the case according to the findings of this thesis. It is important to note
however that (Li et al. 2021) report strong LR consistency on the 8x SR problem but they
only report their findings on 8x models so it is difficult to say whether or not their 2x and
4x models would have even stronger LR consistencies. The biggest difference between
the models in this thesis and their models is the training scheme. They train their models
for longer by a large margin. This does suggest that the training scheme used affects the
models ability to create HR images that get downscaled to the same LR images.
6.1.2
Stochastic Inference
The stochastic inference of diffusion models is a very interesting property especially so
in the case of SR, that most other deep learning models do not possess. This property
of diffusion models is the largest motivation factor behind comparing the conditional dis­
tributions h(x|LR) and lθ(x|LR) mentioned in chapter 4. The main idea is that if these
conditional distributions are the same or very similar and we have a model that can sam­
ple this distribution, then it is effectively possible to sample multiple HR images that all
correspond to the same LR image and compare them against one another and even get
point estimates of certain probabilities. For instance, if there is a medical image that is
upscaled by a diffusion model multiple times, 20% of the different HR images created
by the model could reveal a certain disease while the other 80% do not reveal the same
disease. In that case a probability point estimate for a certain disease is acquired.
While the stochastic property of diffusion model inference does have interesting potential
applications it also has a drawback. Namely, the performance evaluation of diffusion
models has an additional stochastic component. Since deep learning models are typically
evaluated empirically using the samples they create, this would mean that the estimated
performance metrics could change drastically each time they are calculated. To combat
this in this thesis project, we aim to have the sample size large enough to create a reliable
estimate.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
33
==PAGE:42==
6.1.3
LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR ratio
Even though the idea of having diffusion models learn the correct conditional distributions
is tempting, evaluating this property is difficult to do since the distributions are in general
intractable. This intractability means that the evaluation of this property has to be done
empirically. In this thesis we chose to do this by using the LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR ratio as
our empirical estimate of this property.
As already mentioned, it is important to note that the LR­PSNR/HR­PSNR ratio is by no
means the perfect metric that reflects the true similarity of the conditional distributions.
We leave it to future work to figure out a better way of evaluating the similarity of the two
conditional distributions and how deviations in that similarity affect the model performance.
6.1.4
Practical applications
Diffusion models have shown great promise in generative tasks such as image synthesis
and other reconstruction problems such as SR. Even though they show great promise
and have outperformed other state­of­the­art deep learning models in various tasks, it
remains to be seen how they can or will be used for practical applications where reliability
is of major importance. Practical applications of this sort are for instance medical image
analysis/segmentation. Until now, diffusion models have mostly been used for research
and applications such as avatar creation. Thus they have yet to break into the high impact
practical applications.
In our opinion, diffusion models show great potential and could even be used for tasks
such as medical image analysis in their current state. It is however important to note that
they should not be blindly relied on for these high impact applications but rather used as
a tool to help professionals better diagnose their patients for instance.
In order for diffusion models to be blindly relied on we feel that further research is required
and even then, they might not be the right tool for all tasks.
6.2
Conclusion
Throughout this thesis we have investigated diffusion models and their various architec­
tural components for the purpose of solving SR for images. Based on the results pre­
sented in chapter 5, we conclude that the effect of the forward process steps and noise
schedule for SR stay consistent with findings of other diffusion model research papers that
are not SR specific. That is, the amount of forward process steps positively affects model
performance and the choice of noise schedule also affects model performance where the
cosine schedule pulls ahead of the linear schedule. This stays true across all SR ratios
tested in this thesis. As for the models ability to create images that are downscaled to
the correct LR image, we conclude that the forward process steps do affect this property
significantly while the choice of noise schedule seems to have less impact in this regard.
This property is affected by the SR ratio at hand and we report that higher resolution ratios
benefit less from the amount of forward process steps than lower resolution ratios.
6.3
Future Work
6.3.1
Conditional distribution comparison
As already mentioned in the discussion section of this chapter, we leave it to future work to
better evaluate the true similarity of the conditional distributions since the LR­PSNR/HR­
PSNR ratio is unlikely to accurately reflect this property.
6.3.2
Training
According to (Li et al. 2021) they utilize diffusion models and report metrics on 8x models
using the CelebA dataset showing strong consistency between the LR and HR images
34
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:43==
and reporting LR­PSNR over 50 dB while their HR­PSNR is lower reporting in around 25
dB. The main differences between the models used in this thesis and their models is that
they utilize a pretrained LR encoder and they also train their models for 35 hours with
a slightly different learning rate schedule whereas in this thesis they are only trained for
roughly 8 hours. This suggests that the training scheme majorly affects the models ability
to create HR images that get downscaled to the same LR image. Therefore we leave
it to future work to further investigate the effects of different training schemes on model
performance.
6.3.3
Model comparison
In this thesis we are mainly focused on the effects of different diffusion model parameters
on model performance, namely the forward process steps and the noise schedule across
different resolution ratios. We have therefore not put our attention in creating the best
possible diffusion models in terms of model performance but rather created many models
to cover as many bases as possible within the given time. Because of the limited time,
we have chosen to not compare our diffusion models to other state­of­the­art models for
a couple of reasons. First, there do not seem to be many papers that utilize the same
dataset as us and comparison between models is therefore difficult to gauge. Second,
other state­of­the­art models usually are trained for a very long time to achieve the best
possible results and comparing our models which were trained for 8 hours to models
that were trained for weeks doesn’t really say much about the differences between the
models but it rather reflects the difference in training. State­of­the­art diffusion models
have frequently been compared to other state­of­the­art deep learning models and have
been reported outperforming other models such as GANs on various performance metrics
on various tasks. Thus we leave it to future work to continue this comparison between
different models.
6.3.4
Model size
Model size is another interesting parameter to investigate in terms of model performance
as deep learning models typically get better as their model size gets bigger. Our models
come in at 15.5 million learnable parameters which in the context of deep learning models
is considered very small. Additionally, the CelebA dataset is a large scale dataset and
would likely benefit from a larger model since a small model like ours used on such a
large dataset and trained for a short amount of time is likely to be underfitted to the data.
Unfortunately, due to time constraints, we were not able to experiment with different model
sizes and how they affect the model performance. Thus we leave it to future work to
research how model size affects diffusion models.
6.3.5
Datasets
As already mentioned, the CelebA dataset is a large scale dataset with over 200k images.
Since this is the only dataset tested in this thesis, it would be interesting to see how
different datasets with different properties affect model performance. Moreover, the model
size, dataset and training time are all linked in this way and their relationship would also
be interesting to investigate not only for diffusion models.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:45==
7
Bibliography
Ho et al. (2021). ”Cascaded Diffusion Models for High Fidelity Image Generation”. In
”https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.15282.pdf”.
Li et al. (2021). ”SRDiff: Single Image Super­Resolution with Diffusion Probabilistic Mod­
els”. In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.14951.pdf”.
Nichol & Dhariwal (2021). ”Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models”.
In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.09672.pdf”.
Rombach et al. (2022). ”High­Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models”.
In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.10752.pdf”.
Sohl­Dickenstein et al. (2015). ”Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium Ther­
modynamics”. In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/1503.03585.pdf”.
Ho et al. (2020). ”Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models”.
In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.11239.pdf”.
Ronneberger et al. (2015). ”U­Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Seg­
mentation”. In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/1505.04597.pdf”.
Song et al. (2021). ”Score­based Generative Modeling Through Stochastic Differential
Equations”. In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/2011.13456.pdf”.
Kong et al. (2021). ”DiffWave: A Versatile Diffusion Model for Audio Synthesis”. In
”https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.09761.pdf”.
Vaswani et al. (2017). ”Attention Is All You Need”. In ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762.pdf”.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
==PAGE:47==
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Super Resolution
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads , Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
