==PAGE:1==
Near Wellbore Salt Precipitation
during Geological Carbon Storage
Master Thesis June 2023
DTU Applied Chemical Engineering Department
Author
Qifan Wang - s212500
Supervisor
Wei Yan
Co-supervisor
Maryam Khosravi
==PAGE:2==
23rd of June 2023
Abstract
Geological carbon dioxide sequestration is considered to be one of the most effective
technical solutions to mitigate global warming. However, salt precipitation during CO2
injection can cause salt clogging near the wellbore, thereby damaging the injectivity.
This study carries out both lab-scale experiments and semi-field scale simulations using
CMG-GEM. The objectives of this thesis are to examine the evaporation rate during the
evaporation process in the experimental section, and to study the drying-out process
along with salt precipitation mechanisms, such as salt diffusion and capillary backflow,
in the simulation.
The experimental results show that the injection rate significantly affects the CO2
flooding process, including the displacement and the evaporation process.
A lower
injection rate tends to establish equilibrium more easily during the evaporation process
but offers less efficient displacement. Conversely, a higher injection rate results in a non-
equilibrium condition during the evaporation process but leads to a higher displacement
efficiency.
The simulation results suggest that there are three active drying regimes during
CO2 injection, each exhibiting varying behaviors in aspects such as porosity, water sat-
uration, salt precipitation, and bottom-hole pressure. The capillary regime experiences
the most severe impairment to injectivity due to localized salt precipitation. On the
other hand, the evaporative regime encounters less damage near the wellbore, despite a
higher volume of mineral deposits in the entire field. Furthermore, salt diffusion signif-
icantly impacts salt precipitation. Specifically, it influences the initiation time of salt
precipitation. A higher diffusion coefficient leads to a delayed start of salt precipitation
and vice versa. However, this delay in the onset of salt precipitation is not particularly
noticeable in the evaporative regime.
Keywords: CO2 sequestration, salt precipitation, salt clogging, CMG-GEM sim-
ulation, water evaporation experiments
i
==PAGE:3==
23rd of June 2023
Preface
The MSc thesis is for a 5-month final project and has been completed in partial fulfill-
ment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering.
During this project, I received immense support from my supervisor, Associate Professor
Wei Yan, and post-doctoral researcher, Maryam Khosravi. I am deeply grateful to Wei for
introducing me to the research field of CCUS, enabling me to gain a deeper understanding
of the subject. Maryam has been instrumental in providing insightful suggestions for my
simulations and invaluable inspiration for my thesis. Additionally, I want to express my
gratitude to my co-worker and friend, Research Assistant Yao Xu. His assistance in the
lab, including setting up the experimental system and instructing the experiments, has been
incredibly helpful.
I would like to express my great gratitude to the Erasmus+ program. Their support
enabled me to participate in an exchange program in NTNU, Norway, which significantly
broadened my horizons and offered me an opportunity to learn from diverse global perspec-
tives. Receiving the Erasmus+ grant scholarship was an honor and a humbling experience
for which I am deeply appreciative.
Furthermore, I wish to express my profound appreciation for the invaluable opportuni-
ties and memories forged at DTU. The journey at this institution not only facilitated my per-
sonal and professional growth, but also presented moments of joy and occasional challenges.
I deeply missed the cherished individuals whom I shared this journey with. This includes
my teachers, who shared their knowledge and wisdom, my classmates and co-workers, with
whom I attended classes and worked on projects, and my friends who were there with me
during our spare time both in DTU and NTNU.
The last but not least, I must express my heartfelt thanks to my parents who have
supported me financially, covering my tuition and living expenses, and have always been
there for me to lend a listening ear during moments of great frustration. Furthermore, I
would like to express my deepest appreciation to my girlfriend, who has been supporting me
remotely from China. Her companionship throughout this journey has been invaluable, and
I truly cherish her willingness to stay by my side.
Qifan Wang
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Review of simulation works
7
3
Review of experimental works
10
4
Theory
14
4.1
Multi-phase fluid flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Salt diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Capillary-driven back flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Water evaporation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
Carbon dioxide dissolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.6
Salt precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.7
Porosity and permeability evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.8
Capillary number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.9
Peclet number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Laboratory Experiment
21
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Material and methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.1
Rock sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.2
Fluid properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.3
Experiment setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Experimental procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4.1
Typical evaporative curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4.2
Effect of injection rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Semi-field scale simulation
28
6.1
Model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2
Fluid properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Grids optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.4
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.4.1
Results of base case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.4.2
Analysis of effect of injection rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.4.3
Analysis of dimensionless number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.4.4
Salt diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Conclusion
53
8
Recommendation of further research
55
List of Figures
I
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
23rd of June 2023
List of Tables
III
References
IV
9
Appendix A
X
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
INTRODUCTION
23rd of June 2023
1
Introduction
The primary concern of this century has been the escalating emissions of greenhouse
gases (GHG), as a result of the industrial cycle. This issue has escalated to an international
concern regards to climate mitigation change [1].
The atmospheric concentration of CO2, which rose from approximately 280 parts per
million (ppm) during the pre-industrial period to over 400 ppm in the early 2000s, has con-
tinued to increase at an alarming rate. Specifically, the average annual increase was about
2 ppm per year until the early 2000s. However, during the decade from 2010 to 2019, this
rate escalated, with the CO2 concentration rising at an average decadal rate of 2.4 ppm per
year [2].
The results are the observations of global changes in various environmental aspects in-
cluding the shrinking of glacial environments, alterations in rainfall patterns, and shifts in
average ocean temperatures [2][3]. These changes not only directly impact these domains
but also indirectly affect biodiversity maintenance conditions [4].
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) reached a
key agreement at the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP-21) in Paris in 2015. This agree-
ment, known as the Paris Agreement, aims to unite all nations in the fight against climate
change. It calls for ambitious measures to combat climate change and adapt to its effects,
with increased funding to help developing countries do so. The main goal is to keep the
global temperature rise this century well below 2 ◦C above pre-industrial levels, and ideally
to limit the increase to 1.5 ◦C [5][6].
The greenhouse gas (GHG) consists of methane, water vapor, carbon dioxide, nitro-
gen, etc [7]. Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) emerges as a potential game-changer in
the global effort to mitigate climate change. Even under pessimistic scenarios for emission
growth, CCS is anticipated to play a vital role. Recently, it was confirmed that a tremendous
potential for CO2 storage approaching 440 Gigatons (Gt) with a possible injection rate of 22
Gt per year in 5 countries (United Kingdom, Denmark, Norway, Netherlands and Germany)
[8].
Page 1 of 55
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
23rd of June 2023
Researchers have projected that deep saline aquifer could geologically store up to 10,000
Gt of CO2, demonstrating the considerable potential of these aquifers [9][10].In the mean-
time, the possibilities for geological CO2 storage are not only stored in saline aquifers but
also in other formations, such as depleted oil and gas reservoirs and coal seams. The choice
of storage location depends on a mix of economic, political, and technical factors[11].
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) special report argued that the
various CO2 trapping mechanisms would work overtime to increase storage security in the
long term [12]:
(1) Structural and stratigraphic trapping: This mechanism uses physical barriers that
prevent the upward migration of CO2. The CO2 is strategically injected into porous rock
formations, which are effectively sealed by non-porous rock layers, creating secure natural
storage. However, it has the highest risk of leakage if there are potential faults and fractures.
(2) Residual CO2 trapping: CO2, upon injection, displaces water within the pore spaces
of rocks. Subsequent pressure reduction results in the CO2 becoming entrapped within these
pores, resulting from intricate capillary forces at play.
(3) Solubility trapping: As the passage of time persists, the CO2 begins a process of
dissolution within the formation water. This increases the total volume of stored CO2 and,
consequently, augments the overall security of the storage system.
(4) Mineral trapping: Given a sufficiently elongated timescale, the dissolved CO2 ini-
tiates a chemical reaction with the indigenous minerals of the rock. This gives rise to the
formation of solid and stable carbonate minerals, offering a virtually permanent storage
solution for the CO2.
Page 2 of 55
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 1: Storage security depends on a combination of physical and geochemical trapping.
Over time, the physical process of residual CO2 trapping and geochemical processes of sol-
ubility trapping and mineral trapping increase [12].
The viability of CO2 storage in any given geological formation is contingent upon a
thorough pre-assessment of three critical factors: storage capacity, containment efficiency,
and injectivity. For injectivity, it fundamentally determines the rate at which CO2 can be
injected into a storage formation. This factor is dependent on the physical properties of the
geological formation such as permeability and porosity. Due to a large amount of dry CO2
injection, the brine will be displaced, and simultaneously residual water in the small pores,
resulting from capillary pressure, will be evaporated by the dry CO2 flow. Thus, the decrease
of water saturation results in the increase of the molality of ions such as sodium (Na+) and
chloride (Cl−). Once the concentration of ions exceeds the limitation of ion solubility in
water, the precipitation of minerals such as halite, occurs in the vicinity of the well and
blocks the throats and pores. The clogging of deposited minerals will exaggeratedly decrease
porosity and permeability, and sequentially, injectivity.
Miri et al. [13] summarized 6 main mechanisms of salt precipitation from all previous
research that govern the phenomena of drying and salt precipitation in deep saline aquifers.
These include: (1) Two-phase displacement: This process involves the brine being displaced
away from the injection well due to the viscous pressure gradients established by the injected
CO2. (2) Evaporation: Brine is evaporated into the dry supercritical(sc) CO2 stream, induc-
ing drying near the injection site. (3) Capillary-driven backflow: This phenomenon occurs
when the capillary pressure gradients instigate a return flow of the aqueous phase towards
Page 3 of 55
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
23rd of June 2023
the injection point, counterbalancing the brine’s displacement by CO2. (4) Molecular diffu-
sion: This process sees the dissolved salt in the aqueous phase move via molecular diffusion,
which can instigate salt precipitation if the salt concentration surpasses the solubility limit.
(5) Gravity override: Due to the lower density of CO2 than the brine, the injected CO2
may rise to the top of the formation, potentially leading to an uneven distribution of CO2
and localized occurrences of drying or salt precipitation. (6) Salt self-enhancement: As salt
precipitation begins, it may further escalate the concentration of salts in the residual brine,
possibly inducing a self-enhancing cycle of salt precipitation.
The aforementioned mechanisms governing the drying and salt precipitation are graph-
ically represented in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Schematic illustration of different physical mechanisms contributing to the process
of salt precipitation. Each of these mechanisms, namely (a) immiscible displacement and
evaporation, (b) Capillary backflow (c) ion diffusion (d) salt self-enhancement [13]
In this research, we explore the significant interplay between active drying regimes and
salt precipitation and their subsequent impacts on injectivity. As part of our comprehensive
investigation, we have discerned that salt precipitation can manifest in two distinct forms,
namely, local and non-local precipitation. These different forms of precipitation have unique
implications for the alteration of injectivity [13].
Miri et al. have identified three drying regimes that directly influence these two precip-
itation forms. They introduced symbols Je and Jc to refer to the stabilized evaporative and
capillary fluxes,respectively[13].
Diffusive regime
In this regime (Je ≪Jc), the injection rate is very low, which means the evaporation rate
is much smaller than capillary backflow resulting in a very low evaporation rate. The evap-
oration will occur and CO2 will evaporate the brine and thus the brine saturation decreases
and induces a capillary pressure gradient[14][15]. The brine will be continuously transported
Page 4 of 55
==PAGE:10==
1
INTRODUCTION
23rd of June 2023
to the vicinity of the well and its velocity is similar to the evaporation rate. Therefore, there
is no dry-out zone form in this regime. In the meantime, the water evaporation leads to the
salt concentration increase inducing a salt gradient [16][15].
Figure 3: Schematic illustration of diffusive regimes associated with the process of salt
precipitation[13]
Capillary regime
In this regime, the injection rate is larger (Je ≈Jc), which leads to the viscous force is
much larger than capillary force at beginning (also a high evaporation rate) but will reach
an equilibrium condition later due to increasing capillary gradient[15] [17]. As a result, a
dry-out zone will form near the wellbore and move forward to reservoir and then stopped
by increasing capillary-driven backflow [18]. Besides, due to the high evaporation rate at
first, the salt has no time to diffuse away from dry-out front to offset the increment of salt
concentration. In consequence, a massive accumulation of salt at the drying front termed as
"local salt precipitation"[13].
Page 5 of 55
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 4: Schematic illustration of capillary regimes associated with the process of salt
precipitation[13]
Evaporative regime
In this regime, the evaporation rate is much greater than capillary backflow (Je ≫Jc),
so the injection rate is larger than the previous regime, which means the water evaporation
rate is much larger than the rate of capillary-driven back flow. As a result, the dry-out front
will continuously move advance to the reservoir with a constant velocity while immediately
evaporating the trapped brine along the migration path. [13].
Figure 5: Schematic illustration of evaporative regimes associated with the process of salt
precipitation[13]
Page 6 of 55
==PAGE:12==
2
REVIEW OF SIMULATION WORKS
23rd of June 2023
2
Review of simulation works
The mechanism of Capillary-driven back flow plays a critical role in salt precipitation.
Kelly and Mathias [19] used a new similarity solution through Python to study the im-
portance of capillary pressure during CO2 injection in a saline formation, accounting for
capillary and radially symmetric flow based on the work of Zeidouni et al., [20] as well as
Bjornara and Mathias [21]. Norouzi et al. [22] using CMG-GEM underpin the role of capil-
lary pressure and capillary-driven backflow through a compressive sensitivity analysis using
CMG-GEM and defined a backflow extent parameter (BEP) and find out a semi-linear re-
lationship between backflow extent parameter (BEP) and the amount of precipitated salt.
Their results also indicated the relationship between the backflow velocity profile and salt
precipitation. Parvin et al. [23] proposed a modification of capillary pressure to model the
salt self-enhancement phenomenon using AD-MRST software.
Temperature and pressure are two critical reservoir properties, as two crucial factors that
influence the salt precipitation during CO2 injection. Zhao and Cheng [24] used TOUGH
2 to simulate a non-isothermal model and pointed out that colder CO2 will decrease the
extent of salt precipitation. Meanwhile, the injection of CO2 into hotter aquifers increases
solid saturation. Piao et al. [25] considered the wellbore flow process in TOUGH2 by investi-
gating the change of both pressure and temperature profiles within the wellbore during CO2
injection in the wellbore reservoir (WR) model and compared with conventional equivalent
porous media (EPM) model, which neglected wellbore flow process. Then, they pointed out
that the change of temperature and pressure in the wellbore due to CO2 injection influences
the simulation results significantly. Masoudi et al. [26] found that both temperature and
pressure had significant effects on the dissolution rate during CO2-water-rock interaction.
Additionally, a large number of references emphasize the importance of properties of
CO2 and brine such as salinity of brine and injection flow rate, which have a large effect
on salt precipitation and explain how it affects salt precipitation. Regarding the salinity of
brine, Shaibu et al.[27] found that increasing brine salinity has an adverse effect on injectivity.
Norouzi et al.[22] proposed that higher salinity results in a large reduction of permeability
and porosity and an average (over all salinities) 20% increase of pumping power is required
to keep the injection rate constant. Zhao and Cheng [24] pointed out that, the maximum
build-up pressure is proportional to the brine salinity in low salinity. While salinity exceeds
Page 7 of 55
==PAGE:13==
2
REVIEW OF SIMULATION WORKS
23rd of June 2023
to 20%, the maximum additional build-up pressure increases sharply.
Regarding injection flow rate, Kelly and Mathias [19] pointed out that an injection rate
decrease leads to the volume fraction of precipitated salt around the injection well signif-
icantly increasing as a result of a potentially significant loss of injectivity. Shaibu et al.
[27] found that high flow rates induce high salt precipitation which causes an appreciable
pressure build-up.
Except above simulation, there are some innovative studies. Some of the researchers
attempted to modify the previous model and make the model more precise to predict the
performance of CO2 storage in the formation.
Parvin et al. [23] developed an accurate and reliable fluid model ePC-SAFT which can
effectively account for ionic effects, which is a novel approach for incorporating formation
drying-out and halite-precipitation modeling into compositional AD-MRST software. Then,
the thermodynamic model successfully simulated both evaporation and salting-out effect
within the condition of binary data and a more complex asphaltenic fluid. Lima et al. [28]
used an open-source, parallel finite-element framework to numerically model two-phase flow
through 2-D fracture planes in order to investigate salt precipitation in fracture-dominated
geological reservoirs and evaluate the potential for salt precipitation under increasing effective
normal stresses in the evaporative regime. Their results showed that the displacement and
the dry-out fronts are heavily impacted by fracture aperture variations that depend on
effective normal stress conditions. Masoudi et al. [26] developed a 3D pore-scale reactive
transport solver based on a D3Q19 advection-diffusion Lattice-Boltzmann (LB) model, which
is a reactive transport LB model with a new probabilistic approach for nucleation. The model
takes for the first time salt nucleation into consideration via a new probabilistic approach
to simulate the formation of micro-meter size salt crystal aggregates in the CO2-rich phase
and their effect on changes in pore morphology and permeability.
Page 8 of 55
==PAGE:14==
2
REVIEW OF SIMULATION WORKS
23rd of June 2023
Table 1: Summary of the research outcomes using rigorous simulations studies for the salt
precipitation induced by CO2 injection.
Reference
Model
Tool
Comments
Zhao et al.(2017)
non-isothermal numerical models
TOUGH 2
Colder CO2 can obviously decrease the extent of salt precipitation the injection
of CO2 into hotter aquifers induces the increase of solid saturation
Cui (2017a)
3D reactive transport simulation models
SMG-GEM
most of the injected CO2 is trapped via the structure, residual gas and solubility
mechanisms, and only a small amount of CO2 or even no CO2 can be mineralized
due to geochemical reactions.
Cui (2018b)
A comprehensive model with water evaporation, CO2-water-rock
geochemical reactions, NaCl precipitation, and changes in porosity
and permeability
CMG-GEM
the influence of salt precipitation is much more significant than the influence of
CO2-water-rock geochemical reactions capillary pressures and permeabilities
enhance the detrimental influence of fluid-rock interactions, especially salt precipitation,
on the reservoir properties and injectivity.
Kelly et al.(2018)
a new similarity solution to study the role of capillary
Python
Decrease in injection rate will increase salt precipitation and lead to a significant loss of injectivity.
Shaibu et al. (2018)
developed bundle-of-tubes model especially adding
tortuosity coefficient
Python
Elevated brine salinity adversely affects injectivity, notably influencing permeability over porosity.
High initial permeability mitigates salt precipitation, while high porosity quickens permeability
reduction by retaining more brine. High flowrates induce substantial salt precipitation, causing
a significant pressure increase.
Parvin et al. (2020)
A novel overall-composition transport formulation,
considering ionic effects
AD-MRST
software
A novel model treats salt as a distinct solid phase, forming through two fundamentally different processes.
The fluid model capably represents both evaporation and the salting-out effect. Furthermore,
a modification of capillary pressure is proposed to depict the salt self-enhancing phenomenon.
Lima et al. (2020)
open-source, parallel finite-element framework
MOOSE-based
applications
Supercritical CO2 (scCO2) is injected into single brine-filled fractures in a shallow, cold reservoir,
creating two distinct fronts: displacement and dry-out. Greater effective normal stress triggers substantial
fracture volume variation, while permeability reduction is more significant for aperture fields.
Norouzi et al. (2021)
CMG-GEM
Brine back flow velocity profile correlates with salt precipitation, with capillary back flow enhancing
near-well salt precipitation. The back flow extent parameter (BEP) shows a semi-linear relationship
with precipitated salt quantity. Increased salinity reduces permeability and porosity significantly,
requiring an average 20% increase in pumping power to maintain constant injection rates.
Zhao et al.(2021)
The ’tubes-in-series’ model
TOUGH2
Permeability reduction peaks at 88% with a 4.91MPa pressure buildup. Maximum pressure correlates with
brine salinity but surges above 20% salinity. It decreases with rising permeability, except past a threshold when
it increases rapidly. Vertical permeability rise reduces buildup pressure. Formation heterogeneity intensifies salt
precipitation, increasing pressure.
Masoudi et al (2021)
Pore-scale models upscale geochemical reactions in the
CO2-brine-rock system.
PhreeqcRM
Higher flow rates homogenize rock dissolution, while lower rates concentrate dissolution near injection.
For set porosity, permeability increases more at higher injection rates. Variations with temperature and pressure
are minor at high rates but sensitive at low rates.
Page 9 of 55
==PAGE:15==
3
REVIEW OF EXPERIMENTAL WORKS
23rd of June 2023
3
Review of experimental works
Jeddizahed [29] conducted an experiment to investigate the influence of the injection
rate and brine salinity on injectivity reduction due to evaporation and salt precipitation.
They injected scCO2 into sandstone fully saturated with NaCl brine and investigate the
evaporation process through mass measurement of displaced water and vapor produced.
The results reported that the level of salt precipitation increases with salinity, within a
permeability reduction range of 21 −66%, and decreases with the injection rate, within a
permeability reduction range of 43 −62%. The relative permeability of CO2 is affected by
both the injection rate and salinity.
Sokama-Neuyam et al. [30] did a core-flood experiments to investigate the impact of
fines mobilization on CO2 injectivity, the relative contribution of fines mobilization and salt
precipitation to injectivity impairment, and the coupled effect of salt precipitation and fines
mobilization via Permeability measurement (SEM) and element analysis (EDS). They found
that 26 % injectivity impairment induced by fine migration; salt precipitation compound the
impact of fine migration. Later, they did a similar experiment and reported that (1) Poor
sweep and high brine salinity are strong controlling parameters of external salt precipitation
on the surface of the injection area. And high CO2 injection flow rate could reduce external
and internal salt precipitation by improving sweep efficiency at the injection inlet. (2) CO2
Low Salinity Alternating Gas (CO2-LSWAG) injection as a potential mitigation technique
will reduce injectivity impairment induced by salt precipitation. (3) Injectivity impairment
is dependent on both solid salt saturation and the distribution of deposited salt within the
pore spaces.
A medium-scale experiment on salt precipitation in the near-well region was conducted
by Berntsen et al. [31]. Through methods such as X-ray computed tomography (CT), X-
ray powder diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), it concluded that
(1) No significant pressure build-up was observed across the rock specimen, indicating that
permeable flow paths were not entirely clogged; (2) Three different drying regimes, namely
no drying regime, diffusive drying regime and capillary drying regime were found to occur
in different wellbore regions.
Yusof et al. [32] conducted a CO2 coreflood experiment and analysed the core samples
Page 10 of 55
==PAGE:16==
3
REVIEW OF EXPERIMENTAL WORKS
23rd of June 2023
using X-ray fluorescence (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and field-emission scanning elec-
tron microscopy equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (FESEM-EDX). They
reported that (1) At a similar injection flow rate, the injection of scCO2 would lead to more
permeability reduction compared to the injection of CO2-saturated brine in sandstone core
samples; (2) The increase in injection flow rate of scCO2 would increase the permeability
impairment. However, there is a critical flow rate that acts as a turning point of perme-
ability reduction from an increasing trend to lower permeability reduction. Thereafter, a
similar experiment was conducted by Yusof et al [33]. This time, they used response surface
methodology (RSM) and poroperm for gas permeability measurement and considered the
couple effect of fine migration. The core flooding experiment revealed that combined effect
of salt precipitation and fines migration led to a threefold increase of permeability reduction
compared to salt precipitation alone.
Akindipe [34] and co-workers using x-ray micro-tomography imaging techniques firstly
found the direct evidence of so-called reverse solute diffusion in the pore-scale experiment
during the transition from advection to diffusion-limited flow, where solute species are trans-
ported from a region of lower concentration to that of a higher concentration due to an
external driving force that is the interfacial tension (IFT) between supersaturated brine and
scCO2 at the evaporation front. And this process is termed salt self-enhancement at the
macro/reservoir scale by analogy. Besides, they reported that (1) The precipitate saturation
is higher in smaller pores compared to larger pores, but the final salt saturation is limited
by the amount of salt deposit in medium-sized pores. (2) A higher injection rate reduces the
amount of salt deposits formed in near-wellbore regions. a five-fold increase in injection rate
caused an 82 % reduction of salt depositions. (3) Microporous media in sandstone reservoirs
contribute significantly to the observed salt precipitation, which increase 4 % of overall salt
saturation. (4) The time and extent of precipitation are also influenced by morphological
heterogeneity and less precipitates form as systems become more homogeneous for the same
injection rate. However, He et al. [35] suggested that the injection well can be selected in
the formation with strong heterogeneity to alleviate the blockage by salt precipitation.
Thereafter, Akindipe et al. [36] conducted a similar pore-scale experiment to investigate
CO2 injected into depleted carbonate and sandstone oil reservoirs and suggested a funda-
mental basis for the prediction of salt precipitation during three-phase (CO2, high-salinity
brine and oil) flow processes. It reported that oil significantly shortens the transition period,
which suppresses the transition phenomenon of reverse solute diffusion, limiting precipitation
Page 11 of 55
==PAGE:17==
3
REVIEW OF EXPERIMENTAL WORKS
23rd of June 2023
only to local regions where the brine is in direct contact with the flowing scCO2 phase.
Table 2: Summary of the experimental studies for salt precipitation induced by CO2 injec-
tion.
Reference
Sample properties
Fluid properties
Injection condition
Analysis method
Comments
Jeddizahed (2016)
K=212mD, ϕ=23%,
L= 8cm D=3.81cm,
50-200 g/L NaCl
P=8.62MPa, T=65 ◦C
mass measurement of displaced water
and vapor produced
The salt precipitation and permeability loss increase
with salinity and reduction in the injection rate.
Cui (2017a)
crushed rock samples
sorted particles diameter
0.15-0.2mm SA/V=400cm2/cm3
Inonic strength
sandstone 0.203
carbonate 0.074
P=10MPa and 15MPa
T=100 ◦C and 200◦C
field emission scanning
electron microscope (Hitachi S4800)
XRD (mineral composition)
CO2-water-rock systems can result in changes in the
reservoir porosity and permeability
Sokama-Neuyam et al. (2017)
Bentheimer core
K=1200-2000mD, ϕ=22-24%,
L=20cm D=3.81cm
Berea
K=90-120mD, ϕ=17-19%,
Bandera
K=4-10mD, ϕ=19-21%
77.4 g/L NaCl brine
P=80bar T=65◦C
Permeability measurement SEM
element analysis EDS
26% injectivity impairment induced by fine migration;
salt precipitation compound the impact of fine migration
Berntsen et al. (2019)
Bentheimer sandstone
K=1500-3500mD, ϕ=24%,
L=200mm, outer D=190mm,
25%wt NaCl brine
P=100bar T=40◦C
Q=12ml/min
X-ray computed tomography(CT)
X-ray powder diffraction(XRD)
scanning electron microscopy(SEM)
Varied Injection rates showed no significant pressure buildup.
Three drying regimes occurred in different wellbore regions
Sokama-Neuyam et al. (2019)
Bentheimer sandstone
K=1600-2400mD, ϕ=22∼24%,
Berea
K=90-105mD, ϕ=17-19%,
L=20cm, outer D=3.81cm,
120,75g/L NaCl brine
P=80bar T=50◦C
Q=1,5,10mL/min
X-Ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy (XRF)
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD)
High CO2 injection rates reduce salt precipitation
Injectivity impairment relies on salt saturation and distribution.
Yusof et al. (2020)
K1 sandstone
K=183mD, ϕ=20%,
L=200mm, outer D=7.62cm,
B1
K=203mD, ϕ=20%,
L=200mm, outer D=3.81cm
6000-100000ppm NaCl brine
P=124 bar T=60◦C
Q=2,5,10 mL/min
EDX analysis
FESEM images
CO2-saturated brine has less damage on permeability.
Permeability impairment rises with scCO2 injection rate.
Higher brine salinity increases salt precipitation.
Yusof et al. (2021)
Bentheimer sandstone
K=185Âą20mD, ϕ=20Âą5%,
L=200mm, outer D=193mm,
6000-100000ppm NaCl brine
P=124 bar T=333.15K
Q=2,5,7,10 mL/min
Poroperm for permeability
Response surface
methodology(RSM)
Brine salinity influences permeability reduction more
than particles. Combined salt precipitation
and fines migration triple permeability reduction.
A critical flow rate shifts permeability reduction trend.
A validated model predicts CO2 injectivity change.
Akindipe et al.(2021)
Clashach sandstone
K=667 mD, ϕ=18%,
L=60.51mm, outer D=8.96mm,
Prairie Shell limestone
K=354&347 mD,
ϕ=27.72&24.98%,
L=60.4&60.88mm,
D=8.9&8.953mm
250000 NaI brine
P=1500 psi T=50◦C
Q=0.1,0.5 mL/min
Scanning Electron Microscopy (QEMSCAN)
micro-CT scanner
SEM imaging
Precipitate saturation is higher in smaller pores.
Higher injection rates reduce near-wellbore salt deposits.
Microporous media significantly contribute to salt precipitation.
A new mechanism called reverse solute diffusion was found.
Akindipe et al.(2022)
Clashach sandstone
K=667 mD, ϕ=18%,
L=60.51mm, outer D=8.96mm,
Prairie Shell limestone
K=354&347 mD,
ϕ=27.72&24.98%,
L=60.4&60.88mm,
D=8.9&8.953mm
250000 NaI brine
P=1500 psi T=50◦C
Q=0.1,0.5mL/min
Micro-CT imaging
SEM imaging
Oil shortens the transition period, suppressing reverse
solute diffusion and precipitation.
Strongly hydrophilic minerals increase near-wellbore salt deposition.
Salt deposition varies across pore sizes.
Porosity reduction correlates with wettability.
This research dives into the impact of salt diffusion, capillary pressure, and injection
rate on the evaporation rate and salt precipitation process near the wellbore. The study
encompasses lab-scale experiments investigating the CO2 flooding process, while the com-
positional simulator CMG-GEM is utilized to simulate various cases. The study aims to
achieve four primary objectives:
(1) First and foremost, the mechanism behind salt precipitation and some phenomena
of salt precipitation near the wellbore are investigated.
(2) Secondly, the competition between viscous and capillary forces is investigated by
Page 12 of 55
==PAGE:18==
3
REVIEW OF EXPERIMENTAL WORKS
23rd of June 2023
considering the capillary pressure in the model.
(3) Then, the effect of ion diffusion on salt precipitation is investigated.
(4) Investigating the impact of injection rates on water evaporation rates.
Page 13 of 55
==PAGE:19==
4
THEORY
23rd of June 2023
4
Theory
This section will mainly introduce the theories that are used to model various phys-
ical processes during CO2 injection. All the models and simulations are achieved in the
compositional simulator CMG-GEM.
4.1
Multi-phase fluid flow
When CO2 is injected into a saline aquifer, multi-phase flow is initiated within the
porous media. The constituents within these phases interact and interchange during the
spatiotemporal movement of these phases. This interaction instigates other coupled processes
detailed in this section. As a result, multi-phase fluid flow is the primary and most crucial
physical process that must be considered in this study.
The fluid flow in this study is
presumed to occur at the continuum scale, and it follows the principle of mass conservation,
as illustrated by the equation below:
∂
∂t (ϕ (ciwρwSw + cigρgSg)) = ∇·
 ρwqw + ρgqg

+ qi + Fiw + Riw
(1)
where ciw and cig are the concentration of component i in water phase and gas phase
respectively; qi, Fiw and Riw represent component variation due to injection, diffusion and
chemical reactions per unit volume and time, respectively; the qw and qg are the symbols of
water flow rate and gas flow rate, calculated by Darcy’s law as presented in Equation:
qw = −Kkrw
µw
(∇P −ρwg)
qg = −Kkrg
µg
(∇P −ρgg)
(2)
where γ is the capillary force parameter, Swi is the irreducible water saturation, and Sgr is
the residual gas saturation.
4.2
Salt diffusion
Salt diffusion comes into play when there is an imbalance in the concentration of ions,
affecting molecular movement. This physical mechanism is crucial in the context of carbon
sequestration. During the injection of CO2 into the formation, diffusion occurs for CO2
Page 14 of 55
==PAGE:20==
4
THEORY
23rd of June 2023
molecules as well as various ions. This diffusive regime influences water evaporation and
halite precipitation. This mechanism is modeled by Fick’s law, as demonstrated below:
J = −DdCi
dx
(3)
where the J is the diffusion flux, of which the dimension is the amount of substance per unit
area per unit time; D is the diffusivity, of which the dimension is the area per unit time; Ci
is the concentration of substance i and x is the position.
4.3
Capillary-driven back flow
As CO2 flooding continuously prompts water evaporation, a saturation gradient devel-
ops between the deep water zone and the dry-out region. As a result, the capillary pressure
propels brine, carrying ions, to flow in reverse from the deeper zone to replenish the evapo-
ration front. This phenomenon is known as capillary back flow and is modeled by the Van
Genuchten function, as illustrated by the following equation:
Pcap = P 0
cap
 S−1/γ−1
wn
1−γ
(4)
Swn =
Sw −Swi
1 −Swi −Sgr
(5)
where γ is the capillary force parameter, Swi is the irreducible water saturation, and Sgr is
the residual gas saturation.
4.4
Water evaporation
During CO2 injection, water continuously evaporates from the liquid phase to the CO2-
rich phase. This physical process governs the partitioning of water between different phases
and is responsible for salt precipitation. The higher the mole fraction of water in the CO2
phase, the more water evaporates, leading to more severe salt blockage. The distribution
of water in aqueous and gas phases can be quantified by phase equilibrium calculations, as
follows:
f a
H2O = f g
H2O
(6)
where the fugacity of water in gas phase f g
H2O is calculated by Peng-Robinson equation of
state [37]; and f a
H2O, the fugacity of water in aqueous phase with solutes is calculated from
Page 15 of 55
==PAGE:21==
4
THEORY
23rd of June 2023
fH2O, the fugacity of pure water at pressure P and temperature T by:
f a
H2O = ywfH2O
(7)
fH2O = f s
H2O exp
 Z P
P s
H2O
vH2O
RT dP
!
(8)
where yw represents the water molar fraction in the aqueous phase. f s
H2O denotes the fugacity
of water at saturation pressure and temperature, which is calculated using the method from
Canjar and Manning [38]. P s
H2O signifies the saturation pressure of water as per Saul and
Wagner [39], and vH2O is the molar volume of water according to Rowe and Chou [40].
4.5
Carbon dioxide dissolution
The dissolution of carbon dioxide is another significant coupled mechanism contributing
to the quantity of CO2 storage and multi-phase flow within the porous media. As CO2 is
transported within the formation, the gas interacts with the brine and partially dissolves into
the liquid phase. This is one of the well-recognized mechanisms of CO2 storage. Furthermore,
the dissolution of CO2 also alters the properties of the brine, such as increasing its density,
which in turn influences the physical process of liquid transport. Given that dissolution is a
rapid process, it is modeled by thermodynamic equilibrium, as follows:
f a
CO2 = f g
CO2
(9)
In these thermodynamic equilibrium calculations, f g
CO2 represents the fugacity of CO2
in the gas phase, which is calculated using the Peng-Robinson equation of state [37]. f a
CO2
denotes the fugacity of CO2 in the brine, obtained using Henry’s Law [39][41]
f a
CO2 = yCO2Hsalt ,CO2
(10)
ln
Hsalt ,CO2
HCO2

= ksalt ,CO2msalt
(11)
In this calculation, Hsalt, CO2 represents Henry’s constant for CO2 in brine water, while
HCO2 is Henry’s constant in pure water at pressure P and temperature T, which is calculated
using Equation 12. msalt is the molarity of the dissolved salt. Finally, ksalt,CO2 is the salt-out
Page 16 of 55
==PAGE:22==
4
THEORY
23rd of June 2023
coefficient, determined using the critical temperature Tc (◦C) as per the Equation 13:
ln HCO2 = ln Hs
CO2 +
Z p
P s
H2O
ˆvCO2
RT dp
(12)
ksalt,CO2 = 0.11572 −6.0293 ∗10−4Tc + 3.5871 ∗10−6T 2
c −3.7772 ∗10−9T 3
c
(13)
In the above calculations, Hs
CO2 represents Henry’s constant at the water-saturated
pressure P s
H2O and temperature T, which is calculated using Harvey’s correlation [42]. Ad-
ditionally, ˆvCO2 is the molar volume of CO2, as calculated using Garcia’s correlation.
4.6
Salt precipitation
Due to the above-mentioned coupling mechanisms, the concentrations of ions, primarily
Na+ and Cl−, in brine can exceed their solubility limits, leading to precipitation of halite out
of the water. In this study, salt precipitation is described by the following mineral reaction:
Halite ←→Na+ + Cl−
(14)
Under reservoir conditions, H2O and CO2 participate in a series of chemical reactions
within the aqueous phase. These intra-aqueous reactions influence CO2 dissolution. Typi-
cally, these reactions progress rapidly, reaching chemical equilibrium almost instantaneously.
Therefore, kinetics during this process is often neglected, and only the chemical equilibrium
is considered, as per the following equation:
Qα = Keq,α
(15)
where Qα represents the activity product of ions at equilibrium, which is computed as
follows:
Qα =
naq
Y
i=1
a
mαj
j
(16)
where αj represents the activity of component j, and the activity coefficient is determined
using the B-dot model [43]. The term naq refers to the number of ions in the reaction, while
mαj is the stoichiometric coefficient of component j in reaction α.
The value of Keq,α is the chemical equilibrium constant for the intra-aqueous reaction
α. This constant is highly dependent on temperature and is modeled in the simulator as a
Page 17 of 55
==PAGE:23==
4
THEORY
23rd of June 2023
fourth-order polynomial function, as follows:
log Keq,α = ϵ0 + ϵ1T + ϵ2T 2 + ϵ3T 3 + ϵ4T 4
(17)
Where αj represents the chemical equilibrium coefficients, and T denotes the temperature
in ◦C.
However, the precipitation of halite is a slower process during CO2 injection compared
to the intra-aqueous reactions. Therefore, the kinetics equation (shown as Equation 18) is
needed to calculate the reaction time and rate before chemical equilibrium is achieved [44]
[45].
rβ = Akβ

1 −Qβ
Keq,β

(18)
where rβ represents the reaction rate, A stands for the specific surface area of the salt-halite,
and kβ is the reaction constant. Qβ is the activity product of Na+ and Cl−, calculated using
Equation 15. Finally, Keq,β is the equilibrium constant of the salt precipitation reaction,
which is calculated using Equation 17.
The reaction constant is temperature-dependent and is modeled as follows:
kβ = k∗
β exp

−Eβ
R
 1
T −1
T0

(19)
where k∗
β represents the rate constant of the reaction at a temperature of 298.15 K, Eβ is
the activation energy of the reaction, and T0 is the temperature at the initial time.
The reactive specific surface area is dynamic and correlates with the mole concentration
of the salt during precipitation or dissolution, according to the following relationship:
A = A0 Nβ
N 0
β
(20)
where A0 represents the specific surface area at the initial time, while N 0
β and Nβ are the
mole concentrations of salt per unit rock volume at the initial time and the current time,
respectively.
The ratio in Equation 18 is known as the saturation index [46]. Here: (1) If it is larger
than 1, halite dissolution occurs and the reaction rate (rβ) is negative, indicating a net loss of
halite. (2) If the saturation index is less than 1, halite precipitation occurs and the reaction
rate (rβ) is positive, indicating a net gain of halite. (3) If the saturation index equals 1, the
Page 18 of 55
==PAGE:24==
4
THEORY
23rd of June 2023
reaction rate is zero, signifying that the reaction has reached a chemical equilibrium where
the rates of halite precipitation and dissolution are equal.
4.7
Porosity and permeability evolution
The prediction of changes in porosity and permeability is crucial when assessing the
potential impairment to injectivity caused by halite precipitation. To focus exclusively on
the effects of halite precipitation on porosity, and to exclude the effects of pressure changes,
we set the rock’s compressibility to zero in our simulation. The change in reservoir porosity
over time is thus described by the following formula:
ϕ =

ϕ0 −
Rβ
X
β
Nβ −N 0
β
ρβ
+ Nsalt −N 0
salt
ρsalt


(21)
where ϕ represents the current porosity. ϕ0 is the initial porosity. Nsalt denotes the
current molar quantity of salt per unit volume. N 0
salt is the molar quantity of salt per unit
volume at the initial time. Alterations in rock porosity can indicate the amount of halite that
has precipitated in the pores. Consequently, we can infer that changes in permeability are
connected to reductions in porosity. In this study, we use the Kozeny-Carman equation, as
stated in Equation 22, to predict changes in permeability resulting from halite precipitation.
K
K0
=
 ϕ
ϕ0
n 1 −ϕ0
1 −ϕ
2
(22)
where K represents the current permeability. K0 is the permeability at the initial time. n
is the resistance exponent factor.
4.8
Capillary number
The capillary number (Ca) is a dimensionless quantity that provides insight into the
dominant forces affecting fluid flow within a porous medium, such as a geological reservoir.
The capillary number is defined as the ratio of viscous forces (associated with fluid flow)
to capillary forces (related to interfacial tension). A high capillary number indicates that
viscous forces are dominant, while a low capillary number indicates that capillary forces are
Page 19 of 55
==PAGE:25==
4
THEORY
23rd of June 2023
dominant. Mathematically, the capillary number is expressed as:
Ca = µv
σ
(23)
where µ is the viscosity of the fluid, v is the average flow velocity, and σ is the interfacial
tension between two fluid phase.
4.9
Peclet number
The peclet number (Pe) is a dimensionless number used in the field of fluid dynamics and
transport phenomena. It provides valuable insight into the dominant transport mechanisms
in the subsurface reservoir where the CO2 is being stored.
The peclet number is defined as the ratio of the rate of advection (bulk fluid motion due
to pressure gradients) to the rate of diffusion (dispersion or spread from high-concentration
areas to lower-concentration areas). It is calculated as follows:
Pe = vL
D
(24)
Where v is the average fluid velocity, L is a characteristic length (often the length of the
reservoir or the distance the fluid travels), D is the diffusion coefficient.
Page 20 of 55
==PAGE:26==
5
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
23rd of June 2023
5
Laboratory Experiment
5.1
Introduction
During scCO2 injection, the water in the brine will be evaporated into a dry CO2
stream.
The experiment was conducted based on Jeddizahed et al.[29] in high pressure
and temperature imitated the reservoir condition, which aims to understand the change in
evaporation rate over time and saturation in various factors such as core type and injection
rate. It is expected that the series of experiments can help us understand the principles of
water evaporation in different conditions.
5.2
Material and methods
5.2.1
Rock sample
The experiments were conducted on sandstone, which was collected from Bentheimer.
The core used in both experiments was 75.36 mm in length and 37.77 mm in diameter.
Table 3: Rock properties of Bentheimer
Properties
Values
Units
Length
75.36
mm
Diameter
37.77
mm
Dry weight
172.53
g
Permeability
2333
mD
Porosity
23.2
%
Pore volume
19.58
cm3
Water saturated
16.06
g
5.2.2
Fluid properties
Since the purpose of this experiment is to investigate the trend of evaporation rate
during scCO2 injection, both two sandstones were saturated by deionized water in a vacuum
pump for 24 hours in the condition of 20 bar.
Page 21 of 55
==PAGE:27==
5
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
23rd of June 2023
5.2.3
Experiment setup
Figure6 depicts a simplified schematic of the high-pressure experimental setup. A core
holder, whose temperature was regulated by a heating jacket connected to a thermostat with
circulating water, houses the sample. This holder can accommodate samples up to 11 cm
in length and 3.81 cm in diameter, withstanding a maximum confining pressure of 70 MPa.
The cylindrical rock sample, encased in Teflon, is situated inside a rubber sleeve. This sleeve
transfers the confining pressure onto the sample.
Figure 6: Experiment schematic plot[47]
The core holder is vertically placed, and fluids are administered into the core at a con-
stant rate via positive-displacement pumps. A back pressure of 200 bar regulates the outflow,
ensuring stability in system pressure. The outlet fluids are gathered and measured through
the use of two traps designed for water and vapor. Both traps are filled with silica gel,
enabling it to capture the total amount of displaced brine and vapor. A data acquisition
system, connected to a computer, records pertinent data such as inlet/outlet pressure, tem-
perature, and backup pressure.
5.3
Experimental procedure
The clean and dry rock sample was weighed, and then, fully saturated with deionized
water by vacuum pump for 24 hours to ensure no air remained inside the pore throats.
Next, the 100 % water-saturated sample was weighed. Thereafter, the sample was wrapped,
Page 22 of 55
==PAGE:28==
5
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
23rd of June 2023
sleeved and then mounted into the core holder vertically. The water heater temperature was
elevated to 62 ◦C and stabilized for 8 h. The confining pressure was set to 220 bar. The
supercritical CO2 was pressurized to 208 bar and then injected at a controlled constant rate
(1 mL/min and 5mL/min). In both tests more than 100 pore volumes of CO2 were injected
to mimic the region near the injection well during CO2 sequestration. Thereafter, the core
was depressurized and the water heater temperature was decreased to the room temperature
of 26 ◦C. The remaining water saturation was calculated via a comparison of core weight
before and after.
5.4
Results and discussion
5.4.1
Typical evaporative curve
Figures7, 8 indicate the production curves. The black curve is the total amount of
water and vapor in the trap, which provides a graphical representation of the process of
supercritical CO2 injection into porous media. This process can be divided into two main
stages, which are distinguishable by the shape and slope of the production curves. An early
stage of the experiments is marked by a sharp increase in water and vapor production.
Most of the water and vapor are produced during the first 0.375 hours of gas injection as
the dominant process is piston-like displacement. As the gas injection continues, the total
production slows down. Thereafter, the evaporation process is dominant in the second stage
where the most of remaining water trapped in small pores was evaporated by non-wetting
dry scCO2 and the remaining quantity of water affects the rate of evaporation [29]. Through
comparison of the weights of the fully saturated sample and after the flooding test, the
remaining water saturation is 8.69 % and 3.2 % respectively, but in the graphs, only the
relatively stable data for the first 6 hours were shown.
Page 23 of 55
==PAGE:29==
5
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
23rd of June 2023
Figure 7: Water production curves during first flooding test.
Page 24 of 55
==PAGE:30==
5
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
23rd of June 2023
Figure 8: Water production curves during first flooding test.
5.4.2
Effect of injection rate
As per figure 9, the total amount of water, including displacement and evaporation,
increases with injection rates rising and most of water produced in the displacement process
according to figures 9 and 10(a). Compared with an injection rate of 1 mL/min and 5mL/min
in figure 10(a), it can be seen that displaced water production increases with the injection
rate. As a consequence, the remaining water saturation decreases with the injection rate.
This is mainly due to improved advective force, which can better overcome the capillary
forces of the rock sample medium. As the remaining water saturation becomes lower with
the injection rate, less water contained in the smallest pores of the rock sample is exposed
to the dry scCO2 flow and therefore the tendency towards vaporization is decreased. Also,
when the injection is higher, the CO2 and brine will be in a non-equilibrium condition, which
causes much less evaporation of water. When the CO2 and water have a smaller differential
velocity, the condition is close to equilibrium and the gas phase can become saturated with
water vapor. Consequently, according to Figure 10(b), the vapor production, which leads to
salt precipitation, decreases with the injection rate.
Page 25 of 55
==PAGE:31==
5
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
23rd of June 2023
Figure 9: Comparison of the total amount of water in different injection rates
(a) displaced water production versus time
(b) Vapor production versus time
Figure 10: Comparison of individual water and vapor production in different injection rates
The above observation can be also verified through figures 11 12. We focused on the
data in the second stage, which represents the evaporation process. Then, we determined
the slopes of the fitted curves and it reported that the constant evaporation rate is obtained
Page 26 of 55
==PAGE:32==
5
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
23rd of June 2023
during 1 mL/min injection rate as the evaporation occurs in equilibrium condition and CO2
flow has a longer time to be saturated by remaining water so that the process is completed.
While a variable evaporation rate was observed in the 5 mL/min injection rate case as the
process occurs in non-equilibrium condition and CO2 has less chance to react with remaining
water in small pores.
(a) Simple fit of second stage for test 1
(b) Simple fit of second stage for test 2
Figure 11: Simple fit of second stage for 2 tests
(a) Evaporation rate for test 1
(b) Evaporation rate for test 2
Figure 12: Evaporation rate for 2 tests
Page 27 of 55
==PAGE:33==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
6
Semi-field scale simulation
A radial flow model was considered to investigate the competition between viscous and
capillary force, the effect of capillary-driven back flow and salt diffusion on salt precipitation
for the CCS studies in the project Greensand Phase 2.
6.1
Model description
A radial flow model was considered to investigate the relationship between capillary-
driven back flow, salt diffusion and salt precipitation as well as bottom-hole pressure (BHP)
build-up in this study. The radius of the cylinder is 50 m with an infinite boundary and the
thickness is 0.1 m (Table 4). The grids near the wellbore area are small approximately 0.01
m and increase toward the outside. Muti-phase fluid flow, salt diffusion, water vaporization,
capillary back flow, gas dissolution, salt precipitation and their effects on the porosity and
the permeability of the field are considered during these simulations presented in the Theory
section.
Figure 13: 3D view of simulation model
Page 28 of 55
==PAGE:34==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Table 4: Reservoir initial properties of the main simulation case.
Parameters
Values
Units
Parameters
Values
Units
Raduis near wellbore
0.01
m
Permeability
400
mD
Radius of field
50
m
Pressure
18.5
MPa
Thickness
0.1
m
Initial water saturation
1
Unitless
Temperature
62
◦C
Initial porosity
0.39
Unitless
For the model, the irreducible water saturation is set as 0.2. And the capillary force
was calculated by Equation 4. The relative permeability and capillary curve are shown in
figure 14 15.
Figure 14: relative permeability curve
Figure 15: capillary curve
Page 29 of 55
==PAGE:35==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
6.2
Fluid properties
Fluid properties have been derived from the history matching of the experimental report
of Jeddizahed et al. [29] that is conducted by Khosravi et al. [48]. Some considerations are
taken into account for the design of this simulation. CO2 is injected at the supercritical con-
dition through an injection well that is perforated at the middle of the layer (0.05 m). With
regards to the type of salt precipitation, halite is only considered in this study. The initial
composition of Na+ and Cl−are 1.358 and 1.74 in molality, respectively. And the salin-
ity of brine is set as 1.7 gmol/L. The phenomenon of water evaporation is estimated using
Henry’s correlation. The activity coefficients are calculated from the B-dot model[43]. The
geochemistry data input is modified using GEOCHEM_V2. Karman-Cozeny correlation
with an exponent of 3 for estimation of permeability versus porosity. LOG-CHEM-EQUIL-
COEFS is used to calculate log(Keq), log of chemical equilibrium constant and the value of
each parameter are 1.50124, 0.0049775,5 -6.01076e-05, 2.2442e-07 and -4.10942e-10, respec-
tively.
The coefficients of REACTIVE-SURFACE-AREA, ACTIVATION-ENERGY, and
LOG-TST-RATE-CONSTANT were set as 17600, 2000 and -5.0, respectively.
6.3
Grids optimization
In simulations, we often use a grid to simplify and approximate continuous processes.
The finer detailed this grid is, the better it can capture these complex processes, reducing
what we call ’truncation error’ in a finite difference.
However, when increasing the detail of grids, other kinds of issues appear, such as
round-off errors due to the finite precision of numerical calculations and accuracy of function
convergence. Moreover, a more detailed grid requires more computational power and time.
Therefore, it’s important to find a balance between a grid that’s detailed enough to give ac-
curate results, but not so detailed that it becomes computationally expensive or introduces
computational issues.
To find the optimum grid size, 6 different models were constructed with the same volume
but different grid numbers. The number of grids was tuned from 10 to 60 and the total
amount of mineral deposits was plotted in figure 16. It can be seen that when the number
of grids is 50, there is the largest number of mineral deposits so even if the injection rate is
Page 30 of 55
==PAGE:36==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
tiny, there is an obvious phenomenon of salt precipitation in the following analysis.
Figure 16: The amount of halite versus grids number
Then, the thickness of the model is validated by changing the parameter from 10 to 60.
Via comparison of the variation of porosity of each curve, we found that no matter what
value of thickness, all of the porosity curves are overlapped, which means that the thickness
of this model can be ignored so that the thickness can be as small as possible (0.1 m) in
order to decrease the running time of the simulation.
Figure 17: The porosity versus time
Page 31 of 55
==PAGE:37==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
6.4
Results and discussion
Based on the literature, mineral precipitation has damaging effects on the reservoir’s
porosity, permeability, and CO2 injectivity. Accordingly, in this section, the results of the
simulations are presented.
6.4.1
Results of base case
The whole reservoir can be divided into three zones by two shock fronts (discontinuities
in saturation or concentration) consisting of a two-phase (aqueous and gaseous) system
during CO2 injection The results of zonalisation can be reflected in the numerical method
via simulation results in figure 18.
Figure 18: The zone view of the whole reservoir
According to figure 19, far from the injection well-downstream of a leading shock, a
fresh brine region exists that is being displaced by the injected CO2.
Upstream of the
leading shock (so-called flooding front), a region of two-phase (gaseous and aqueous) flow
exists (an equilibrium region), in which an aqueous phase (brine and dissolved CO2) and a
gaseous phase (CO2 and vaporized water) flow.
Page 32 of 55
==PAGE:38==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 19: The zone view far away from injection well
As per figure 20, a trailing evaporation shock (also called dry-out front) separates the
equilibrium region from the dry-out region closest to the wellbore where salt has precipitated.
In reality, there is ion components exchange between the equilibrium region and the dry-out
front due to the ion concentration gradient during salt precipitation.
Figure 20: The zone view near wellbore
Page 33 of 55
==PAGE:39==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
6.4.2
Analysis of effect of injection rate
Diffusive regime
From typical simulation results, figure 21 22, the water saturation curves reflect the
process of water displacement and evaporation by CO2 flow. Initially, the trend witnesses a
significant decrease which is the period when water is mostly displaced. However, it stabilizes
subsequently and shows a slight reduction over time due to water evaporation. It is evident
that the porosity remains constant, indicating that halite precipitation does not occur in the
diffusive regime, as the dry-out zone has not formed due to capillary-driven back flow. This
finding is consistent with previous research. Furthermore, the aforementioned words provide
an explanation for the stable and low levels of bottom-hole pressure (BHP). Additionally,
Figure 23 shows red arrows indicating the direction of water flow, which is a clear indication
of capillary backflow due to the dominance of capillary force over viscous force.
Figure 21: Prosity, water saturation and salt deposits v.s. Time
Page 34 of 55
==PAGE:40==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 22: bottom-hole pressure versus Time
Figure 23: The aerial view of model
Page 35 of 55
==PAGE:41==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 24: A part of simulation results for diffusive cases
Capillary regime
Based on the standard simulation results, as shown in Figure 25, the 3-curve plot reveals
Page 36 of 55
==PAGE:42==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
a noticeable competition between viscous and capillary forces. Initially, the water satura-
tion undergoes a significant reduction to a specified level, lower than what is observed in
the diffusive regime. This can be attributed to the increased displacement efficiency, driven
by a higher injection rate. Concurrently, salt precipitation initiates when water saturation
decreases to a certain threshold, a phenomenon evident from the halite amount curve. This
sequence of events leads to the clogging of pores near the wellbore, causing a noticeable
decrease in porosity.
Subsequently, it is notable that water saturation experiences an increase due to the
capillary-driven backflow. This backflow of brine leads to an enhanced halite amount by
replenishing the salt, and at the same time, dissolves a portion of the previously precipitated
halite when water saturation decrease again. This accounts for the observed pattern in the
halite mineral curve, which first increases and then decreases, while the trend in the porosity
curve displays an inverse relationship.
From figure 26, there is an extremely high bottom-hole pressure (BHP) build-up. And
this phenomenon can be found in all of the cases in the capillary regime from figure 28.
This is caused by the ’local precipitation’ pattern. The so-called ’local precipitation’ can
be observed directly in the aerial view of the model in figure 27. In addition, according to
Figure 27, the arrows that represent the direction of water flow illustrate the rivalry between
viscous and capillary forces. Near the injection well, the capillary force is significantly high
due to the reduced water saturation resulting from the dry-out zone. Consequently, capillary
backflow can be observed in the vicinity of the injection well. As water saturation increases,
the capillary force diminishes, allowing the viscous force to prevail farther away from the
injection well.
Page 37 of 55
==PAGE:43==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 25: Prosity, water saturation and salt deposits v.s. Time
Figure 26: bottom-hole pressure versus Time
Page 38 of 55
==PAGE:44==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 27: The aerial view of model
Page 39 of 55
==PAGE:45==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 28: A part of simulation results for capillary cases
Evaporative regime
As per typical results, figure 29 30, the water saturation decreases to the minimal limit
promptly. This implies that the dry scCO2 flow immediately displaces a substantial volume
Page 40 of 55
==PAGE:46==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
of brine and evaporates the irreducible water trapped in the pores and the dry-out zone
thus forms during this period. In the evaporative regime, capillary-driven backflow can be
disregarded due to the exceptionally high viscous force, a consequence of the high injection
rate, as evidenced by the arrows in Figure 31. However, it is noteworthy that the quantity
of halite near the wellbore is significantly lower in comparison to the capillary regime. This
lack of change in porosity near the wellbore implies that no detrimental effects are imposed
on the injectivity near the well.
In addition, there is not an abnormal BHP build-up and the BHP recovers to a normal
condition gradually after a high pressure due to the high injection rate near the injection
well. As depicted in figure 31, severe salt precipitation, referred to as ’non-local precipita-
tion’, takes place far from the wellbore. This pattern of drying regime and salt precipitation
results in less impairment on injectivity compared to the capillary regime.
Figure 29: Prosity, water saturation and salt deposits v.s. Time
Page 41 of 55
==PAGE:47==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 30: bottom-hole pressure versus Time
Figure 31: The aerial view of model
Page 42 of 55
==PAGE:48==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 32: A part of simulation results for evaporative cases
Page 43 of 55
==PAGE:49==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
6.4.3
Analysis of dimensionless number
The peclet number (Pe) and capillary number (Ca) are important parameters to con-
sider when modeling CO2 sequestration processes, particularly during the injection. During
the injection phase, the peclet number capillary number can be used to understand how
the CO2 will move within the subsurface formation. They could help optimize the rate of
CO2 injection. Different values of peclet number and capillary number will lead to varying
patterns in the onset of salt precipitation, bottom-hole pressure build-up and total quantity
of mineral deposits.
In this study, a small distance was selected very close to the wellbore, and the dif-
fusion coefficient was set as a constant of 2.05e-05 cm2/s. The interfacial tension (IFT)
of CO2−brine system was set as 30 mN/m and CO2 viscosity is 0.05 mPa s [49][50]. The
bottom-hole pressure build-up was defined as the difference between the highest bottom-hole
pressure and initial injection pressure. This measure effectively illustrates the extent of the
injectivity impairment.
In this section, our objective is to classify the three active drying regimes previously
mentioned (diffusive, capillary, and evaporative regimes). We aim to detail the behaviors of
salt diffusion, total halite precipitation, and BHP build-up. This will enable us to estimate
the impairment of injectivity during CO2 injection with differing peclet and capillary num-
bers. An overview of the contents is provided in Figure 41.
In the diffusive regime, where Pe < 285 and Ca < 1.95e-08, the total amount of halite
remains zero, as per Figure 33. As previously mentioned, this is because no dry-out zone
forms and consequently, no halite precipitation occurs within this regime.
Additionally,
Figure 34 indicates a relatively stable Bottom-Hole Pressure (BHP), with only minor fluc-
tuations. This suggests that there is no occurrence of injectivity impairment under these
conditions.
Page 44 of 55
==PAGE:50==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
(a) Halite v.s. Pe
(b) Halite v.s. Ca
Figure 33: A mount of Halite versus Pe and Ca
(a) BHP v.s. Pe
(b) BHP v.s. Ca
Figure 34: Bottom-hole pressure versus Pe and Ca
As indicated in Figure 35, the total amount of halite generally increases with the peclet
and capillary numbers, which aligns with our expectations. As the injection rate increases,
the area of local precipitation expands around the wellbore.
Simultaneously, Figure 36
shows that the Bottom-Hole Pressure (BHP) build-up in the capillary regime is generally
much higher compared to the other two regimes. This build-up initially increases and peaks
at Pe ≈1617, and Ca ≈1.11e-07. Beyond this point, the BHP build-up decreases with
increasing peclet and capillary numbers.
This behavior suggests that each reservoir, characterized by a specific diffusion coeffi-
cient, has an optimally matched injection rate, which could lead to the most severe injectivity
damage. The relatively low BHP build-up at the boundaries of the capillary regime could
hint at transitions toward the diffusive or evaporative regimes.
Page 45 of 55
==PAGE:51==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
(a) Halite v.s. Pe
(b) Halite v.s. Ca
Figure 35: A mount of Halite versus Pe and Ca
(a) BHP v.s. Pe
(b) BHP v.s. Ca
Figure 36: Bottom-hole pressure versus Pe and Ca
Figure 37 demonstrates that the total amount of mineral deposits increases with rising
peclet and capillary numbers, specifically for values exceeding 2786 and 1.9e-7 respectively.
This is primarily due to most of the salt precipitating away from the wellbore, with the
radius of the precipitation area expanding accordingly. As Miri et al.[51] have reported, the
extent of precipitation could be considerably greater than the salt content in the residual
trapped water alone due to the strong capillary suction of precipitated salt. Figure 38 shows
that the BHP build-up is zero, indicating that in the evaporative regime, a high injection
rate does not negatively impact injectivity.
Moreover, as seen in figure 30, the injection pressure is only high at the initial injection
period and recovers to a lower level subsequently. However, it’s important to note that the
injection pressure must not exceed the reservoir’s limited fracture pressure [52], thus placing
a limit on how high the injection rate can be.
Page 46 of 55
==PAGE:52==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
(a) Halite v.s. Pe
(b) Halite v.s. Ca
Figure 37: A mount of Halite versus Pe and Ca
(a) BHP v.s. Pe
(b) BHP v.s. Ca
Figure 38: Bottom-hole pressure versus Pe and Ca
Following the comprehensive discussion about the behaviors of each drying regime,
we have synthesized our findings in figures 39 40.
These illustrations facilitate a better
understanding of the effects of the two dimensionless numbers, the peclet number (Pe) and
capillary number (Ca), on salt precipitation.
(1) In the diffusive regime, low peclet and capillary numbers exert a minimal impact on
both the amount of salt precipitation and BHP build-up.
(2) In the capillary regime, specific values of the peclet and capillary numbers result in
the most severe impairment to injectivity.
(3) In the evaporative regime, damage to the vicinity of the wellbore is virtually nonex-
istent, even though the amount of halite increases with rising values of the dimensionless
numbers.
Page 47 of 55
==PAGE:53==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 39: The total amount of halite versus dimensionless number: 1.Diffusive regime
2.Capillary regime 3.Evaporative regime
Figure 40: The total amount of halite versus dimensionless number: 1.Diffusive regime
2.Capillary regime 3.Evaporative regime
Page 48 of 55
==PAGE:54==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Figure 41: overview of the classification of 3 regimes
Page 49 of 55
==PAGE:55==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
6.4.4
Salt diffusion
In this model, the halite is the main mineral deposit so the dominant ions are Na+
and Cl+ and the diffusion coefficient of them are assumed as the same value. The amount
of halite is greatly impacted by the radius in the radial flow model. Comparisons can be
challenging due to variations in the grid block radius, so we chose to compare at the entire
field scale. Nonetheless, for a more localized analysis, we examined the alterations in Na+
mobility in the vicinity of the wellbore.
Figure 42 depicted how salt diffusion performs in the diffusive regime. As per figure
42(a), it can be seen that an increment of Na+ mobility as the mobile brine was displaced and
evaporated by dry scCO2 during CO2 injection. This process ultimately amplifies the salt
concentration. However, according to Fick’s laws of diffusion, the ions will transport from
high to low concentration due to a concentration gradient. Therefore, the ion will diffuse
toward to place far from the wellbore. This phenomenon accounts for the variation in peaks
among the curves associated with different diffusion coefficients during the initial phase.
A curve associated with a higher diffusion coefficient, indicating a more pronounced salt
diffusion capability, can mitigate significant increments in the concentration of Na+. Hence,
curves with higher diffusion coefficients are characterized by lower peaks in Na+ molality.
Meanwhile, as discussed in the previous section, no salt precipitation occurs in this regime.
Consequently, the halite content at the field scale remains at zero, as illustrated in figure
42(b).
The salt diffusion process becomes more complex in the capillary regime. The initial
process is similar to that in the diffusive regime. As per figure 43(a), the curve with a lower
diffusion coefficient has a sharper up trend to reach its peak than the other curves due to
its weaker capacity for salt diffusion. Differently, once the salt concentration exceeds the
maximum solubility limits, salt precipitation begins and the curve decreases. Thus, a lower
diffusion coefficient always initiates salt precipitation earlier than higher diffusion coefficient
cases. In other words, a high diffusion capacity will delay the onset of salt precipitation, as
shown in figure 43(b). Interestingly, the declining trends of Na+ concentration vary among
the curves after the start of salt precipitation. This is because, once the salt precipitates
out of the aqueous phase, the salt concentrations will decrease. At this point, the ions will
be transported from the reservoir to the vicinity of the well to replenish the consumption
of salt. Consequently, this movement partially offsets the reduction of Na+ concentration.
Page 50 of 55
==PAGE:56==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
Furthermore, a build-up trend can be observed in figure 43(a) due to the capillary-driven
backflow replenishing a large number of ions.
In the evaporative regime, the behaviors of each curve differ from those observed in the
other two regimes. As per figure 44(a), the curves rise at a similar pace and start to decrease
once they reach their peaks at almost the same time. This suggests that the salt precipitates
synchronously regardless of the diffusion coefficient. Moreover, the slopes of the decreasing
portion of the curves are similar as well. This indicates that in the evaporative regime, both
the salt diffusion and the capillary backflow have a reduced impact due to the extremely
high evaporation capacity.
(a) Na+ v.s. time
(b) A mount of Halite v.s. time
Figure 42: Salt diffusion in diffusive regime
(a) Na+ v.s. time
(b) A mount of Halite v.s. time
Figure 43: Salt diffusion in capillary regime
Page 51 of 55
==PAGE:57==
6
SEMI-FIELD SCALE SIMULATION
23rd of June 2023
(a) Na+ v.s. time
(b) A mount of Halite v.s. time
Figure 44: Salt diffusion in evaporative regime
Page 52 of 55
==PAGE:58==
7
CONCLUSION
23rd of June 2023
7
Conclusion
In this study, lab-scale experiments and semi-reservoir scale simulations are conducted.
For the experiment, we mainly investigate the effect of the injection rate on the evaporation
rate. For the simulation part, the distribution of different zone was classified, and the effect
of diffusion coefficient on salt precipitation and different patterns of porosity, water satu-
ration, and accumulative mineral deposits are compared in three active drying regimes as
well as the variable impairment of injectivity can be summarized using dimensionless number.
There are two stages during the CO2 flooding in a saline aquifer. The first stage is
dominated by immiscible water displacement where most of the water can be displaced out
in a very short time. After the breakthrough, water evaporation will take over the process,
in which the water can continue to be taken out in the form of vapor at a much lower
rate. Different injection rates will influence the two different stages differently. With a low
injection rate, the displacement process is not efficient. However, the evaporation stage is
much more efficient because the equilibrium condition is reached where the dry CO2 flow
has enough time to be saturated by immobile water trapped in small pores.
Conversely, the high injection rate leads to a highly efficient displacement of water but
it reaches a non-equilibrium condition during the evaporation stage due to less time for in-
teraction between dry scCO2 flow and irreducible water. Also, the above phenomenon can
be reflected on the simple fitted curve of the evaporation rate. A stable evaporation rate can
be obtained from a low injection rate, while a variable evaporation rate is obtained from a
higher injection rate.
There are three different zones, namely the dry-out zone, equilibrium zone and fresh
brine zone, during CO2 injection. These three different zones are divided by two shock fronts
termed trailing front and leading front where the water saturation is not continued in this
region. The salt will diffuse across different zones due to the salt concentration gradient.
Due to the water evaporation, the salt concentration increases resulting from a reach to the
critical salt solubility in water. The ions will diffuse from high to low concentration places
in order to prevent the tendency of salt precipitation. This ability is stronger with a higher
diffusion coefficient so the onset of salt precipitation will be delayed in cases with high dif-
fusion coefficient. Once salt precipitation starts, with the salt concentration drop, salt will
Page 53 of 55
==PAGE:59==
7
CONCLUSION
23rd of June 2023
be transported from the reservoir to the dry-out front due to concentration gradient and
capillary backflow to replenish the consumption of salt.
This study classifies three active drying regimes −the diffusive regime, capillary regime,
and evaporative regime −using dimensionless numbers, and verifies the extent of injectivity
impairment in different regimes.
In the diffusive regime, defined by Pe<285 and Ca<1.95e-08, salt precipitation does
not occur due to the absence of a dry-out zone formation. This means that the injectivity
impairment is negligible in this regime.
The capillary regime, defined by 368<Pe<2157 and 2.52e-08<Ca<1.47e-07, is where
the most severe injectivity damage occurs due to local salt precipitation. The impairment
of injectivity in this regime is significant and needs to be considered carefully in the process
of CO2 injection.
The evaporative regime, defined by Pe>2786 and Ca>1.90e-07, presents a scenario
where the impairment of injectivity near the wellbore is minimal, although the total amount
of mineral deposits is high in the entire field.
Page 54 of 55
==PAGE:60==
8
RECOMMENDATION OF FURTHER RESEARCH
23rd of June 2023
8
Recommendation of further research
While the simulation models used in this study have provided important insights into
the effects of salt diffusion in a radial flow model, some discrepancies and exceptions were
noted. For example, a smaller diffusion coefficient was associated with a higher amount
of halite, and in certain cases, a smaller diffusion coefficient resulted in a much delayed
onset of salt precipitation. These findings suggest that the role of the diffusion coefficient in
these processes is more complex than initially anticipated and warrants further investigation.
Specifically, the compatibility between the injection rate and the diffusion coefficient should
be studied in more depth to fully understand their interaction and impacts on the outcomes.
Furthermore, this study was limited by the fact that the impacts of gravity were not
included in the simulation models. The inclusion of gravity could potentially provide a more
realistic depiction of the processes during CO2 injection. In future studies, incorporating
gravity effects into the simulation models could help to further refine our understanding of
the various factors influencing injectivity during CO2 injection and salt precipitation.
In addition, the transition zones between each active drying regime offer potential ar-
eas for further investigation. These transition zones may exhibit unique behaviors that are
not fully captured by the categories of diffusive, capillary, and evaporative regimes. Future
studies could focus on these transitional areas to provide a more detailed and comprehensive
understanding of the overall process.
In the experimental part, the DI water can be replaced by brine to account for the
salinity effect. The accuracy of the measured water content should be further improved.
More sets of CO2 injection rates should be conducted to explore further effects of injection
rates.
Page 55 of 55
==PAGE:61==
List of Figures
1
Storage security depends on a combination of physical and geochemical trap-
ping. Over time, the physical process of residual CO2 trapping and geochem-
ical processes of solubility trapping and mineral trapping increase [12].
. . .
3
2
Schematic illustration of different physical mechanisms contributing to the
process of salt precipitation. Each of these mechanisms, namely (a) immiscible
displacement and evaporation, (b) Capillary backflow (c) ion diffusion (d) salt
self-enhancement [13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Schematic illustration of diffusive regimes associated with the process of salt
precipitation[13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Schematic illustration of capillary regimes associated with the process of salt
precipitation[13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
Schematic illustration of evaporative regimes associated with the process of
salt precipitation[13]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
6
Experiment schematic plot[47] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
Water production curves during first flooding test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
8
Water production curves during first flooding test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
9
Comparison of the total amount of water in different injection rates . . . . .
26
10
Comparison of individual water and vapor production in different injection
rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
11
Simple fit of second stage for 2 tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
12
Evaporation rate for 2 tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
13
3D view of simulation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
14
relative permeability curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
15
capillary curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
16
The amount of halite versus grids number
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
17
The porosity versus time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
18
The zone view of the whole reservoir
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
19
The zone view far away from injection well . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
20
The zone view near wellbore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
21
Prosity, water saturation and salt deposits v.s. Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
22
bottom-hole pressure versus Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
23
The aerial view of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
I
==PAGE:62==
LIST OF FIGURES
23rd of June 2023
24
A part of simulation results for diffusive cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
25
Prosity, water saturation and salt deposits v.s. Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
26
bottom-hole pressure versus Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
27
The aerial view of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
28
A part of simulation results for capillary cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
29
Prosity, water saturation and salt deposits v.s. Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
30
bottom-hole pressure versus Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
31
The aerial view of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
32
A part of simulation results for evaporative cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
33
A mount of Halite versus Pe and Ca
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
34
Bottom-hole pressure versus Pe and Ca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
35
A mount of Halite versus Pe and Ca
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
36
Bottom-hole pressure versus Pe and Ca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
37
A mount of Halite versus Pe and Ca
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
38
Bottom-hole pressure versus Pe and Ca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
39
The total amount of halite versus dimensionless number: 1.Diffusive regime
2.Capillary regime 3.Evaporative regime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
40
The total amount of halite versus dimensionless number: 1.Diffusive regime
2.Capillary regime 3.Evaporative regime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
41
overview of the classification of 3 regimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
42
Salt diffusion in diffusive regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
43
Salt diffusion in capillary regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
44
Salt diffusion in evaporative regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
45
Experimental set up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
Page II of X
==PAGE:63==
LIST OF TABLES
23rd of June 2023
List of Tables
1
Summary of the research outcomes using rigorous simulations studies for the
salt precipitation induced by CO2 injection.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Summary of the experimental studies for salt precipitation induced by CO2
injection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Rock properties of Bentheimer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Reservoir initial properties of the main simulation case. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Page III of X
==PAGE:64==
REFERENCES
23rd of June 2023
References
[1] I. L. d. Araujo, H. K. d. M. Costa, and Z. Makuch, “Climate change review and the ccs
technology contribution to the climate mitigation challenges,” Ambiente & Sociedade,
vol. 25, 2022.
[2] P. R. Nair, B. M. Kumar, V. D. Nair, P. R. Nair, B. M. Kumar, and V. D. Nair, “Carbon
sequestration and climate change mitigation,” An Introduction to Agroforestry: Four
Decades of Scientific Developments, pp. 487–537, 2021.
[3] S. I. Seneviratne, S. J. Phipps, A. J. Pitman, A. L. Hirsch, E. L. Davin, M. G. Donat,
M. Hirschi, A. Lenton, M. Wilhelm, and B. Kravitz, “Land radiative management as
contributor to regional-scale climate adaptation and mitigation,” Nature Geoscience,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 88–96, 2018.
[4] I. P. O. C. Change, “Ipcc,” Climate change, 2014.
[5] K. Abbass, M. Z. Qasim, H. Song, M. Murshed, H. Mahmood, and I. Younis, “A review
of the global climate change impacts, adaptation, and sustainable mitigation measures,”
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, vol. 29, no. 28, pp. 42539–42559, 2022.
[6] F. Chien, A. Anwar, C.-C. Hsu, A. Sharif, A. Razzaq, and A. Sinha, “The role of
information and communication technology in encountering environmental degradation:
proposing an sdg framework for the brics countries,” Technology in Society, vol. 65,
p. 101587, 2021.
[7] A. Mikhaylov, N. Moiseev, K. Aleshin, and T. Burkhardt, “Global climate change and
greenhouse effect,” Entrepreneurship and Sustainability Issues, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 2897,
2020.
[8] P. Karvounis and M. J. Blunt, “Assessment of co2 geological storage capacity of
saline aquifers under the north sea,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Con-
trol, vol. 111, p. 103463, 2021.
[9] H. V. Thanh and K.-K. Lee, “Application of machine learning to predict co2 trapping
performance in deep saline aquifers,” Energy, vol. 239, p. 122457, 2022.
Page IV of X
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
23rd of June 2023
[10] L. Romeo, R. Thomas, M. Mark-Moser, A. Bean, J. Bauer, and K. Rose, “Data-driven
offshore co2 saline storage assessment methodology,” International Journal of Green-
house Gas Control, vol. 119, p. 103736, 2022.
[11] J. Gale, “Geological storage of co2: What do we know, where are the gaps and what
more needs to be done?,” Energy, vol. 29, no. 9-10, pp. 1329–1338, 2004.
[12] B. Metz, O. Davidson, H. De Coninck, M. Loos, and L. Meyer, IPCC special report on
carbon dioxide capture and storage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[13] R. Miri and H. Hellevang, “Salt precipitation during co2 storageâa review,” International
Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 51, pp. 136–147, 2016.
[14] H. Ott, J. Snippe, K. De Kloe, H. Husain, and A. Abri, “Salt precipitation due to sc-gas
injection: single versus multi-porosity rocks,” Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 3319–3330,
2013.
[15] Y. Peysson, L. André, and M. Azaroual, “Well injectivity during co2 storage operations
in deep saline aquifersâpart 1: Experimental investigation of drying effects, salt precip-
itation and capillary forces,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 22,
pp. 291–300, 2014.
[16] Y. Peysson, “Permeability alteration induced by drying of brines in porous media,” The
European Physical Journal-Applied Physics, vol. 60, no. 2, p. 24206, 2012.
[17] K. Pruess and N. Müller, “Formation dry-out from co2 injection into saline aquifers: 1.
effects of solids precipitation and their mitigation,” Water Resources Research, vol. 45,
no. 3, 2009.
[18] K.-Y. Kim, W. S. Han, J. Oh, T. Kim, and J.-C. Kim, “Characteristics of salt-
precipitation and the associated pressure build-up during co 2 storage in saline aquifers,”
Transport in porous media, vol. 92, pp. 397–418, 2012.
[19] H. L. Kelly and S. A. Mathias, “Capillary processes increase salt precipitation during
co2 injection in saline formations,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 852, pp. 398–421,
2018.
Page V of X
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
23rd of June 2023
[20] M. Zeidouni, M. Pooladi-Darvish, and D. Keith, “Analytical solution to evaluate salt
precipitation during co2 injection in saline aquifers,” International Journal of Green-
house Gas Control, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 600–611, 2009.
[21] T. I. Bjørnarå and S. A. Mathias, “A pseudospectral approach to the mcwhorter and
sunada equation for two-phase flow in porous media with capillary pressure,” Compu-
tational Geosciences, vol. 17, pp. 889–897, 2013.
[22] A. M. Norouzi, M. Babaei, W. S. Han, K.-Y. Kim, and V. Niasar, “Co2-plume geother-
mal processes: A parametric study of salt precipitation influenced by capillary-driven
backflow,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 425, p. 130031, 2021.
[23] S. Parvin, M. Masoudi, A. Sundal, and R. Miri, “Continuum scale modelling of salt
precipitation in the context of co2 storage in saline aquifers with mrst compositional,”
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 99, p. 103075, 2020.
[24] R. Zhao and J. Cheng, “Salt precipitation and associated pressure buildup during co
2 storage in heterogeneous anisotropy aquifers,” Environmental Science and Pollution
Research, pp. 1–15, 2022.
[25] J. Piao, W. S. Han, S. Choung, and K.-Y. Kim, “Dynamic behavior of co2 in a wellbore
and storage formation: wellbore-coupled and salt-precipitation processes during geologic
co2 sequestration,” Geofluids, vol. 2018, pp. 1–20, 2018.
[26] M. Masoudi, H. Fazeli, R. Miri, and H. Hellevang, “Pore scale modeling and evaluation
of clogging behavior of salt crystal aggregates in co2-rich phase during carbon storage,”
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 111, p. 103475, 2021.
[27] R. Shaibu, Y. Sokama-Neuyam, and J. Ursin, “A theoretical study of the effect of salt
precipitation on co2 injectivity,” in SPE International Conference and Exhibition on
Formation Damage Control, OnePetro, 2018.
[28] M. Grimm Lima, P. Schädle, C. P. Green, D. Vogler, M. O. Saar, and X.-Z.
Kong, “Permeability impairment and salt precipitation patterns during co 2 injection
into single natural brine-filled fractures,” Water Resources Research, vol. 56, no. 8,
p. e2020WR027213, 2020.
Page VI of X
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
23rd of June 2023
[29] J. Jeddizahed and B. Rostami, “Experimental investigation of injectivity alteration due
to salt precipitation during co2 sequestration in saline aquifers,” Advances in water
resources, vol. 96, pp. 23–33, 2016.
[30] Y. A. Sokama-Neuyam, S. L. Forsetløkken, J.-e. Lien, and J. R. Ursin, “The coupled
effect of fines mobilization and salt precipitation on co2 injectivity,” Energies, vol. 10,
no. 8, p. 1125, 2017.
[31] A. Berntsen, J. Todorovic, M. Raphaug, M. Torsæter, E. A. C. Panduro, and K. Gawel,
“Salt clogging during supercritical co2 injection into a downscaled borehole model,”
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 86, pp. 201–210, 2019.
[32] M. A. Md Yusof, M. A. Ibrahim, M. Idress, A. K. Idris, I. M. Saaid, N. M. Rosdi, M. S.
Mohsin, and A. A. A. A. Matali, “Effects of co2/rock/formation brine parameters on
co2 injectivity for sequestration,” SPE Journal, vol. 26, no. 03, pp. 1455–1468, 2021.
[33] M. A. M. Yusof, M. A. Mohamed, N. A. M. Akhir, M. A. Ibrahim, and M. K. Mard-
hatillah, “Combined impact of salt precipitation and fines migration on co2 injectivity
impairment,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 110, p. 103422,
2021.
[34] D. Akindipe, S. Saraji, and M. Piri, “Salt precipitation during geological sequestration of
supercritical co2 in saline aquifers: A pore-scale experimental investigation,” Advances
in Water Resources, vol. 155, p. 104011, 2021.
[35] D. He, P. Jiang, and R. Xu, “The influence of heterogeneous structure on salt precipi-
tation during co 2 geological storage,” Advances in Geo-Energy Research, vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 189–198, 2023.
[36] D. Akindipe, S. Saraji, and M. Piri, “Salt precipitation in carbonates during supercritical
co2 injection: A pore-scale experimental investigation of the effects of wettability and
heterogeneity,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 121, p. 103790,
2022.
[37] D.-Y. Peng and D. B. Robinson, “A new two-constant equation of state,” Industrial &
Engineering Chemistry Fundamentals, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 59–64, 1976.
[38] L. N. Canjar and F. S. Manning, Thermodynamic properties and reduced correlations
for gases. Gulf Publishing Company, 1967.
Page VII of X
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
23rd of June 2023
[39] A. Saul and W. Wagner, “International equations for the saturation properties of ordi-
nary water substance,” Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data, vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 893–901, 1987.
[40] A. M. Rowe Jr and J. C. Chou, “Pressure-volume-temperature-concentration relation of
aqueous sodium chloride solutions,” Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 61–66, 1970.
[41] R. J. Bakker, “Package fluids 1. computer programs for analysis of fluid inclusion data
and for modelling bulk fluid properties,” Chemical Geology, vol. 194, no. 1-3, pp. 3–23,
2003.
[42] A. H. Harvey, “Semiempirical correlation for henry’s constants over large temperature
ranges,” AIChE journal, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1491–1494, 1996.
[43] J. Kestin, H. E. Khalifa, and R. J. Correia, “Tables of the dynamic and kinematic
viscosity of aqueous nacl solutions in the temperature range 20–150 c and the pressure
range 0.1–35 mpa,” Journal of physical and chemical reference data, vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 71–88, 1981.
[44] M. Jin, A. Ribeiro, E. Mackay, L. Guimarães, and U. Bagudu, “Geochemical modelling
of formation damage risk during co2 injection in saline aquifers,” Journal of Natural
Gas Science and Engineering, vol. 35, pp. 703–719, 2016.
[45] M. Alkattan, E. H. Oelkers, J.-L. Dandurand, and J. Schott, “Experimental studies of
halite dissolution kinetics: Ii. the effect of the presence of aqueous trace anions and k3fe
(cn) 6,” Chemical geology, vol. 143, no. 1-2, pp. 17–26, 1997.
[46] L. Nghiem, P. Sammon, J. Grabenstetter, and H. Ohkuma, “Modeling co2 storage in
aquifers with a fully-coupled geochemical eos compositional simulator,” in SPE/DOE
symposium on improved oil recovery, OnePetro, 2004.
[47] Y. Xu, “Near wellbore salt precipitation during geological co2 storage,” 2022.
[48] M. Khosravi, Y. Xu, S. Mirazimi, E. H. Stenby, and W. Yan, “Challenges in simulation of
salt clogging,” in SPE EuropEC-Europe Energy Conference featured at the 84th EAGE
Annual Conference & Exhibition, OnePetro, 2023.
Page VIII of X
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
23rd of June 2023
[49] B. Bennion and S. Bachu, “The impact of interfacial tension and pore-size distribu-
tion/capillary pressure character on co2 relative permeability at reservoir conditions in
co2-brine systems,” in SPE/DOE symposium on improved oil recovery, OnePetro, 2006.
[50] S. Vitoonkijvanich, A. M. AlSofi, and M. J. Blunt, “Design of foam-assisted carbon
dioxide storage in a north sea aquifer using streamline-based simulation,” International
Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 33, pp. 113–121, 2015.
[51] R. Miri, R. van Noort, P. Aagaard, and H. Hellevang, “New insights on the physics of
salt precipitation during injection of co2 into saline aquifers,” International Journal of
Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 43, pp. 10–21, 2015.
[52] N. Thompson, J. S. Andrews, H. Reitan, and N. E. Teixeira Rodrigues, “Data mining
of in-situ stress database towards development of regional and global stress trends and
pore pressure relationships,” in SPE Norway Subsurface Conference, OnePetro, 2022.
Page IX of X
==PAGE:70==
9
APPENDIX A
23rd of June 2023
9
Appendix A
Figure 45: Experimental set up
Page X of X
