==PAGE:1==
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
 
 
Investigating the interplay between 
the scramblase ATG9A and the 
cellular membranes 
 
Master Thesis in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
 
Student writer: 
Sergio Esteban Echeverrí a, s212716 
 
 
External supervisor: 
Matteo Lambrughi, Danish Cancer Society Research Center, 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
 
 
Internal supervisor: 
Elena Papaleo, Cancer Systems Biology, Section for Bioinformatics, 
Department of Health Technology, 
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark and 
Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark 
 
 
July 17, 2023 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
1 
 
Contents 
List of Figures ............................................................................................................................... 2 
Acknowledgements ....................................................................................................................... 3 
Abbreviations ................................................................................................................................ 4 
Abstract ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
1. 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 6 
1.1. 
Cellular membranes and membrane proteins ................................................................ 6 
1.2. 
Autophagy and ATG9A ................................................................................................. 8 
1.3. 
Molecular Dynamics Simulations ............................................................................... 10 
1.4. 
LipidDyn ..................................................................................................................... 11 
2. 
Materials and methods ........................................................................................................ 13 
2.1. 
LipidDyn pipeline ....................................................................................................... 13 
2.2. 
Case study: Molecular Dynamics simulations of ATG9A ........................................... 14 
2.3. 
Analysis tools for the MD simulation of ATG9A ........................................................ 16 
3. 
Aims .................................................................................................................................... 18 
4. 
Results ................................................................................................................................. 19 
4.1. 
LipidDyn implementations .......................................................................................... 19 
4.1.1. 
Protein-lipid Interaction module ......................................................................... 20 
4.1.2. 
Lipid transbilayer movement module .................................................................. 21 
4.1.3. 
Improvements of Order Parameter module ........................................................ 24 
4.1.4. 
Implementation of checkpoints for LipidDyn analysis ....................................... 25 
4.1.5. 
Other improvements to the LipidDyn pipeline .................................................... 25 
4.2. 
Unbiased MD simulations of ATG9A: investigation of close-open dynamics and lipid-
protein interactions and effects of N-glycosylation at N99 ......................................... 26 
4.2.1. 
Analysis using the Protein-Lipid Interaction module in LipidDyn ..................... 26 
4.2.2. 
Analysis of lipid transbilayer movements using the Scrambling module in 
LipidDyn............................................................................................................ 28 
4.2.3. 
Analysis of close-open motions of ATG9A homotrimer and modulation by the N-
glycosylation at position N99 ............................................................................ 30 
4.2.4. 
Quality threshold clustering implementation ...................................................... 33 
4.2.5. 
RMSD and other analysis .................................................................................... 35 
5. 
Discussion ........................................................................................................................... 36 
5.1. 
Limitations and Future Perspectives ........................................................................... 37 
6. 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................... 39 
7. 
References ........................................................................................................................... 40 
 
==PAGE:3==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
2 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 1. Structure of ATG9A ...................................................................................................... 9 
Figure 2. Overview of the LipidDyn pipeline ............................................................................ 14 
Figure 3. Updated overview of the LipidDyn pipeline, after the addition of the new modules . 19 
Figure 4. Graphical representation of the Protein-Lipid Interaction .......................................... 21 
Figure 5. Graphical representation of the Scrambling module (1) ............................................. 23 
Figure 6. Graphical representation of the Scrambling module (2) ............................................. 24 
Figure 7. Depletion-enrichment factor in MD simulations of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc ......... 28 
Figure 8. Transbilayer movement of residue POPC 708 in MD simulations of ATG9A and 
ATG9AN99-glyc ............................................................................................................ 29 
Figure 9. Visualization of residue POPC 708 during the transbilayer movement ...................... 30 
Figure 10. Collective contact score in the trajectories of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc ................ 31 
Figure 11. Clusters found on the contact score data ................................................................... 32 
Figure 12. Structure of protomer-protomer interfaces in clusters with asymmetric opening ..... 33 
Figure 13. RMSF in the trajectories of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc ............................................ 33 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
3 
 
Acknowledgements 
First of all I would like to thank my supervisor Matteo Lambrughi for his invaluable help and 
guidance during this project. I am also grateful to my DTU supervisor Elena Papaleo for making 
this project possible and to the entire DCRC team for their openness and support, and specially 
the CSB team for their support and feedback. Finally, I would like to thank my family, friends 
and fellow students for their continuous help and support. 
 
==PAGE:5==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
4 
 
Abbreviations 
- 
MD 
 
Molecular Dynamics 
- 
ATG9A  
Autophagy Related 9A protein non-glycosylated   
- 
ATG9AN99-glyc  Autophagy Related 9A protein N99-glycosylated 
- 
POPC   
Palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine 
- 
CHOL/CHL1 Cholesterol 
- 
RMSF  
Root Mean Square Fluctuation 
- 
RMSD   
Root Mean Square Deviation 
- 
QTC 
 
Quality-Threshold Clustering 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
5 
 
Abstract 
Cellular membranes are an essential component of life, acting as functional barriers that separate 
the cell and the environment, as well as defining the subcellular compartments. Membranes are 
highly complex systems where the composition and environmental conditions affect their 
properties. Lipids form interactions with a wide variety of biomolecules, including membrane 
proteins. Cellular processes rely on the concerted interplay of proteins with membranes and their 
alterations are linked to diseases, such as cancer. Increasing the knowledge of these lipid-protein 
mechanisms is paramount to understanding their contributions to cellular processes and cancer. 
Molecular Dynamics (MD) is a powerful tool to complement experimental approaches and study 
complex systems including lipid bilayers and proteins at the atomic level. Mass spectrometry-
based lipidomics of cellular compartments provides a massive amount of information that can be 
utilized to design biologically-relevant membrane models for MD simulations.  To automatize the 
analysis of these complex systems, at the Cancer Structural Biology, Center for Autophagy, 
Recycling, and Disease, Danish Cancer Society Research Center, we developed LipidDyn 
https://github.com/ELELAB/LipidDyn. LipidDyn is a pipeline that implements tools to better 
integrate lipidomics data and MD simulations and effectively analyze mechanical and 
physicochemical properties of simulations of membrane models in a reproducible way. LipidDyn 
provides a well-organized workflow that can be further developed.  We are using this framework 
to investigate the lipid interactions of the transmembrane protein ATG9A. ATG9A is essential for 
autophagy, the process of recycling damaged cellular components, and it has biomedical 
relevance in diseases, such as in cancer. However, the molecular details of the function of ATG9A, 
as lipid binding and translocation of lipids across the membrane, are unclear.  
In this thesis project, we implemented new analysis tools in LipidDyn for the study of lipid-
protein interactions in MD trajectories. The main additions to the pipeline comprise two analysis 
modules with integrated graphical visualization. The Protein-Lipid Interaction module enables 
the investigation of protein-lipid contacts and the calculation of enrichment or depletion of lipids 
in the surrounding of the protein. The Scrambling module enables to characterize the transbilayer 
movements of lipids and identify flip-flop events, especially important for investigating proteins 
that regulate lipid translocation.  
We employed our implementations in LipidDyn to analyze MD simulations of ATG9A 
homotrimer in lipid bilayers to explore its dynamics and lipid-protein interactions and we studied 
the effects of its N-glycosylation at N99. We observed that ATG9A undergoes asymmetric close-
open motions at the interfaces between its protomers. In our models, the presence of N-
glycosylation influenced the close-open states of ATG9A promoting the occurrence of opening 
motions. We observed that the opening of the protein at the interfaces between the protomers of 
ATG9A is associated with the lateral opening of the central cavity of the protein to the bilayer. 
Furthermore, we identified phospholipids entering with their headgroups to the central cavity of 
the protein. Our analysis showed that some of these lipids undergo partial transbilayer movements 
inside the protein cavity from the luminal leaflet toward the cytosolic leaflet of the bilayer. 
In summary, we foresee that the results of this project could be useful for the scientific community 
investigating membrane proteins by making use of the highly reproducible and consistent pipeline 
of 
LipidDyn. 
The 
result 
of 
our 
work 
is 
publicly 
available 
on 
GitHub 
(https://github.com/ELELAB/LipidDyn). 
 
==PAGE:7==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
6 
 
1. 
Introduction 
We here first provide a comprehensive overview of cellular membranes, emphasizing their 
remarkable structural and functional diversity. Subsequently, we delve into the intricate 
relationship between lipids and membrane proteins and their alterations in human diseases, with 
a particular focus on cancer, highlighting the significance of investigating this association. Then, 
we introduce the autophagy transmembrane protein ATG9A and its lipid scrambling activity as a 
case study within the framework of this thesis project. Moving forward, we briefly present the 
theoretical backgrounds of Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations and their efficacy in the study 
of lipids and proteins. Furthermore, we introduce and discuss the LipidDyn pipeline for analyzing 
MD ensembles of lipid bilayers and embedded proteins. 
1.1. 
Cellular membranes and membrane proteins 
Cellular membranes are a key component of living organisms, that delimit the cell with the 
external environment and effectively segregate the distinct organelles and subcellular 
compartments [1]. Thus, membranes play crucial roles in maintaining cellular homeostasis. For 
instance, the plasma membrane, which surrounds the cell, acts as a selective barrier, regulating 
the movement of substances into and out of the cell. Among their multiple functions, membranes 
provide support and structural stability [1], modulate as barriers the molecule transportation [2], 
and actively participate in a myriad of cellular processes and intracellular signaling pathways, 
including autophagy [3] and apoptosis [4]. This wide range of functions is enabled by the high 
diversity of chemical structures of lipids and their different compositions in membranes, which 
variate between organisms, tissues, and cellular compartments [5]. 
The foundation of cellular membranes are bilayers of lipids, which are amphipathic molecules 
that provide a hydrophobic core environment while presenting a hydrophilic exterior. These 
bilayers spontaneously assemble due to the amphipathic nature of lipids [1]. For example, in the 
plasma membrane, the hydrophilic head groups of lipids face the extracellular matrix and the 
cytoplasmic aqueous environment, while the hydrophobic carbon tails reside within the center of 
the lipid bilayer, forming a thermodynamically favorable structure. The main lipid categories that 
compose the cellular membranes include glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, and sterols [1]. 
Glycerophospholipids are the most abundant lipids in biological membranes [6]. They contain a 
glycerol moiety that links a phosphate headgroup and two fatty acid tails. The diversity of 
glycerophospholipid species and classes arises in the various combination of different head group 
substituents and numbers of double bonds and acyl chain lengths [5]. In eukaryotic membranes, 
the most abundant glycerophospholipids are the species in the phosphatidylcholine (PC), 
phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), and phosphatidylinositol (PI) classes. 
For example, phosphatidylcholine is one of the most abundant lipid classes in cellular membranes, 
representing more than half of the phospholipids in eukaryotic membranes [1]. 
Phosphatidylcholine species are composed of a choline headgroup, a phosphate group, and two 
acyl chains with different degrees of saturation. Sphingolipids include sphingophospholipids and 
sphingoglycolipds, such as ceramide and sphingomyelin. Lipids in this class share a long 
sphingosine backbone and one fatty acid [7]. Sphingomyelin species present a phosphate 
headgroup and they are present in different compositions among cellular membranes. Sterols have 
steroid ring structures and include a polar head group linked to one end of the ring structure while 
==PAGE:8==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
7 
 
the other end links to a non-polar hydrocarbon tail. The main sterol found in mammal membranes 
is cholesterol [8]. It is formed by a tetracyclic structure and a short aliphatic chain and plays key 
roles in providing structural stability, maintaining fluidity levels at high and low temperatures, 
and modulating membrane density. Cholesterol rigid ring structure induces the ordering of 
neighboring lipid acyl chains, resulting in increased overall membrane order and reduced fluidity 
[8]. Consequently, membranes requiring higher fluidity such as the ones of the endoplasmic 
reticulum, that are involved in the transfer and insertion of proteins and lipid molecules across the 
bilayer, exhibit lower cholesterol concentrations. On top of the structural variety of lipids, the 
different compositions of membranes provide another dimension of diversity, that affects their 
biophysical properties and their functions [5]. For example, lipid compositions of cellular 
compartments and organelles possess distinct lipid compositions based on their specific functions. 
For instance, the endoplasmic reticulum presents a lower cholesterol and sphingomyelin 
concentration compared to plasma membranes [5]. 
In addition to this fundamental lipid-bilayer framework, membranes contain other biomolecules 
such as membrane proteins, glycoproteins, and glycolipids [9]. Proteins contribute with additional 
functional properties to the membrane, highly varying across different membranes. Thus, a 
cellular membrane can be seen as a complex mixture of lipids and proteins, with arrangements 
highly dependent on cell type and membrane subcellular location. Membrane proteins make 
interactions with lipids and play critical roles in numerous cellular processes, such as cell 
signaling, ion channel-mediated transportation, and selective transport of ligands across the 
bilayer [10]. The wide range of lipid and protein structures and membrane compositions leads to 
an array of diverse protein-lipid interactions [5]. Such interactions can vary from specific 
interactions between a particular protein binding site and lipids to more general interactions that 
affect overall membrane structure, thickness, and curvature, thereby inducing conformational 
changes in membrane proteins [11]. Several protein activities are highly sensitive to changes in 
membrane structure, such as curvature, thickness, and fluidity [12]. Furthermore, lipid-protein 
interactions can be classified based on their level of specificity. Some proteins specifically recruit 
lipids with defined chemical structures via lipid-binding pockets or act as lipid transfer proteins, 
such as flippases/floppases and scramblases, which regulate the levels of lipids between the two 
leaflets of the cellular membranes [13], [14]. 
In eukaryotic cells, the regulated movements of lipids across the bilayer of the membrane, known 
as transbilayer movement (flip-flop), play a crucial role in homeostasis and signaling [15]. 
Maintaining asymmetric lipid compositions among the leaflets is crucial for the function and 
signaling in cellular membranes. Furthermore, changes in lipid asymmetry hold significant 
implications for disease processes [16]. One notable example is observed in multidrug-resistant 
cancer cells, where there is a redistribution of phosphatidylserines from the inner leaflet, where 
they mostly reside under normal physiological conditions, to the outer leaflet of the plasma 
membrane [17]. At body temperature, lipid bilayers have overall a significant fluidity, presenting 
lateral diffusion and motion of phospholipids occurring within pico-/nanoseconds [18]. On the 
other hand, lipid transbilayer movements have a high energy barrier since the hydrophilic 
headgroups of the phospholipids need to traverse the hydrophobic hydrocarbon region at the 
center of the bilayer. Thus, in cellular membranes, membrane proteins a play key role in 
facilitating, in an energy-dependent or energy-independent way, these motions of lipids. Examples 
of these proteins are flippases and floppases that mediate energy-dependent unidirectional lipid 
motion/transport and the maintenance of the asymmetry in the lipid composition of the leaflets of 
==PAGE:9==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
8 
 
the cellular membranes [16]. Furthermore, asymmetry in bilayers can be disrupted by energy-
independent transbilayer movements mediated by scramblase proteins. This is important in 
cellular processes that rely on the formation of membranes such as autophagosome formation 
during autophagy, as seen in the following section. The three-dimensional structures of different 
scramblases, flippases and floppases have been reported, but for several of them, such as the 
autophagy transmembrane protein ATG9A, the molecular details of their activity in promoting 
lipid transbilayer movements are still unclear[13].  
Given the critical roles of lipids, more and more evidence associate alterations in membrane 
composition with pathophysiological conditions, including metabolic diseases, diabetes, and 
neurodegenerative conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, and cancer [5]. For example, during 
cancer progression, the increase in cell proliferation rates necessitates rapid lipid synthesis for 
generating cell membranes, energy storage to support cell growth, and enhanced signaling 
pathway activities for tumor cell proliferation and migration [4]. Thus, cancers are frequently 
associated with alterations in lipid metabolism, lipid functions, and membrane compositions. 
Additionally, membranes and membrane proteins are crucial players in determining the efficacy, 
delivery, and mechanisms of action of drugs. Thus, investigating lipids and membranes presents 
a promising approach for characterizing molecular mechanisms in cancer and identifying targets 
for drug development. 
1.2. 
Autophagy and ATG9A 
Autophagy is a complex process through which the cell can degrade and recycle its cellular 
components [19]. A key step in autophagy is the formation of a double membrane vesicle called 
the autophagosome. This vesicle engulfs and transports cargo molecules to the lysosome for 
degradation. Autophagy is mediated by several proteins, called autophagy machinery proteins, 
and between them the only transmembrane protein is ATG9A. ATG9A is essential for autophagy 
[3]. During resting conditions, ATG9A locates in different cellular compartments such as the 
trans-Golgi network and endosomes. Upon autophagy induction, ATG9A relocates via vesicles 
nearby the endoplasmic reticulum at the seeding sites for the formation of the autophagosome 
[20], [21]. Here ATG9A contributes to the biogenesis of the first membrane assembly sites called 
phagophore, by interacting with ATG2 proteins, which function as lipid transfer proteins [22]. 
While the detailed mechanisms are largely unknown, the proposed mechanism suggests that 
ATG2 proteins transfer lipids from the endoplasmic reticulum membranes to the nascent 
phagophore. ATG9A is a lipid scramblase, and it is suggested that it contributes to the distribution 
of lipids in the two leaflets of the phagophore membrane, thereby facilitating its expansion and 
the following autophagosome formation [13], [23], [24]. It has been shown for other scramblases, 
such as TMEM16, that they possess hydrophilic channels/grooves in their structures that facilitate 
bidirectional lipid transbilayer motions between the leaflets, akin to a "credit card" mechanism, 
allowing lipid headgroups to cross the membrane hydrophobic environment while the acyl tails 
remain within the bilayer [25]. The cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of human 
ATG9A and yeast Atg9 showed that the protein is a symmetric homotrimer, including three 
protomers that interact with each other forming a central cavity [24] (Figure 1A). Each protomer 
has its N- and C-termini in the cytosolic side of the membrane while the glycosylation site N99 
is located on the luminal side. Furthermore, each protomer includes four transmembrane helices 
(TMH1-4) and two reentrant membrane helices (RMH1-2) that enter and exit the membrane from 
==PAGE:10==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
9 
 
the cytosolic side. The trimerization interface of ATG9 is mediated by a mechanism called domain 
swapping, which involves the extension of two helices from one protomer (TMH3-4) into the 
core of the neighboring protomer, forming extensive contacts. The experimental structures show 
the presence of a network of channels in ATG9A, including the central hydrophilic cavity and the 
lateral cavities of each protomer, that potentially could be involved in lipid scrambling. Mutations 
in residues in these cavities decrease the scrambling activity of ATG9A and impact autophagy 
[26]. The cryo-EM structures showed that ATG9A can assume two distinct conformations named 
open and closed states, in which the protomers are reoriented modulating the length and shape of 
the central cavity (Figure 1B), suggesting a regulatory mechanism for lipid transport [24]. 
Furthermore, previous coarse-grained simulations suggested that ATG9A, like other scramblases, 
induces membrane deformation and this may contribute to its scrambling activity. 
Experiments have demonstrated that ATG9A undergoes N-glycosylation [26]. N-glycosylation is 
a post-translational modification that involves the attachment of glycans, i.e. oligosaccharide 
chains, to specific asparagine (N) residues of the proteins [27]. N-glycosylation could impact 
protein structure, stability, folding, cellular localization, function, and signaling. ATG9A is N-
glycosylated at the residue N99 of each protomer by the addition of complex-type 
oligosaccharidic chains. The residue N99 is in a short luminal loop connecting the first and second 
transmembrane helices (TMH1 and TMH2) of ATG9A, proximal to the luminal opening of the 
central cavity. Thus, its N-glycosylation could have a role in lipid transport and open/close 
mechanisms. Nevertheless, the role of N-glycosylation in the function and dynamics of ATG9A 
remains unknown.  
ATG9A is not only a crucial protein in autophagy but its alterations have been associated with 
disease and cancer, for example in hypoxia-induced autophagy in brain tumors [19]. Overall, the 
molecular mechanism of ATG9A such as lipid interaction, lipid scrambling mechanisms, and the 
role of N-glycosylation are still not fully understood. The complex architecture and flexibility of 
glycans and the structural complexity of ATG9A make it difficult to study this protein by structural 
biology techniques and MD simulations can contribute to this area. 
 
Figure 1. Structure of ATG9A. A. Experimental structure of the closed state of ATG9A (7JLP) colored by 
protomer (A in blue, B in green, C in red). The left panel represents the side view with the cytosolic part of 
the protein at the top and the luminal part at the bottom and the left panel represents the top view of the 
cytosolic side. B. Detail on the protomer-protomer interface AC around the central cavity of the closed state 
(7JLP, chain A in blue and chain C in red) aligned with the open state (6WQZ, light blue). In the open state, 
the transmembrane helices 3-4 (TMH3-4) of protomer A gain distance from the reentrant membrane helix 
1 (RMH1) of the same chain and TMH3-4 of protomer C, opening the access to the luminal side of the 
central cavity. 
==PAGE:11==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
10 
 
1.3. 
Molecular Dynamics Simulations 
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are powerful and widely utilized computational 
techniques that allow us to investigate the molecular behavior and properties of various and 
complex biological systems [28]. By calculating the time-dependent behavior of a molecular 
system, MD simulations can provide detailed insights into molecular fluctuations and 
conformational changes. MD simulations leverage statistical mechanics to connect macroscopic 
properties (e.g., temperature, pressure) and microscopic parameters. At the microscopic level, a 
molecular system is defined by its set of atomic positions (q) and their momenta (p), collectively 
referred to as microstates or microscopic states [29]. A microstate can be represented as a point 
within the phase space, i.e., the multidimensional space including all and only the possible system 
states. An ensemble represents a collection of points (q, p) in the phase space. Based on the ergodic 
hypothesis, statistical mechanics postulates that the time average equals the ensemble average. 
This implies that the average properties of a single molecule over an infinite time period should 
be the same as the instantaneous ensemble average of the same property obtained from multiple 
molecules in an experimental measurement. Nevertheless, due to computational limitations, it is 
impractical to compute all possible states over an infinite time span [30]. Instead, MD simulations 
sample a finite duration of time long enough to approximate the ensemble properties successfully 
[31]. To accomplish this objective, MD simulations employ iterative integration of Newton's 
second law of motion to generate a sequence of microstates in the function of time: 
 
Equation 1 
𝑚𝑖𝑑2𝑟𝑖/𝑑𝑡2 = 𝑓𝑖= −∂/ ∂𝑟𝑖 𝑈(𝑟1, 𝑟2, … , 𝑟𝑛) 
In the equation above U(r1, ..., rN) represents the potential energy defined within the force field 
equation, relying on rN (the atomic coordinates of N particles of the system). By solving Newton's 
equation of motion, the accelerations of each particle can be determined. Consequently, with 
knowledge of the initial positions and accelerations, the new velocities can be predicted as a 
function of time, subsequently updating the new positions. The ensemble of positions over time 
generates the final trajectory.  
The physical models, i.e. classical force fields, for MD simulations encompass the equations and 
set of parameters employed to estimate the forces acting on each particle within the system [32]. 
Forces are derived as gradients of the potential energy with respect to particle positions. 
Commonly utilized force fields distinguish between bonded and nonbonded interactions [29]. 
Bonded interactions primarily describe the stretching of covalent bonds, angle bending, and 
torsion potentials associated with bond rotations on dihedral angles. Nonbonded interactions 
involve Lennard-Jones repulsion and dispersion forces, as well as Coulomb electrostatic 
interactions. In the context of investigating biomolecular systems through MD simulations, the 
selection of an appropriate classical force field holds utmost importance, as it determines the 
resolution and accuracy achieved. Different force fields enable varying levels of resolution and 
accuracy, and they have different limitations and approximations, facilitating the modeling of 
complex biological systems at relevant time and length scales. For instance, all-atom force fields 
specify parameters for each atom type, explicitly defining every atom within the system [33]. 
Conversely, coarse-grained force fields employ pseudo atoms or beads that represent multiple 
atoms while preserving their chemical properties [33]. This approximation strikes a balance 
between resolution and computational requirements, allowing to conduct MD simulations of 
systems with different spatial dimensions and complexity, and over diverse time and length scales. 
Among the widely employed force fields for conducting MD simulations, notable ones include 
==PAGE:12==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
11 
 
the coarse-grained Martini [34] and the all-atom ones belonging to the CHARMM [35] and 
AMBER [36] families. These force fields encompass a broad range of biologically relevant lipids 
and offer precise descriptions of membrane models including diverse lipid species and their 
interactions with proteins.  
Nowadays, thanks to advancements in software and hardware, MD simulations, especially when 
integrated into experiments, allow us to explore the microsecond-millisecond timescale of large 
and complex biological systems, such as lipid bilayers and membrane proteins [37]. Thus, MD 
simulations based on robust frameworks are a powerful tool to increase our understanding of the 
complex and largely unknown mechanisms of biological membranes and membrane proteins, 
especially at the organelle level, and how they are altered in disease. 
1.4. 
LipidDyn 
MD simulations are a powerful tool to complement experimental approaches, such as mass 
spectrometry-based lipidomics of cellular compartments [38]. The diverse lipid compositions 
found in subcellular and organelle membranes are highly sensitive to the cellular environment, 
and alterations in these compositions have been associated with cancer [39]. Nevertheless, our 
current understanding of the lipid compositions of these membranes and their functional roles 
remains limited. Interestingly, lipidomic data collected for different cellular conditions and 
subcellular fractions of health and disease cells, offer a wealth of information that could be 
leveraged to design biologically relevant membrane models for simulations [40]. Such a 
framework will generate a substantial amount of data, necessitating efficient analysis methods to 
rationalize and extract valuable biological insights. Thus, open challenges in the field are how to 
combine lipidomic data to design membrane models for MD simulations and effectively 
investigate the collected simulation data. 
In this context, the Cancer Structural Biology group at the Danish Cancer Institute has developed 
LipidDyn, a Python-based pipeline designed to address these challenges [38]. LipidDyn serves as 
a comprehensive workflow automation tool for analyzing MD trajectories of lipid bilayers, 
allowing for comparison with experimental data. It enables reproducible analyses of membrane 
models in a time-efficient manner. The pipeline includes a range of analytical tools, providing 
characterizations of lipid bilayer systems and facilitating investigations into their mechanical, 
physicochemical, and dynamic properties. LipidDyn includes tools to calculate properties, such 
as lateral diffusion, area per lipid, thickness, lipid density, order parameter, and membrane 
curvature. Furthermore, it incorporates tools to automatize the analysis and usage of lipidomic 
data for designing the lipid composition of membrane models for MD simulations. LipidDyn 
supports both all-atom and coarse-grained topologies and trajectories and lipid bilayers with or 
without membrane proteins. Additionally, the pipeline generates publication-ready figures, 
simplifying the interpretation of results. For easy accessibility, LipidDyn is publicly available on 
GitHub at the following link: https://github.com/ELELAB/LipidDyn.  
While LipidDyn offers a plethora of useful features, there are still opportunities for improvement, 
specifically in terms of incorporating tools for the analysis of protein-lipid interactions and lipid 
movements. This thesis project focused on this area to support new implementations in the 
pipeline. Recently, different Python packages and web servers have been developed for the 
analyses of protein-lipid interactions and lipid movements in MD simulations. For example, 
==PAGE:13==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
12 
 
PyLipID provides a characterization of lipid interactions and binding sites on membrane proteins 
by using a community analysis approach to provide metrics such as lipid residence times [41]. 
ProLint provides different sets of analysis and visualization of lipid-protein interactions [42]. 
LiPyphilic tools provide a set of different geometrical analyses, including cholesterol flip-flop 
[43]. In this thesis project, we implemented tools in LipidDyn to have a complete and automatized 
workflow to streamline analysis collection and visualization, ensuring usage flexibility and work 
reproducibility. 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
13 
 
2. 
Materials and methods 
In this section, we present an overview of the LipidDyn pipeline as it existed prior to this thesis 
project. Additionally, within this project, we have integrated two new modules and several other 
minor implementations into LipidDyn that are explained in detail in the result section. Here, we 
will describe the current LipidDyn pipeline along with its associated analyses. We also provide 
details regarding the design and preparation of the MD simulation used as case study. Finally, we 
will delve into the other analysis tools used to analyze the MD ensembles. 
2.1. 
LipidDyn pipeline 
LipidDyn is an automated computational pipeline designed for the analysis of MD simulations of 
lipid bilayers with varying compositions and membrane proteins [38]. This software enables a 
range of analyses to be performed through an Application Programming Interface (API), 
accompanied by visual representations of the obtained results. LipidDyn supports both all-atom 
and coarse-grained topologies and is available as an open-source program on GitHub: 
https://github.com/ELELAB/LipidDyn. It utilizes open-source packages and Python libraries, 
including MDAnalysis [44], for its core functionalities. The LipidDyn pipeline streamlines the 
examination of both time-series and average-value properties of the simulated system. To utilize 
LipidDyn, an MD trajectory is required, which should be generated externally to the pipeline. For 
example, systems consisting of lipid bilayers can be constructed using CHARMM-GUI [45], and 
GROMACS [46] software can be employed to conduct MD simulations. Currently, LipidDyn 
exclusively supports file formats in the GROMACS format. 
For the analyses performed by LipidDyn, three input files are necessary: 1) a trajectory file in 
GROMACS format (.xtc, .trr, or .gro), 2) a topology file (.gro) defining the atoms of the system 
for MD simulation, and 3) a configuration file (.yml). The configuration file includes 
specifications and ratios for each lipid species present in the system, as well as various parameters 
and settings for the calculations, such as the force field type and the inclusion of a membrane 
protein. The trajectory file can be derived from either coarse-grained or all-atom MD simulations, 
with or without proteins embedded within the membrane. Other parameters to consider include 
the number of cores used ("-n"), the desired analyses ("-a" for all analyses), and the deletion of 
intermediate files ("-c"). 
The LipidDyn tool is structured into modules, offering the flexibility to run specific parts or the 
entire set of analyses [47]. Each module performs distinct analyses, as illustrated in Figure 2. The 
LeafletFinder class from the MDAnalysis package is employed by LipidDyn to define the upper 
and lower leaflets in the lipid bilayer. We here include a brief description of each analysis module 
in LipidDyn. The FATSLiM module calculates the area per lipid and the thickness of the lipid 
bilayer [48]. Thickness is computed by considering neighborhood-averaged coordinates to 
account for lipid movements within the leaflet. The Lipid Density module generates two-
dimensional (2D) density maps for the upper and lower leaflets of the bilayer. This module utilizes 
the densmap package from GROMACS and calculates the average density of atoms or beads 
across each leaflet. The resulting information provides insights into lipid density variations and 
movements, saved as .dat files for each leaflet. The Lipid Enrichment module quantifies and 
visualizes areas in the membrane where lipids are enriched or depleted, such as specific 
compositions surrounding proteins. The Lipid Diffusion Movement module characterizes the X-Y 
==PAGE:15==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
14 
 
plane lateral movements of lipids within each leaflet over the trajectory duration. The Order 
Parameter module assesses the order parameter for the acyl chains of each lipid species. This 
calculation involves the utilization of the NMRlipids and LiPyphilic algorithms, in conjunction 
with the configuration file defining the sn-1 and sn-2 tails [49]. The module provides insights into 
lipid organization and acyl chain conformation. The Membrane Curvature module calculates 
membrane curvature for each leaflet. These results contribute to the exploration of how lipid 
compositions and protein influence membrane curvature. Surface mean curvature and Gaussian 
curvature are calculated for each leaflet and each time frame within the trajectory. The Lipid2MD 
module automates the design of simplified membrane models using lipidomics data. This 
integration matches lipid species in the lipidomics data, their corresponding lipid classes, and the 
appropriate force-field parameters for MD simulations. The Lipid2MD module incorporates a 
simplification algorithm to preserve crucial features of lipidomics data during the design process 
of the membrane model. Upon obtaining the output data, LipidDyn offers plotting tools to 
facilitate the automated visualization of the results and produce publication-ready figures and 
plots.  
 
Figure 2. Overview of the LipidDyn pipeline. From the topology and trajectory files of a MD simulation, 
and a configuration file, the user selects the analyses to execute from the command line. LipidDyn also 
offers a graphical visualization option for the results of the different modules. 
2.2. 
Case study: Molecular Dynamics simulations of ATG9A 
During this thesis project, we contributed to an ongoing project in the research group at DCRC 
aimed at employing MD simulations to investigate the dynamics and lipid-protein interactions of 
the transmembrane protein ATG9A and investigate the role of its N-glycosylation at N99. We used 
these MD simulations as a case study to apply analysis tools and evaluate the newly implemented 
tools in the LipidDyn pipeline developed as a part of this thesis project. The aim was to 
==PAGE:16==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
15 
 
demonstrate the potential and applicability of the updated version of the LipidDyn pipeline in 
analyzing MD trajectories of a system including a scramblase protein and a lipid bilayer. The case 
studies involved unbiased all-atom MD simulations of ATG9A, both in its glycosylated and non-
glycosylated states, inserted in a lipid bilayer. We here describe the details of the protocol used 
for designing and collecting the MD simulations analyzed during this thesis project.  
The starting model for the MD simulations was obtained from a cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-
EM) structure of human ATG9A homotrimer in the closed state (here named as ATG9A, PDB 
entry 7JLP [13]) embedded in nanodiscs (resolution of the electron density map is 3.4 Å).  In the 
system for the MD simulations, we included the region of residues 36-522 of ATG9A, while the 
lipid molecules present in the cryo-EM structure were removed. The PDB entry 7JLP is missing 
coordinates for the luminal loop of ATG9A spanning the residues 96-108. We employed 
MODELLER v. 9.15 software [50] to reconstruct only this region while keeping the rest of the 
coordinates of the protein in their original positions. We generated 100 different models and we 
evaluated and ranked them using a statistically optimized atomic potential score in MODELLER 
[51]. We then selected a model of ATG9A ensuring that the reconstructed regions had similar 
orientations between the protomers and did not make extensive contact with the rest of the protein 
to avoid artificial bias in the initial conformation for MD simulations. 
We used this selected model to generate a glycosylated form (named ATG9AN99-glyc). ATG9A is 
known to be glycosylated with a complex-type N-glycan at N99 [3]. Thus, we N-glycosylated 
ATG9A using a common complex-type structure of N-glycans in humans [32] using the tools 
provided by CHARMM-GUI [52]. In brief, we designed each N-glycan to include a core 
pentasaccharide consisting of two N-acetylglucosamine and three mannose monomers, elongated 
with two antennas at the α1,3- and α1,6-linked mannose monomers. Each antenna consisted of 
one N-acetylglucosamine and one galactose residue. One antenna was modified with an α2,6-
linked sialic acid N-acetylneuraminic acid, and an α1,6-linked fucose was added to the core of 
the N-glycan. 
Using these two models we built the starting system for MD simulations using the CHARMM-
GUI web server, which is widely used for simulating biological systems including lipid bilayers. 
CHARMM-GUI provides a graphical user interface for generating molecular systems 
interactively, standardizing and simplifying the process of building simulation systems. We used 
the tool Membrane Builder. The selected models of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc were used to 
construct the systems with lipid bilayers. In CHARMM-GUI, the cavities of ATG9A/ATG9AN99-
glyc were solvated, and we used the CHARMM36m force field. Rectangular lipid bilayers were 
created in CHARMM-GUI, measuring 160 Å in both the X and Y dimensions. The bilayer 
consisted of 75% palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine (POPC) and 25% cholesterol (CHOL). The 
lipid composition in the bilayers was symmetric between the upper and lower leaflets and 
included around 800 lipids. We oriented the protein in the bilayer using the Orientation of Proteins 
in Membranes webserver (https://opm.phar.umich.edu/ppm_server [53]) in CHARMM-GUI. 
In CHARMM-GUI we solvated the system in a rectangular box of water molecules, keeping a 
minimum distance of 20 Å between the protein atoms and the edge of the water layers preventing 
artificial contacts between adjacent image boxes. Approximately 100 water molecules per lipid 
were included. We employed the solvent model TIP3P adjusted for CHARMM force fields with 
Lennard-Jones sites on the hydrogen atoms [54].  To neutralize the system net charge, a 
concentration of 0.15 M NaCl was added. We minimized and equilibrated the system to the 
==PAGE:17==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
16 
 
simulation conditions using the multi-step protocol provided by CHARMM-GUI [55]. The 
equilibration procedure involved the gradual removal of positional restraints for lipid and protein 
backbone atoms. Then we performed the final equilibration step without any restraints. Post-
processing analysis of the preparation trajectories involved centering the atoms in the simulation 
box and monitoring the values of potential and kinetic energy, xyz-box dimensions, as well the 
Cα-atoms Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) and radius of gyration. We also calculated the 
minimum distance between the atoms of the protein and its periodic images to find potential 
periodic boundary artifacts. We observed a minimal distance always above 2.8 Å. 
Productive all-atom MD simulations were conducted in the semi-isotropic NPT ensemble at a 
temperature of 310 K and 1 bar. We used a Nose-Hoover thermostat [56] and a Parrinello-Rahman 
barostat [57]. In our simulations, we used periodic boundary conditions. We used the LINCS 
algorithm to constrain the hydrogen bonds [58] and we applied an integration time step of 2 fs. 
We used the particle-mesh Ewald summation scheme [59] to calculate long-range electrostatic 
interactions. Van der Waals and Coulomb interactions were truncated at 12 Å. We used 
GROMACS v.2019 or 2022 for the preparation steps and simulations [46]. GROMACS is a 
widely adopted MD simulation software package that provides high-performance and versatile 
implementation, along with a range of calculation and analysis tools accessible through a simple 
command line interface. MD simulations were collected with timescales ranging from 1 to 3 μs 
for both ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc. Post-processing analysis of the MD trajectories involved 
centering the atoms in the simulation box and monitoring the values of potential and kinetic 
energy, xyz-box dimensions, Cα-atoms RMSD, radius of gyration, and minimum distance 
between the atoms of the protein and its periodic images (observed always above 2.8 Å). 
2.3. 
Analysis tools for the MD simulation of ATG9A 
During the thesis project we mostly focus on using analysis tools to calculate and analyze the 
protein flexibility and transitions between close and open conformation states of ATG9A and 
ATG9AN99-glyc during the MD simulations. Firstly, we calculated the RMSD values of the 
simulation frames compared to the cryo-EM structures. RMSD measures the average deviation 
between corresponding atoms in two structures, providing insights into structural changes. We 
here compared the coordinates of all Cα atoms of each frame of the simulations to the closed-
state cryo-EM structures (PDB ID 7JLP [13]) and the open-state cryo-EM structures (PDB ID 
6WQZ [24]). To ensure accuracy, we excluded from the RMSD analysis the flexible loops. For a 
more comprehensive assessment of potentially independent conformations sampled by each 
protomer, we calculated the RMSD values for all the Cα atoms of the swapped transmembrane 
helices (TMH3 and TMH4) of each protomer (i.e., chain A, B, and C), with respect to the cryo-
EM structures. Rigid body superposition was achieved using the helical transmembrane regions 
of the protomers (residues 43-55, 59-86, 119-127, 130-168, 180-193, 206-225, 245-256, 279-322, 
and 472-507).  
To further analyze the close-open transition, we calculated a collective score based on the fraction 
of contacts present exclusively in the closed-state cryo-EM structure when compared to the open 
state. This analysis was performed using the CONtact Analysis (CONAn) software [60] to assess 
intramolecular contacts in the cryo-EM structures of the closed (PDB ID 7JLP) and open states 
(PDB ID 6WQZ) of ATG9A. CONAn is a software tool used for analyzing, based on distance 
==PAGE:18==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
17 
 
cutoffs, possible contacts between atoms in molecular structures, providing insights into their 
interactions. As parameters for CONAn, we used a cutoff value of 10 Å (rcut), and rinter and rhigh-
inter values of 5 Å, following the protocol suggested in the original publication. The resulting data 
provided a list of contacts specific to the closed structure. We then filtered these contacts to 
include only those formed by residues within the regions of ATG9A involved in the close-open 
transition, i.e. the swapped helices and the regions of each protomer that interact with them. 
Specifically, contacts between residues 367-431 of the swapped helices of each protomer and 
regions 316-335 of the same protomer, as well as region 389-426 of the corresponding 
neighboring protomer, were included. The swapping order of protomers followed the sequence: 
i) chain A with chain C, ii) chain B with chain A, and iii) chain C with chain B. We calculated the 
presence of these contacts in the MD trajectory, and a timewise collective contact score was 
calculated as the fraction of contacts present. Values close to 1 indicated that nearly all the contacts 
were maintained, resembling the closed structure, while values close to 0 indicated the absence 
of most contacts.  
Furthermore, we calculated the per-residue Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSF) of Cα atoms 
to assess protein flexibility. RMSF represents the average fluctuation of a specific residue over a 
given time period of simulation, indicating regions of higher or lower flexibility within the protein 
structure. We calculated RMSF values by averaging over consecutive and non-overlapping time 
windows of 100 ns along the MD trajectories. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
18 
 
3. 
Aims 
In this master's project, the main aim was to incorporate additional tools into LipidDyn to analyze 
lipid-protein contacts and lipid transbilayer (flip-flop) movements in MD simulations of models 
of lipid bilayers. Our new implementation of LipidDyn aims to facilitate the investigation by MD 
simulations of lipid-protein relationships. Lipid-protein relationships are key elements in the 
functions of cellular membranes and membrane proteins and their alterations are associated with 
various diseases, such as cancer. Characterizing these interactions could serve as an initial step in 
identifying potential druggable targets. We then aimed to utilize the newly implemented version 
of LipidDyn to explore, through MD simulations, the largely unknown dynamics of the autophagy 
transmembrane protein ATG9A in lipid bilayers, including its lipid binding and lipid scrambling 
across the membrane. 
To accomplish this, the primary tasks involved: 
1. Enhancing the code and performance of LipidDyn. 
2. Developing and integrating automated tools into LipidDyn to compute lipid-protein 
contacts, monitor lipids that undergo transbilayer movements and provide graphical 
visualization of the results. 
3. Analyzing unbiased MD simulations of ATG9A in lipid bilayers using LipidDyn and 
other tools to investigate protein dynamics and lipid-protein contacts. 
The focus of our project is centered on expanding the analysis modules within LipidDyn to 
monitor the dynamics of lipids surrounding the protein in the MD ensembles. Additionally, we 
implemented a module to track lipids that undergo partial or complete transbilayer movements. 
Overall, our objective was to integrate the necessary calculation tools within LipidDyn for the 
analysis of protein-lipid contacts in MD simulations. Our integration supports the analysis of 
protein-lipid contacts and lipid movement in MD trajectories, supporting both all-atom and 
coarse-grained force fields, thereby providing a valuable resource for the scientific community 
investigating membrane proteins, including scramblases and flippases/floppases. 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
19 
 
4. 
Results 
4.1. 
LipidDyn implementations 
In this section, we present the outcomes of our work with the LipidDyn pipeline conducted during 
the thesis project. Specifically, we provide a comprehensive description of the wide variety of 
improvements that were added to the existing LipidDyn pipeline (Figure 3). These include the 
implementation of two newly designed analysis modules aimed at investigating protein-lipid 
contacts and lipid transbilayer (flip-flop) movement, as well as improvements of the existing ones 
and the addition of general features to the pipeline. Then, we showcase the utility of our new 
implementation and the results obtained from its application. All these implementations have been 
included in the main version of the LipidDyn pipeline and can be accessed freely at the following 
GitHub repository: https://github.com/ELELAB/LipidDyn. In total, in this project we contributed 
to the repository with 8 merged pull-requests addressing their corresponding issues, in which we 
performed 25 commits, modifying 35 files with 2342 additions and 579 deletions. 
 
Figure 3. Updated overview of the LipidDyn pipeline, after the addition of the new modules added in 
this project. 
==PAGE:21==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
20 
 
4.1.1. Protein-lipid Interaction module 
We implemented the Protein-Lipid Interaction module into LipidDyn to investigate the contacts 
between proteins and membrane lipids. In our implementation, this module then calculates the 
depletion-enrichment factor of lipids surrounding the protein, i.e., evaluating changes in lipid 
concentrations. The depletion-enrichment factor of a lipid species around a protein reveals 
whether the lipid species is enriched or depleted in the lipid annulus of the protein compared to 
its density in the bulk membrane [61]. This analysis allows us to investigate the detail of how a 
protein modulates its local environment in the lipid bilayer, by enrichment or depletion (i.e., 
making contact or not) of lipid species. This could detect protein regions and motifs recruiting 
specific lipid species and forming protein-lipid contacts. We implemented the calculation of the 
depletion-enrichment factor using the following formula: 
 
Equation 2     depletion−enrichment =
(𝑛𝑜.  𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑑 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑠 𝑋
𝑛𝑜.  𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑠
) 𝑎𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 6Å 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑛
(𝑛𝑜.  𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑑 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑠 𝑋
𝑛𝑜.  𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑠
) 𝑖𝑛 𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘
 
Thus, depletion-enrichment factor values above 1 indicate enrichment of the lipid species, while 
values below 1 indicate depletion. During the calculation, only lipids in contact with the protein 
are considered in each frame. A protein-lipid contact is defined by a distance cutoff between any 
atom of the lipid molecules and any atom of the protein group. We used a default cutoff of 6 Å. 
The analysis can be executed in LipidDyn using the flag -int, as in the following example: 
 
We developed the Interaction core class to parse and store the basic analysis information, 
including the selection of the protein and lipid atoms the calculations are performed. The main 
function iterates through the MD trajectory, selecting and counting the number of lipids of 
different classes surrounding the protein. To optimize the performance of the module, we 
performed significant efforts to minimize selection commands and utilize NumPy vectorized 
array functions, as the analysis is computationally intensive. 
The analysis generates a .tsv file that contains a data frame with depletion-enrichment values for 
each lipid species in the system and for each frame in the MD trajectory. Additionally, the module 
offers an option to calculate the depletion-enrichment factor individually for each residue in the 
protein group, producing an additional .tsv file with a nested data frame. 
We implemented different options and parameters for the Protein-Lipid Interaction module that 
a user can specify via the LipidDyn configuration file in yaml format: 
- 
interaction_domains: this option enables the user to select specific regions (i.e., range 
of residues) of the protein to analyze, by easily writing residue index ranges or using 
MDAnalysis selection commands. By default, it includes the entire protein group. 
- 
interaction_cutoff: this value controls the distance cutoff in Å between the protein 
and the lipid residues to determine a contact. Defaults to 6 Å. 
- 
interaction_by_res: when enabled, this option calculates the depletion-enrichment 
factor also individually for each residue in the protein group. 
Furthermore, we implemented the data representation script ‘interaction’, allowing users to plot 
the depletion-enrichment factor values calculated for one or more selected lipid species (Figure 
LipidDyn -f trajectory.xtc -s topology.gro -g config.yml -int -p -n 1 -c 
==PAGE:22==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
21 
 
4). The function generates a box plot with the distribution of the parameter along the entire 
trajectory and a line plot depicting the temporal evolution of the depletion-enrichment factor. Due 
to the high complexity of data representation of the depletion-enrichment factor by residue, we 
did not implement this feature. The script can be executed as follows: 
 
 
Figure 4. Graphical representation of the Protein-Lipid Interaction. Depletion-enrichment factor plots 
generated with the Protein-Lipid Interaction module of LipidDyn for a 5 ns coarse-grained trajectory of a 
protein inside a lipid bilayer. The box plot on the left shows the distribution of the factor along the trajectory, 
where palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine (POPC) molecules appear to be slightly enriched around the 
protein, while the sphingomyelin (i.e., DPSM) molecules are depleted. The line plot on the right shows the 
evolution of the factor over time, where the user can identify specific enrichment or depletion events during 
the trajectory. 
4.1.2. Lipid transbilayer movement module 
The ability to monitor lipid transbilayer (flip-flop) movement in a bilayer is of utmost importance 
as it provides valuable insights into the dynamic behavior of lipid bilayer systems. This tool 
enables the identification of lipid transbilayer events, giving insights into lipid organization and 
the molecular mechanisms of proteins, such as scramblases, that modulate these movements. We 
implemented the Scrambling module into the LipidDyn pipeline to monitor and analyze the lipid 
transbilayer movement. This tool first identifies the surface of the bilayer and tracks the positions 
of lipid headgroups, enabling the identification of lipids that undergo flip-flop movement by 
moving between leaflets. The module produces one file per lipid molecule that is considered to 
do a full or partial transbilayer movement, containing its time evolution and, if provided, contacts 
with the protein residues. 
The first part of the analysis takes place for each frame. First, the leaflets are identified using the 
MDAnalysis function LeafletFinder, which clusters the lipid headgroups by a proximity cutoff. 
This method typically results in two major groups representing the leaflets, but it can fail, 
especially when many lipids appear in the central part of the bilayer due to their transbilayer 
motions. To address this, the module performs the algorithm with different cutoffs until it 
identifies two coherent groups, that represent most of the lipids in the system, while not having 
one group englobing most of them. 
The positions of the leaflet groups are then used to estimate the surface of the leaflets, which will 
provide a reference for the transbilayer movement event. Surface estimation is performed through 
interaction -i Interaction/d_e.tsv -o Interaction/d_e_ -l CHOL DPSM POPC 
==PAGE:23==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
22 
 
linear regression, calculating the z-coordinate of the leaflets based on the x and y coordinates of 
the lipid. The user can select the number of parameters used for regression (powers of the x/y 
coordinates) depending on the desired detail in representing the shape or curvature of each leaflet 
surface. This step generates an intermediate file, z_data.tsv, which stores the z-coordinate of each 
lipid at each frame and their respective leaflet z-coordinates at their x/y positions, allowing reuse 
for computational efficiency. 
Once all frames have been analyzed, the program selects the lipids considered to undergo 
transbilayer movement, based on user-defined parameters, by a series of logical operations. The 
output is a file for each lipid that undergoes transbilayer movement, containing the z-coordinate 
progression of the leaflets and the lipid headgroup, and its protein contacts (if a protein group is 
specified). The file is named based on the lipid species name and molecule index (e.g., 
POPC_708.tsv). 
The user can specify a range of parameters via the configuration file in yaml format, including: 
- 
scrambling_lipids: list of lipid residue names to analyze. 
- 
scrambling_reg_params: number of parameters used for performing linear regression, 
corresponding to the polynomial degree of the equation. Degree 0 results in a flat surface 
parallel to the x/y plane, 1 adds orientation to the plane, and degree 2 or more adds 
curvature to the surface at the cost of possible overfitting. Defaults to 4. 
- 
scrambling_upper_z and scrambling_upper_rel_z: boundaries defining the upper 
side of the lipid bilayer for the transbilayer movement. If at a given frame, a lipid is above 
the given value, it is considered to be on the upper side of the bilayer. If both the 
parameters are specified, they both need to be fulfilled for the selection. If neither is 
defined, all lipids will be considered. z represents the absolute coordinate in Å, while 
relative z uses the leaflets as reference (0 for the lower leaflet, 0.5 for the middle, and 1 
for the upper leaflet). 
- 
scrambling_lower_z and scrambling_lower_rel_z: boundaries defining the lower 
side of the lipid bilayer for the transbilayer movement. If at a given frame, a lipid is below 
the given value, it is considered to be on the lower side of the bilayer. If both the 
parameters are specified, they both need to be fulfilled for the selection. If neither is 
defined, all lipids will be considered. z represents the absolute coordinate in Å, while 
relative z uses the leaflets as reference (0 for the lower leaflet, 0.5 for the middle, and 1 
for the upper leaflet). 
- 
scrambling_upper_ratio: and scrambling_lower_ratio: portion of the trajectory 
(float between 0 and 1) that a lipid needs to be in the upper and lower side of the bilayer 
(see previous parameters) to be considered doing a transbilayer movement. Defaults to 
one frame. 
- 
scrambling_domains: enables the user to select certain regions of the protein for analysis 
by defining ranges of residue index or MDAnalysis selection commands. 
- 
scrambling_cutoff: the distance cutoff in Å between the protein and the lipid 
molecules, to consider a contact. 
Furthermore, we implemented a plotting tool called ‘scrambling’ to represent the results. It plots 
the progression of the z-coordinate of one or more lipids (Figure 5). The user can freely select 
the lipids to represent using the output file or output directory.   Furthermore, the user can also 
==PAGE:24==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
23 
 
choose the coordinate type (relative to the leaflets from 0 to 1 or absolute in Å) with the option -
a and hide or show the leaflet reference with -l. The tool can be executed as follows: 
 
 
Figure 5. Graphical representation of the Scrambling module (1). Results of the Scrambling module 
analysis in LipidDyn for a 50 ns coarse-grained trajectory of a lipid bilayer. Line plot with the z coordinates 
progression of the four lipids identified as doing transbilayer movements. The continuous lines represent 
the evolution of the lipid headgroup z coordinates, while the dashed lines correspond to the coordinates of 
the x/y plane of each leaflet calculated for the lipid molecule represented with the same color. 
We also added a second option to visualize the protein contacts of the lipid. By selecting a single 
output file and using option -c, a heatmap representing the protein contacts will be represented 
in the background (Figure 6). This allows users to monitor the interaction between the protein 
and the lipid molecule and compare it with the lipid motion. For better clarity, option -r defines 
the range of residue indices to represent in the heatmap, as shown in the following example: 
 
scrambling -i Scrambling/lipids/ -o Scrambling/z_trajectory.pdf -a 
scrambling -i Scrambling/lipids/POPC_708.tsv 
-o Scrambling/POPC_708_contacts.pdf -c -l -r 1250 1400 
==PAGE:25==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
24 
 
 
Figure 6. Graphical representation of the Scrambling module (2). Transbilayer movement of the lipid 
headgroup of the POPC residue with ID 702 (POPC_702), relative to the leaflet positions of the bilayer, 
during a MD simulation of 3μs of ATG9A. In the line plot (right axis), we can see the lipid starting in the 
upper leaflet, with a value of 1, and then starting a transbilayer movement towards the center of the bilayer, 
staying around the central part of the membrane (0.5-0.6) until the end of the trajectory, when it progresses 
further toward the opposite leaflet. The black tiles represent contacts of the lipid molecule with the protein 
residues, with their residue index corresponding to the left axis. We can identify a persistent contact with 
the region of the protein including residues 1347-1359, while the contacts with the residues 1257-1265 only 
appear once the lipid molecule has accessed the central part of the bilayer. 
4.1.3. Improvements of Order Parameter module 
We performed a revitalization of the Order Parameter module for all-atom simulations, to 
improve both user experience and robustness of the code. The module was originally adapted 
from NMRlipids (https://github.com/NMRLipids/MATCH) and the code and output styles were 
not fully adapted into the pipeline. The changes were oriented to code cleaning, efficiency 
enhancement, better error handling, and clearer output for the user, while the actual results were 
unchanged. 
 
First, the main core class, OrderParameter, had several unused positional arguments, trivial error 
handling, and debug prints left. These parts were removed to improve code clarity. Some error 
handling was added to the class call in case the constructor failed. Moreover, the class created an 
additional MDAnalysis universe instance for each lipid species name analyzed. This was fixed by 
using the general universe from the pipeline for increased efficiency and coherency. Secondly, 
many calculations took place in the module function, whereas other routine commands (such as 
file reading and writing) happened in the core class. These parts were rearranged so that the 
calculations took place in the core class defined in core.py, and the more general functions 
happened in the module function defined in the main program LipidDyn, similar to the rest of the 
modules. We modified the module to only perform the analysis on those lipids present in the 
system and to write the final output files directly in the corresponding directory. This increased 
the efficiency and clarity of the code, avoiding calculations of lipids that were not present in the 
==PAGE:26==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
25 
 
trajectory and avoiding moving or deleting output files. Some parts of the code were rewritten for 
better clarity and reproducibility, including the mathematical calculations in the core functions 
and the output file writing. Additionally, old comments and unused variables and functions were 
removed from the module class. Information and warning messages were added to the logging 
file and the progress bar to the standard output was corrected. The comments and function doc-
strings were also updated to match the changes.  
As a result, the Order Parameter module is more robust, due to a better handling of errors, more 
efficient, as unnecessary parts were removed, and clearer for the user, thanks to enhanced 
messages and output. 
4.1.4. Implementation of checkpoints for LipidDyn analysis 
In some situations, the user may have to run more than once several analyses due to different 
necessities, such as using different options for some of the analysis modules. This could lead to 
repeating unnecessary steps of the analysis. To enhance the user experience in this aspect, we 
implemented an output-checking function into the pipeline. This feature enables to verify the 
presence of the expected output files in the specified directory before running each module of the 
program, so the analyses that were already completed could be avoided. This option can save time 
for the user when repeating various analyses, as the user will not need to modify the program call 
and running time will be saved. In case an analysis is skipped, the user is notified in the logging 
file. Alternatively, we added an option to force running the analysis even if the expected output 
exists, by calling the program with the flag -ow/--overwrite. This can be useful when trying out 
repeatedly different options, where the user wants to overwrite the result. 
4.1.5. Other improvements to the LipidDyn pipeline 
We performed various small fixes related to maintenance, better error handling, and better 
standard output for the user. 
- 
NumPy deprecation errors: most parts of the original program were developed under 
NumPy version 1.20., but current versions have some features deprecated or removed, 
which leads to errors if the user installed a newer version of the package. The issues were 
related to the change in the names of integers and floating-point instances (numpy.int 
and numpy.float) in version 1.24. The code was changed to address this problem. 
- 
Better leaflet assignment: multiple modules depend on a correct assignment of the leaflet 
groups of the bilayer, performed by the MDAnalysis function LeafletFinder. Before, the 
two first groups obtained were assigned as the upper and lower leaflet, respectively. 
However, this function returns one or more headgroup clusters in arbitrary order. The 
function call and instance assignment were corrected to better handle the output and the 
possible cases where it fails. 
- 
Handling incorrect input files: when incorrect input files were provided (trajectory, 
topology and configuration), the program could crash prematurely, and no information 
was given. The initial part of the program was modified to handle these possible errors 
and offer the user information and indications to overcome the issues. 
- 
Fixing log files: the adaptation of the curvature module left unchanged the logging output 
of the original program where it was adapted from. This conflicted with our output and 
==PAGE:27==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
26 
 
created several logging files, with duplicated messages and trivial output to the screen. 
Most of these parts of the code were removed, corrected, or redirected to the main logging 
file, to improve the clarity of the output as well as to enhance the image of the program. 
4.2. 
Unbiased MD simulations of ATG9A: investigation of close-open 
dynamics and lipid-protein interactions and effects of N-
glycosylation at N99 
During this thesis project, we contributed to an ongoing project in the research group at DCRC 
using unbiased all-atom MD simulations to investigate the close-open states and lipid-protein 
interactions of the transmembrane protein ATG9A and study the role of its N-glycosylation at 
N99. We used these MD simulations as a case study to apply analysis tools and test the modules 
in the LipidDyn pipeline project newly implemented during the thesis project.  
We collected several all-atom MD simulations using the CHARMM36m force field, which consist 
of three replicates starting from the closed conformation of ATG9A homotrimer (referred to as 
ATG9A, PDB ID 7JLP) and three replicates of the same conformation including the N-
glycosylation on N99 (referred as ATG9AN99-glyc). The ATG9A structure comprises the residues 
36-522, including the short loop 96-108 that was missing in the original experimental structure 
and was modeled using MODELLER. This loop contains the N-glycosylated N99 residue, and it 
is located at the interface between ATG9A and the lipid headgroups of the bilayer, near the luminal 
opening of the central protein cavity (Figure ). To investigate whether the N-glycosylation of N99 
could introduce an additional level of structural regulation in ATG9A, we modeled N-
glycosylation at position N99 of each ATG9A protomer with the most common complex-type N-
glycan structure found in humans (see method section). The protein was embedded in both cases 
in a bilayer composed of palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine (POPC 75%) and cholesterol 
(25%). In the method section, we explained the details of the design of the simulation systems 
and the minimization and equilibration steps used to prepare the systems for the productive 
simulation conditions. We conducted microsecond-scale MD simulations with varying durations 
(timescales ranging from 1 to 3 μs depending on the replicate) for both ATG9A and ATG9AN99-
glyc. The trajectories were manipulated to prepare them for further analysis. First, the system was 
centered in the simulations box and several indexing files were extracted so we could easily filter 
out the desired contents, such as lipids, protein, and glycosylation groups. Using the indexing 
files, we filtered the topology files and extracted trajectories with different timesteps, depending 
on the analysis. To investigate the differences in the sampled conformational ensembles of ATG9A 
and ATG9AN99-glyc, we created and analyzed two concatenated version of the trajectories of the 
replicates that included the initial first microsecond of each of the three replicates for each system, 
i.e., non-glycosylated and glycosylated system. We used the collected MD simulations as a case 
study to apply analysis tools and test the newly implemented tools in the LipidDyn pipeline 
developed in this thesis project. For this purpose, we used both the concatenated trajectories and 
the single replicates. 
4.2.1. Analysis using the Protein-Lipid Interaction module in LipidDyn 
We first test and evaluated the newly implemented Protein-Lipid Interaction module in LipidDyn 
to get information about the lipid environment surrounding ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc and 
==PAGE:28==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
27 
 
investigate the contacts between proteins and lipids. We calculated the depletion-enrichment 
factor of lipids surrounding the protein using a distance cutoff of 6 Å to define the protein-lipid 
contacts. Depletion-enrichment factor values above 1 indicate enrichment of the lipid species 
around the protein, while values below 1 indicate depletion. The analysis showed a minor 
enrichment of POPC around the protein in the two systems (Figure ). This minor effect is expected 
since most of the bilayer is composed of POPC. On the other hand, we observed that cholesterol 
is significantly depleted (depletion-enrichment factor values below 1) in the lipid annulus of the 
protein both for ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc compared to its density in the bulk bilayer, even if this 
behavior seems to be strong in the non-glycosylated system (Figure 7A). We observed a 
cholesterol depletion in all the replicates in the concatenated trajectories and this is also consistent 
when analyzing the full-length of the replicates of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc (Figure 7B). It is 
known that transmembrane proteins with an inherently conical shape, such as ATG9A, induce 
spontaneous positive curvature in membranes. Furthermore, in our simulations we observed that 
ATG9A undergoes opening and exposition of the hydrophilic central cavity to the bilayer (see 
results below). This alters the hydrophobic matching of the protein and lipid bilayer and could 
result in inducing further bending and reorientation of lipids. Although the lipid bilayers in our 
models are too small to collect reliable calculations of membrane curvature, a preliminary analysis 
with LipidDyn tools suggested a positive curvature in both the leaflets in the surround of the 
protein and a reduction of bilayer thickness. All these mechanisms could contribute to the 
depletion of cholesterol around the protein since it is a cone-shaped lipid that thus induces 
negative curvature in leaflets. Further analysis and MD simulations will help to investigate 
additional details of these mechanisms, such as discriminating if the effects of cholesterol 
depletion happen more in one leaflet or around some regions of the protein. 
Overall, we here showed the utility of our implementation of the Protein-Lipid Interaction module 
in the LipidDyn pipeline. 
==PAGE:29==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
28 
 
 
Figure 7. Depletion-enrichment factor in MD simulations of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc. A. Evolution 
of the depletion enrichment factor of cholesterol (CHL1) and POPC for the concatenated trajectory of 
ATG9A (left) and ATG9AN99-glyc (right). B. Evolution of the depletion enrichment factor of cholesterol 
(CHL1) and POPC for the entire trajectory of replicates 1 of ATG9A (left) and ATG9AN99-glyc (right). 
4.2.2. Analysis of lipid transbilayer movements using the Scrambling 
module in LipidDyn 
We investigated possible scrambling events in the simulations, testing and evaluating the 
Scrambling module that we implement in LipidDyn. The analysis revealed several lipid molecules 
that undergo transbilayer movements along the MD replicates of both ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc. 
We observed several cholesterol molecules performing flip-flop movements from one leaflet to 
another. We observed this for both leaflets. This is an expected behavior of cholesterol, and we 
observed that these movements were generally unrelated to the presence of the protein since we 
did not observe contact with the protein during the event.  
Interestingly, we observed several POPC molecules that undergo transbilayer movements from 
the luminal towards the cytosolic leaflet of the bilayer, although not ending up in the opposite 
leaflet (Figure 8). We observed that the lipids reorient horizontally and enter by their headgroups 
in the central cavity of both ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc while they maintain their acyl chains in 
the hydrophobic environment of the bilayer (Figure 9). These movements seem to be associated 
with the opening of the protein at the interfaces between the protomers of ATG9A around the 
central cavity. Indeed, we observed that the opening of the protomer-protomer interfaces occurred 
till below the interface between the reentrant membrane helix 1 (RMH1)-turn-helix α9 and 
==PAGE:30==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
29 
 
TMH3-4. Lipids after starting the movement enter these protomer-protomer interfaces and reach 
RMH1, around the central part of the bilayer. Here lipids kept shuffling for the rest of the 
trajectory, without completing the transbilayer movement or reaching opposite cytosolic leaflets. 
 
Figure 8. Transbilayer movement of residue POPC 708 in MD simulations of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-
glyc. Evolution of the z coordinate of the head group of the lipid residue POPC 708 (blue line) along the 
trajectory of the replicate 2 of ATG9AN99-glyc. Here the value of 1 corresponds to the luminal leaflet and 0 
corresponds to the cytosolic leaflet. The black tiles represent the contacts of the head group along the 
trajectory with the different residue indices of the protein. The contacts in 285-287 correspond to the 
residues 321-323 of chain A (RMH1-A), the ones in 854-861 to residues 392-399 of chain B (TMH3-B), 
the ones in 1280-1286 to residues 320-326 of chain C (RMH1-C), and the ones in 1366-1383 to residues 
406-423 of chain C (THM4-C). 
As an example, to show the utility of our analysis module in LipidDyn, we studied the transbilayer 
movements of a lipid molecule that we identified from replicate 2 of ATG9AN99-glyc (POPC with 
ID 708, Figure 8). We observed that the lipid molecule enters the central cavity of the protein by 
the opening interface between protomers B and C (Figure 9). Then the headgroup traverses the 
central cavity until it reaches the RMH1 domain of protomer C, which appears to act as a 
bottleneck/gate. Analyzing the protein-lipid contacts, we can observe that the lipid forms contacts 
with different regions of the protein. Along the entire trajectory, the lipid molecule forms contacts 
with the THM4 of the protomer C as it traverses the central cavity. At the start, some contacts are 
observed with the TMH3 of protomer B, which corresponds to the entrance to the central cavity 
from the luminal side of the bilayer. Later, the lipid interacts with RMH1 of protomer C as it 
progresses to the central region of the protein. In the future, we will use these tools to investigate 
the details of the paths and movements of lipids in ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc and how they are 
modulated by close-open states of the protein. 
==PAGE:31==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
30 
 
 
Figure 9. Visualization of residue POPC 708 during the transbilayer movement. Position of the residue 
POPC 708 (light green-blue) of replicate 2 in the central cavity of ATG9AN99-glyc during the simulation at 
time 100 ns (left) and 450 ns (right), located around the CB interface. The ribbon objects represent 
ATG9AN99-glyc chains A (blue), B (green) and C (red). The highlighted protein domains present contacts 
with the lipid residue along the trajectory. Note that this figure shows the luminal leaflet of the bilayer at 
the top and the cytosolic leaflet at the bottom. 
Overall, we here showed the utility of our implementation of the Scrambling module in the 
LipidDyn pipeline to the identification of lipid transbilayer events and related protein-lipid 
contacts. 
4.2.3. Analysis of close-open motions of ATG9A homotrimer and 
modulation by the N-glycosylation at position N99 
It has been shown by cryo-EM data, that ATG9A can be present in two main conformations, open 
and closed, that differ in the degree of separation between the protomer interfaces, specifically at 
the interface of TMH4-3 of one protomer with the RMH1 of the same protomer and the TMH3 
of the neighboring protomer [13]. Furthermore, the two states differ in the radius and dimensions 
of the central cavity and its luminal opening. By visual inspection, we observed that in our MD 
simulations, ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc undergo close-to-open motions primarily driven by the 
separation at the protomer-protomer interfaces of the TMH3-4 helices from the rest of the 
protomer, leading to lateral opening of the central cavity towards the hydrophobic portion of the 
lipid bilayer. This observation is consistent with previous findings from an all-atom MD 
simulation [13]. We observed that these motions are asymmetric and happen at different protomer-
protomer interfaces depending on the replicate and the simulated system. 
To study the observed conformational states and examine the close-open transitions in ATG9A 
and ATG9AN99-glyc, we calculated a collective contact score during the MD simulations. The 
collective contact score was calculated as the fraction of protein-protein contacts observed in the 
protomer-protomer interfaces that were present in the reference cryo-EM structure of the closed 
state (Figure 9). Thus, values of collective contact score close to 1 indicated that nearly all the 
contacts were maintained, resembling the closed structure, while values close to 0 indicated the 
absence of most contacts. Analyzing the concatenated trajectories, we commonly observed an 
asymmetrical opening of the interfaces where one, two or three protomer-protomer interfaces 
shifted from closed conformations closer to open ones (Figure 10). Furthermore, we observed 
==PAGE:32==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
31 
 
increased opening motions in ATG9AN99-glyc when compared to ATG9A, with the protomer-
protomer interfaces shifting closer to the open state, and most or nearly all the contacts from the 
closed cryo-EM structure occurring infrequently (i.e., collective score values close to 0, Figure 
9). This behavior was particularly evident in replicates 1 and 2 of ATG9AN99-glyc for protomers A, 
B, C, and C, respectively. Conversely, we also observed an increased exploration of states with a 
higher occurrence of select contacts (i.e., collective score values close to 1) in ATG9AN99-glyc, 
suggesting the preservation of closed conformations at protomer-protomer interfaces (Figure 9). 
This happened in protomer C in replicate 2 and protomer A in replicate 3 of ATG9AN99-glyc. 
 
Figure 10. Collective contact score in the trajectories of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc. Projection of the 
densities of the collective contact score values of the different protomer-protomer interfaces calculated for 
the concatenated trajectories of ATG9A (left) and ATG9AN99-glyc (right). 
To better assess the different conformational states sampled by ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc, we 
performed quality-threshold clustering (QTC) analysis on the collective contact score values of 
the concatenated trajectories. In our analysis, each frame constituted a data point with the 
collective contact score calculated for each protomer-protomer interface. To consider the threefold 
symmetry of the ATG9A homotrimer, we considered the assembly of the protomers ABC to be 
equivalent to the assembly BCA and CAB, taking the minimum of the pairwise distances to each 
of the different rotations to perform the clustering. We calculated the Euclidean distance between 
frames based on their collective contact scores as coordinates. The clustering analysis employed 
a quality-threshold method with a threshold of 0.45. The details of the implementation of the 
script for calculating QTC are described in the following section. 
The clustering revealed the main populations in the concatenated trajectories. The cluster analysis 
and examination of representative structures from each cluster revealed distinct conformational 
states for the non-glycosylated and glycosylated ATG9A (Figure 11). We found five clusters in the ATG9A 
while for ATG9AN99-glyc we observed six clusters ( 
Table 1). The most populated cluster of ATG9A (57% of the frames) was represented by states 
with the partial opening of the three interfaces as indicated by the contact scores of the 
representative structure (collective contact scores of  0.35, 0.2, 0.15) and only the fifth cluster, 
with 2% of the frames, showed predominantly open conformational states at all interfaces (0.15, 
0.15, 0.05). On the other hand, the second most populated cluster of ATG9AN99-glyc, including 
around 30% of the frames, predominantly exhibited conformational states with fully open 
interfaces (0.2, 0.05, 0.15). 
==PAGE:33==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
32 
 
 
Figure 11. Clusters found on the contact score data. Clusters found with QTC on the collective contact 
score data of non-glycosylated (left) and glycosylated (right) ATG9A concatenated trajectories, each with 
3000 analyzed frames in total. A quality-threshold algorithm was used with a threshold of 0.45, discarding 
clusters with less than 60 frames (2% of the total). 
Table 1. Summary of the clusters found on the collective contact score data. The size corresponds to the 
number of frames in the cluster. The collective contact score values of the different interfaces of a cluster 
(Int. AC, Int. BA, Int. CB) correspond to the contact score of the representative frame, determined as the 
frame with the minimum mean squared pairwise distance to other frames in the cluster. 
ATG9A 
ATG9AN99-glyc 
# 
Size 
Int. AC 
Int. BA 
Int. CB 
# 
Size 
Int. AC 
Int. BA 
Int. CB 
1 
1690 
0.35 
0.2 
0.15 
1 
1271 
0.8 
0.15 
0.2 
2 
864 
0.7 
0.2 
0.5 
2 
887 
0.2 
0.05 
0.15 
3 
250 
0.65 
0.35 
0.2 
3 
348 
0.65 
0.5 
0.25 
4 
76 
0.95 
0.2 
0.4 
4 
132 
0.3 
0.5 
0.1 
5 
65 
0.15 
0.15 
0.05 
5 
121 
0.85 
0.75 
0.6 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
102 
0.95 
0.4 
0.3 
 
Cluster 1 of ATG9AN99-glyc, including 42% of the frames, displayed states where two interfaces 
between protomers are open while one of them remained closed (collective contact scores of 0.8, 
0.15, 0.25), as shown in Figure 12. A similar asymmetrical opening was observed in clusters 3 
and 6 of ATG9AN99-glyc, as well as clusters 2, 3, and 4 of ATG9A (Figure 12). Only cluster 5 of 
ATG9AN99-glyc (approximately 4% of the frames) predominantly included conformational states 
with all closed interfaces. We then investigated if the occurrence of these closed states at protomer 
interfaces is related to the effect of the initial structure, or if they represent intermediate states 
during opening motions. We investigated the timewise behavior of individual replicates of 
ATG9AN99-glyc in terms of collective contact scores. We observed that replicate 2 and 3 mainly 
sampled conformations with two open interfaces and one remains closed like the starting 
structure. Visual analysis of these states suggested that this behavior could be associated with 
contacts formed between N-glycans and the luminal loop of neighboring protomers. It is 
important to note that the contacts mediated by N-glycans should be interpreted with caution, as 
they may be influenced by the limitations of the employed force field. Specifically, CHARMM36 
force field parameters for carbohydrates tend to favor carbohydrate-carbohydrate and 
==PAGE:34==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
33 
 
carbohydrate-protein interactions over carbohydrate-water interactions due to effects related to 
over-polarization and electrostatic attraction [32]. In the future, we aim to further investigate the 
details of contacts mediated by N-glycans. 
 
Figure 12. Structure of protomer-protomer interfaces in clusters with asymmetric opening. For 
interfaces AC and BA, cluster 2 of ATG9A has contact scores of 0.7 and 0.2, respectively, and cluster 1 of 
ATG9AN99-glyc has contact scores of 0.8 and 0.15, respectively. 
Furthermore, we calculated timewise per-residue RMSF of Cα atoms to assess protein flexibility. 
RMSF analysis showed very similar fluctuations of the protein residues during the trajectory 
(Figure 13). The resulting profiles were similar for ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc, except for the 
residues corresponding to the flexible luminal loop 95-104, which also contained the 
glycosylation group. The loop appears to fluctuate less in the glycosylated replicates, which could 
indicate signs of effects on the flexibility of the loop by the presence of the glycan. 
 
Figure 13. RMSF in the trajectories of ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc. Fluctuation of the protein residues 
along the concatenated trajectory of ATG9A (left) and ATG9AN99-glyc (right), shown by the RMSF analysis. 
4.2.4. Quality threshold clustering implementation 
To identify and study the conformational states from the different analyses of MD simulations, 
we developed a generalized clustering script that implements the quality-threshold clustering 
(QTC) algorithm [62]. This clustering method is characterized by having a distance threshold, 
that dictates the maximum pairwise distance between two points in a cluster, thus guaranteeing a 
minimum similarity among the cluster. Another advantage of this algorithm is that it does not 
require prior knowledge of the number of clusters. However, it is computationally expensive, 
scaling as much as O(N3), being N the input data size [63]. In the context of MD simulations, 
==PAGE:35==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
34 
 
QTC is seen as a viable approach to assess the similarity between frames, typically using measures 
such as the RMSD [63]. Here we adapted the original deterministic algorithm described by Heyer 
et al. Whereas other implementations of the algorithm, such as the stochastic QTC results in faster 
results, this comes at the cost of worse reproducibility and stability [64]. The QTC deterministic 
algorithm works as follows for N data points: one starts with N candidate clusters, each containing 
one data point. Each cluster is expanded independently, adding the data point that increases its 
diameter the least, where the diameter is the maximal pairwise distance between two data points 
in a cluster. This is done until there are no points left, or until the diameter exceeds a specified 
threshold (then the point is not added). After all N candidate clusters are expanded, the one with 
the most points (or one with the smallest diameter) is considered a true cluster and its points are 
removed. The process is then repeated growing candidate clusters with the remaining points until 
all points have been assigned to true clusters. 
The developed script contains the Clustering class, which stores the input data and some basic 
options. The method compute_distance_matrix calculates the pairwise distance matrix between 
the data points using the optimized method cdist from scipy.spatial.distance [65]. Here the user 
can specify the distance measure used, which is ‘Euclidean’ by default. Once the distance matrix 
is available, QTC is performed by the method clustering, employing the user-defined 
parameters: 1) threshold: maximum diameter in the clusters, 2) noise: minimum number of 
points for a cluster, 3) max_clusters: maximum number of clusters to generate. The function 
returns the clustering result, an array with the cluster identifier of each data point, which can be 
written directly to a file if specified.  
It is worth noticing that we made some optimizations to enhance the performance of the original 
algorithm. Exploiting memory usage, a history of the candidate clusters development was stored 
in a set, initialized on each external iteration. If a candidate cluster grew to a state where it matched 
exactly with a cluster in the history, we considered that it converged, and assumed that it would 
develop identically to a previously seen cluster, allowing us to skip this origin. Other 
optimizations were directed to minimize the amount of data used on each iteration and to exploit 
array vectorized operations to decrease the running time. Due to the necessity of considering the 
symmetry of the data discussed in the previous section, we also implemented an option to treat 
symmetrical data by finding the smallest distance of the rotations of the data. Additionally, we 
implemented the summary method, that provides relevant information about the found clusters 
corresponding to the loaded data and clustering results: 1) cluster identifier, 2) size (number of 
points in the cluster), 3) diameter (maximal pairwise distance), 4) representative data point, 5) 
value of the representative data point. We defined the representative point of a cluster as the point 
with the minimum mean squared pairwise distance to the rest of the points in the cluster. We 
developed this method separately so it can be executed independently of the QTC algorithm, 
which can take a long computation time, and to be able to summarize clustering data of any origin 
if just the data is provided. The class is employed in Python as shown below: 
 
import qt_clustering 
import numpy as np 
 
data = np.loadtxt(’data.csv’, sep=’,’) 
QTC = qt_clustering.Clustering(data=data, metric=’Euclidean’) 
clusters = QTC.clustering(threshold=0.5, noise=10, 
      output=’clusters.dat’, verbose=True) 
QTC.summary(clusters, output=clusters_summary.tsv’) 
==PAGE:36==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
35 
 
4.2.5. RMSD and other analysis 
We also examined the closed-open transitions by performing a RMSD analysis to compare the 
structures in the simulation with the closed and open cryo-EM structures of ATG9A (PDB ID 
7JLP and 6WQZ, respectively). We calculated the RMSD of the Cα atoms of the domain-swapped 
transmembrane helices (TMH3-4) for each protomer. The analysis confirmed the results from the 
analysis of the collective contact score showing that, in all replicates, at least one protomer of 
ATG9A transitioned from the closed conformation to the open state, showing asymmetrical 
opening. Overall, upon analyzing the concatenated trajectories, the analysis confirmed that N-
glycosylation on N99 in ATG9AN99-glyc led to increased exploration of states with high RMSD 
values for the protomers, suggesting enhanced close-to-open motions. This effect was particularly 
prominent in replicate 1 of ATG9AN99-glyc, where all three protomer-protomer interfaces shifted 
closer to the open state. 
Furthermore, to analyze the tunnels and cavities within the protein, we utilized the CAVER 3.02 
software to track the cavities in ATG9A and monitor their changes throughout the MD trajectories 
[66]. CAVER is a software tool for the analysis and visualization of tunnels and cavities in protein 
structures. The software employs algorithms to probe the protein structure and identify potential 
pathways connecting the protein interior region with its surface and can thus be accessible to 
solvent or ligands. Given the complex and interconnected network of tunnels in ATG9A, we 
selected various starting points as references for cavity exploration using CAVER, separating for 
the central cavity, lateral cavities and perpendicular cavities. During cavity analysis, we used a 
probe radius of 1.2 Å to approximate the size of a water molecule. We analyzed the cavity 
evolution during the MD trajectories, compared their radius and length to those of the 
corresponding cavities in the reference cryo-EM open and closed structures, and calculated the 
residues lining the cavities. However, due to time constraints and the complexity of the data, we 
have not yet thoroughly analyzed the collected data during this thesis. In the future, these data 
will allow to study the modulation of cavities accessibility and size by close-open motions and 
N-glycosylation on N99. 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
36 
 
5. 
Discussion 
In this thesis project, we successfully integrated into LipidDyn tools to identify and visualize 
protein-lipid interactions and transbilayer movements in Molecular Dynamics simulations. The 
main results of the project were integrated into the LipidDyn pipeline, publicly available on 
GitHub (https://github.com/ELELAB/LipidDyn). 
The Protein-Lipid Interaction Module provides an overview of how the protein affects the lipid 
environment and allows to investigate protein-lipid contacts of specific regions of the protein. We 
implemented the Scrambling module, which helps to identify and monitor transbilayer 
movements with a high degree of versatility thanks to the numerous configuration options. Both 
modules produced satisfactory results when testing them with coarse-grained and all-atom 
simulations, which can prove to be useful for the scientific community investigating the role of 
membrane proteins, scramblases and flippases in cellular membranes. Despite the analyses 
focusing on calculating general features from the MD simulations, they provide relevant results 
and behaviors that can guide the user to design more tailored and advanced analyses to better 
understand the molecular mechanisms. 
Furthermore, we revised other modules in the existing LipidDyn pipeline and added new useful 
features to the program. The changes made resulted in an overall enhancement of the modules, 
where code quality, effectiveness, and user experience were improved. 
We collected several unbiased all-atom MD simulations to investigate the close-open states and 
lipid-protein interactions of the transmembrane protein ATG9A and study the role of its N-
glycosylation at N99. We used these MD simulations as a case study to apply analysis tools and 
test the modules in the LipidDyn pipeline newly implemented during the thesis project. We 
observed that in our bilayer models, ATG9A and ATG9AN99-glyc have a significant depletion of 
cholesterol in the lipid annulus of the protein, accompanied by a slight enrichment of POPC. 
Furthermore, when monitoring the lipid-protein contacts, we observed tendency of several POPC 
molecules to enter the central cavity of the protein by the luminal side interfaces.  Our analysis 
with the Scrambling module showed that these lipids undergo partial transbilayer movements 
from the luminal leaflet toward the cytosolic leaflet of the bilayer. These movements are 
associated with the opening of the protein at the interfaces between the protomers of ATG9A 
around the central cavity. Notably, we observed that the opening of the protomer-protomer 
interfaces occurred below the interface between the RMH1-turn-helix α9 and TMH3-4. As the 
movement commenced, the lipids entered these protomer-protomer interfaces and eventually 
reached RMH1, located in the central region of the bilayer. The contact analysis suggests that 
TMH4 and RMH1 could play a role in the lipid movement, as they form contact with lipids, 
accompanying them toward the middle of the central cavity. Furthermore, our analysis suggested 
that there is a notable distinct behavior between non-glycosylated and glycosylated ATG9A, 
underscoring the impact of glycosylation on the conformational landscapes. We observed that the 
ATG9A homotrimer displays asymmetric close-open motions in both the non-glycosylated and 
glycosylated states. Specifically, the presence of N-glycosylation at N99 seems to influence the 
close-open states of the ATG9A homotrimer promoting the occurrence of opening motions and 
affecting the occurrence of closed conformations. 
==PAGE:38==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
37 
 
5.1. 
Limitations and Future Perspectives 
Although the new implementations were successful, we encountered some limitations when 
developing the tools. To overcome some of the challenges new improvements can be made to the 
existing modules in the future. We aimed for a good balance between versatility and specificity, 
where the users can adapt an analysis according to their needs and singularities of their 
simulations, but at the same time, the module returns meaningful results. Even though much effort 
was put into making a generalized and versatile module, some users may need a more specific 
analysis of their data, so they will have to use external tools to expand the results obtained with 
the LipidDyn modules. This can especially happen in the case of graphical visualization, where 
the user may need to show specific results from the analysis.  
One of the main limitations of our implementation of the Scrambling module to monitor lipid 
transbilayer movements is the step of the leaflet assignment, which represents a bottleneck in both 
running time and possible errors. For this step in LipidDyn, we employed the MDAnalysis 
function LeafletFinder which clusters lipid molecules in groups by a proximity cutoff, using a 
default of 15 Å. If lipid molecules appear in the central part of the membrane, the algorithm could 
cluster the two leaflets together, something that is more likely to happen if transbilayer motions 
are being studied. In this case, the module will detect a group that is too big and will thus repeat 
the assignment with a lower cutoff. This is repeated until two representative groups are obtained, 
but in some extreme cases, the groups end up completely fragmented, meaning that the 
assignment is not possible for that specific frame. Currently, the frame is skipped, as this event is 
not very common, but this could lead to a potential loss of valuable information since this tends 
to happen in the frames of actual interest. Currently, not many options for leaflet assignment are 
available if we want to avoid assuming flat membrane surfaces, but possible methods that we 
could explore in the future could involve the calculation of acyl chain normals on top of proximity 
of residues, at the cost of computation time. Furthermore, adding to this analysis module the 
calculation of the orientations of the acyl chains of the lipids (e.g., from the head group to the tail) 
could be used for determining the transbilayer movements but could also be complemented with 
z coordinate data to provide more information about the motions. Other improvements to the 
module should be directed at increasing the overall robustness of the analysis. 
In the case of the Protein-Lipid Interaction module, the information that is already stored when 
executed in the module could be employed to provide additional information, such as protein-
ligand interaction constants, and calculate other metrics to evaluate protein-lipid contacts. 
For the case study on ATG9A, the next step will be to focus on analyzing the modulation of the 
complex internal cavities of the protein to better understand the scrambling mechanisms of 
ATG9A and the effects of N-glycosylation. We will monitor the properties of the cavities during 
the MD simulations, such as their radius, length and accessibility over time, and relate them to 
the identified close-open motions and lipid transbilayer movements. The MD simulations of the 
non-glycosylated ATG9A reached the length of 3 μs, but some of the replicates of the glycosylated 
ATG9A only had 1 μs and could not be extended for this thesis project. For a better comparison 
of the systems, we sliced the trajectories to the first microsecond per replicate. Thus, the extension 
of the MD simulations is ongoing.  
While classical MD simulations have proven valuable for investigating lipid bilayer systems, it is 
crucial to recognize their inherent limitations. The simulated bilayers are a simplified version of 
==PAGE:39==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
38 
 
the actual biological membranes, and their reliability relies heavily on the accuracy of the selected 
force field and the sampling techniques employed. It is important to acknowledge that force fields 
are not perfect and have limitations in their accuracy in describing molecular systems, which must 
always be considered. For example, in our case, it is known that CHARMM36 force field 
parameters for carbohydrates tend to favor carbohydrate-carbohydrate and carbohydrate-protein 
interactions over carbohydrate-water interactions. Furthermore, classical MD simulations are 
known to have limitations in sampling the conformational space of molecular systems and may 
struggle to overcome high energy barriers, often getting trapped in local minima and providing a 
limited description of the events under study. To address these issues, we are designing 
simulations using enhanced sampling techniques, such as using umbrella-sampling approaches, 
to introduce biasing potentials to promote the exploration of the events of interest, such as the full 
transbilayer motions of lipids from one leaflet to the other. 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
39 
 
6. 
Conclusion 
In this project, we developed several tools for the analysis of MD simulations, emphasizing the 
study of protein-lipid interactions and transbilayer movements. The final modules were 
implemented into the LipidDyn pipeline, available at https://github.com/ELELAB/LipidDyn. The 
new modules enable the user to study the effect of proteins in the lipid environment, analyze 
events of lipid depletion and enrichment, as well as monitoring and analyzing transbilayer 
movements in the lipid membrane. Furthermore, we revised the existing modules and added new 
general features to the program, with the aim of improving the code quality and user experience. 
To test our implementations, we collected MD simulations of membrane protein ATG9A in lipid 
bilayers. We investigated the close-open states and lipid-protein interactions of ATG9A and 
studied the effects of its N-glycosylation at N99. The analysis modules in LipidDyn proved to be 
useful in providing insight into the modulation of ATG9A on the lipid environment and studying 
its molecular mechanisms. We observed that the ATG9A homotrimer displays asymmetric close-
open motions in both the non-glycosylated and glycosylated states. In our models, the presence 
of N-glycosylation at N99 influenced the close-open states of ATG9A, promoting the occurrence 
of opening motions and affecting the occurrence of closed conformations. 
In summary, the results of this project can be useful for the scientific community investigating the 
dynamics and structures of membrane proteins by making use of the highly reproducible and 
consistent pipeline of LipidDyn. 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
40 
 
7. 
References 
[1] 
G. Van Meer, D. R. Voelker, and G. W. Feigenson, “Membrane lipids: Where they are and 
how they behave,” Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 112–124, 2008, doi: 
10.1038/nrm2330. 
[2] 
D. Casares, P. V. Escribá, and C. A. Rosselló, “Membrane lipid composition: Effect on 
membrane and organelle structure, function and compartmentalization and therapeutic 
avenues,” Int J Mol Sci, vol. 20, no. 9, 2019, doi: 10.3390/ijms20092167. 
[3] 
A. R. J. Young et al., “Starvation and ULK1-dependent cycling of mammalian Atg9 
between the TGN and endosomes,” J Cell Sci, vol. 119, no. 18, pp. 3888–3900, 2006, doi: 
10.1242/jcs.03172. 
[4] 
W. Szlasa, I. Zendran, A. Zalesińska, M. Tarek, and J. Kulbacka, “Lipid composition of 
the cancer cell membrane,” J Bioenerg Biomembr, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 321–342, 2020, doi: 
10.1007/s10863-020-09846-4. 
[5] 
T. Harayama and H. Riezman, “Understanding the diversity of membrane lipid 
composition,” Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 281–296, 2018, doi: 
10.1038/nrm.2017.138. 
[6] 
R. L. Miesfeld and M. M. McEvoy, Biochemistry. Norton & Company, Inc., 2017. 
[7] 
B. M. Quinville, N. M. Deschenes, A. E. Ryckman, and J. S. Walia, “A comprehensive 
review: Sphingolipid metabolism and implications of disruption in sphingolipid 
homeostasis,” Int J Mol Sci, vol. 22, no. 11, 2021, doi: 10.3390/ijms22115793. 
[8] 
E. J. Dufourc, “Sterols and membrane dynamics,” J Chem Biol, vol. 1, no. 1–4, pp. 63–
77, 2008, doi: 10.1007/s12154-008-0010-6. 
[9] 
T. Kobayashi and A. K. Menon, “Transbilayer lipid asymmetry,” Current Biology, vol. 28, 
no. 8, pp. R386–R391, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.007. 
[10] 
I. Levental and E. Lyman, “Regulation of membrane protein structure and function by 
their lipid nano-environment,” Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 107–122, 2023, 
doi: 10.1038/s41580-022-00524-4. 
[11] 
D. Russo, S. Parashuraman, and G. D’Angelo, “Glycosphingolipid–protein interaction in 
signal transduction,” Int J Mol Sci, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 1–21, 2016, doi: 
10.3390/ijms17101732. 
[12] 
C. E. Erdinc Sezgin, Ilya Levental, Satyajit Mayor, “The mystery of membrane 
organization: composition, regulation and physiological relevance of lipid rafts,” Nat Rev 
Mol Cell Biol, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 361–374, 2017, doi: 10.1038/nrm.2017.16.The. 
[13] 
S. Maeda et al., “Structure, lipid scrambling activity and role in autophagosome formation 
of ATG9A,” Nat Struct Mol Biol, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1194–1201, 2020, doi: 
10.1038/s41594-020-00520-2. 
[14] 
Y. Wang et al., “Substrate transport and specificity in a phospholipid flippase,” bioRxiv, 
pp. 1–21, 2020. 
==PAGE:42==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
41 
 
[15] 
J. S. Allhusen and J. C. Conboy, “The ins and outs of lipid flip-flop,” Acc Chem Res, vol. 
50, no. 1, pp. 58–65, 2017, doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00435. 
[16] 
F. X. Contreras, L. Sánchez-Magraner, A. Alonso, and F. M. Goñi, “Transbilayer (flip-
flop) lipid motion and lipid scrambling in membranes,” FEBS Lett, vol. 584, no. 9, pp. 
1779–1786, 2010, doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.12.049. 
[17] 
J. I. Elliott et al., “Membrane phosphatidylserine distribution as a non-apoptotic signalling 
mechanism in lymphocytes,” Nat Cell Biol, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 808–816, 2005, doi: 
10.1038/ncb1279. 
[18] 
S. Gupta and R. Ashkar, “The dynamic face of lipid membranes,” Soft Matter, vol. 17, no. 
29, pp. 6910–6928, 2021, doi: 10.1039/d1sm00646k. 
[19] 
H. Yamamoto, S. Zhang, and N. Mizushima, “Autophagy genes in biology and disease,” 
Nat Rev Genet, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 382–400, 2023, doi: 10.1038/s41576-022-00562-w. 
[20] 
C. Kishi-Itakura, I. Koyama-Honda, E. Itakura, and N. Mizushima, “Correction to 
Ultrastructural analysis of autophagosome organization using mammalian autophagy-
deficient cells [Journal of Cell Science, 2014, 127, 4089-4102],” J Cell Sci, vol. 127, no. 
22, p. 4984, 2014, doi: 10.1242/jcs.164293. 
[21] 
D. Popovic and I. Dikic, “TBC1D5 and the AP2 complex regulate ATG9 trafficking and 
initiation of autophagy,” EMBO Rep, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 392–401, 2014, doi: 
10.1002/embr.201337995. 
[22] 
A. R. van Vliet et al., “ATG9A and ATG2A form a heteromeric complex essential for 
autophagosome formation,” Mol Cell, vol. 82, no. 22, pp. 4324-4339.e8, 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.molcel.2022.10.017. 
[23] 
K. Matoba et al., “Atg9 is a lipid scramblase that mediates autophagosomal membrane 
expansion,” Nat Struct Mol Biol, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1185–1193, 2020, doi: 
10.1038/s41594-020-00518-w. 
[24] 
C. M. Guardia et al., “Structure of Human ATG9A, the Only Transmembrane Protein of 
the Core Autophagy Machinery,” Cell Rep, vol. 31, no. 13, 2020, doi: 
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107837. 
[25] 
M. E. Falzone, M. Malvezzi, B. C. Lee, and A. Accardi, “Known structures and unknown 
mechanisms of TMEM16 scramblases and channels,” Journal of General Physiology, vol. 
150, no. 7, pp. 933–947, 2018, doi: 10.1085/jgp.201711957. 
[26] 
C. Staudt, F. Gilis, M. Boonen, and M. Jadot, “Molecular determinants that mediate the 
sorting of human ATG9A from the endoplasmic reticulum,” Biochim Biophys Acta Mol 
Cell Res, vol. 1863, no. 9, pp. 2299–2310, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.06.007. 
[27] 
S. Esmail and M. F. Manolson, “Advances in understanding N-glycosylation structure, 
function, and regulation in health and disease,” Eur J Cell Biol, vol. 100, no. 7–8, p. 
151186, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2021.151186. 
==PAGE:43==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
42 
 
[28] 
W. F. D. Bennett and D. P. Tieleman, “Computer simulations of lipid membrane domains,” 
Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr, vol. 1828, no. 8, pp. 1765–1776, 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.03.004. 
[29] 
A. Kukol, Molecular modeling of proteins, second edition: methods in molecular biology. 
2015. 
[30] 
C. Gupta, D. Sarkar, D. P. Tieleman, and A. Singharoy, “The ugly, bad, and good stories 
of large-scale biomolecular simulations,” Curr Opin Struct Biol, vol. 73, p. 102338, 2022, 
doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2022.102338. 
[31] 
R. Bradley and R. Radhakrishnan, “Coarse-grained models for protein-cell membrane 
interactions,” Polymers (Basel), vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 890–936, 2013, doi: 
10.3390/polym5030890. 
[32] 
E. Fadda, “Molecular simulations of complex carbohydrates and glycoconjugates,” Curr 
Opin Chem Biol, vol. 69, p. 102175, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2022.102175. 
[33] 
A. N. Leonard, E. Wang, V. Monje-Galvan, and J. B. Klauda, “Developing and Testing of 
Lipid Force Fields with Applications to Modeling Cellular Membranes,” Chem Rev, vol. 
119, no. 9, pp. 6227–6269, 2019, doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00384. 
[34] 
L. Monticelli, S. K. Kandasamy, X. Periole, R. G. Larson, D. P. Tieleman, and S. J. 
Marrink, “The MARTINI coarse-grained force field: Extension to proteins,” J Chem 
Theory Comput, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 819–834, 2008, doi: 10.1021/ct700324x. 
[35] 
K. Vanommeslaeghe et al., “CHARMM General Force Field: A Force Field for Drug-Like 
Molecules Compatible with the CHARMM All-Atom Additive Biological Force Fields,” 
J Comput Chem, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 671–690, 2010, doi: 10.1002/jcc.21367. 
[36] 
J. Wang, R. M. Wolf, J. W. Caldwell, P. A. Kollman, and D. A. Case, “Development and 
testing of a general Amber force field,” J Comput Chem, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1157–1174, 
2004, doi: 10.1002/jcc.20035. 
[37] 
K. Sawade and C. Peter, “Multiscale simulations of protein and membrane systems,” Curr 
Opin Struct Biol, vol. 72, pp. 203–208, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2021.11.010. 
[38] 
S. Scrima et al., “Unraveling membrane properties at the organelle-level with LipidDyn,” 
Comput 
Struct 
Biotechnol 
J, 
vol. 
20, 
pp. 
3604–3614, 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2022.06.054. 
[39] 
M. T. Snaebjornsson, S. Janaki-Raman, and A. Schulze, “Greasing the Wheels of the 
Cancer Machine: The Role of Lipid Metabolism in Cancer,” Cell Metab, vol. 31, no. 1, 
pp. 62–76, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.11.010. 
[40] 
K. Yang and X. Han, “Lipidomics: Techniques, Applications, and Outcomes Related to 
Biomedical Sciences,” Trends Biochem Sci, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 954–969, 2016, doi: 
10.1016/j.tibs.2016.08.010. 
[41] 
W. Song et al., “PyLipID: A Python Package for Analysis of Protein-Lipid Interactions 
from Molecular Dynamics Simulations,” J Chem Theory Comput, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1188–
1201, 2022, doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00708. 
==PAGE:44==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
43 
 
[42] 
B. I. Sejdiu and D. P. Tieleman, “ProLint: A web-based framework for the automated data 
analysis and visualization of lipid-protein interactions,” Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 49, no. 
W1, pp. W544–W550, 2021, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab409. 
[43] 
P. Smith and C. D. Lorenz, “LiPyphilic: A Python Toolkit for the Analysis of Lipid 
Membrane Simulations,” J Chem Theory Comput, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 5907–5919, 2021, 
doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00447. 
[44] 
N. Michaud-Agrawal, E. J. Denning, T. B. Woolf, and O. Beckstein, “MDAnalysis: A 
toolkit for the analysis of molecular dynamics simulations,” J Comput Chem, vol. 32, no. 
10, pp. 2319–2327, Jul. 2011, doi: 10.1002/jcc.21787. 
[45] 
J. Lee et al., “CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder for Complex Biological Membrane 
Simulations with Glycolipids and Lipoglycans,” J Chem Theory Comput, vol. 15, no. 1, 
pp. 775–786, 2019, doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01066. 
[46] 
M. J. Abraham et al., “Gromacs: High performance molecular simulations through multi-
level parallelism from laptops to supercomputers,” SoftwareX, vol. 1–2, pp. 19–25, 2015, 
doi: 10.1016/j.softx.2015.06.001. 
[47] 
S. Scrima et al., “Unraveling membrane properties at the organelle-level with LipidDyn,” 
Comput 
Struct 
Biotechnol 
J, 
vol. 
20, 
pp. 
3604–3614, 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2022.06.054. 
[48] 
S. Buchoux, “FATSLiM: A fast and robust software to analyze MD simulations of 
membranes,” 
Bioinformatics, 
vol. 
33, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
133–134, 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1093/bioinformatics/btw563. 
[49] 
P. Smith and C. D. Lorenz, “LiPyphilic: A Python Toolkit for the Analysis of Lipid 
Membrane Simulations,” J Chem Theory Comput, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 5907–5919, 2021, 
doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00447. 
[50] 
N. Eswar et al., Comparative Protein Structure Modeling Using MODELLER, vol. 50, no. 
1. 2007. doi: 10.1002/0471140864.ps0209s50. 
[51] 
G. Q. Dong, H. Fan, D. Schneidman-Duhovny, B. Webb, A. Sali, and A. Tramontano, 
“Optimized atomic statistical potentials: Assessment of protein interfaces and loops,” 
Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 24, pp. 3158–3166, 2013, doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt560. 
[52] 
J. Lee et al., “CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder for Complex Biological Membrane 
Simulations with Glycolipids and Lipoglycans,” J Chem Theory Comput, vol. 15, no. 1, 
pp. 775–786, 2019, doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01066. 
[53] 
M. A. Lomize, I. D. Pogozheva, H. Joo, H. I. Mosberg, and A. L. Lomize, “OPM database 
and PPM web server: Resources for positioning of proteins in membranes,” Nucleic Acids 
Res, vol. 40, no. D1, pp. 370–376, 2012, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr703. 
[54] 
A. D. MacKerell et al., “All-atom empirical potential for molecular modeling and 
dynamics studies of proteins,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 102, no. 18, pp. 
3586–3616, 1998, doi: 10.1021/jp973084f. 
==PAGE:45==
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
Sergio Esteban Echeverría 
44 
 
[55] 
A. L. Duncan, R. A. Corey, and M. S. P. Sansom, “Defining how multiple lipid species 
interact with inward rectifier potassium (Kir2) channels,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, vol. 
117, no. 14, pp. 7803–7813, 2020, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1918387117. 
[56] 
S. Nosé, “Molecular Physics: An International Journal at the Interface Between Chemistry 
and Physics A molecular dynamics method for simulations in the canonical ensemble A 
molecular dynamics method for simulations in the canonical ensemblet,” An International 
Journal at the Interface Between Chemistry and Physics MOLECULAR PHYSICS, vol. 
52, no. July 2012, pp. 255–268, 1984. 
[57] 
M. Parrinello and A. Rahman, “Polymorphic transitions in single crystals: A new 
molecular dynamics method,” J Appl Phys, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 7182–7190, 1981, doi: 
10.1063/1.328693. 
[58] 
B. Hess, H. Bekker, H. J. C. Berendsen, and J. G. E. M. Fraaije, “LINCS: A Linear 
Constraint Solver for molecular simulations,” J Comput Chem, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1463–
1472, 1997, doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(199709)18:12<1463::AID-JCC4>3.0.CO;2-
H. 
[59] 
H. G. Petersen, “Accuracy and efficiency of the particle mesh Ewald method,” J Chem 
Phys, vol. 103, no. 9, pp. 3668–3679, 1995, doi: 10.1063/1.470043. 
[60] 
D. Mercadante, F. Gräter, and C. Daday, “CONAN: A Tool to Decode Dynamical 
Information from Molecular Interaction Maps,” Biophys J, vol. 114, no. 6, pp. 1267–1273, 
2018, doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2018.01.033. 
[61] 
V. Corradi et al., “Lipid-Protein Interactions Are Unique Fingerprints for Membrane 
Proteins,” 
ACS 
Cent 
Sci, 
vol. 
4, 
no. 
6, 
pp. 
709–717, 
2018, 
doi: 
10.1021/acscentsci.8b00143. 
[62] 
L. J. Heyer, S. Kruglyak, and S. Yooseph, “Exploring expression data identification and 
analysis of coexpressed genes,” Genome Res, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1106–1115, 1999, doi: 
10.1101/gr.9.11.1106. 
[63] 
R. González-Alemán, D. Hernández-Castillo, J. Caballero, and L. A. Montero-Cabrera, 
“Quality Threshold Clustering of Molecular Dynamics: A Word of Caution,” J Chem Inf 
Model, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 467–472, 2020, doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00558. 
[64] 
T. Scharl and F. Leisch, “The Stochastic QT Clust Algorithm: Evaluation of Stability and 
Variance on Time Course Microarray Data,” Proceedings in Computational Statistics, pp. 
1015–1022, 2006. 
[65] 
P. Virtanen et al., “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python,” 
Nat Methods, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 261–272, 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2. 
[66] 
E. Chovancova et al., “CAVER 3.0: A Tool for the Analysis of Transport Pathways in 
Dynamic Protein Structures,” PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 23–30, 2012, doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002708. 
  
