==PAGE:1==
Department of Environmental and
Resource Engineering
Climate & Monitoring
Evaluation of carbon monoxide exchanges
in a rural landscape as proxy for the
distinction between fossil and natural
carbon dioxide emissions
Master Thesis
Pierre Pousset
supervised by Assoc. Pr. Andreas Ibrom
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Abstract
1
Acknowledgement
2
1
Introduction
3
2
Materials and methods
6
2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
The study area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
The eddy covariance method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Eddy-covariance CO measurements from the Risø tall tower, and other
meteorological data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Boundary layer height time series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.5
Flux footprint model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.6
Data used for estimating surface emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
General method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Identification of relevant processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Expressing the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio as a function of surface sources . .
18
2.2.4
General scheme for estimating CO and FFCO2 emissions at high spatio-
temporal resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.5
Estimation of CO and FFCO2 emissions from heating of buildings . . . . .
21
2.2.6
Estimation of CO and FFCO2 emissions from road transport . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.7
Overall formula to estimate CO2,ff fluxes from CO flux measurements
. . .
29
3
Results
29
3.1
Estimated spatiotemporal variations of CO2,ff and CO surface fluxes and of their
ratio in the study area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Heating surface flux
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Road Transport surface flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.3
Total surface flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Estimated CO2,ff-CO ratio in the measured fluxes from the study area . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Time series of simulated CO2,ff fluxes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Discussion
42
4.1
Variability and of the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Comparison of the measured CO fluxes with simulated CO fluxes . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion
43
References
45
A Appendices
50
A.1 Links to each data source used to estimate heating and road transport emissions .
50
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Reducing emissions of fossil fuel carbon dioxide plays a key role in mitigating climate change, and
its dire impacts in the near future. Monitoring such emissions is thus critical To elaborate efficient
and fair policies, monitoring such emissions is critical, not only through bottom-up inventories but
also through direct measurements. The use of carbon monoxide (CO) as a tracer to distinguish
fossil fuel carbon dioxide (CO2,ff) emissions from the biogenic carbon dioxide cycle as been proposed
and tested in previous studies, in which mean concentration measurements were used. In this study,
the eddy covariance method is used in conjunction with the CO tracer methodology to estimate
CO2,ff from a rural area, where biogenic cycles are more significant than previously studied urban
areas. One of the opportunity of the eddy covariance method is that the scale of the studied area
can be reduced and background concentrations are not considered, leading to more accurate results.
To carry out this technique, estimates of the emissions of these carbon oxides with a high spatial
and temporal resolution were calculated, mostly from open data from Denmark. This estimation
process focused on emissions from road transport and the heating of buildings. The resulting
surface fluxes of CO and CO2,ff and their ratio varied significantly not only geographically but also
throughout the day, between week days and weekends and throughout the year. Primary road 6 and
towns such as ˚Agerup and Gundsømagle are identified as main CO and CO2,ff sources in the study
area. Despite this variability, the CO2,ff-CO ratio that is estimated to have been observed by the
eddy covariance instrument has an average value of 224 molCO2,ff/molCO and a standard deviation
of only 61.5 molCO2,ff/molCO. This value is higher than previous studies using concentrations.
The emissions of CO seem to be underestimated, and modelling the impact of natural sources
of CO such as the oxidation of volatile hydrocarbons is critical for future applications of this method.
Keywords
Fossil fuel carbon dioxide tracer; Carbon oxides emission ratio model; High-spatiotemporal-
resolution carbon oxides emission inventory; Carbon monoxide; Eddy covariance flux; Flux footprint;
Micrometeorology
1
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
First, I would like to express my gratitude to Associate Professor Andreas Ibrom, who supervised this
master thesis. His guidance through the field of micrometeorology, eddy covariance measurements
and flux footprints was essential for conducting this master thesis. Our frequent meetings yielded
invaluable insights for my work.
I am also thankful for the help that PhD. student Anastasia Gorlenko and Postdoc Konstantinos
Kissas provided. Their inputs during meetings, as well as their assistance with the eddy covariance
data, the boundary layer height data and the data from DTU Transport, was critical.
Lastly, I am truly grateful for R´emi, my boyfriend: we mutually supported each other during
the 5-month-long process of writing our respective master thesis.
2
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Climate change has already caused widespread adverse impacts on ecosystems and humans, and
climate hazards will likely increase in the near, mid and long term future [IPCC, 2022]. The main
driver of climate change is the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations, due
to anthropogenic emissions [IPCC, 2021]. Given that more than 80% of all anthropogenic CO2
emissions originate from the combustion of fossil fuels (other sources are deforestation, biomass
burning or cement production) [IPCC, 2021], reducing such emissions is paramount to mitigate the
effects of climate change. With this in mind, the European Union aims to become climate neutral
by 2050 [EU, 2021]. Hence the need to monitor the emissions of fossil fuel carbon dioxide (CO2,ff),
to assist in evaluating the effectiveness of mitigation policies, and in making more targeted, more
equitable and more effective policies [Gurney et al., 2020].
Distinguishing the fossil fuel fraction of measured CO2 concentrations, which also include back-
ground and biogenic CO2, is possible using carbon 14 (14C) analyses, since millions-year-old organic
molecules in fossil fuels are deprived of this unstable carbon isotope with a 5,700-year half-life,
whereas it is continuously produced in the atmosphere [Levin et al., 2003, Gamage et al., 2020].
However, conducting precise radiocarbon analyses with high temporal resolution is too labori-
ous and expensive [Gamnitzer et al., 2006, Van Der Laan et al., 2010]. Another method to es-
timate CO2,ff emissions, which uses carbon monoxide (CO) concentration measurements as a
proxy for CO2,ff, has been proposed by several recent greenhouse gas and atmospheric research
studies [Gichuhi and Gamage, 2023, Konovalov et al., 2016, Lopez et al., 2013, Wang et al., 2010,
Van Der Laan et al., 2010, Gamnitzer et al., 2006]. CO is a trace gas in the atmosphere, with a
tropospheric lifetime ranging from 30 to 90 days [Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016].
Moreover, CO itself contributes to climate change, albeit indirectly. This short-lived climate
forcer impacts the climate because of its oxidation into CO2, yet it is worse for the climate than
directly emitting CO2 because of its interaction with atmospheric processes involving potent green-
house gases (methane degradation and tropospheric ozone production) [Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016].
As CO reacts with hydroxyl radicals to form CO2, it lowers OH atmospheric concentration, slowing
the degradation of methane in the atmosphere, i.e. increasing the atmospheric lifetime of methane
and its climate impact [Daniel and Solomon, 1998]. CO also contributes to the production of
tropospheric ozone [Daniel and Solomon, 1998]. It is estimated that CO has a 100-year global
warming potential of 1.9 [Forster et al., 2007]. In addition, exposure to high ambient concentrations
of CO can reduce oxygen levels in body tissues, due to carbon monoxide’s ability to bind with
haemoglobin, and increase heart attack risks [Lee et al., 2020]. CO is considered to be a priority air
pollutant by the World’s Health Organisation, who has set an air quality guidelines of 24h-average
CO concentration of 4 mg.m−3 (i.e. around 3.4 ppm) [WHO, 2021]. Even though these CO
concentration guidelines are rarely exceeded in outdoor air in Europe, they may be in cities in the
rest of the world [Guerreiro et al., 2014, Saadi et al., 2021]. Therefore, monitoring CO fluxes also
supports the development of measures to mitigate climate change and reduce air pollution.
Figure 1: Diagram of air flows near the surface with a mast equipped with an eddy covariance system
(image reproduced from [Burba, 2013], ©LI-COR Inc.)
3
==PAGE:6==
The fluxes of CO in a given region can be measured with a high temporal resolution with
the eddy covariance methodology, although complex setup and data processing steps are required
[Burba, 2013].
This method has been developed since the 1980s and it has become the pre-
ferred technique to assess the exchange of trace gases in surface-atmosphere exchange studies
[Aubinet et al., 1999, Rebmann et al., 2018]. With this environmental monitoring technology, the
simultaneous variations of vertical wind speeds and of gas concentrations are interpreted as fluxes of
gas molecules being transported by moving swirls of air, from a representative area on the surface
to the top of a tower, as illustrated in Figure 1. To do so, this direct atmospheric measurement
method relies on high precision measurements and atmospheric transport models. This top-down
approach offers an alternative way to verify regional bottom-up emission inventories, like the
estimation framework of the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP),
that are typically derived from economic statistics [Lopez et al., 2013, Albrektsen et al., 2019].
This is all the more important as these bottom-up estimates are often associated with considerable
uncertainties [Konovalov et al., 2016].
CO may be a good tracer of CO2,ff because their sources are closely linked (although the
CO2,ff-CO emission ratio varies significantly depending on the condition of combustion and
on the fuel type), and CO concentrations can be easily and precisely measured on a hourly
basis [Gamnitzer et al., 2006].
However, CO is not only emitted by the combustion of fos-
sil fuels, but also by atmospheric oxidation of methane and other volatile organic compounds
[Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016], as well as from the photodegradation and thermochem-
ical degradation of organic surfaces such as living plants, plant litter and other soil organic material
[Mikkelsen et al., 2017, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016]. In addition, the atmosphere constitutes a sink
for CO as it reacts with hydroxyl radicals (OH) [Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016]. A
strong signal of CO and CO2,ff can be measured near cities [Gamnitzer et al., 2006], however in
rural areas these signals may be more heavily influenced by natural processes.
The research question investigated in this master thesis is therefore the following:
• How can fossil fuel carbon dioxide emissions from a Danish rural landscape be estimated
based on carbon monoxide eddy covariance flux measurements?
Previous research studies have used the estimated and measured ratio of CO2,ff-CO not only to
evaluate the performance of different bottom-up FFCO2 estimates [Gurney et al., 2020], but also
to directly partition fossil fuel CO2 from biogenic and background CO2 in measured CO2 concen-
trations. Turnbull et al. showed that such CO2,ff proxy approach with CO can be well-correlated
with the robust 14C technique when accounting for non fossil fuel sources of CO and CO sinks,
although biases due to these additional processed have been observed [Turnbull et al., ]. Lopez
et al., who conducted measurements of 14C in Paris, also pointed out that the 14C method, as
opposed to the CO tracer method, requires corrections for nuclear plant’s production of 14C, if such
plants are located nearby. Quasi-continuous CO concentration measurements have been used to
enhance the temporal resolution of weekly 14CO2 analyses using integrated sampling, where CO2
is captured in a solution [Lopez et al., 2013, Van Der Laan et al., 2010, Gamnitzer et al., 2006]
(with Lopez et al. even distinguishing different fossil sources, i.e. gas, liquid or solid, using
13C isotope measurements). To estimate the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio, some studies relied on
spatial databases of emissions of CO and CO2,ff such as EDGAR or EMEP’s gridded emis-
sions [Konovalov et al., 2016, Van Der Laan et al., 2010, Gamnitzer et al., 2006, Turnbull et al., ],
while other studies calculated it based the correlation between simultaneous changes in CO and
CO2 measured concentrations [Gichuhi and Gamage, 2023, Lopez et al., 2013, Wang et al., 2010,
Palmer et al., 2006]. For this master thesis, as simultaneous CO and CO2 measurements are not
available, the former approach is followed. This CO tracer method has been applied concentrations
measurements carried from ground-based instruments [Gamage et al., 2020, Lopez et al., 2013,
Wang et al., 2010, Van Der Laan et al., 2010, Gamnitzer et al., 2006, Turnbull et al., ], but also
from aircrafts [Palmer et al., 2006] as well as with satellites [Konovalov et al., 2016]. This diversity
of concentration measurement techniques is explained by the diverse geographical scopes at which
this method was employed: from continental scales [Konovalov et al., 2016, Palmer et al., 2006] to
less extended regional scales to quantify national emissions [Van Der Laan et al., 2010] or emissions
from megacities [Lopez et al., 2013, Djuricin et al., 2010, Wang et al., 2010] and medium-sized
cities [Gichuhi and Gamage, 2023, Gamnitzer et al., 2006]. However, no record of this approach
4
==PAGE:7==
being used at the landscape scale ( km2) for a rural area have been found in the scientific lit-
erature. This may be explained by the fact that CO signals are more important in urban areas
[Lopez et al., 2013, Gamnitzer et al., 2006], but also because previous studies have worked with
concentrations, and not with tall tower eddy covariance fluxes, as proposed in this study. The
eddy covariance technique offers the opportunity to measure trace gas fluxes with a similarly
high temporal resolution but at a higher spatial resolution than strict concentration approaches.
Measured turbulent CO fluxes are more heavily influenced by local emissions as defined by the flux
footprint, whereas mean CO boundary layer concentrations may be influenced by larger source
areas. In addition, studies measuring CO and CO2 atmospheric concentrations need to account
for background concentrations of these gases, while the eddy covariance method is exempted from
such considerations. When using concentrations, the limited residence time of CO in the boundary
layer impacts significantly the measurements; CO sinks thus need to be appropriately modelled
[Djuricin et al., 2010, Turnbull et al., ]. By contrast, the sinks of CO may have a less significant im-
pact on tall tower eddy covariance flux measurements, given that the more restricted source areas are
also associated with a smaller time between the emission and the detection of CO molecules by eddy
covariance technology. Previous studies also suggested that seasonal, weekly and hourly variations
of the CO2, ff-CO ratio need to be considered [Gichuhi and Gamage, 2023, Djuricin et al., 2010].
Likewise, some prior research concluded that detailed local data on emissions is required to ef-
fectively use CO concentrations as proxy for CO2,ff, unless the study area is small and/or very
homogeneous [Djuricin et al., 2010, Gamnitzer et al., 2006]. . Landscape-scale studies, enabled by
the eddy covariance method, may thus be well-suited for this CO tracer method. Nonetheless, as the
source area of eddy fluxes is smaller, the CO2,ff-CO flux ratio is more sensitive to the heterogeneity
of sources in the study area. The grid used in spatial emission databases employed in earlier studies
(e.g. EMEP, EDGAR) may be too coarse to account for the varied and unevenly distributed sources
”seen” by the tall tower eddy covariance system in the study area.
The aim of this master thesis is to estimate the fluxes of fossil fuel carbon dioxide (CO2,ff)
based on observations of carbon monoxide (CO) eddy fluxes in a Danish rural landscape measured
between 2014 and 2015 from a tall tower located on DTU Risø campus. The following research
objectives for this master thesis thus are:
– To establish a method to estimate the surface fluxes of CO2,ff and CO that is adapted to the
study area and mostly based on open data, with a spatial and temporal resolution compatible
with the eddy covariance measurements;
– To apply this method in the study area, in order to highlight emission hotspots and compute
local ratios of CO2,ff-CO emissions;
– To estimate the expected ratios of CO2,ff-CO in the measured fluxes using a flux footprint
model, and to provide an approximation of a typical value for such ratio in a Danish rural
area;
– To construct a time series of simulated CO2,ff fluxes at the tall tower derived from the
aforementioned CO2,ff-CO ratios;
– To identify the main challenges and sources of uncertainty associated with this approach.
This master thesis contributes to the research project ”Observation System of Greenhouse Gas
Sources and Sinks at the Landscape Scale for Verification of the Green Transition of Denmark”, led
by Pr. Andreas Ibrom at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
After describing the study area and the data and tools used, the method developed to combine
top-down CO flux measurements with bottom-up CO2,ff flux estimates is described in details (for
reference in the research project) in section 2. Afterwards, within section 3, the obtained CO2,ff-CO
emission ratios, as well as the constructed time series of simulated flux of CO2,ff are presented.
Lastly, section 4 offers some perspectives on the ratio of CO2,ff and CO emissions, and comparison
of CO emission estimates with eddy covariance measurements leading to qualitative consideration
of uncertainties.
5
==PAGE:8==
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Materials
Data processing and calculations were carried with the R programming environment version 4.2.2
[R Core Team, 2022] in the RStudio integrated development environment version 2021.9.0.351
[RStudio Team, 2021], and with the geographic information system (GIS) software QGIS version
3.22.10 [QGIS Development Team, 2022]. The coordinate reference system (CRS) used in QGIS
used is the European Terrestrial Reference System 1989 datum with Lambert Azimuthal Equal
Area projection (ETRS89/LAEA, ESPG:3035), which preserves relative area and is the CRS used
for geographical data sets in the European Union (EU Commission Regulation No 1089/2010 of 23
November 2010, Annex II).
2.1.1
The study area
The area under study is a Danish rural lanscape, spanning over several squared kilometers, located
north of the city of Roskilde and east of the Roskilde fjord, in Zealand, Denmark. It stretches
across parts of 3 Danish municipalities: Roskilde, Høje-Taastrup and Egedal municipality. It was
selected given the availability of eddy covariance measurements from the Risø tall tower (at 55.6942
latitude and 12.0883 longitude in the coordinate reference system EPSG:4326 WGS84), located on
the Risø campus of the Technical University of Denmark. Originally, eddy covariance measurements
were carried from the Risø peninsula on Roskilde fjord to study NO2 fluxes from this eutrophic
coastal system [Lequy et al., 2022].
Figure
2:
Land
cover
of
the
area
surrounding
the
Risø
tall
tower,
located
east
of
the
Roskilde Fjord (Zealand,
Denmark),
as described in the CORINE Land Cover 2012 database
[European Environment Agency (EEA), 2012]. The outline of the study area, which is defined as the
portion of the 10km-radius around the tower located between the radii with a respective angle of 20 and
110 degrees from the direction of the north, is also shown. (map projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
6
==PAGE:9==
More precisely, the study area is defined as a sector of the circle of radius 10km centered on the
tall tower shown in Figure 2. This sector is delimited by the radii with a respective angle of 20°
and 110° from the north direction. As illustrated in Figure 2, which presents land cover data from
the CORINE Land Cover 2012 database [European Environment Agency (EEA), 2012], this area
is mostly covered by agricultural areas. This quarter of a circle is delimited on the north by the city
of Jyllinge and on the south by the city of Hedehusene, which were excluded of the study area in
order to preserve its homogeneity as a rural area. Nonetheless, land covers other than agricultural
areas are present in the sector under study, such as such as forests, small towns or water bodies.
This relatively flat area dominated by agriculture is typical of a Danish rural landscape.
The study area only extends up to 10km form the tall tower, as the typical flux footprint upwind
distance is said to follow the rule of thumb whereby the fetch is roughly 100 times the measurement
height [Burba, 2013], which is about 100 meters. A previous study on NO2 flux measurements
made with the same eddy covariance system during the same measurement campaign also found
that the corresponding flux footprints for these measurements ranged up to 5km from the tall tower
during the day and more than 10 km during the night, using the footprint model by Kormann
and Meixner [Lequy et al., 2022, Kormann and Meixner, 2001]. However, a different flux footprint
model will be used in this study (see section 2.1.5).
Another important feature of the study area for CO and CO2,ff estimation is the presence of
heavily trafficked road (Primærrute 6, Frederiksborgvej) crossing the study area from South to
North near the tall tower. In addition, an important motorway is located outside of the study
area, on the south of the study area (Primærrute 21). Also these roads are not visible on Figure 2,
they are depicted in Figure 10 in subsection 2.2.6. In fact, 422 km of roads and paths crosses the
78.5-km2 large study area, mostly roads of lesser importance in the network.
The wind patterns over the study area (direction and speed), are presented in a later section
presenting the measurements (section 2.1.2, Figure 4).
2.1.2
The eddy covariance method
The conservation of CO within a control volume, can be written as in a Cartesian coordinate system
(x1, x2, x3), with x1 the direction of the mean wind and x3 the normal to the ground surface
[Stull, 1988, Aubinet et al., 1999]:
∂CCO
∂t
+ uj
∂CCO
∂xj
−DCO = SCO
(1)
With CCO the concentration of CO in the air, t the time, uj the wind speed in direction xj,
DCO the molecular diffusion and SCO the mean source/sink term of CO.
The Reynolds decomposition of a variable into its mean and turbulent part (i.e. α = α + α′
with α a meteorological variable, resulting in α′ = 0), is then introduced into equation 1. After
integrating equation 1 along the air flow path in the vertical direction from 0 to the measurement
height hm, the following is obtained, where molecular diffusion as well as mean vertical and
horizontal advective mean fluxes are neglected (as we assume that the terrain is horizontal and
uniform, and that the vertical flux is fully turbulent) [Aubinet et al., 1999, Stull, 1988, Burba, 2013,
Rebmann et al., 2018]:
u′
3 · C′
CO +
Z hm
o
∂CCO
∂t
dx3 =
Z hm
o
SCOdx3
(2)
In equation 2, the first term corresponds to the eddy flux at the measurement height, the second
to the storage change in the column of air below the measurement height and the third to emissions
or removals of CO, either anthropogenic or natural. Therefore, eddy covariance measurement can
be used to estimate sources and sinks of CO in the environment.
The assumption that the area of interest is horizontal and uniform is considered to be a good
approximation for the Danish rural landscape under study (it is dominated by agricultural fields as
shown in Figure 2).
For eddy measurements to be representative of surface exchanges of an upwind area, they should
also be carried inside the constant flux layer within the boundary layer, and the divergence and
convergence of air flows should be negligible [Burba, 2013]. Furthermore, it is assumed that the
7
==PAGE:10==
air flow is not distorted by the tower or the instruments themselves (hence the use of somewhat
thin masts) [Burba, 2013]. It is also assumed that an eddy’s shape and properties do not change
as it blows past the sensors (it is ”frozen”) [Stull, 1988]. This latter assumption is called Taylor’s
hypothesis, and it is valid when the turbulence intensity is small compared to the mean wind speed
[Stull, 1988].
As dry molar ratios are obtained through the measurement campaign (as described in section
2.1.3), the eddy covariance CO flux FCO (in molCO.m−2.s−1) is calculated as (assuming that dry
air molar volume fluctuations are negligible) [Ibrom et al., 2007, Burba, 2013]:
FCO = p −e
p · v · w′ · r′
CO
(3)
With p the air pressure, e the partial pressure of water vapour, v the molar volume of the moist
air (m3.mol−1
air), w = u3 the upward vertical wind speed in m.s−1 and rCO the mixing ratio in
dry air of CO in molCO/moldry air (here defined as the ratio of moles of CO per mole of dry air).
Consequently, positive values of fluxes correspond to upward fluxes, while negative values of fluxes
correspond to downward fluxes.
Using the eddy covariance flux measurement and storage change estimations, the natural and
anthropogenic emission of CO can be estimated based on equation 2.
2.1.3
Eddy-covariance CO measurements from the Risø tall tower, and other meteo-
rological data
Carbon monoxide turbulent fluxes east of Roskilde fjord were measured with an eddy covariance
sensor placed on a tall tower located on the Risø peninsula, as depicted in Figure 3. The measure-
ments were conducted during 15 months in 2014 and 2015 (from 8th July 2014 to 8th October
2015), with a few data gaps due to pump and computer breakdowns (e.g. in April 2015, as shown
in Figure 5). Fluxes are calculated every 30 minutes as the covariance of the vertical wind speed
and of the CO molar fraction in the air samples times the molar volume of dry air (as in equation
3). On the Risø tall tower, a 3D ultrasonic anemometer (USA-1, METEK, Elmshorn, Germany)
measured wind speeds and directions 94 meters above ground, while air samples from the same
height were pumped through a 150-meter-long nylon tube to a quantum cascade laser analyzer
(Model N2O/CO-23d, Los Gatos Research, Mountain View, USA), which measured the mixing
ratio of N2O and CO. As shown in Figure 3, the sonic anemometer and the air intake of the gas
analyser are placed sufficiently far apart to limit air flow distortions but close enough so that they
observe the same eddies [Burba, 2013]. Nonetheless, the air inlet not being placed in the middle of
the sonic anemometer still induces a low-pass filter as small eddies may be observed by only one of
the 2 instruments.
8
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3: (a) Picture of the 125-meter-tall tower on the Risø peninsula from the ground. (b) Picture
of the eddy covariance instruments at 94m above ground with Roskilde fjord in the background, one can
see the 3D sonic anemometer on the right and of the air inlet of the gas analyser in the middle. Pictures
reproduced from [Ibrom et al., 2015] with the author’s permission.
The instruments should also be within the daytime constant flux layer, which typically extends
up to 100 to 150 meters [Burba, 2013], tall tower eddy covariance measurements may thus under-
estimate emissions because of the vertical flux divergence (correcting factors have been proposed
[Drysdale et al., 2022, Stull, 1988]). The height of the instruments enables the measurement of
fluxes at the landscape scale (e.g. up to several kilometers away from the tower), and it limits
the impact of local surface heterogeneity on the flux measurements. Eddies farther from the
ground also tend to be larger, thus at the instruments’ height, a smaller share of the pollutant
transport is done by high frequency air movements that may be difficult to measure [Burba, 2013].
The measurements frequency was 10Hz, which is high enough to capture fluxes due to small
eddies (of the order of a 10th of a second) since eddies of very different sizes coexist and overlap
[Stull, 1988, Burba, 2013]. Nonetheless, there are eddies with even lower frequencies whose contri-
bution to fluxes may not be detected (low-pass filter). On the other hand, considering time frames
of 30 minutes to average parameters and compute covariances induces a high-pass filter as the
influence of eddies with larger frequencies on the fluxes are not measured. However, this 30-minute
time resolution ensures that only turbulent fluxes are measured and not fluxes at synoptic or diurnal
scale [Stull, 1988, Burba, 2013].
Prior to this master thesis, the raw measurement data was processed by Pr. Andreas Ibrom
and his team, including corrections for the high-pass and low-pass filters previously mentioned,
as well as the physical effects of the closed-path eddy covariance system (such as the transport
time in the tubing system or the condensation of water onto particles adsorbed on the inside of
the tubes, or evaporation of such water [Ibrom et al., 2007]). More details on the eddy covariance
system and on data treatment can be found in the research article by Lequy et al. focusing on NO2
flux measurements made with the same eddy covariance system during the same measurement cam-
paign [Lequy et al., 2022], and in the textbook Eddy Covariance Method for Scientific, Industrial,
Agricultural and Regulatory Applications [Burba, 2013]. The values of the CO storage changes
below the tower were also estimated prior to this study, by assuming that the rate of concentration
change is vertically uniform (see the second term in equation 2). Other atmospheric parameters
were also measured or estimated for each 30-minute measurement (including wind direction, mean
wind speed, displacement height, Monin Obukhov length, friction velocity and standard deviation
of lateral velocity fluctuations).
These ready-to-use values of CO flux and atmospheric parameters were made available for this
9
==PAGE:12==
master thesis, i.e. no time was spent on designing or carrying the measurement campaign, nor was
time spent on the treatment of raw measurement data. Only some minor filtering was made on
the final measured flux data. Data points with any of the following characteristics were deemed
unrepresentative of surface fluxes and excluded from further analysis:
• the flux measurement quality was previously flagged as ”not use” (e.g. due to issues with
the instruments or to meteorological issue leading to the eddy covariance assumptions being
inapplicable, refer to [Foken and Wichura, 1996] for more details);
• the CO storage change value is not available;
• the pressure in the gas analyser cuvette was outside of its standard operating bounds (i.e.
when it was not between 83 Torr and 87 Torr);
• the friction velocity was smaller than 0.1 m/s;
• the measurements were not contained within the entrainment layer (i.e. the entrainment
layer height, considered to be 0.8 times the boundary layer height, must be higher than the
measurement height, set at 94m minus the displacement height, considered constant at 1m in
this dataset, although this displacement height estimation may be a high for an agricultural
area).
• the ratio of measurement height (93m as defined in the previous criterion) over the Monin
Obukhov length is lower than -15.5 (the flux footprint model used is not valid in such
conditions);
The three last excluding criteria are also requirements for the flux footprint model used and
presented in section 2.1.5. 28% of the initial 3402 observations for wind directions between 20°
and 110° (or 23% of the 19007 observations for all directions) were thus filtered out. The strictest
criteria (i.e. those disqualifying the most data points without considering any other criteria), were
in order the cuvette pressure criterion, the friction velocity criterion and the entrainment height
criterion. While each of these three criteria was enough to filter more than a thousand measurement
out of all observations, the CO storage change value and the Monin Obukhov length criteria only
lead to a few tens of values being discarded.
Figure 4 below shows the wind rose obtained from this measurement campaign, after applying
the filters described above. One can see that the dominant wind regime is from the southwest, with
some winds originating from the east. Between the 20° and 110° directions, most of the observations
are located on the southern part of this range. The location of the tower is not ideal to estimated
fluxes from the region under study. Positioning the tower northeast of the rural landscape would
likely offer more observations for this particular region (although the intention of this study is to
provide insights for another flux measurement campaign located in a different area).
10
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4: Wind rose showing the frequency of counts and wind speeds by wind directions for the valid CO
flux measurements observed from the Risø tower between 8th July 2014 and 8th October 2015 (the plot is
produced with the openair R package). The outline of the study area, between 20° and 110°, is also shown.
The time series of the measured CO fluxes (including storage changes) are presented in Figure 5
below. CO fluxes from the study area were measured at many times all throughout the measurement
campaign.
Figure 5: Time series of the measured CO flux 94 meters above ground at the Risø tall tower between 8th
July 2014 and 8th October 2015 (as the sum of the measured eddy covariance flux, after corrections, and
the storage change), with fluxes measured with a wind direction between 20° and 110° shown in red.
11
==PAGE:14==
2.1.4
Boundary layer height time series
The height of the atmospheric boundary layer is an important parameter for air pollution models.
Estimates of boundary layer height were obtained from the ERA5 database, the fifth generation
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) reanalysis, from the Coperni-
cus Climate Change Service (C3S) [Hersbach et al., 2023]. A climate reanalysis, such as ERA5,
consist in combining diverse historical meteorological observations (e.g. sattelite data and in-situ
measurements, which may have different temporal and spatial coverage) with modern atmospheric
models to compute consistent atmospheric parameter values over a long time period and across an
extensive area, with a high temporal and spatial resolutions. The ERA5 database provides a wide
range of atmospheric data (e.g. boundary layer height, precipitation data, air temperature and
wind speed at different heights, radiation balance parameters, etc.) globally from 1940 onward, at
hourly scale and with a temporal resolution of 31km [Hersbach et al., 2023]. ERA5 combines inputs
from both satellite and in-situ data, using the ECMWF Integrated Forecasting System CY41R2
[Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S), 2023].
In ERA5, the boundary layer height is calculated based on radiosonde data as the lowest
height from the ground at which the bulk Richardson number reaches the critical value of 0.25
[Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S), 2017]. The bulk Richardson number is a dimensionless
ratio comparing the buoyant production/consumption of turbulence over the wind shear production
of turbulence; in the atmosphere laminar air flow typically becomes turbulent turbulent when the
bulk Richardson number decreases to 0.25 [Stull, 1988].
The ERA5 boundary layer height time series at the tall tower, for the eddy covariance measure-
ment time frame (from July 2014 to October 2015), were provided in an ready-to-use format by
Post-Doc Konstantinos Kissas.
2.1.5
Flux footprint model
To interpret the turbulent flux measurements made at the tall tower, it is necessary to know which
area influenced the CO flux measurements at each timestep, i.e. the area of origin of the air flow
that lead CO molecules from the ground, where they were emitted, to the sensor. This area is
known as the flux footprint. To simplify the calculation of the flux footprint, the assumption that
the area is horizontal and uniform is also necessary. The flux footprint parameterisation (FFP)
elaborated by [Kljun et al., 2015] is used in this study. This FFP model provides an estimation of
the source area where the CO molecules detected at the tall tower were emitted for each of the
thousands of 30-minute measurement, without requiring large computational resources and for a
wide range of atmospheric conditions [Kljun et al., 2015]. To each discrete parcel of land around
the tall tower, the model assigns a flux footprint value comprised between 0 and 1 representing the
contribution of this parcel to the total flux measured. The integral over an infinite plane (x,y) of
the flux footprint values f(x, y) for a single flux measurement is equal to 1 (i.e. the contributions
from all parcels sum up to the total flux). Consequently, the flux measured is a weighted average of
the surface fluxes by the footprint values. However for a finite geographical domain, discretised
into parcels of area A(x, y), we have:
X
x,yϵ finite domain
f(x, y) · A(x, y) = 1 −ε
(4)
Where ε > 0 is the contribution of all the land area outside of the finite domain, and should be
close to zero, as it increases the uncertainty of the simulated flux defined later. Figure 6 below
illustrates the resulting flux footprint from the FFP model for a single flux measurement over the
study area. In this example, the integration of the flux footprint values over the domain yields
0.926.
12
==PAGE:15==
Figure 6: Flux footprint over the study area calculated with the FFP model from [Kljun et al., 2015]
based on measurement data on 13th October 2014 between 14:00 and 14:30 (wind direction: 73.8°, wind
speed: 7.17 m/s, boundary layer height: 680m, Monin Obukhov length: 798m, friction velocity: 0.574 m/s,
standard deviation of lateral velocity fluctuations: 0.794 m/s). In this map, pixels with footprint values
below 0.0001 ha−1 get gradually more transparent. (map projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
The FFP model by Kljun et al. is based on simulations from an backward Lagrangian stochastic
particle dispersion model (LPDM-B) in various atmospheric conditions, and it includes both
the upwind extend and the crosswind spread of the footprint [Kljun et al., 2015]. After scaling
the diverse LPDM-B simulation results to a narrow range of dimensionless curves, Kljun et al.
determined a single function fitting all scaled-down footprints, which can be converted back to
real-scale dimensions using the following parameters: measurement height, mean wind speed
at measurement height (or alternatively the roughness length), friction velocity, boundary layer
height, Obukhov length, standard deviation of lateral velocity fluctuations, and wind direction
[Kljun et al., 2015]. These parameters are all available for the Risø tall tower measurements. The
code for this FFP is also freely available in several programming languages.
LPDM-B, from which the parameterisation used was extrapolated, was successfully evaluated
against wind tunnel experimental data [Kljun et al., 2004], and the initial Lagrangian stochastic par-
ticle dispersion model on which the LPDM-B is based was tested against wind tunnel and water tank
data, large-eddy simulation and a field tracer experiment [Rotach et al., 1996, Kljun et al., 2015].
Previous studies with this data set used an earlier flux footprint model, the Kormann and
Meixner analytical footprint model [Kormann and Meixner, 2001]. There exists a satisfying corre-
spondence between the analytical model and the LPDM-B on which the flux footprint is based
[Kljun et al., 2003, Vesala et al., 2008]. However, the analytical model may perform slightly worse
than the LPDM-B model for high measurement heights such as in this study, and its validity ranges
in terms of atmospheric stability is more limited [Kljun et al., 2003, Vesala et al., 2008]. The FFP
by Kljun et al. is also used in many tall tower measurement studies (e.g. in the ICOS-network
[Rebmann et al., 2018]).
The three main restrictions of the FFP model are that: first, the measurement height must be
higher than 20 times the displacement height (as dispersion in the roughness layer near the ground
are included in LPDM-B); second, the measurement height must be lower than the entrainment layer
height defined as 80% of the boundary layer height (as dispersion at the top of the boundary layer
are included in LPDM-B); and third, the ratio of the measurement height over the Monin-Obukhov
length zm
L must be higher than -15.5 [Kljun et al., 2015]. More precisely, the measurement height
13
==PAGE:16==
in these requirements is actually defined as the measurement height above the displacement height.
The first requirement is fulfilled given the height of the tall tower, while the second and third
requirements were ensured in the preprocessing of the measurement data (see section 2.1.3.
Finally, in the FFP script by Kljun et al. it is assumed that the sensors are located on the
center of the pixel at (x=0, y=0). Yet, given how the grid representing the study area and its
surroundings was defined, the tall tower did not fall in the center of a pixel. A minor modification
was made in the FFP script to be able to move the location of the tall tower anywhere in the
domain, simply by changing the cylindrical coordinate system used for flux footprint calculations.
2.1.6
Data used for estimating surface emissions
Multiple databases were used to estimate emissions of carbon monoxide and fossil fuel carbon
dioxide in the study area. Table 4 in Appendix A.1 provides links to all the data sources that are
mentioned in this subsection.
2.1.6.1
EMEP grid emissions of CO in 0.1°×0.1° long-lat resolution in Denmark
Grid yearly emissions of CO in 0.1°×0.1° long-lat resolution in Denmark in 2015 were extracted from
the grid emission database curated by EMEP (European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme, also
known as the co-operative programme for monitoring and evaluation of the long-range transmission
of air pollutants in Europe) download platform, which implements the Convention on Long-
Range Transboundary Air Pollution and is directed by the UNECE [EMEP, 2023]. Countries
that are parties to the convention are invited by the EMEP to report their spatial emission data
every year based on the EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook [EMEP, 2023,
Albrektsen et al., 2019]. The Danish emissions were reported by a team of Danish researchers
from Aarhus University using the SPREAD model, where geographical keys are used to distribute
national emissions from each sector into a 1km×1km grid with the SPREAD model (spatial high-
resolution distribution model for emissions to air), which are then aggregated into the EMEP
0.1°×0.1° grid resolution (which is about 6km×11km in Denmark) [Plejdrup et al., 2021]. Results
from the SPREAD model were not directly found online. Although the values from this EMEP
database were not used in the emission estimations of this study, they provided an indication of
which processes may be more relevant to consider for CO emissions. The EMEP database was
also used in otehr studies using CO as a proxy for CO2,ff [Konovalov et al., 2016]. The EDGAR
database also provides emissions of air pollutants at the same resolution as the EMEP, and could
also be used in future studies similar to this one, either as a first screening tool or as a first grid of
emission whose resolution may be increased using distribution keys based on geographical data.
The EDGAR data proved to be difficult to access from a Macintosh computer, and the EMEP data
uses the same emission factors as in this study, providing an interesting comparison.
2.1.6.2
Emission factors
The emissions factors that were used for this study are those used in Denmark’s National Inventory
Report that is submitted to the IPCC yearly. The authors of this report made sure to used
the most consistent emission factors for Denmark [Nielsen et al., 2022]. These emission factors
(EF) were also used for the previously mentioned EMEP 0.1°×0.1° grid resolution of Danish
emissions with the SPREAD model [Plejdrup et al., 2021]. They are based on the CORINAIR
system [Albrektsen et al., 2019, Nielsen et al., 2022], and they are given as a quantity of pollutant
per energy use, for different pollutant, sources and fuels (e.g. gCO.GJ−1). These EF only include
direct emissions (scope 1). These EF values can be downloaded from Aarhus University’s website,
as the Emission factors for stationary combustion greenhouse gases and main pollutants for the year
2021 and the Exhaust emission factors for mobile sources greenhouse gases and main pollutants for
the year 2021. Emission factors for CO and for fossil fuel CO2, as a distinction is made between
biogenic and fossil CO2, are available. Such EF are given for residential stationary combustion
plants with different fuels, as well as for road transport with different vehicle types, different fuels
and different driving conditions (urban, rural, highway). The specifity of these CO and CO2,ff EF
makes them relevant for this study.
14
==PAGE:17==
2.1.6.3
Other data sets used to estimate residential heating emissions
Several other data sources were used to estimate residential heating emissions in this study.
• Spatial distribution of sources
Data from the Building and Housing Register (”Bygnings- og Boligregistret” in Danish, shortened
as BBR) was used to locate buildings in the study area and to know what type of fuel each uses for
heating. The Building and Housing Register is a nationwide register with data on all the country’s
buildings and dwellings [Bygnings- og Boligregistret, 2023]. The Building and Housing Register
provides also provides data on the use of the building, the construction date, the number of dwellings
in the residential buildings, etc. This register is regularly updated by municipality based on informa-
tion provided by building owners (who must ensure that the information is accurate and up-to-date).
This data is for instance used to calculate property tax [Bygnings- og Boligregistret, 2023]. This
data is made publicly available as a GIS points layer by the Danish Agency for Data Supply
and Infrastructure (”Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Infrastruktur” in Danish), in the coordinate
reference system with the ETRS89 datum and the UTM projection zone 32N (EPSG:25832). The
data is owned by the Danish Development and Simplification Agency and it is adapted to the
INSPIRE data specification buildings.
• Activity data
To estimate the energy use for heating in the study area, data on the Danish use of energy for space
heating and hot water in 2015 was obtained through the 2015 Energy statistic report by Danish
Energy Agency (”Energistyrelsen” in Danish) [Agency, 2015]. This national figure was then divided
by the total population is Denmark in 2015 according to Statistics Denmarks (Table FOLK1A:
”Population at the first day of the quarter by region, sex, age and marital status”), to obtain the
energy use for heating in Denmark per person in 2015 (27.93 GJ.person−1.year−1).
Population data on a 1km×1km grid was extracted from GEOSTAT, which is a project by Eu-
rostat (the statistical office of the European Union) to collect spatial gridded data. The coordinate
reference system of this dataset is based on the CRS ETRS89/LAEA (EPSG:3035) [Eurostat, 2013].
Population data was only available for 2006, 2011, 2018 and 2021; the 2011 data was selected as it
was the closest year to the CO flux measurements. The 2011 data for Denmark was provided to
GEOSTAT by Statistics Denmarks (”Danmarks Statistik” in Danish, the governmental organisation
on Danish statistics) [Eurostat, 2013]. Statistics Denmark calculates population data based on
the Central Person Register (CPR), the national database on all Danish residents, which includes
residency addresses [Statistik, 2023]. Statistics Denmark also directly offers population data on
a 100m×100m grid (including a distinction between nighttime and daytime population), yet this
data set is not available for free (its price for the municipalities included in the study area is far
beyond the budget of this thesis).
• Temporal distribution of emissions
Finally, data about the hourly distribution of the electricity use by Danish households for heating
and domestic hot water, during workdays and non-workdays for each month, was obtained from
Andersen et al. [Andersen et al., 2017].
2.1.6.4
Other data sets used to estimate road transport emissions
Several additional data sources were used to estimate road transport emissions in this study.
• Spatial distribution of sources
First, the road network for each of the municipality in the study area was acquired from the Danish
Agency for Data Supply and Infrastructure (”Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Infrastruktur” in
Danish). This dataset is made by GeoDanemark (the collaboration between the Danish Agency
for Data Supply and Infrastructure and Danish municipalities) based on municipal data, and it
is adapted to the INSPIRE Data Specification on Transport Networks. As such, it includes a
categorisation of the roads ”based on the importance of the role that the road performs in the road
network” [Murray et al., 2014]; 7 classes (including unclassified) are included in the roads set of
the 3 municipalities in the study area. However it also includes some bike lanes and footpaths.
15
==PAGE:18==
The additional table ”Form of way”, which is provided, should enable to filter these paths with no
internal combustion engine vehicle based on the INSPIRE data specifications [Murray et al., 2014],
yet the current available version of this table is incomplete, which makes this filtering impossible.
The coordinate reference system used for these GIS files is the same as for the BBR (ETRS89/UTM
zone 32, EPSG:25832).
Data about the composition of the road traffic in Denmark in 2015 was obtained through
Statistics Denmark (Table VEJ23: ”Road traffic of Danish vehicles on Danish roads by means of
transport”). Statistics Denmark provides the distance travelled by each type of vehicles including
fuel used (e.g. petrol private cars, diesel vans below 2,001 kg, lorries, etc.) used on Danish roads
based on estimations by the Danish Road Directorate (”Vejdirektoratet” in Danish). However, it is
restricted to Danish vehicles.
• Activity data
Data from traffic counters was collected from Open Data DK. The number of motor vehicles
was counted at different points on Danish roads by the Danish Road Directorate and municipalities,
and the data is provided as average daily traffic count for an entire year, for workdays and for days
in July, as it can be found in the Danish national traffic data system Mastra (which harmonises the
processing of such traffic count data) [Open Data DK, 2023]. The proportion of trucks in the traffic
and the speed limit and average speed on the roads are also included for each traffic count point in
the data set. The GIS data layer from Open Data DK included many points in the 3 municipalities
in the study area (Roskilde, Høje-Taastrup and Egedal), and for different years. Nonetheless, this
data is regularly updated so traffic counts were mainly from 2019 to 2023. They also tended to be
concentrated along the main roads.
• Temporal distribution of emissions
Hjalmar Christiansen, Senior Executive Officer at DTU Transport, provided the 2019 and 2022
raw data from the Danish National Travel Survey for this study. However, an earlier version of
this data was also provided by DTU Transport to the research intern Geoffrey Alloin, in 2016
[Alloin, 2016]. During the research project by Geoffrey Alloin, the hourly distribution of road traffic
in Roskilde was extracted from this database. Pr. Andreas Ibrom, who supervised both Geoffrey
Alloin’s project and this project, ensured that the data shown in Geoffrey Alloin’s non-confidential
report was transferred for this project. This data set was directly used, as it was more relevant for
the temporal scope of this study.
2.2
Methods
2.2.1
General method
The general method used in this study to estimate the fossil fuel CO2 fluxes in the rural landscape
based on measured CO fluxes, simply comes down to multiplying the measured CO by a factor,
defined as an CO2,ff-CO emission ratio in molCO2,ff/molCO for instance. This emission ratio is a
function of what sources of CO are located in the source area ”seen” by the eddy covariance system.
The only assumption for the existence of this ratio is, again, that all sources of fossil fuel CO2 are
also sources of CO (i.e. the set of sources of CO2,ff is a subset of the sources of CO). Indeed, the
generation of CO molecules is inherently linked with hydrocarbon oxidation processes resulting in
CO2 production (everyday fuel combustion is never perfectly complete) [Gamnitzer et al., 2006].
This ensures that there is no source with an undefined emission ratio. In other words, a source
either emits both CO and CO2,ff (CO2,ff-CO emission ratio is higher than 0), or it emits CO but no
CO2,ff (the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio is 0, like pure biofuel combustion), the case where computing
the emission ratio would involved a division by zero is thus avoided (when no emission of CO and
CO2,ff occur, the emission ratio is defined as 0). The main question then becomes how does this
CO2,ff-CO emission ratio vary.
As mentioned in section 2.1.2 and shown in equation 5, one can estimate the total source/sink
term of CO in the air flow rising form the ground to the sensor SCO as the sum of the CO turbulent
16
==PAGE:19==
flux Fturb.,CO and CO storage change in the air column below the sensor Sstor,CO (by identifying
terms in equation 2, as presented in [Rebmann et al., 2018]):
SCO(t) = Fturb.,CO(t) + Sstor,CO(t)
(5)
Moreover, SCO can be expressed as a sum of positive source term (representing a production of
CO in the air flow) and negative sink terms (representing a consumption of CO in the air flow), and
both may be subsequently divided into a ground exchange term and a atmospheric exchange term.
The objective is to estimate Ssource,CO2,ff, the source term of CO2,ff. Equation 6, theorised in
the previous paragraphs, is thus used:
Ssource,CO2,ff(t) = RCO2,ff/CO(t) · SCO(t)
(6)
By injecting equation 2 into equation 6, the following is obtained:
Ssource,CO2,ff(t) = RCO2,ff/CO(t) · (Fturb.,CO(t) + Sstor,CO(t))
(7)
2.2.2
Identification of relevant processes
First, to estimate the fossil fuel CO2 fluxes in the rural landscape based on measured CO fluxes, it
is necessary to determine which processes are relevant to model regarding their emissions and fate
in the boundary layer.
The main direct anthropogenic sources of CO in the atmospheric boundary layer were identified
based on the emission data from the EMEP grid emissions of CO in 0.1°×0.1° resolution in Denmark
in 2015, made ftom the SPREAD model. The main sources of CO (¿10%) listed in the paper
presenting the model SPREAD 3.0 [Plejdrup et al., 2021] for the entire country of Denmark are:
”residential plants - solid fuels”, ”passenger cars and motorcycles on urban roads”, as well as
”machinery used in the commercial and institutional sector”. When looking only at the emission
data from the EMEP grid cells that overlap with the study area (4 cells, of latitude 55.65 and
55.75 and of longitude 12.15 and 12.25), it appear that there are 3 main sources of CO. 42%
of the total CO emissions in those cells is from road transport, 32% from ”other stationary
combustion” and 20% from ”offroad” sources. The second category indeed encompasses residential
plants, commercial and institutional plants, according to the correspondence between the Gridding
Nomenclature for Reporting (GNFR) used in the EMEP data, and the Selected Nomenclature for
Air Pollution (SNAP) [Albrektsen et al., 2019]. Such plants correspond mainly to space heating
and domestic water heating [Albrektsen et al., 2019]. In this document, to designate both space
and domestic water heating, the single word ”heating” may be used to shorten long sentence. The
third category includes many SNAP categories (Military, Railways, Inland waterways, National
fishing, Agriculture, Forestry, Industry, Household and gardening, as well as ”Off-road - Commercial
and institutional”) [Albrektsen et al., 2019], making more difficult to model. The third category
of sources was therefore not included in the emission model of this study. Therefore, 2 main
direct anthropogenic sources of CO were identified: road transport and heating in buildings (as in
[Alloin, 2016]). As it is assumed that all processes that emit CO2,ff also emit CO, these 2 main
direct anthropogenic sources of CO are also assumed to be the 2 main sources of CO2,ff. This
assumption may be supported by the fact that the combustion of fossil fuels in vehicles and homes
is not a perfect combustion (i.e. it does not yield fully oxidised products), and that air pollution
control measures do not remove 100% of the CO in the exhaust gases (although catalytic converters
on vehicles may be highly efficient [Dey and Mehta, 2020]). However, the reciprocal is not true: for
instance biomass burning is a significant source of CO that is not a source of fossil fuel CO2.
Combustion is here only considered to be a anthropogenic sources, as it is assumed that no
natural forest fires occured in the study area. Besides the direct emissions of CO by combustion
processes, other tropospheric sources of CO may be the degradation by OH radicals during the day
of hydrocarbons in the atmosphere, such as methane, isoprenes and terpenes, or to a lesser extent
traces of fuel [Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016]. The latter is likely not an important
source of CO compared to fuel combustion [Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016]. These
hydrocarbons that may be partially oxidised into CO by OH radicals during the day. CO is also
17
==PAGE:20==
directly emitted at the surface of the ocean and on the surface of plants, but at the global scale, these
emissions are estimated to be at a lower order of magnitude than natural hydrocarbon oxidation
[Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016]. Globally, it is estimated that only about half of CO
emissions are due to direct emissions, while the other half are from the oxidation of methane and
non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC) [Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016,
IPCC, 2021]. Depending on the geographic and temporal distribution of the emissions of volatile
organic compounds and on the scale of the reaction rates, the oxidation of methane and NMVOC
may also lead significant atmospheric CO flux. Nonetheless, as a first approach these flux were
neglected, similarly to what was done in the previous study on the same Risø CO flux measurement
but focusing the urban area of Roskilde [Alloin, 2016]. Whether this is a reasonable assumption for
a rural area will be further discussed in section 4.2.
The atmospheric fate of CO may also be relevant to include in this study given that what has
been measured is eddy covariance fluxes of CO, and not directly the CO concentration in exhaust
or flue gases. Removal processes in the boundary layer between the emission of CO molecules and
their detection at the tall tower might be significant. Accounting for these sinks would thus avoid
underestimating the ground emissions. Yet, as discussed in the following paragraphs, neglecting
these removal processes should not have a significant impact on the uncertainties of the estimates.
The sinks of CO in the troposphere are mainly oxidation by OH radicals, and to a lesser extent
consumption by soils and fluxes to the stratosphere [Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016].
By analogy, in the boundary layer, one may consider fluxes to the free atmosphere (and not to the
stratosphere) as a sink, however these flux may be neglected [Stull, 1988]. Moreover, with CO+OH
reaction rates of about 10−15 molecule.cm−3.s−1 and maximum OH concentration of around 106
during the day in summer in Denmark [Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016], the maximum reaction rate is
only of 10−7 s−1. With such a low rate, the impact of this reaction on a flux of CO molecules
emitted in the study area and reaching the tall tower is negligible, as only about 20 minutes elapsed
between their emission and detection (such CO molecules travel roughly a 10km distance with mean
wind speeds of around 10 m/s, i.e. they spend around 1000 seconds in the atmosphere in between).
Similarly, dry deposition can be neglected. The deposition velocity of CO on continental surfaces
vd is about 0.03 cm.s−1 [Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016]. The dry deposition flux is Fdry dep. = vd · ρ,
with ρ the mass or molar concentration. Thus for a 100m-high column of air, the residence time of
CO would be about 3.3· 105 s (i.e. about 4 days), which, again, is much longer than the travel time
of CO molecules from the surface to the sensor. Both these sinks verify equation 8 below.
FCO,sink
SCO
· L
u << 1
(8)
Where FCO,sink is the flux induced by the sink process, SCO the storage of CO in a 100m-high
column of air (approximately the height of the sensor), for a travel length L =10km, with wind
speeds u =10m/s. Wet deposition has not been investigated, but CO is not very soluble in water
(its solubility is around 26 mg/L at 20°C [Bierhals and Griesheim, 1991]). However, overall the
tropospheric lifetime of CO ranges from 30 to 90 days on the global scale of the troposphere
[Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016], which is slightly lower than the inverse of the reaction rate calculated
previously, but the order of magnitude of this lifetime is still much larger than the order of magnitude
of the travel time of CO molecules from the study area. Vesala et al. also estimated that for a
substance with an atmospheric lifetime of 1h, the change in the total cumulative flux footprint is
only of about 5% (for a 1km footprint upwind distance with a measurement height of 22 m, above a
14m-high canopy forest and a friction velocity of 1m/s) [Vesala et al., 2008]. Thus, with a substance
such a CO with a lifetime three orders of magnitude higher, the effect of these atmospheric sinks
should be negligible compared to the uncertainties of the estimated source fluxes.
Conversely, the fate of the emitted CO2,ff is not investigated in this study, since CO2,ff emissions
will be calculated as co-emissions of CO directly from the source (since there are no measurements
of CO2,ff fluxes to compare to emission estimations).
2.2.3
Expressing the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio as a function of surface sources
Since sink terms may be neglected and that source terms only correspond to ground sources (no
boundary layer source of CO, such as low-flying aircrafts, are considered), the CO2,ff and CO
18
==PAGE:21==
source fluxes in the observed air flow from the ground to the sensor each become SCO2,ff(t) =
Ssource,ground,CO2,ff(t) and SCO(t) = Ssource,ground,CO(t).
Then, these sources fluxes may be
expressed based on surface emissions using the flux footprint values. Given the footprint values
f(x, y, t) at time t for (x,y) a point of the studied domain and its surroundings, the CO2,ff and CO
source fluxes can be expressed as:
Ssource,CO2,ff(t) =
Z xmax
xmin
Z ymax
ymin
FCO2,ff(x, y, t) · f(x, y, t) · dy · dx
(9)
And:
SCO(t) = Ssource,ground,CO2,ff(t) =
Z xmax
xmin
Z ymax
ymin
FCO(x, y, t) · f(x, y, t) · dy · dx
(10)
Where FCO2,ff(x, y, t) and FCO(x, y, t) are respectively the surface emissions of CO and CO2,ff
at point (x,y) and at time t.
By dividing equation 9 by equation 10 (assuming that equation 10 is not equal to zero, i.e. that
the eddy covariance system always ”sees” CO sources), the following can be obtained:
Ssource,CO2,ff(t) =
R xmax
xmin
R ymax
ymin FCO2,ff(x, y, t) · f(x, y, t) · dy · dx
R xmax
xmin
R ymax
ymin FCO(x, y, t) · f(x, y, t) · dy · dx
· SCO(t)
(11)
Finally, you can identify RCO2,ff/CO(t) in equation 11 based on equation 6:
RCO2,ff/CO(t) =
R xmax
xmin
R ymax
ymin FCO2,ff(x, y, t) · f(x, y, t) · dy · dx
R xmax
xmin
R ymax
ymin FCO(x, y, t) · f(x, y, t) · dy · dx
(12)
The CO2,ff-CO emission ratio will thus be calculated as indicated in equation 12 above, hence
the need to estimate CO2,ff and CO surface fluxes at a temporal resolution as high as the CO eddy
covariance flux measurements. Equation 12 also states that the average emission ratio in the source
area is not the weighted average of the surface emission ratios, but the ratio of weighted surface
emissions.
In this model, as only emissions from building heating and road transport are considered,
these surface CO2,ff and CO fluxes can be estimated with equations 13. Fheating,CO2,ff(x, y, t),
Froad,CO2,ff(x, y, t), Fheating,CO(x, y, t) and Froad,CO(x, y, t) thus need to be estimated.
FCO2,ff(x, y, t) = Fheating,CO2,ff(x, y, t) + Froad,CO2,ff(x, y, t)
FCO(x, y, t) = Fheating,CO(x, y, t) + Froad,CO(x, y, t)
(13)
The study area and its surroundings are then divided into regular square cells, to be able to perform
such calculations digitally. The flux footprint parameterisation model by Kljun et al. also provides
discrete values of flux footprint for custom square cells covering the study area. The integrals in
equations 9 to 12 will thus be written as sums with dx, dy the size of the cell (and dx · dy the area
of the cell), as in equation 4. The study domain is a discrete set of cells, that will be labelled with
the same notation as points previously (x, y).
2.2.4
General scheme for estimating CO and FFCO2 emissions at high spatio-temporal
resolution
If all surface sources in the study area had similar CO2,ff-CO emission ratios, the calculation of
RCO2,ff/CO(t) in equation 12 would be very simple. However, the emission factors used in this
study for different sources appear to differ significantly, both for CO and CO2,ff, preventing such a
hasty simplification. The difference of magnitude of these emission factors is highlighted in Figure
7 below (note the log-scale on the y axis). Most importantly, Figure 7 shows that these CO2,ff and
CO emission factors are far from falling on a line originating from (0,0), making the ratio of CO2,ff
to CO emission highly variable between different sources.
19
==PAGE:22==
Figure 7: Emission sources considered in this study (including fuel, as well as driving conditions for
vehicles) distributed on a plane depending on their CO2,ff and CO emission factors.
Gridded emissions of CO and CO2,ff are thus required to apply the CO2,ff flux estimation method
elaborated here. The 1km×1km yearly emissions by the SPREAD model still have a resolution
too small for the requirements of this study. 1km×1km is too coarse for the flux footprint source
area, which may only be a few kilometers wide in the cross-wind direction (as shown on Figure 6 in
section 2.1.5). Using such a coarse grid would smooth flux footprint values, which would hinder the
calculations of accurate CO2,ff-CO emission ratios. In addition, a much lower temporal resolution
is required to match the eddy covariance measurements.
Therefore, a finer grid is defined for the study area, with 100m-side square cells. The added
value of a finer grid is not worth the increased computing power it would require, since the footprint
values will anyway average the cell emissions at the scale of squared kilometers. Moreover, procuring
larger processing speed and memory capacity would have been a additional challenge for this master
thesis. The same grid size was used by Geoffrey Alloin in his project [Alloin, 2016]. Another reason
for choosing 100m as the size of the grid is that it is a divisor of 1km, which will be important
when using the 1km×1km population grid data (from GEOSTAT). In fact, the exact position of
the grid is determined by the population 1km×1km grid data.
Using this grid, the emissions of CO2,ff and CO in high spatial resolution are estimated as the
product of a emission factor and activity data for each cell (x,y), as suggested in the EMEP/EEA
air pollutant emission inventory guidebook (see equation 14 below, with F the emitted flux in
g/ha/yr or g/ha/d, EF the emission factor in g/GJ and A the activity in GJ/ha/yr or GJ/ha/d)
[Albrektsen et al., 2019].
F(x, y) = EF(x, y) · A(x, y)
(14)
Temporal distribution keys are then used to reach a time resolution of one half-hour. Furthermore,
a distinction is made between emissions rates during week days and those during weekends, and
between each month. A grid of emission in g/ha/30min is then obtained, which is then converted
to nmol/m2/s to be able to compare CO estimations with the eddy covariance measurement (using
28.01 g/mol and 44.01 g/mol as the CO and CO2,ff molar mass [Prohaska et al., 2022]).
20
==PAGE:23==
2.2.5
Estimation of CO and FFCO2 emissions from heating of buildings
Spatial distribution of emissions
The building data from the Building and Housing register (BBR) provide a geographical point for
each building, as well as its use, its nature, its construction state, its construction date and the
fuel it uses for heating (among other fields). A building may have up to one heating fuel in this
dataset. Initially, buildings located far away from the study area were removed from the working
data set. Buildings not yet built in 2015, buildings demolished before 2015, were also filtered out.
Even after these filters, most buildings in this layer had an undefined heating fuel. Buildings with
the following nature: ”silo”, ”storage tank”, ”windmill”, ”tower”, ”greenhouse”, or buildings with
the following use: ”agriculture”, ”ancillary” (often corresponding to garages based on a look at
some point compared to satellite images), ”unknown” or not defined, had an overwhelmingly high
proportion of undefined heating fuel. It seems also reasonable to assume that these buildings are
typically hot heated. Therefore, all these buildings were filtered out.
The remaining building points and the type of heating they use is shown in Figure 8. Figure 8
demonstrate that buildings and heating fuels are not evenly distributed in the study area. One can
see in Figure 8 that cities and towns stand out with a high density of buildings. District heating is
restricted to the city of Roskilde and its surroundings (where it is ubiquitous). In the study area
however, the heating fuels used are more diverse, but they are mainly natural gas and electricity
(including heat pumps), with some buildings using liquid and solid fuels (and more rarely straw).
Each of those heating fuels have significantly different emission factors (as shown in Figure 7 in the
previous subsection). District heating in Roskilde originates from the Roskilde incinerator, which
also appears on Figure 8; it is located outside of the study area.
Finally, for each cell, the number of buildings using each heating fuel was counted.
Figure 8: Map of the buildings in 2015 in the study area and its surroundings, classified by heating fuel
used. A magnified view of part of the study area is given, revealing the 100m×100m grid used in further
calculations. (map projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
Emission factors
The emission factors (EF) for ”residential plants” from Denmark’s National Inventory Report are
used, as accommodations are typically the most abundant buildings with space heating. These
initial EF are given for various fuels which do not perfectly match the data about the fuel used in
buildings in the study area, which is more generic. The original EF values are represented in Figure
21
==PAGE:24==
7. Table 1 below shows the correspondence used to compute EF usable with the buildings data.
The final EF are calculated as a weighted average of the initial EF with the energy use by household
as weight (data from [Agency, 2015]). For liquid fuels, only gas oil was used by households as it is
much more widely used than other liquid fuels (e.g. LPG) [Agency, 2015], and all relevant liquid
fuels had similar CO and CO2,ff emissions. As opposed to other fuel type, liquid fuels are also
used for transportation (e.g. gasoline, diesel, which here are all considered as gas oil), it was also
difficult to determine the share of each liquid fuels in space heating. As these EF only include
direct emissions, the EF of a building heated by district heating or electricity is 0 g/GJ for both
CO and CO2,ff. In this case the pollutants are not directly emitted on the vicinity of the building,
but indirectly at a power or heating station farther away (such as Roskilde’s waste incinerator
shown in Figure 8). All buildings with no heating (”none”) are given emission factors of 0, and so
are all buildings with an undefined heating fuel (both ”not defined” and ”other”).
Table 1: Table of correspondence between fuels in the building data and in the initial emission factors
(EF).
Fuels in the
buildings data
Fuels in initial EF
Weights
[Agency, 2015]
Petroleum coke
0.017
Solid fuels
Wood and simil. (incl.
firewood)
0.648
Wood pellets
0.335
Liquid fuels
Gas oil
1
Natural gas
Fossil natural gas
0.990
Bio natural gas
0.010
Straw
Straw
1
Electricity (incl.
heat pumps)
0
1
District heating
0
1
None, other, not
defined
0
1
Activity data
Activity data for heating buildings is here defined based on population. Using national figures of
annual energy use for space and domestic water heating, as well as as Danish population number,
it was calculated that an average Danish resident in 2015 used 27.93 GJ.person−1.year−1 for such
purposes (see section 2.1.6.3). It is assumed that the heating energy consumption of the residents
of the study area is close to the average Danish heating energy. It is also assumed that the heating
energy consumption is independent from the fuel used for heating.
From this personal annual heating energy consumption, population density data on the
100m×100m grid is thus required to get an activity term in GJ/yr/ha for each cell. The resolution
of the population data from GEOSTAT is too low, at 1km×1km. Spatial upsampling of this data
set was done by dividing each 1km-side cells into 100 cells of side 100m, and by redistributing the
population of the larger cells into its composing smaller cells based on the distribution of dwellings.
The number of dwellings in each 100m-side cell was calculated from the BBR buildings data layer,
as one of the field for each building is the number of dwellings it contains. As this value is not
defined for non-residential buildings, these were first filtered out of the building data set that was
refined earlier to count the number of buildings using each heating fuel in each cell. The resulting
population layer in a 100m×100m resolution is presented in Figure 9.
22
==PAGE:25==
Figure 9: Map of the estimated population density in 2015 in the study area and its surroundings, obtained
by an interpolation of the coarser GEOSTAT population grid by the number of dwellings. A magnified view
of part of the study area is given (the same one as in the previous Figure 8), revealing the 100m×100m
grid used in calculations. (map projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
This method of estimating energy use by population does not include the heating of non-
residential buildings (offices, shops, hospitals, schools, etc.). However, people in rural areas tend to
live in single detached houses and to go work in cities (at least when living near large cities such
as Roskilde or Copenhagen for the study area). Therefore one may think that such buildings are
less frequent, relative to residential buildings, in rural area compared to cities, which would reduce
the uncertainties of this method for the rural case compared to the urban areas. An alternative
way of determining the energy consumption for heating on a pixel could be to use the area of
the heated building and then use the average energy required to heat 1 squared meter of a room.
Although an official area value is given in the data from the Building and Housing register, it
appears based on area calculations of the corresponding building polygons provided in a different
data set of the BBR, that this area only include the land area of the house (i.e. the area of the
ground floor). The data about the number of floors for each building also seems to be of poor
quality, as most buildings in the study area are said to only have a ground floor (while most houses
appear to have a first floor). Therefore estimating the total area of a building by multiplying the
area of its ground floor by its number of floors would not yield a reliable estimate. Knowing more
precisely which building is heated and which is not might also be necessary for this floor area
method. This second method might also ignore the energy required to heat domestic water, which
might be large compared to space heating given the high calorific value of water compared to the
air. That is why the population estimate route was preferred in this study, despite its own limitations.
Temporal distribution of emissions
The obtained emission per grid cell are yearly values so far. Hourly fluxes are obtained by multi-
plying these annual values by coefficients given in Andersen et al. [Andersen et al., 2017]. These
hourly coefficients also differ depending on the month, and whether or not it is a workday. In this
master thesis workdays correspond to week days and non-workdays to weekends, holidays were not
considered in this first approach. The sum all these hourly coefficient for each hour of each workday
and non-workday for each month in a year is equal to 1: these coefficients are temporal distribution
23
==PAGE:26==
keys. Although these coefficients were estimated for electricity use in space and domestic water
heating, it is assumed that all heating systems behave similarly to electric heating systems (in
terms of temporal distribution of energy usage). This assumption seems reasonable in this first
approach given that all these heating systems respond to the same average input demand. Then,
the hourly coefficient are transformed into half-hourly coefficient by halving them, i.e. it is assumed
that the energy used in an hour is evenly distributed between the first half-hour and the second
half-hour. The temporal resolution of the heating emissions estimation matches with the eddy flux
measurements which were made for the first and second half of each hour (e.g. between 12:00 and
12:30 and between 12:30 and 13:00).
Final formula
When piecing together all the previously described steps into equation 14, the following expres-
sion of the high-spatiotemporal-resolution CO flux from heating buildings Fheating,CO(x, y, t) in
nmol.m2.s−1 (both space and domestic water heating) in each cell (x,y) at time t can be obtained
as:
Fheating,CO(x, y, t) = (
X
k∈fuels
EFk,CO · Nk(x, y)
N(x, y) · M −1
CO) · Pop(x, y) · ECheat.,yr · αheat(t)
30 · 60
(15)
Where fuels designates the heating fuels, EFk,CO the emission factor of CO by fuel k (g/GJ),
Nk(x, y) the number of buildings using fuel k for heating in cell (x,y), N(x, y) = P
k∈fuels Nk(x, y)
is the total number of buildings in cell (x,y), M −1
CO is the molar mass of CO (g/nmol), Pop(x, y)
is the population density in cell (x,y) (in person/m2), EC the energy consumption for heating
per capita per year (in GJ/person/yr) and αheat(t) the temporal distribution key for heating (in
yr/30min). The first term between parentheses correspond to an average emission factor for cell
(x,y), and the rest to an activity factor.
The same formula as equation 15 can be written for CO2,ff.
2.2.6
Estimation of CO and FFCO2 emissions from road transport
Spatial distribution of emissions
The road network data used provides both the layout of the roads in the study area and its
surroundings, but it also offers a classification of these roads depending on their importance in the
network. This road network is represented in Figure 10 below. One can see the 2 main roads that
were mentioned in section 2.1.1, including the primary road 6 (Primærrute 6) that comes close to
the tall tower and crosses the study area from North to South. For each cell, the road length of
each road class in the cell has been counted.
24
==PAGE:27==
Figure 10: Map of the road network in the study area and of traffic counters having motor vehicle traffic
count data for years other than 2020 or 2021 (years during which covid-19 lockdowns occurred in Denmark).
A magnified view of part of the study area is given, revealing the 100m×100m grid used in calculations.
(map projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
It is assumed that the composition of the motorised road traffic on each of these roads is the
same, and is equal to the average road fleet traffic composition for Denmark, where less frequently
seen vehicles for which a fuel type is not given have been neglected (taxis, motorcycles and mopeds).
It is also assumed that all buses, tractors and lorries were using diesel in 2015. In fact, in the data
set by Statistics Denmark, only gasoline- and diesel-powered vehicles are counted. The resulting
fleet composition is given in Table 2.
Table 2: Motorised road fleet composition considered in this study.
Vehicle type
Fuel
Proportion of
the road traffic
Passenger cars
Diesel
33.5%
Passenger cars
Gasoline
46.2%
Light duty vehicle (Vans)
Diesel
13.8%
Light duty vehicle (Vans)
Gasoline
1.1%
Heavy duty vehicles
Diesel
5.5%
Heavy duty vehicles
Gasoline
0.0%
Emission factors
The emission factors (EF) for road transport are available for each of the vehicle types considered and
for both gasoline and diesel, as well as for 3 driving conditions: rural, highway and urban. However
these EF relate emissions to the energy use of a vehicle. An estimation of the energy use by each
type of vehicle, for each fuel and for each driving conditions is thus necessary. Each driving condition
is characterised by a typical average speed, which is according to the formulation of the SPREAD
3.0 model is: 40km/h, 70km/h and 100km/h for a passenger car on urban roads, rural roads and
highways, and 40km/h, 65km/h and 80km/h for a light duty vehicle [Plejdrup et al., 2021]. Based
on these speeds, and on the travel speed dependent formula for vehicle energy use given in an
25
==PAGE:28==
EU-funded study [Centre et al., 2013], the energy consumption values for passenger cars (PC) and
light-duty vehicles (LDV) each of the previously mentioned cases can be calculated. The average
parameters (weight, rolling resistances, aerodynamic drag) for European passenger car, and for
light-duty vehicles that are given in the EU study are used as inputs to the energy consumption
formula. The parameters used for LDV are those for vehicles of category N1-III for diesel LDV,
and the smaller N1-II for gasoline LDV, since the first ones appear to weigh mostly above 2t and
the second less than 2t in Denmark, based on the same fleet composition data set by Statistics
Denmark. These categories are defined by the European Commission for emission standards, and
depend on the weight of the vehicle. No such formula is provided for heavy-duty vehicles (HDV),
whose characteristics including shape and weight are much more diverse. That is why, as a first
approach, heavy-duty vehicles are considered to have the same energy consumption as light-duty
vehicles. These heavy-duty vehicles only represent 5.5% of the fleet (Table 2), thus the impact on
the estimate of this assumption should be limited. The results of these calculations are reported
in Table 3. Conversion of these results into a more common fuel consumption unit, using the
specific energy (the lower heating value per unit mass) and density values for diesel and gasoline
(from [Guibet, 2000]) is also given for reference. By multiplying the energy use of a vehicle by the
emission factors in g/GJ, a new emission factor in g/km/vehicle is obtained.
Table 3: Energy consumption and corresponding fuel consumption of passenger cars and light-duty
vehicles, for diesel and gasoline and for 3 different driving conditions.
Vehicle type
Fuel
Driving
conditions
Energy
consumption
(MJ/km)
Fuel
consumption
(L/100km)
Urban
2.10
5.88
Diesel
Rural
1.54
4.30
Passenger car
Highway
1.54
4.31
Urban
2.46
7.63
Gasoline
Rural
1.72
5.34
Highway
1.70
5.28
Urban
5.95
16.6
Diesel
Rural
4.04
11.3
Light-duty vehicle
Highway
3.65
10.2
Urban
4.68
14.5
Gasoline
Rural
3.07
9.52
Highway
2.75
8.52
Activity data
Points with traffic data in the study area and its surroundings containing the average daily vehicle
count in a year, on workdays or during July are used to estimate the traffic in the study area.
First, all traffic counters that focused on non-motorised vehicles (i.e. bikes) were filtered out. Then,
the traffic count points were assigned to a road class depending on its closest road. This traffic
data actually relates to different years, from 2009 to 2023, with the last few years representing the
majority of the data. The traffic counters with data for 2020 and 2021 are filtered out, because
road traffic during those two years has likely been affected by the lockdowns in Denmark during the
covid-19 pandemic. The remaining road traffic counters categorised by road class are presented in
Figure 10, where one can see that they tend to be concentrated near cities and on more important
roads. The blue point visible in Figure 10 near the tall tower in the study area is indeed not located
on the main road but on an motorway exit (as its low traffic count value compared to traffic counts
on the motorway shows).
As the yearly traffic on all Danish roads but motorways has remained constant (according
to the traffic study used in the SPREAD 3.0 model [Jensen et al., 2019, Plejdrup et al., 2021]),
the value for all points not classified as ”mainRoad” or ”fist class”, which are considered as
motorways in the study area, is deemed representative for 2015. For the motorways however,
a linear relationship between total yearly traffic and years has been extrapolated, based on
the 2010, 2015 and 2020 motorway traffic index data from [Jensen et al., 2019] (T(year1) =
26
==PAGE:29==
T(2015) · (1 + 3.6 · 10−2 · (year1 −2015))). The obtained traffic estimations then correspond to the
temporal scope of this study.
In this study, we assume that workday data is applicable to all weekdays, and non-working days
to week-end, i.e. holidays are ignored (there are 11 public holidays in Denmark, the impact of this
assumption should thus be limited). Although the traffic data for workdays is given, it is not given
for non-workdays. The traffic data on non-workdays Tnon-workdays is calculated from the traffic for
an average day in a year Taverage day (365 days in a year), the traffic for a workday Tworkdays (5
days per weeks, 52 weeks in a day, and an additional day to end the year), and the the traffic for a
day in July (31 days, including approximately 23 weekdays and 8 week-end days):
Tnon-workdays = (365 · Taverage day −[(5 · 52 + 1 −23) · Tworkdays + 31 · Tday in July])/(2 · 52 −8)
Finally, the data from the traffic counts points must be interpolated to each road. For this purpose,
a very simplified traffic model is built. The traffic value that is given to each road stretch is the
data from the nearest traffic counter of the same road class as the road itself. This performs well
for the main road in the study area, as traffic counters have been placed regularly along these linear
roads. However, this interpolation does not make sense for the smallest roads (fourth, fifth and
other road classes), as only 4 traffic counters have been placed on such small roads in the study
area while the total length of these roads is the study area is very high and they tend to form
a mesh rather than a straight line. This is why for these smaller roads a different approach was
undertaken. The traffic numbers that are assigned to all of these smaller roads is the average value
of the 4 traffic counters placed on small roads (respectively 111.75, 123.75 and 98.75 vehicles per
day for an average day in the year, a workday and a day in July). It is therefore assumed that
the 4 small roads stretches on which traffic was recorded are representative of all the roads. This
bold assumption weakens the accuracy of the model, but it is deemed more appropriate than the
previous interpolation procedure. As traffic on these smaller roads tend to be significantly lower
than on the main roads (typically a thousand to more than ten thousands vehicles per day) and as
the source area from the flux footprint model tend to overlap many of these small roads (somewhat
averaging their emissions), this weak point of the model should not impact the emission model
very significantly. The results of this traffic model are shown in Figure 11 for an average day. This
model also does not work well on highways where traffic counters have been placed on the highway
exits instead of the road itself, such as the one outside of the study area, on the South (primary
road 21). The estimated traffic figures on primary road 21 are lower near large road interchange, as
shown in Figure 11.
27
==PAGE:30==
Figure 11: Map of the estimated motorised road traffic in the study area for an average day in 2015. A
magnified view of part of the study area is given (the same one as in Figure 10), revealing the 100m×100m
grid used in calculations. (map projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
For each 100m-side cell, the daily number of cars travelling on each road class is calculated.
Some cells are crisscrossed by multiple small roads, but as they all have the same estimated traffic
a single figure for this road class is kept. For larger roads, the cells that have road stretches of the
same class but with different traffic counts, the average value of these traffic counts is taken. In
such small cells, roads stretches of the same important class tend to represent a contiguous road,
thus taking an average of the their traffic count seems reasonable.
Temporal distribution of emissions
The previous step resulted in daily traffic counts for each cell (on each road class) for a weekday,
a weekend day or a day in July. One must subsample these daily traffic count into a temporal
resolution of 30 minutes, to use then with the CO eddy measurements. This is executed by
multiplying the daily traffic count by the hourly traffic distribution coefficient in Roskilde (from
DTU transport and Geoffrey Alloin’s project). These hourly coefficients sum up to 1 for a full day.
To get from the hourly to the half-hourly resolution, these hourly distribution coefficient (that sum
up to 1), are divided by two, i.e. it is assumed that the number of cars travelling on a road stretch
in an hour is split evenly between the first half hour and the second half hour.
Final formula
To combine the emission factors with the length of road and traffic figures, road classes were
matched with driving conditions. Drivers on main roads and on first class roads are considered
to behave as on highway; drivers on second, third, fourth and fifth class roads are considered to
behave like on rural roads; and drivers on other roads, which are mostly located in cities and towns,
are considered to behave like on urban roads.
After all computing all these variables, the following expression of the high-spatiotemporal-
resolution CO flux from road transport Froad,CO(x, y, t) in nmol.m2.s−1 in each cell (x,y) at time t
can be obtained as:
28
==PAGE:31==
Froad,CO(x, y, t) =
(16)
(
X
r∈road type
(
X
v∈vehicles
X
k∈fuels
EFv,k,r,CO · ECv,k,r · ϕv,k) · Lr(x, y) · Tr(x, y, t)) · M −1
CO · αroad(t)
30 · 60
Where road type, vehicles and fuels respectively designates the road class (main road, first class,
second class, ..., fifth class and other roads), the vehicle types (PC, LDV, HDV) and vehicle fuels
(diesel or gasoline), EFv,k,r,CO the emission factor of CO by vehicle v with fuel k on road r (g/GJ),
ECv,k,r the energy consumption of vehicle v with fuel k on road r per kilometer (GJ/km/vehicle),
ϕv,k is the proportion of vehicle v using fuel k in the total motorised road fleet, Lr the length
of road class r in cell (x,y) (km), Tr(c, y, t) the average traffic in cell (x,y) for the type of day
determined by t (vehicle/d), M −1
CO is the molar mass of CO (g/nmol), and αroad(t) the temporal
distribution key for road transport (in d/30min).
The same formula as equation 2.2.6 can be written for CO2,ff.
2.2.7
Overall formula to estimate CO2,ff fluxes from CO flux measurements
The method developed enables us to estimate the CO2,ff flux that should be measured at the
tall tower based on CO eddy flux measurements. The overall formula to do so is obtained as a
combination of equation 7 (defining the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio), equation 12 (expressing the
emission ratio with surface fluxes and flux footprint values), equation 13 (decomposing the surface
flux into a heating and road term) and equations 15 and 2.2.6 (estimating the surface emissions
from heating and road transport). The resulting final formula is shown below (the area of the
regular cells cancels out in the fraction).
Ssource,CO2,ff(t) =
P
x,y(Fheating,CO2,ff(x, y, t) + Froad,CO2,ff(x, y, t)) · f(x, y, t)
P
x,y(Fheating,CO(x, y, t) + Froad,CO(x, y, t)) · f(x, y, t)
· (Fturb.,CO(t) + Sstor,CO(t))
(17)
3
Results
3.1
Estimated spatiotemporal variations of CO2,ff and CO surface fluxes
and of their ratio in the study area
3.1.1
Heating surface flux
3.1.1.1
Temporal variability
Figures 12 and 13 present the half-hourly surface fluxes of CO2,ff and CO from space and domestic
water heating in buildings for an average cell in the study area, respectively for a weekday and for
a weekend day (the results are spatially-averaged). We can see that winter months (in blue) have
higher emissions than the summer months (in red). There are visible peaks in the morning around
8:00am and in the evening around 8:00pm, attributable to the use of large volumes of hot water
(e.g. in showers) [Andersen et al., 2017]. People might tend to use hotter water for showers during
winter, yet this is unlikely to explain the change in amplitude of the morning and evening peaks
between seasons. During week-ends, the morning peak is postponed. As the temporal keys for the
two halves of an hour are the same, the curves appear to plateau every two values.
29
==PAGE:32==
0
50
100
150
200
250
CO2,ff flux (nmol/m2/s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Time of day (hour)
CO flux (nmol/m2/s)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Heating (weekday)
Figure 12: Average half-hourly CO2,ff and CO surface flux from heating buildings during weekdays in the
study area
30
==PAGE:33==
0
50
100
150
200
250
CO2,ff flux (nmol/m2/s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Time of day (hour)
CO flux (nmol/m2/s)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Heating (weekend day)
Figure 13: Average half-hourly CO2,ff and CO surface flux from heating buildings during weekends in the
study area
The spatially-averaged surface CO2,ff-CO emission ratio for heating is at 377 molCO2,ff/molCO,
it is constant in time, given equation 15.
3.1.1.2
Spatial variability
Figures 14 and 15 respectively showcase the yearly average flux of CO2,ff and CO from heating in
the study area and its surroundings. The towns and cities clearly stand out in these emission maps,
except for the largest one of them, Roskilde. This is because most buildings use district heating
in the city of Roskilde (as previously shown in Figure 8), resulting in no direct emissions in the
buildings’ vicinity.
31
==PAGE:34==
Figure 14: Map of the yearly averaged surface fluxes of CO2,ff from heating in the study area (map
projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
Figure 15: Map of the yearly averaged surface fluxes of CO from heating in the study area (map projection:
LAEA, ESPG:3035)
3.1.2
Road Transport surface flux
3.1.2.1
Temporal variability
Figure 16 presents the half-hourly surface fluxes of CO2,ff and CO from road transport for an
average cell in the study area (the results are spatially-averaged). As opposed to heating emissions,
32
==PAGE:35==
every month is considered to have the same daily emissions, except July which corresponds to
school holidays in Denmark (although some people might also be switching from their car to their
bikes for commuting during all summer months). For all months but July, different road traffic
activity weekday and weekend have been set in the model. Weekdays see the highest road transport
fluxes, and 2 peaks are clearly visible, one at 8:00am and a wider and taller one around 4:00pm,
corresponding to commuting times in Denmark. All days see the same daily distribution as the
same temporal distribution key was used, it is questionable that the weekday and weekend days
have the same profile. The temporal key used represents an average day, thus it is a mix of the
actual weekday and weekend day, which might explain the larger traffic during the afternoon. Like
for heating emissions, the curves appear to plateau every two values because the temporal keys for
the two halves of an hour are the same.
The spatially-averaged surface CO2,ff-CO emission ratio for road transport is 96.5 molCO2,ff/molCO
(respectively 96.7, 96.0 and 96.3 for a day within the week, within the weekend or in July).
0
100
200
300
400
500
CO2,ff flux (nmol/m2/s)
Weekday
Weekend day
Day in July
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time of day (hour)
CO flux (nmol/m2/s)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Weekday
Weekend day
Day in July
Road Transport
Figure 16: Average half-hourly CO2,ff and CO surface flux from road transport in the study area
33
==PAGE:36==
3.1.2.2
Spatial variability
Figures 17 and 18 respectively showcase the yearly average flux of CO2,ff and CO from road
transport in the study area and its surroundings. The busiest roads (i.e. primary road 6 crossing
the study area from North to South, and primary road 21 going from the East to the West, South
of the study area) clearly stand out. One can also distinguish the road network.
Figure 17: Map of the yearly averaged surface fluxes of CO2,ff from road transport in the study area (map
projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
Figure 18: Map of the yearly averaged surface fluxes of CO from road transport in the study area (map
projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
34
==PAGE:37==
3.1.3
Total surface flux
3.1.3.1
Temporal variability
Figures 12 and 13 present the half-hourly total surface fluxes of CO2,ff and CO for an average cell in
the study area, respectively for a weekday and for a weekend day (the results are spatially-averaged).
The summer total surface fluxes are almost equal to the road transport surface fluxes, because the
emissions from heating are close to zero in this season. Likewise, at night, the total surface fluxes
are almost equal to the surface heating fluxes, because roads are almost empty of vehicles at such
time. Heating emissions during the winter lead to the highest total fluxes. The total surface flux
profile is similar to that of the road surface fluxes, since road surface fluxes vary little seasonally
and since the spatially averaged surface road fluxes are about double the spatially averaged surface
heating fluxes (during daytime). Due to weekend days not being considered in July for road traffic,
the same July traffic value is used in both Figures 12 and 13, which leads to July having higher
road surface on weekend days than other summer months.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
CO2,ff flux (nmol/m2/s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time of day (hour)
CO flux (nmol/m2/s)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Total (weekday)
Figure 19: Average half-hourly CO2,ff and CO surface flux from heating buildings during weekdays in the
study area
35
==PAGE:38==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
CO2,ff flux (nmol/m2/s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time of day (hour)
CO flux (nmol/m2/s)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Total (weekend day)
Figure 20: Average half-hourly CO2,ff and CO surface flux from heating buildings during weekends in the
study area
The surface CO2,ff-CO emission ratio therefore varies depending on the month, the type of day,
and the hour, as evidenced by Figure 21. It doubles between at night compared to daytime, due
to road traffic being being almost non-existing, and reaches the surface heating emission ratio.
During the day, its value is a weighted average of the surface emission ratios of heating and roads.
In addition, the seasonal variations of this ratio are relatively limited, but are more pronounced
during weekend days than during weekdays.
36
==PAGE:39==
0
100
200
300
400
CO2,ff−CO emission ratio (molCO2,ff/molCO)
Weekday
0
100
200
300
400
Time of day (hour)
CO2,ff−CO emission ratio (molCO2,ff/molCO)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Weekend day
Month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Total
Figure 21: Average half-hourly surface CO2,ff-CO emission ratio in the study area
3.1.3.2
Spatial variability
Figures 22 and 23 respectively showcase the yearly average total flux of CO2,ff and CO in the study
area and its surroundings. One can make out both roads and cities from these maps.
37
==PAGE:40==
Figure 22: Map of the yearly averaged total surface fluxes of CO2,ff in the study area (map projection:
LAEA, ESPG:3035)
Figure 23: Map of the yearly averaged total surface fluxes of CO in the study area (map projection:
LAEA, ESPG:3035)
Furthermore, Figure 24 offers a visual representation of the geographical distribution of surface
CO2,ff-CO emission ratio in the study area and its surroundings (including both heating and road
transport). The values of this ratio vary significantly depending on the grid cell, ranging from 0
where there are no emission of CO2,ff (and possibly no emission of CO either) to more than 104
molCO2,ff/molCO for some cells in cities. Typical yearly fluxes in road are in the order of magnitude
38
==PAGE:41==
of 102 molCO2,ff/molCO; for instance for cells overlapping with primary road 6, this ratio is about
265 molCO2,ff/molCO. This ratio tends to be higher in cities not connected to the district heating
network, where its order of magnitude is closer to 103 molCO2,ff/molCO. Cells where heating is
predominantly fueled by biomass (straw and solid fuels, which are mostly wood) have low ratios
since they do not emit a lot of CO2,ff, but they do emit significant amounts of CO (as hinted by the
emission ratios depicted in Figure 7). The cells with the highest values are those where liquid fuels
(gas oil) are used for heating, as they do not emit large quantities of CO relative to CO2,ff, when
compared to other heating fuels (again, as hinted by the emission ratios depicted in Figure 7).
Figure 24: Map of the yearly averaged surface CO2,ff-CO emission ratio in the study area, including both
heating and road transport (map projection: LAEA, ESPG:3035)
3.2
Estimated CO2,ff-CO ratio in the measured fluxes from the study
area
After integrating the estimated CO2,ff and CO flux with the flux footprint values, the simulated
CO2,ff-CO ratio in the flux measurements is calculated. The resulting ratio values are shown in
Figure 25. Although the simulated ratio in measured fluxes ranges from 41.2 to 673 molCO2,ff/molCO,
it only has a standard deviation of 61.5 molCO2,ff/molCO. The mean value of this ratio is equal to
224 molCO2,ff/molCO (2.24 · 10−2 ppmCO2,ff/ppbCO), slightly higher than the median value of 220
molCO2,ff/molCO. It seems to follow a log-normal distribution.
This average value reflects the CO2,ff and CO fluxes according to the flux footprint climatology
shown in Figure 26. One can see that the area influencing the most the measurements in the
studied domain is very close to the tower, and it includes a small stretch of primary road 6.
Furthermore, grid cells overlapping with primary road 6 had high emissions (except at night), and
an average emission ratio of approximately 265 molCO2,ff/molCO, which is only 18% above the
average simulated emission ratio in the flux footprint.
39
==PAGE:42==
Estimated CO2,ff to CO ratio in measured fluxes
Frequency
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
CO2,ff to CO ratio (molCO2,ff/molCO)
Figure 25: Simulated CO2,ff-CO emission ratio in the measured fluxes
Figure 26: Map of the flux footprint climatology for the Risø tall tower eddy covariance measurements,
with a wind direction between 20° and 110°, between July 2014 and October 2015. In this map, pixels with
footprint values below 0.0001 ha−1 get gradually more transparent. Yearly averaged total surface fluxes of
CO2,ff are given for reference in the background (same data as in Figure 22). (map projection: LAEA,
ESPG:3035)
40
==PAGE:43==
3.3
Time series of simulated CO2,ff fluxes
Finally, by multiplying the variable simulated CO2,ff-CO ratio by the CO flux measurement from
the study area, the following time series of fossil fuel CO2 is obtained, as depicted in Figure 27.
However, 28% of these CO2,ff flux values are negative (i.e. the flux is oriented downward), due to
some of the measured CO flux values being negative as shown in Figure 5. The overall average of
these fluxes is 1.01 mol/m2/s, and 1.82 mol/m2/s when only considering positive values of flux.
Figure 27: Time series of simulated CO2,ff fluxes from the study area
Figure 28 shows that for all wind directions in the study area, similar CO2,ff fluxes are estimated
(when considering only positive CO2,ff flux values).
Figure 28: CO2,ff flux values from the study area depending on the wind direction
41
==PAGE:44==
4
Discussion
4.1
Variability and of the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio
Despite the spatio-temporal variations in surface emissions of CO2,ff and CO in the study area,
the footprint of the flux measurement lead to a much reduced CO2,ff-CO emission ratio variability.
Indeed, the estimated surface emissions of CO2,ff and CO geographical fluctuations occur at a spatial
scale that is much smaller than the footprint, thus the footprint averages these spatial differences.
More importantly, the main source area (where the highest footprint values concentrates) of the flux
measurements has quite a limited extent, as evidenced by the flux footprint climatology (Figure 26).
Yet, this variability was also reduced by the fact that the data points with the right wind direction
are not evenly distributed in time. Even though flux measurements from the study area have a
relatively uniform distribution during the day, they are however, mostly from June to October.
This could have been due to seasonal wind patterns. However, in this case it is most likely due to
the temporal range of the measurements, which lasted slightly longer than a year (from July 2014 to
October 2015, so each month between July and October is twice as represented). Additionally, no
measurements were made during April 2015 due to technical issues. Both the spatial and temporal
considerations lead to the CO2,ff-CO emission ratio having a relatively low variance, and an average
value of 2.24 · 10−2 ppmCO2,ff/ppbCO (or 44.6 ppbCO/ppmCO2,ff). This value is significantly lower
than for a diesel car on a highway (7.6 ppmCO2,ff/ppbCO), but this may be due to the use of solid
fuels. Burning these solid fuels lead to high CO emissions, because their solid nature hinders their
mixing with oxygen during combustion, and zero CO2,ff when it is biomass such as wood or straw.
This value of emission ratio is higher than previous values found in the literature, which are
more commonly reported as a CO-CO2,ff ratio. Lopez et al. reported a correlation between CO2,ff
and CO enhancements of 7.9 to 14.5 ppbCO/ppmCO2,ff for Paris whereas Gichuhi and Gamade
reported a correlation of 2.0-2.5 ppbCO/ppmCO2,ff during summer and 7.3-9.7 ppbCO/ppmCO2,ff
during winter in the city of Cookeville in Tennessee [Lopez et al., 2013, Gichuhi and Gamage, 2023].
Based on gridded emission databases, Gamnitzer et al. used a ratio of 13 ppbCO/ppmCO2,ff for
the city of Heidelberg, Laan et al.
a ratio of 5 to 15 ppbCO/ppmCO2,ff for the Netherlands
[Gamnitzer et al., 2006, Van Der Laan et al., 2010]. This may be due to solid fuels being more
commonly used for heating in rural areas than in the urbanised areas previously studied (for
instance because of the easier access to firewood). It more likely that this is due to natural sources
of CO, such as oxidation of methane and NMVOC in the atmosphere, not being included in the
model developed.
This comparison also suggest that the sinks of CO are indeed not significant, however they may
control the CO production processes that have been underestimated.
Negative values of CO eddy fluxes also hinders the interpretation of this approach.
4.2
Comparison of the measured CO fluxes with simulated CO fluxes
CO fluxes from the study area have been both measured and estimated, thus the performance of
the CO estimation model can be evaluated. Figure 29 below provides a comparison between the
measurements and the a priori emissions. One can see that the CO emissions appear to have been
underestimated compared to the eddy covariance observations. This is surprising, since one could
expect that the tall tower eddy covariance measurement are themselves an underestimation of the
vertical flux, due to the neglected terms in the mass balance equation 1 and to the effect of vertical
flux divergence. This latter point is all the more important because only 16% of the the Risø tall
tower measurements from the study area were conducted within the constant flux layer. It is also
expected the the uncertainties associated with the bottom-up CO flux are significant given the
numerous simplifications used during the estimations. The most arguable assumptions made was
that the natural production of CO in the atmosphere was negligible, while globally it is a source of
CO on a par with anthropogenic emissions [Warneck, 1988, Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016].
Although the top-down and the bottom-up CO emissions evaluations yield a similar emission
profile, with values close to zero during the night and with two peaks during the day corresponding
to commuting times, these peaks have a much higher amplitude in the measurements than in
the estimations, especially in the morning. Incidentally, one can see that the addition of the
42
==PAGE:45==
storage change leads to the measured and estimated fluxes to be better synchronised. The peak
underestimation may be due to the road traffic being higher than expected, particularly on primary
road 6 near the tall tower. It may be also due to an underestimation of heating, since the estimated
CO flux is almost exclusively from road transport as evidenced in Figure 29. The combustion of solid
fuels for heating can lead to high emissions of CO. The BBR database used may also be particularly
incomplete in that regard, as owners are supposed to keep it updated, and because only one heating
fuel is given for each building, while people might burn firewood as extra heating. The SPREAD
3.0. model used a database of chimneys to better account for this [Plejdrup et al., 2021]. Heating
emissions also experience a morning peak, even if it is less significant than for road transport, but
heating emissions also peak later in the evening, which is not clearly visible on the measurements.
The measurements and the estimations agreeing during the night might be simply due to the fact
that, at night, the tall tower eddy covariance measures little eddy fluxes due to the stability of
the atmosphere in the absence of thermal convection of air by the Sun. It could also be due to
the release of isoprenes and other NMVOC by plants during daytime, that are oxidised into CO.
As suggested by Gamage et al., CO may be a better tracer of CO2,ff during winter, when less
NMVOC are released by plants when tropospheric hydroxyl radical concentrations, which react with
CO, are lower [Gamage et al., 2020]. If the latter argument is less defensible for eddy covariance
measurements, the former may hold true. The limited number of observations from the study area
during winter did not allow for the verification of this hypothesis.
Figure 29: Comparison of the measured and estimated average flux of CO per hour from the study area.
Two values are given for measured fluxes, which correspond to eddy covariance fluxes, with and without
the storage changes.
5
Conclusion
The combined eddy covariance and CO tracer methods required a fine estimation of surface fluxes
of CO and fossil fuel CO2. Many sources of open data are available in Denmark to conduct such
emission estimates, but better emission estimates with a high enough spatial resolution could be
obtained via the SPREAD 3.0 model. However obtaining accurate half-hourly estimates of emissions
is challenging. Moreover, including natural fluxes of CO seems critical for future application of the
methodology to rural areas outside of winter. Another approach to estimate this ratio would be
to calculate the covariance of CO and CO2 concentration enhancements like in previous studies
using concentrations instead of eddy covariance fluxes. Nonetheless, the emission ratio of these
two carbon oxides appears not to vary too significantly in the Danish rural area studied, which
makes using CO as a proxy for fossil fuel CO2 with eddy covariance measurements in such an area
promising. However, the uncertainties associated with this technique appear to be significant, and
should be quantified. Negative fluxes of CO also hinders the applicability of this method. In order
43
==PAGE:46==
to make the tracer approach with CO more accurate, one future development direction for the
methodology would be to focus on the daily ratio during the measurement period and on the main
source area.
44
==PAGE:47==
References
[Agency, 2015] Agency, D. E. (2015). Energy Statistics 2015 - Data, tables, statistics and maps.
Technical report.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Statistik/energy_statistics_
2015.pdf.
[Albrektsen et al., 2019] Albrektsen, R., Hutchings, N., Hjorth Mikkelsen, M., Dore, C., German,
R., Goodwin, J., Hobson, M., King, K., Sanchez, B., Amon, B., Vandromme, N., Kouridis, C.,
Mellios, G., Ntziachristos, L., Webb, J., Kuenen, J., Hausmann, K., Doering, U., Kludt, R.,
and Reichel, J. (2019). EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019. Technical
guidance to prepare national emission inventories. Technical report, European Environment
Agency.
[Alloin, 2016] Alloin, G. (2016). Interpretation of landscape scale CO exchange with the atmosphere.
[Andersen et al., 2017] Andersen, F. M., Baldini, M., Hansen, L. G., and Jensen, C. L. (2017).
Households’ hourly electricity consumption and peak demand in Denmark. Applied energy,
208:607–619.
[Aubinet et al., 1999] Aubinet, M., Grelle, A., Ibrom, A., Rannik, ¨U., Moncrieff, J., Foken, T.,
Kowalski, A. S., Martin, P. H., Berbigier, P., Bernhofer, C., et al. (1999). Estimates of the
annual net carbon and water exchange of forests: the EUROFLUX methodology. In Advances in
ecological research, volume 30, pages 113–175. Elsevier.
[Bierhals and Griesheim, 1991] Bierhals, J. and Griesheim, M. (1991). Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of
Industrial Chemistry. cited by ECHA for the solubility value of carbon monoxide.
[Burba, 2013] Burba, G. (2013). Eddy covariance method for scientific, industrial, agricultural and
regulatory applications: A field book on measuring ecosystem gas exchange and areal emission
rates. LI-Cor Biosciences.
[Bygnings- og Boligregistret, 2023] Bygnings- og Boligregistret (2023). Om BBR & BBR’s forvalt-
ningsomr˚ade. https://bbr.dk/bbr.
[Centre et al., 2013] Centre, J. R., for Energy, I., Transport, Keller, M., Fontaras, G., Ntziachristos,
L., Hausberger, S., Dilara, P., Mellios, G., and Samaras, C. (2013). Parameterisation of fuel
consumption and CO2 emissions of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles for modelling
purposes. Publications Office.
[Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S), 2017] Copernicus
Climate
Change
Service
(C3S)
(2017).
Chapter
3:
Turbulent
transport
and
interactions
with
the
sur-
face,
page
50.
https://www.ecmwf.int/sites/default/files/elibrary/2017/
17736-part-iv-physical-processes.pdf#section.3.10.
[Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S), 2023] Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S)
(2023). ERA5: data documentation. https://confluence.ecmwf.int/display/CKB/ERA5.
[Daniel and Solomon, 1998] Daniel, J. S. and Solomon, S. (1998). On the climate forcing of carbon
monoxide. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 103(D11):13249–13260.
[Dey and Mehta, 2020] Dey, S. and Mehta, N. (2020). Automobile pollution control using catalysis.
Resources, Environment and Sustainability, 2:100006.
[Djuricin et al., 2010] Djuricin, S., Pataki, D. E., and Xu, X. (2010). A comparison of tracer
methods for quantifying CO2 sources in an urban region. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, 115(D11).
[Drysdale et al., 2022] Drysdale, W. S., Vaughan, A. R., Squires, F. A., Cliff, S. J., Metzger, S.,
Durden, D., Pingintha-Durden, N., Helfter, C., Nemitz, E., Grimmond, C. S. B., Barlow, J.,
Beevers, S., Stewart, G., Dajnak, D., Purvis, R. M., and Lee, J. D. (2022). Eddy covariance
measurements highlight sources of nitrogen oxide emissions missing from inventories for central
London. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 22(14):9413–9433.
45
==PAGE:48==
[EMEP, 2023] EMEP (2023).
Co-operative programme for monitoring and evaluation of the
long-range transmission of air pollutants in Europe. https://www.emep.int/.
[EU, 2021] EU (2021). REGULATION (EU) 2021/1119 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
AND OF THE COUNCIL of 30 June 2021, establishing the framework for achieving climate
neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate
Law’). Official Journal of the European Union.
[European Environment Agency (EEA), 2012] European Environment Agency (EEA) (2012). ©
European Union, Copernicus Land Monitoring Service.
[Eurostat, 2013] Eurostat (2013).
Reference data - Population Distribution / Demography
- GEOSTAT 2011 grid dataset.
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/gisco/geodata/
reference-data/population-distribution-demography.
[Foken and Wichura, 1996] Foken, T. and Wichura, B. (1996). Tools for quality assessment of
surface-based flux measurements. Agricultural and forest meteorology, 78(1-2):83–105.
[Forster et al., 2007] Forster, P., Ramaswamy, V., Artaxo, P., Berntsen, T., Betts, R., Fahey, D.,
Haywood, J., Lean, J., Lowe, D., Myhre, G., Nganga, J., Prinn, R., Raga, G., Schulz, M.,
and Van Dorland, R. (2007). Changes in Atmospheric Constituents and in Radiative Forcing.
In Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
[Gamage et al., 2020] Gamage, L. P., Hix, E. G., and Gichuhi, W. K. (2020). Ground-based
atmospheric measurements of CO: CO2 ratios in Eastern Highland Rim using a CO tracer
technique. ACS Earth and Space Chemistry, 4(4):558–571.
[Gamnitzer et al., 2006] Gamnitzer, U., Karstens, U., Kromer, B., Neubert, R. E., Meijer, H. A.,
Schroeder, H., and Levin, I. (2006). Carbon monoxide: A quantitative tracer for fossil fuel CO2?
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 111(D22).
[Gichuhi and Gamage, 2023] Gichuhi, W. K. and Gamage, L. P. (2023). Efficacy of the CO Tracer
Technique in Partitioning Biogenic and Anthropogenic Atmospheric CO2 Signals in the Humid
Subtropical Eastern Highland Rim City of Cookeville, Tennessee. Atmosphere, 14(2):208.
[Guerreiro et al., 2014] Guerreiro, C. B., Foltescu, V., and De Leeuw, F. (2014). Air quality status
and trends in europe. Atmospheric environment, 98:376–384.
[Guibet, 2000] Guibet, J.-C. (2000). Les carburants et la combustion (R´ef. BM2520 V1). Techniques
de l’Ing´enieur.
[Gurney et al., 2020] Gurney, K. R., Song, Y., Liang, J., and Roest, G. (2020). Toward Accurate,
Policy-Relevant Fossil Fuel CO2 Emission Landscapes. Environmental Science & Technology,
54(16):9896–9907. PMID: 32806921.
[Hersbach et al., 2023] Hersbach,
H.,
Bell,
B.,
Berrisford,
P.,
Biavati,
G.,
Hor´anyi,
A.,
Mu˜noz Sabater, J., Nicolas, J., Peubey, C., Radu, R., Rozum, I., Schepers, D., Simmons,
A., Soci, C., Dee, D., and Th´epaut, J.-N. (2023). Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S)
Climate Data Store (CDS).
[Ibrom et al., 2007] Ibrom, A., Dellwik, E., Flyvbjerg, H., Jensen, N. O., and Pilegaard, K. (2007).
Strong low-pass filtering effects on water vapour flux measurements with closed-path eddy
correlation systems. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 147(3-4):140–156.
[Ibrom et al., 2015] Ibrom, A., Lequy, E., Loubet, B., Pilegaard, K., and Ambus, P. (2015). Tall
tower landscape scale NO2 flux measurements in a Danish agricultural and urban, coastal area.
In EGU General Assembly.
46
==PAGE:49==
[IPCC, 2021] IPCC (2021). Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, volume In Press. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA.
[IPCC, 2022] IPCC (2022). Summary for Policymakers, page In Press. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK. In Press.
[Jensen et al., 2019] Jensen, S., Plejdrup, M., and Hillig, K. (2019). Gis-based national road and
traffic database. Aarhus University DCE - Danish Centre for Environment and Energy, Scientific
Report No. 151:25. http://dce2.au.dk/pub/TR151.pdf.
[Kljun et al., 2015] Kljun, N., Calanca, P., Rotach, M., and Schmid, H. P. (2015). A simple
two-dimensional parameterisation for Flux Footprint Prediction (FFP). Geoscientific Model
Development, 8(11):3695–3713.
[Kljun et al., 2004] Kljun, N., Kastner-Klein, P., Fedorovich, E., and Rotach, M. (2004). Evaluation
of lagrangian footprint model using data from wind tunnel convective boundary layer. Agricultural
and Forest Meteorology, 127(3-4):189–201.
[Kljun et al., 2003] Kljun, N., Kormann, R., Rotach, M., and Meixer, F. (2003). Comparison of
the langrangian footprint. Boundary-layer meteorology, 106:349–355.
[Konovalov et al., 2016] Konovalov, I. B., Berezin, E. V., Ciais, P., Broquet, G., Zhuravlev, R. V.,
and Janssens-Maenhout, G. (2016).
Estimation of fossil-fuel CO2 emissions using satellite
measurements of ”proxy” species. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 16(21):13509–13540.
[Kormann and Meixner, 2001] Kormann, R. and Meixner, F. X. (2001). An analytical footprint
model for non-neutral stratification. Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 99:207–224.
[Lee et al., 2020] Lee, K. K., Spath, N., Miller, M. R., Mills, N. L., and Shah, A. S. (2020).
Short-term exposure to carbon monoxide and myocardial infarction: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Environment International, 143:105901.
[Lequy et al., 2022] Lequy, E., Asmala, E., Ibrom, A., Loubet, B., Massad, R. S., Markager, S.,
and Garnier, J. (2022). Contribution from a eutrophic temperate estuary to the landscape flux
of nitrous oxide. Water Research, 222:118874.
[Levin et al., 2003] Levin, I., Kromer, B., Schmidt, M., and Sartorius, H. (2003). A novel approach
for independent budgeting of fossil fuel CO2 over Europe by 14CO2 observations. Geophysical
Research Letters, 30(23).
[Lopez et al., 2013] Lopez, M., Schmidt, M., Delmotte, M., Colomb, A., Gros, V., Janssen, C.,
Lehman, S., Mondelain, D., Perrussel, O., Ramonet, M., et al. (2013). CO, NOx and 13CO2 as
tracers for fossil fuel CO2: results from a pilot study in Paris during winter 2010. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 13(15):7343–7358.
[Mikkelsen et al., 2017] Mikkelsen, T. N., Bruhn, D., and Ambus, P. (2017). Solar UV irradiation-
induced production of greenhouse gases from plant surfaces: From leaf to Earth. Progress in
Botany Vol. 78, pages 407–437.
[Murray et al., 2014] Murray, K., Escriu-Paradell, J., Verlinden, W., Wikstr¨om, L., Chaumet, A.,
Lepage, M., Russell, D., Sandgren, U., and Lihteneger, D. (2014). D2.8.I.7 Data Specification on
Transport Networks – Technical Guidelines. INSPIRE - Infrastructure for Spatial Information in
Europe - .
[Nielsen et al., 2022] Nielsen, O.-K., Plejdrup, M., Winther, M., Nielsen, M., Gyldenkærne, S.,
Mikkelsen, M., Albrektsen, R., Thomsen, M., Hjelgaard, K., Fauser, P., Bruun, H., Johannsen,
V., Nord-Larsen, T., Vesterdal, L., Stupak, I., Scott-Bentsen, N., Rasmussen, E., Petersen, S.,
Baunbæk, L., and Hansen, M. (2022). Denmark’s National Inventory Report 2022, Emission
Inventories 1990-2020 – Submitted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
47
==PAGE:50==
Change and the Kyoto Protocol. Aarhus University DCE - Danish Centre for Environment and
Energy, Scientific Report No. 494. http://dce2.au.dk/pub/SR494.pdf.
[Open Data DK, 2023] Open Data DK (2023). Vejdirektoratet - Tracklings - Nøgletal. https:
//www.opendata.dk/vejdirektoratet/taellinger-nogletal-mastra.
[Palmer et al., 2006] Palmer, P. I., Suntharalingam, P., Jones, D. B., Jacob, D. J., Streets, D. G.,
Fu, Q., Vay, S. A., and Sachse, G. W. (2006). Using CO2: CO correlations to improve inverse
analyses of carbon fluxes. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 111(D12).
[Plejdrup et al., 2021] Plejdrup, M., Nielsen, O., Gyldenkærne, S., and Bruun, H. (2021). Spatial
High Resolution Distribution of Emissions to Air - SPREAD 3.0, Technical Report from DCE -
Danish Centre for Environment and Energy. Technical report.
[Prohaska et al., 2022] Prohaska, T., Irrgeher, J., Benefield, J., B¨ohlke, J. K., Chesson, L. A.,
Coplen, T. B., Ding, T., Dunn, P. J., Gr¨oning, M., Holden, N. E., et al. (2022). Standard
atomic weights of the elements 2021 (IUPAC Technical Report). Pure and Applied Chemistry,
94(5):573–600.
[QGIS Development Team, 2022] QGIS Development Team (2022). QGIS Geographic Information
System. QGIS Association. https://www.qgis.org.
[R Core Team, 2022] R Core Team (2022). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Com-
puting. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org.
[Rebmann et al., 2018] Rebmann, C., Aubinet, M., Schmid, H., Arriga, N., Aurela, M., Burba,
G., Clement, R., De Ligne, A., Fratini, G., Gielen, B., et al. (2018). ICOS eddy covariance
flux-station site setup: a review. International Agrophysics, 32(4):471–494.
[Rotach et al., 1996] Rotach, M. W., Gryning, S.-E., and Tassone, C. (1996). A two-dimensional
Lagrangian stochastic dispersion model for daytime conditions. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, 122(530):367–389.
[RStudio Team, 2021] RStudio Team (2021). RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for
R. RStudio, PBC., Boston, MA.
[Saadi et al., 2021] Saadi, D., Tirosh, E., and Schnell, I. (2021). The relationship between city
size and carbon monoxide (CO) concentration and their effect on heart rate variability (HRV).
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(2):788.
[Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016] Seinfeld, J. H. and Pandis, S. N. (2016). Atmospheric chemistry and
physics: from air pollution to climate change. John Wiley & Sons.
[Statistik, 2023] Statistik, D. (2023). Documentation of statistics - The Population. https://www.
dst.dk/en/Statistik/dokumentation/documentationofstatistics/the-population.
[Stull, 1988] Stull, R. B. (1988). An introduction to boundary layer meteorology, volume 13. Springer
Science & Business Media.
[Turnbull et al., ] Turnbull, J. C., Miller, J. B., Lehman, S. J., Tans, P. P., Sparks, R. J., and
Southon, J. Comparison of 14CO2, CO, and SF6 as tracers for recently added fossil fuel CO2
in the atmosphere and implications for biological CO2 exchange. Geophysical Research Letters,
33(1).
[Van Der Laan et al., 2010] Van Der Laan, S., Karstens, U., Neubert, R., Van Der Laan-Luijkx,
I., and Meijer, H. (2010). Observation-based estimates of fossil fuel-derived CO2 emissions in
the Netherlands using ∆14C, CO and 222Radon. Tellus B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology,
62(5):389–402.
[Vesala et al., 2008] Vesala, T., Kljun, N., Rannik, ¨U., Rinne, J., Sogachev, A., Markkanen, T.,
Sabelfeld, K., Foken, T., and Leclerc, M. Y. (2008). Flux and concentration footprint modelling:
State of the art. Environmental Pollution, 152(3):653–666.
48
==PAGE:51==
[Wang et al., 2010] Wang, Y., Munger, J. W., Xu, S., McElroy, M. B., Hao, J., Nielsen, C. P., and
Ma, H. (2010). CO2 and its correlation with CO at a rural site near Beijing: implications for
combustion efficiency in China. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 10(18):8881–8897.
[Warneck, 1988] Warneck, P. (1988). Chapter 4 Chemistry of the Troposphere: The Methane
Oxidation Cycle. In Chemistry of the Natural Atmosphere, volume 41 of International Geophysics,
pages 131–175. Academic Press.
[WHO, 2021] WHO (2021). WHO global air quality guidelines: particulate matter (PM2. 5 and
PM10), ozone, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide. Technical report.
49
==PAGE:52==
A
Appendices
A.1
Links to each data source used to estimate heating and road trans-
port emissions
Table 4 below summarizes the different data sources that were used to estimate heating and road
transport emissions of CO and FFCO2, and provides links to download these data sets.
Table 4: Data sources used for heating and road transport emission estimations of CO and FFCO2
Database
Curator
Hyperlink
2015 Danish yearly
emissions of CO in a
0.1° × 0.1° grid
EMEP
https://www.ceip.at/the-emep-grid/
gridded-emissions/co
Emission factors
database for
Denmark’s National
Emission Inventory
Aarhus University
https://envs.au.dk/en/research-areas/
air-pollution-emissions-and-effects/
air-emissions/emission-factors
Localisation and other
data on buildings from
the Building and
Housing register
Dataforsyningen -
Styrelsen for
Dataforsyning og
Infrastruktur
https://dataforsyningen.dk/data/3829
2011 population data
in a 1km × 1km grid
GEOSTAT
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/
gisco/geodata/reference-data/
population-distribution-demography/
geostat
Danish total
population in 2015
Danmarks Statistik
www.statbank.dk/FOLK1A
Danish energy use for
space heating and hot
water in 2015
Energistyrelsen
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/
Statistik/energy_statistics_2015.pdf
Road network and
road classification
Dataforsyningen -
Styrelsen for
Dataforsyning og
Infrastruktur
https://dataforsyningen.dk/data/2689
Road fleet composition
in 2015 in Denmark
Danmarks Statistik
https://www.statbank.dk/VEJ23
Traffic count data for
Roskilde,
Høje-Taastrup and
Egedal
Open Data DK (from
Vejdirektoratet)
https:
//www.opendata.dk/vejdirektoratet/
taellinger-nogletal-mastra
Hourly distribution of
road traffic in Roskilde
DTU Transport
Not publicly available
50
