==PAGE:1==
Improving UX in book-tracking platform
through design thinking
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Improving UX in book-tracking platform
through design thinking
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Gabriela Lidia Abello González — Design and Innovation
Piotr Ładoński — Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Supervised by
Per Bækgaard — Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Jakob Eg Larsen — Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis focuses on improving the user experience (UX) of book-tracking platforms
through the application of design thinking principles. The project begins with an explo-
ration of the existing solutions and is followed by user research, which includes an on-
line survey, in-person interviews, and analysis of user reviews from the popular platform
Goodreads.
The research identifies key elements of value for users and leads to the development of
five distinct reader archetypes based on their unique characteristics and needs in rela-
tion to book-tracking. A competitive analysis highlights the presence of alternative book-
tracking apps, such as StoryGraph, that strive to address the shortcomings of other exist-
ing platforms. Consequently, the project scope is adjusted to concentrate on two specific
stages of the reader journey: managing collections and evaluating books.
The subsequent phase of the project involves an iterative prototyping and testing process.
At the start, low-fidelity prototypes are created to gather initial feedback and refine the
proposed ideas. This is followed by multiple rounds of testing using interactive, mid-
fidelity prototypes developed in Figma. The final iteration is tested with a group of five
users, resulting in valuable insights for further development. The designers also perform
analytical testing to assess the final solution based on Jakob Nielsen’s Usability Heuristics.
The main outcomes of the project include an executable mid-fidelity prototype in Figma, a
comprehensive outline of the system’s micro-interactions, user validation notes, and com-
ments. Additionally, the defined reader archetypes, along with an adapted user journey
contribute to a deeper understanding of the target audience. Finally, the competitive anal-
ysis of the book-tracking market highlights potential areas where the proposed solution
could make a significant impact.
ii
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim & scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background Information
5
2.1
Common concepts in book-tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Relevant literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Competitive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Methodology
19
4
User research - Empathize & Define
23
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
User interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4
App reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.5
Archetypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.6
Revisiting Existing Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.7
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5
Iterations - Ideate, Prototype & Test
61
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.2
Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.3
Iteration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.4
Iteration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.5
Iteration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.6
Iteration 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
5.7
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6
Final Iteration & Evaluation
83
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6.2
What was tested - final prototype presentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6.3
How was it tested . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
6.4
Outcome of the tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
6.5
Analysis using 10 Usability Heuristics for UI Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
7
Discussion
99
7.1
Our solution via the lens of the problem statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
7.2
Our high-level goal and the book-tracking market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
7.3
Reflections on the design process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
7.4
Reflection on methods and tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
7.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
8
Conclusion
111
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
iii
==PAGE:6==
Bibliography
113
A User Research - Surveys - Survey
117
B User Research - Interviews - Interview Guide
132
C User Research - Interviews - Interview summaries
134
D User Research - Interviews - Interview Notes
151
E
User Research - Interviews - User Journey
173
F
User Research - App Reviews - Gathering reviews
175
G Iterations - Process - Idea parking lot
176
H Iterations - Process - Archetype survey
178
I
Iterations - Iteration 1 - All sketches
180
J
Prototyping - Iteration 1 - Testing plan
187
K Iterations - Testing notes
189
L
Iterations - Testing tasks
205
M Iterations - User Story Maps
208
N Final Iteration - Prototype
210
O Final Iteration - Microinteractions
211
P
Final Iteration - Completed NASA TLX Surveys
213
Q Final Iteration - Completed SUS Surveys
219
R Final Iteration - Completed Custom Surveys
225
S
Comprehensive Competitive Analysis Table
231
iv
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
This chapter will introduce both our personal and professional motivation for pursuing this
project, our initial understanding of the problem space, relevant terminology, our vision,
and intended goal, as well as an overview of the processes and methodology we utilized
to achieve it.
1.1
Motivation
Whether through the pages of a paperback or an e-reader, reading has the power to
transport people to places they’ve never been and introduce them to people they’ll never
meet. However, the benefits of reading stretch far beyond comfort and escape; it has
also proven to be healthy, in terms of both our physical and mental well-being. In fact,
one study found that reading is correlated with living longer, reducing mortality by 20%
among book readers compared to people who do not read books [1]. It’s also known
that reading has the power to sharpen the mind, broaden our vocabulary, and strengthen
our communication skills. A research group from Emory University found that reading
can stimulate the brain and increase connectivity in the areas associated with language
comprehension and visual processing, thereby improving brain function [2]. Reading has
even been proven to enhance empathy. According to studies from the New School for
Social Research in New York, reading literary fiction can help individuals better understand
the emotions and viewpoints of others [3].
Unfortunately, despite its benefits, leisure reading can be a difficult hobby to start for
many. Finding the right book can be a seemingly endless task, and with social media
and streaming platforms that are intentionally designed to keep you constantly absorbed,
carving out time to sit down and read a book can feel like a challenging endeavor.
This is why many who have developed a goal to read more have turned to book-tracking,
which is essentially a strategy for people to track what books they’ve read and which
they want to read. In most cases, book-tracking also involves reflecting on and reviewing
books, so as to remember one’s feelings about them later on. Apps that are dedicated
to book-tracking allow readers to do all of this - and sometimes more - in one conve-
nient place. The Insightful Reading blog produced by Bookly (a book-tracking platform)
describes the concept of book-tracking apps as a ”personal digital book inventory sys-
tem,” while also noting that some apps even ”generate statistics based on your reading
goals, the number of books you read, the time you spend on them, your overall reading
speed, and more” [4]. Some of these apps, like Amazon Kindle, are primarily digital read-
ing platforms with built-in book-tracking functionalities, making it even easier for users to
integrate both reading and tracking into their daily routines. Overall, if designed correctly,
book-tracking has the potential to be a highly effective tool for promoting and popularizing
reading for pleasure.
It was our own personal experience of wanting to track the books we’ve read that in-
troduced us to the world of book-tracking in the first place and ultimately inspired this
project. Our desires quickly led us to Goodreads, a widely used book-tracking website,
which facilitates discovering books, logging books, and documenting reviews in a large
social setting.
After trying out the Goodreads mobile app for some time, we began to notice that the user
experience was limited and, at times, frustrating. Despite this, we continued to use the
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
1
==PAGE:8==
platform due to its popularity, ease of integration with Kindle, and lack of competitors with
similar functionalities. Nevertheless, we eventually began to learn that some of our friends
had similar experiences with the app, prompting us to question whether our opinions were
even more widespread.
Our first and most immediate inclination in our efforts to find answers was to check the
app’s overall ratings in the App Store. We were slightly deterred when we found that it
had an overall rating of 4.8 out of 5 stars based on over 450,000 ratings in the US store.
However, upon brief further inspection of the written reviews, we began to notice some
trends, which led us to suspect that while many users may enjoy the app overall, they
also feel that it lacks a number of important functionalities and improvements.
Accordingly, we set out to do user research, analyze competing solutions, and study the
framework of the existing market in order to further validate (or invalidate) our percep-
tion that there exists a considerable need for improved user experience in book-tracking.
Our initial desktop research revealed that Simona Tolcheva, a writer at MUO, one of the
biggest online technology publications, recently wrote an article called, ”6 Reasons Why
You Should Stop Using Goodreads” [5]. Her main thesis was that ”as times go on and
change, Goodreads does not. This has led to many users deciding to leave the platform
- a decision supported by years of unaddressed concerns and piling issues.” She then
went on to outline reasons for leaving the platform, which pertained to its acquisition by
Amazon, a lack of important changes, old UI, and unresolved issues and requests, among
other things.
In another recent feature, OneZero writer Angela Lashbrook quotes an anonymous jour-
nalist in an article called, ”Almost Everything About Goodreads Is Broken” saying, ”It’s
generally not a good place to find new things to read... The recommendations suck... It’s
like, 100 lists telling me to read The Handmaid’s Tale and Harry Potter” [6]. She also
notes a conversation she had with Dustin Martin, a Goodreads user and software engi-
neer who claims, ”It’s just really clunky and slow... Even having the resources of Amazon
behind it, the site feels like a relic... I don’t think I’ve seen real improvement or new fea-
tures since I started using the site in 2014.” This article has received over 10,000 ”claps”
(similar to likes) and a number of concurring comments echoing Lashbrook’s assertions.
Among those with similar viewpoints is Prateek Agarwal, a writer with the UX Collective,
who suspects that the reason Goodreads hasn’t improved over the years is that it ”en-
joys a monopoly in the space of book social networks... And if there’s one thing we know
about monopolies, it’s that they don’t have strong incentives to push themselves toward
innovation” [7]. In a subsequent article, Agarwal suggests that the only way for a startup
to ”build a better Goodreads is to literally not start off by building a better Goodreads” [8].
His belief is that instead of trying to create an improvement of what Goodreads already
is, startups should target the gaps in the reader’s journey where Goodreads is weak or
absent.
Our views echo the sentiments above. Goodreads has laid an appreciable foundation for
book-tracking and has helped us - as it has many others - personally to further nurture
and share our love of reading. Having said that, we also see unmet needs, untapped
potential, and thus, a field of opportunity. Therefore, we firmly believe that there exists
a considerable need to update the user experience in book-tracking. By confronting this
issue, we hope to also advocate for more leisure reading in the bigger picture.
2
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Aim & scope
Our high-level goal is to promote the value and enjoyment of reading on a widespread
scale. We believe book-tracking is an effective tool for elevating the reading experience
and thus contributes to this goal indirectly.
With this project, we are therefore aiming to answer the question:
How might we improve the user experience of book-tracking mobile apps?
Our scope involves
• user research, including conducting online surveys, in-person interviews, and anal-
ysis of App Store reviews of Goodreads,
• analyzing data from the user research to understand major pain points and issues
of the current book-tracking solutions,
• designing solutions tackling these issues through an iterative process that includes
frequent user testing.
The intended outcome includes high-level recommendations for a new book-tracking sys-
tem, a defined user flow, and a mid-fidelity wireframe prototype of an app that has been
user-tested and includes design documentation such as an overview of micro-interactions,
an iterated user story map, and validation to confront the specified problem.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
3
==PAGE:10==
4
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:11==
2
Background Information
The following section breaks down some of the central features and terminology of book-
tracking apps, then discusses the aspects of value they provide and the related work that
has been researched by others. Subsequently, a review of the state of the art is presented
in which we examine the strengths and weaknesses of some of the most prominent exist-
ing solutions. Here we also comment on the dynamics of their relationships in the market
of book-tracking through a competitive analysis.
2.1
Common concepts in book-tracking
To clarify some of the basic concepts and features shared by most book-tracking platforms
that we will be referring to throughout this report, we have included screenshots of some
of the main pages of the Goodreads app as an example.
(a) Discover page example
(b) My Books page example
Figure 2.1: Goodreads screenshots showing Discover and My Books pages
Figure 2.1a shows a typical Discover page, which is where book-tracking platforms present
books for users to explore. Sometimes these books are suggested based on a recom-
mendation algorithm; other times, these books belong to more general lists, such as ”New
releases this year” or ”Trending with Goodreads members.” Usually present in Discover
pages is the opportunity to quick-add each book to the user’s ”Want to read” shelf (see
the green button in Figure 2.1a). This shelf is one of three or four default shelves (also
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
5
==PAGE:12==
commonly referred to as collections) usually included in book-tracking, as described be-
low:
• The ”Want to read” shelf accounts for the books the user plans or wants to read at
some point in the future.
• The ”Currently reading” shelf includes the books that the user is reading at the cur-
rent time.
• The ”Read” shelf includes all books the user has indicated that she or he has read
or finished reading.
• The ”Did not finish” shelf includes books that the user has started reading but aban-
doned or quit reading for one reason or another. This shelf is not always included by
default for book-tracking apps, such as with Goodreads, but most smaller platforms
do include it.
In addition to the default shelves, some book-tracking platforms also allow users to create
their own custom shelves. Figure 2.1b demonstrates what an overview of these default
and custom shelves might look like, which can be called a range of terms from My Books
to My Library to My Collections. When entering a shelf or collection, books are usually
displayed in list view, with their covers visible along with some brief summary of relevant
information about the book, which differs from platform to platform. This combination of
the book cover with the short summary of information beside it is commonly referred to in
this report as a book entry.
Almost always, book-tracking applications include Book Information pages (or Book Info
pages), which essentially provide more summarized information about a book, as sug-
gested in Figure 2.2a. Although not all of it is visible in the screenshot, this information
often includes factors like:
• Title and author
• Average rating
• Number of ratings
• Number of reviews
• ISBN number
• Number of pages
• Publication date and company
• Summary of the book
• Reviews of the book published by
other users
• Similar books
• Tags or genres associated with the
book
From the Book Info page, users can also usually add or save the book to one of their
default shelves and/or multiple of their custom shelves. In Figure 2.2a, this would again
happen by tapping somewhere on the central green button.
Another major component of book-tracking is when the user finishes reading a book and
then writes a review and/or rates the book. Figure 2.2a shows an option to quickly rate
the book just below the green button. However, this can also be combined with writing
a review, as seen in Figure 2.2b. Most commonly, rating and reviewing in book-tracking
platforms is as simple and open-ended as it appears in this Goodreads example.
Please note that throughout this project when we use the word ”reading,” we refer to
reading for pleasure in printed, digital and audio formats [9].
6
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:13==
(a) Book Info page example
(b) Rate This Book example
Figure 2.2: Goodreads screenshots showing Book Info and Rate This Book pages
2.2
Relevant literature
To explore relevant literature, we roughly followed a Prisma model using book- and reading-
related search terms (e.g., ”book-tracking”, ”reading benefits”, ”reading applications”, etc.)
and applying them in various research databases (e.g., Research Gate, Scilit, Google
Scholar, etc.) [10].
We found that although for some book-tracking might initially seem like just another data-
collecting hobby, evidence shows that it leads to improved reading habits. According
to Jafari et al. [11], reading challenges, which are a quintessential component of most
book-tracking platforms, significantly affect the number of books read by their participants.
Their study reports that users read nearly 300% more books while partaking in these
kinds of challenges and setting reading goals for themselves than when not doing so. As
previously stated, with this increase in reading comes value in the form of various health
benefits, many of which are psychological. For one, it is commonly considered a way to
relax and escape from reality [12] [13]. Even more, according to the study conducted by
Marchalik et al. [14], it can significantly reduce the likelihood of burnout among medical
workers. Bruneau and Pehrsson [15] also proved that reading can be used for therapeutic
purposes, known as bibliotherapy. Readers don’t have to spend hours with books daily
to benefit from their influence - Billington [16] states that just 30 minutes of daily reading
makes people report 20% greater life satisfaction and 23% more likely to understand
the feelings of others. Reading’s effect on empathy extends to autistic people as well
- autistic adults who read are better at forming friendships, feel less lonely, and have
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
7
==PAGE:14==
improved general social confidence [17], [18]. Apart from benefiting our health, books
help us develop our interests, gain knowledge, and improve our critical thinking ability and
creativity [13], [19]. Simply put, spending a moment every day with a book can positively
impact multiple areas of our life, implying that tools that help us develop proper reading
habits may be well worth investigating.
As it turns out, reading challenges are just one of the multiple ways that both new and
established readers can reinforce their reading behavior. Some book-tracking apps also
include achievement levels that users can unlock to receive various badges. This is most
common in platforms that double as both book-tracking and a digital reading app, such
as Amazon Kindle or Audible, likely because it’s easier for these systems to track digital
reading over print reading behavior. The basis for implementing these types of challenges
and achievement badges can be described, in part, by goal setting theory, which was first
formulated by Locke in 1968 [20]. It essentially explains that one of the major factors
of conscious behavior change is motivation and a studied and effective way to motivate
oneself is by documenting clear and sufficiently challenging goals. Other important char-
acteristics described in Locke’s goal-setting theory are that they must involve commitment
and feedback. This translates to book-tracking because users are prompted to set their
own goals of how many books they want to read in a given time frame. This allows read-
ers to have autonomy of choice, which therefore increases their commitment to the goal
they have set themselves. The achievement badges, on the other hand, are usually as-
sociated with a variety of challenges proposed by the book-tracking platform. Examples
of awards in the Audible app include:
• ”Marathoner: You’ve listened for at least 5 hours straight. Keep clearing that sched-
ule [completed].”
• ”Mount Everest: This epic award is given away when you listen to something as
long as a day [uncompleted].”
What’s especially notable about these is the feedback element. Colorful badges appear
on the user’s screen upon entering the app once each challenge is completed, instilling
in them a sense of achievement. For Deterding [21], this use of badges as feedback
would provide a solid example of gamification in action. As Deterding et al. [22] describe,
gamification is a strategy that involves implementing elements of game design into non-
game contexts for the sake of user motivation and engagement. As for the more common
self-chosen reading goal challenges, for example, the feedback is different from that of
the achievement badges in that users are often presented with a consistent progress bar
to gauge how much closer they are to achieving their goal. However, in Goodreads, for
example, the system does nothing to reward users for reaching said reading goal when
it’s complete.
Aside from providing components of motivation to help users read more, the core ele-
ment of book-tracking is implied in its name: tracking read books. Doing so through one
unified platform serves as an inventory system and can affect one’s feeling of ownership
over books, especially digital ones. As described by Watkins et al, ownership can be
considered in three dimensions: ”control – the degree of agency a consumer has over
an object in its use; continuity – the duration for which a consumer is awarded access
to and agency over an object, and finally; transferability – the ability to move an object
through its cycle of biography, either through divestment, gifting, exchange or destruction”
[23]. In the lens of reading print books, many of the books people read come and go from
their possession, possibly getting lost, passed on to others, or even returned to a library.
Book-tracking allows users to maintain a synthesized list of the titles they own, as well
8
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:15==
as those they’ve lost so that no book is forgotten. When buying e-books from Amazon to
read on their Kindle e-reader, users do not own them in the same sense as they might own
physical books. In fact, they purchase only a licensing agreement to read the books using
the Kindle app, affecting the dimension of control. They cannot sell them, give them as a
present, rent them, or transfer ownership in any other way [24]. Users also do not own the
books permanently, as, in extreme cases, when they violate the terms of use, Amazon
can suspend their access to the account and library. Although book-tracking apps are
not meant to store the content of the books, users can add information about read/owned
ones to their personal library. While e-books themselves can be tied to a specific plat-
form (e.g., only to the Kindle ecosystem), dedicated book-tracking apps usually do not
have this restriction. They allow users to have one place to store information about books
from different digital providers as well as about printed copies. This can lead to increased
feelings of ownership over their collections.
The concept of book-tracking is also an example of a personal informatics system. Ac-
cording to Li [25], personal informatics systems ”help people collect personally relevant
information for the purpose of self-reflection and gaining self-knowledge.” Most digital
book-tracking apps allow their users to track some aspect of their reading behavior, be
it the number of books read over time, their reading speed, the total number of pages
read, or other related measurements. According to various studies on the effects of self-
improvement through self-knowledge (also known as ”self-improvement hypothesis” [26]),
awareness of our habits can positively impact our behavior ([27], [28], [29]). Taking into
account the stage-based model of personal informatics proposed by Li et al [25], book-
tracking apps are usually a bit more focused on collection and integration stages than
reflection and action. This might be enough for some users, but we hope to understand
this aspect of user needs better over the course of the project.
Today, reading - despite being a primarily solitary activity - has significant social dimen-
sions ([30], [31], [32]). Book-tracking apps may have various features of typical social me-
dia platforms. The largest social book-tracking platform is Goodreads, which offers users
the ability to follow friends and view their activity on a news feed, similar to Facebook or
Twitter. According to Thelwall et al.’s research, Goodreads represents a hybrid combina-
tion of a book-based website and a social networking site [31]. As such, social presence
theory should be considered when evaluating potential aspects of book-tracking user ex-
perience. It describes the psychological sensation that other people are ”real” through
digital communication methods [33] and can be utilized to provide a more immersive user
experience [30]. An example of a medium with a high social presence is video-calling,
while emailing is a method with a much lower relative social presence. Higher levels can
result, for example, from the ability to transmit different amounts of visual cues, such as
text-only communication VS voice calls, or giving the users the ability to express their
emotions through reactions or ”likes” under posts of their feed. While working on this
project, we aim to pay close attention to the social aspects of the existing applications
and their importance to the users to understand their value.
2.3
State of the art
The most prominent existing platforms for book-tracking were found through a list pub-
lished by the Insightful Reading blog [4] and the top search results for ”book apps” in the
App Store. Current solutions in the market are mixed between digital reading apps with
built-in book-tracking, dedicated book-tracking apps, social book-tracking platforms, and
non-digital methods of book-tracking. For the purposes of this project, we will mainly be
looking at the iOS versions of the book-tracking apps, although we do recognize that they
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
9
==PAGE:16==
may elicit different user experiences on Android devices. Also, note that the ratings and
reviews reported for each app are taken from the US region’s App Store. The following
seven apps are found to be among the most popular:
2.3.1
Amazon Kindle
4.8 out of 5 stars
4,036,651 ratings
Amazon Kindle is a platform in which users can browse, purchase, download, and read
e-books. Its link to Amazon allows users to choose from over 1,000 titles and to seam-
lessly switch between digital and audiobooks. In this app, users can access their library of
purchased Kindle books as well as free samples of books they’ve acquired. As mentioned
previously, Amazon Kindle also includes a series of challenges and correlated achieve-
ments related to different aspects of the user’s reading behavior. Examples include chal-
lenges based on the number of days users read within a time frame, the number of books
completed, reading streaks, and other special objectives. The Kindle app also gives users
the option to set a reading goal and view their records of longest weekly and daily read-
ing streaks. Some of the other main features of Kindle advertised in the App Store include:
“
FIND YOUR NEXT GREAT READ
• Read the books you buy on Amazon in the Kindle app. Choose from over
six million Kindle books (including those with Audible narration) [...] and
try any book with a free sample straight from the Kindle app.
• Kindle Unlimited members can enjoy unlimited reading and listening, with
the freedom to explore over 1 million titles, thousands of audiobooks, and
current magazines.
• Over 1,000 books, magazines, comics, and more included with Amazon
Prime.
• Kindle Vella brings you stories released one short episode at a time. The
first three episodes of every story are always free [...]
GO BEYOND PAPER [...]
• Read your way. Customize your text size, font type, margins, text align-
ment, and orientation (portrait or landscape)—and choose whether to turn
pages from left to right or continuously scroll. Read comfortably day and
night with adjustable brightness and background colors. [...]
• Look up words, people, and places while you read. Breeze through words
you don’t know and characters you can’t remember with the built-in dic-
tionary, X-Ray, Wikipedia lookup, instant translations, and search within
your book. [...]
• Track your reading progress. See what percent of the book you’ve read,
real page numbers [...], and how much time you have left in the chapter
or book based on your actual reading speed.
• Bookmark places you want to revisit, and make highlights and take notes
throughout your book. Open My Notebook to see all your notes in the
same place.
10
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:17==
• Hop, skim, and jump with Page Flip. Flip between pages or get a bird’s-
eye view of your book with Page Flip—don’t worry, we’ll save your place.
• Zoom in on high-definition color images in Kindle books, magazines,
comics, and manga.
• Sync your books across devices. When you’re reading a book, the Kindle
app will automatically sync where you left off—along with any bookmarks,
highlights, or notes—so you can start reading on one device and pick up
where you left off on another.
• When you can’t read, listen. Switch seamlessly from reading your Kindle
book to listening to the Audible book, all within the Kindle app.
• Get notified when authors you love have new releases.
- App Store summary
”
2.3.2
Goodreads
4.8 out of 5 stars
461,345 ratings
As discussed, Goodreads is another Amazon-owned book-tracking platform. Unlike Ama-
zon Kindle, Goodreads is much more of a book-based social network and does not sup-
port in-app reading. Instead, it allows readers to organize personal collections of books
they’ve read and want to read, as well as to share their thoughts about the books they’re
reading with their friends. With over 90 million users, Goodreads makes up the world’s
largest social community of readers. The top features listed in the App Store include:
“
• Get personalized recommendations and discover new books based on
your tastes.
• Goodreads Choice Awards: vote for your favorite books of the year and
see the winners!
• Participate in the Reading Challenge!
• Book cover and barcode scanner!
• Keep a want-to-read list.
• See book reviews and updates from your friends.
• Discover new books and explore popular book lists.
• Rate and review books you read.
• Share notes and progress updates as you read.
• Recommend books to friends.
• Join online book clubs and connect with other readers.
- App Store summary
”
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
11
==PAGE:18==
2.3.3
Bookly
4.6 out of 5 stars
20,219 ratings
Bookly is similar to Goodreads in that it allows users to manage their book collections and
does not support in-app reading. The main unique function of Bookly is to track reading
in real-time in order to improve users’ reading habits over time. The top features listed in
the App Store include:
“
TRACK YOUR READING IN REAL-TIME
• Start the timer every time you read with a simple tap
• Record your current page number of the books you’re reading
• See how long it will take you to finish the book at your current pace
• Set a Book Goal to finish your book by a given time
• Add your own rating, thoughts, and quotes for each book
• Play ambient sounds while you read
• Generate awesome Infographics style reports for every book
• Unlock achievements to stay motivated and read even more
GET READING STATS & RESULTS
• Get tons of insightful Stats: total read time, pages read, reading speed,
estimated book finish time, daily reading time, days you read in a row,
reading streak and more
• Generate Reading Reports with graphs and stats per book/month/year
• Set Monthly or Yearly Goals in number of hours, pages or books
• Set daily reminders to keep you motivated to achieve your reading goals
• Use the powerful Bookly Assistant to read more, get personalized reading
suggestions, reminders, reports and a lot more
• Share your progress directly from the app
KEEP TRACK OF YOUR BOOKS
• Track and manage your entire library of books, e-books and audiobooks
• Setup your own custom book Collections, like ”Wishlist”, ”Favourites”
• Get book details by scanning the ISBN barcode or searching online di-
rectly in the app
• Store and sync your books among devices using iCloud
• Never lose a book again, mark a book as lent or borrowed
KEEP TRACK OF READATHONS
12
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:19==
• Track your readathon progress in real time
• Track books read, reading time and pages for any period of time
• Track readathon prompts
• Get notifications and stay on track
- App Store summary
”
2.3.4
StoryGraph
4.7 out of 5 stars
1,079 ratings
StoryGraph may be one of the lesser-known book-tracking apps in this list, however, it’s
notable because it ranks in the top 20 of free book-based apps in the App Store. The title
and header in the App Store list StoryGraph as a reading tracker and say it offers book
recommendations and statistics. It also does not support in-app reading. The features
listed are:
“
• Import your Goodreads account
• Reading charts and graphs
• Buddy reads
• Personalized machine learning recommendations
• Follow your friends to see what they’re reading
• Annual reading and page goals
• Search/browse books by mood, pace, and more
• Custom tags
• Lists to share with your friends or the public
• Create your own reading challenge or join in with others
• Browse similar books
• Find similar users
• Half and quarter star ratings
• Built-in DNF (Did Not Finish) functionality (including tracking pages read)
• Progress updates with built-in reading journal
• Author-approved and user-submitted content warnings
• Dark Mode
- App Store summary
”
2.3.5
Apple Books
3.0 out of 5 stars
7,381 ratings
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
13
==PAGE:20==
Unexpectedly, Apple Books currently has the lowest overall rating out of this list of apps.
A brief scan of the recent reviews, however, suggests that the latest iOS 16.2 update has
introduced a number of bugs and issues in the app, which has transformed it from be-
ing a crowd favorite to somewhat defective. Besides being the single source of e-books
from the multi-trillion dollar company, the value offering of Apple Books seems to stack
up equally with its digital reading app contenders, although some reviews (used to) boast
about its unmatched and clean UI, which is quite literally designed to work seamlessly
on almost all iOS devices. Another advantage of using Apple Books over other digital
reading apps is that users are able to make e-book purchases directly in the app, while
this is not possible with its competitors. Apple Books’ features, as described in the App
Store, include:
“
• Selection: Explore millions of books and audiobooks [...]
• Book Store: Check out Top Charts, and find new releases, limited-time
offers, and recommendations for you, updated every week.
• Audiobooks: Discover great audiobooks read by actors, authors, and
other memorable voices.
• Free samples: Preview books and audiobooks while you browse, and
download free samples - sometimes before they’re available anywhere
else.
• Want to Read: Keep track of books and audiobooks you’d like to read
next by adding them to your Want to Read collection.
• Audiobooks app for Apple Watch: Listen to your favorite audiobooks on
your next hike, run, or exercise session, right from your wrist.
• Customize your reading experience: Choose between a selection of fonts
and easy-to-read page colors. Use Auto-Night Theme and adjust your
screen brightness to make reading more comfortable on your eyes. En-
abling Scrolling View to move continuously through books instead of flip-
ping pages.
iCloud Features
• Access any of the books you purchase from Apple Books on all of your
devices.
• Family Sharing makes it easy for you and up to five family members to
share your books and audiobooks purchases.
• Organize your books and PDFs into personal collections that will appear
on all of your devices.
• Access bookmarks, highlights, notes, and your current page on all of your
devices.
- App Store summary
”
2.3.6
Kobo Books
4.5 out of 5 stars
18,943 ratings
14
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:21==
Kobo, like Amazon, produces its own e-readers, which makes it understandable that they
would also have the Kobo Books app to make reading accessible to all those with smart-
phones in a multitude of countries. Interestingly, as suggested earlier, both the Amazon
Kindle app and the Kobo Books app cannot support in-app book purchases on iOS de-
vices due to an agreement with Apple. This inconveniently forces users to need to go to
the Amazon and Kobo websites every time they want to purchase a new book. Some of
the features consist of:
“
• Customize the way you read. Enjoy crisp, clear text in the size and style
you prefer. Try Night Mode to make reading easier on your eyes before
bedtime, and lock the screen in portrait or landscape mode.
• Our beautifully designed, easy-to-use player makes it simple for you to
move through your audiobook with a single touch. Never worry about
losing your spot, and see how much time is left at a glance. Schedule it
to turn off after a set amount of time—perfect for listening before going to
sleep.
• Read thousands of free eBook previews or listen to audiobook samples
[...]
• Start reading on one device and pick up on another. The Kobo App al-
ways remembers where you left off, so you can keep reading across all
your devices.
• Share your love of reading on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. Post
your favorite quotes, notes, and thoughts from what you’re reading.
• Rate and review the books you’ve read or read reviews from booklovers
like you!
• Read in English, French, Spanish, Italian, German, Dutch, Portuguese,
Brazilian Portuguese, Turkish, Traditional Chinese or Japanese.
• Listen to audiobooks while you drive with CarPlay. Download them before
connecting to CarPlay, or else you won’t see them.
- App Store summary
”
2.3.7
Libby
4.8 out of 5 stars
2,534,300 ratings
Libby is a unique and popular reading app that allows users to connect their existing li-
brary card to easily access ebooks and audiobooks from their personal library to borrow
whenever it’s convenient. This essentially allows users to read for free, which explains
why it has been growing rapidly in popularity over recent years and will likely continue to
grow in the future. Libby’s perks are listed as:
“
• Browse your library’s digital catalog of books - from classics to NYT best/sellers
• Borrow and enjoy ebooks, audiobooks, and magazines
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
15
==PAGE:22==
• Download titles for offline reading or stream them to save space
• Send ebooks to your Kindle [...]
• Listen to audiobooks via Apple CarPlay
• Use tags to create your must-read list and any other book lists you want
• Keep your reading position automatically synced on all your devices
In our beautiful, intuitive ebook reader:
• Adjust text size, background color, and book design
• Zoom into magazines and comic books
• Define and search for words and phrases
• Read and listen to read-alongs with your kids
• Add bookmarks, notes, and highlights
In our ground-breaking audio player:
• Slow down or speed up the audio (0.6 to 3.0x)
• Set a sleep timer
• Simply swipe to skip forward or backward
• Add bookmarks, notes, and highlights
- App Store summary
”
2.3.8
Manual Journal
Aside from the reading and book-tracking apps discussed above, we also see a manual
journal as a popular non-digital tool that many may use to accomplish similar book-tracking
activities as those mentioned above. In a manual journal, it’s completely up to the user
what is included, making it by far the most customizable solution of the gamut. A major
disadvantage associated with a manual journal, however, is that using it likely requires
substantial constant work, depending on the level of detail included.
In closing, while the ratings of the apps are meant to provide some indication of user
satisfaction, we do acknowledge that not all users rate apps, which means we cannot rely
on ratings and reviews alone to paint a full picture of the success of an app or method.
Evaluating the existing solutions is useful for us to not only gauge what already exists but
also to potentially highlight gaps where opportunities may lie.
2.4
Competitive Analysis
Below, Table 2.1 displays an initial competitive analysis in which we have noted which
features are included in which book-tracking method or platform. This is purely based
on our initial understanding of the noteworthy elements of book-tracking and does not
yet reflect the value of each in comparison with one another. As shown with the question
marks, some apps or methods were more challenging to explore due to paywalls or library
card requirements. Interestingly, despite being one of the most popular book-tracking
apps, Goodreads seems to possess fewer features than most of the solutions included in
16
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:23==
the table, although we recognize this is a surface-level observation and requires further
research to see what this actually means.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
17
==PAGE:24==
Table 2.1: Initial competitive analysis based on existing solutions. X - feature exists in the given app, ? - unable to determine due to paywalls,
D - digital books, A - audiobooks
Goodreads
StoryGraph
Bookly
Amazon Kindle
Apple Books
Kobo Books
Libby
Manual Journal
read in app
X
X
X
X
purchase books in app
X
read samples of books
X
X
X
X
X
customize reading interface
X
X
X
X
track reading progress
X
X
X
X
X
?
X
bookmark & annotate
X
X
X
X
X
X
set reading goals
X
X
X
X
X
?
X
social aspect (follow friends)
X
X
insightful personal statistics
X
X
X
X
?
unlock achievements
X
X
?
?
track print, digital, audio books
All
All
All
D
D, A
D, A
D, A
All
custom book collections
X
X
X
X
X
half star ratings
X
X
?
?
X
”Did not finish” shelf built in
X
X
X
18
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:25==
3
Methodology
The processes and methodologies most utilized in this project include the concepts of
user experience and design thinking.
3.0.1
User experience design
User experience (UX) essentially describes all the effects elicited from an interaction be-
tween the user and product, service, or system [34]. This includes the time before use
(i.e., when a person first learns about a product), during use, and after use. Effective
user experience design considers a product’s usability, usefulness, emotional impact,
and meaningfulness [34]. Peter Morville presents another interpretation using his User
Experience Honeycomb, as illustrated in Figure 3.1 [35]. Similarly, he claims that user
experience is a multidimensional concept comprised of the following seven characteris-
tics:
• useful - practical value,
• usable - user-friendliness,
• desirable - attractiveness and emotional appeal,
• findable - ease of navigation and information retrieval,
• accessible - inclusive design for people with disabilities,
• credible - trustworthiness and believability,
• valuable - contribution to the purpose or profitability of stakeholders.
Figure 3.1: User Experience Honeycomb by Peter Morville
The hierarchy of these characteristics should be determined by the unique circumstances
of each project. For example, in projects that lack financial resources, a simpler approach
might be to focus on usefulness and usability. An interesting way to assess usability
is outlined in Jakob Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design. These
include:
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
19
==PAGE:26==
1. Visibility of system status
2. Match between system and the real world
3. User control and freedom
4. Consistency and standards
5. Error prevention
6. Recognition rather than recall
7. Flexibility and efficiency of use
8. Aesthetic and minimalist design
9. Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors
10. Help and documentation
It’s also important to note that user experience changes over time as people’s behavior,
needs, and contexts change, which makes UX design an ever-evolving space and is one
of the reasons behind this project. The structure of this project entails the evaluation of
the user experience of existing solutions, as well as the redefining and redesigning of a
book-tracking app with a thoughtful user experience.
3.0.2
Design thinking
Design thinking is generally described as a problem-solving approach, which focuses
on creativity, empathy, and iteration [36]. It also embodies human-centered design by
prioritizing users, their tasks, and the environment in which they’re in. The design thinking
process is often divided into five stages: empathize, define, ideate, prototype, and test
(see Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2: Design thinking process
• The Empathize stage involves doing user research to gain a better understanding of
users and their needs. This can be accomplished through desk research, observa-
tions, interviews, etc. It’s important to keep in mind during this stage that often what
people think is their problem is not really their problem. Pursuing a deeper level of
empathy with users has the potential of uncovering what these latent needs really
are, which helps when confronting complex challenges.
20
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:27==
• The Define stage focuses on processing and analyzing the insights and informa-
tion gathered during the previous stage. The goal of this stage, as suggested in
its name, is to clearly define the core constraints and problems. This stage is vital
to the success of the final design solution because, without an accurately defined
core problem, the final design lacks direction and often fails. The define stage (like
others) may be revisited multiple times throughout the design process as the under-
standing of the problem naturally develops and evolves.
• The Ideate stage revolves around reframing the problem and identifying possible
solutions. It’s often suggested to begin this stage by prioritizing quantity of ideas over
quality, in order to better imagine solutions that may be outside the box. Creativity
is a crucial skill during ideation methods, which is why it can be useful to reframe
the problem in new ways and look at it from a new perspective.
• The Prototype stage is all about experimentation. Here, the challenge is to build out
quick and low-fidelity examples of the identified solution ideas with high potential.
The focus of early prototypes usually falls on the core function of the design (or
minimum viable product), which is essential to solve the core problem. Subsequent
prototypes can be aimed at testing or visualizing other supporting features of the
design.
• The Test stage is where the prototypes are evaluated. It’s important at this stage to
carefully choose evaluation methods and metrics, which are essentially how the de-
signers measure the success or effectiveness of a design. Validation methods can
include thinking-aloud walk-throughs, satisfaction ratings, counting the click errors,
etc.
While it’s written as the final step, the Test stage often re-loops into previous stages. In
fact, as previously mentioned, design thinking is highly iterative. Each of these stages
does not make up a linear path to follow so much as they provide different lenses of
working on a design project with which designers can jump between or simultaneously
work within [36].
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:29==
4
User research - Empathize & Define
4.1
Introduction
As previously described in Chapter 3, user research essentially makes up the Empathize
stage of the design thinking process. Getting to know the users, their needs, and their
pains is vital to designing a successful product or service. The Interaction Design Foun-
dation describes user research as having a natural division between qualitative and quan-
titative methods [37]. Qualitative methods are said to be used for understanding the opin-
ions and needs of users, while quantitative methods are used to measure the actions
of users and test assumptions that are made. In the context of this project, we are in-
terested in learning from readers between the ages of 18 and 35, including those who
use book-tracking and those who do not. Our goal is not only to understand their opin-
ions of book-tracking and the existing solutions but also to acknowledge their behaviors
associated with it, all of which make up their user experience. Doing so will help us to
understand what is working in the current solutions, what is not, and where the oppor-
tunities may lie. Some of the general assumptions we had when entering this stage are
summarized below:
• Most readers are not (knowingly) regularly book-tracking.
• Goodreads is easily the most well-known book-tracking app for readers of print or a
combination of book formats.
• Many people find the Goodreads user interface (UI) to be outdated.
The three major methods we used for user research include surveying, interviewing, and
analyzing existing app reviews. The following sections include a more detailed description
of each method, our procedure for implementing them, the results, our analysis, and any
additional comments we may have.
4.2
Surveys
4.2.1
Introduction
We chose to create a survey because they are relatively easy to distribute and paint
(to some extent) a picture of how people generally feel or think about a topic. Surveys
can include both open-ended and closed-ended questions and responses can either be
anonymous or known. Distribution can happen digitally or in paper form, to a specific
group of people or to the general public.
More specifically, we were interested in discovering what people think about book-tracking
apps, what methods they use, what they like and dislike about them, which features they
use or don’t use, their general reading behavior, etc.
While creating the survey, we assumed that most of the respondents who report that they
do use book-tracking would be Goodreads users.
Apart from being easily distributed, some of the advantages of using surveys for user
research include:
• it’s relatively easy to analyze the data and compare responses,
• they’re quick to prepare and don’t require continuous maintenance after distribution,
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
23
==PAGE:30==
• they’re usually more convenient for participants, considering surveys can be filled
out at whatever time without needing to travel anywhere or speak to anyone.
While these strengths are important, it’s also necessary to acknowledge that surveys also
come with a number of limitations and challenges. For example, one of the most ev-
ident challenges is that survey responses are limited; active discussion cannot occur,
which prevents potentially valuable follow-up questions from being asked and answered.
Without being able to ask for clarification, researchers are sometimes forced to interpret
responses, which can lead to the insertion of their own biases, even if they’re careful.
Similarly, if the wording used in a survey is not fully clear to respondents, they will have
to form their own hypothesis of what is being asked, which may skew the variety of re-
sponses given. Some studies also point out that the type of people who are more likely
to complete a survey tend to be more interested in the topic, and if the survey is online,
respondents tend to be more tech-savvy [38]. It’s also possible that if a survey is dis-
tributed to the general public online, there may be a few completely irrelevant or off-topic
responses, which require that the data need to be cleaned before analyzing.
4.2.2
Methodology
We created our survey online using Google Forms. The survey actively collected re-
sponses from the 5th to the 9th of March, at which time we received a total of 105 re-
sponses. We distributed the survey through a number of social circles, the DTU Inside
message board, the DTU Facebook group, and Subreddits dedicated to survey sharing.
In each instance, we made clear from the beginning that our target group for the survey
was people who read in their free time.
The survey began with a few demographic-based questions about age, gender, and coun-
try. Then we asked general questions about people’s reading interests and behaviors,
such as the number of books they read per month, their favorite genres to read, and their
most used reading formats (print, digital, or audio). The survey then branched off into
three different question paths, which depended on which kind of book-tracking users the
respondents were, such as:
• Current users, who were asked about the method or app they use for book-tracking
and why, the features they use most/least often, what they like/dislike about the
method, etc.,
• Past users, or people that do not currently use book-tracking but have used it in the
past, who were asked about what they used, why they no longer use it, and what, if
anything, would potentially make them interested in using book-tracking again,
• Non-users, or people who do not and have never used book-tracking, who were
asked why they don’t and what might make them interested in trying it.
These italicized terms will be used in the remainder of this chapter when describing the
three user groups who participated in the survey.
After respondents completed the question path most relevant to them, they all returned to
a common thread of a few final questions, which discussed reading amount satisfaction,
interest in personal statistics, and influential factors for book selection. Considering the
range of potential question paths, the survey usually required between three to seven
minutes. A full copy of the survey questions can be found in Appendix A.
4.2.3
Results
Before reporting the results of the survey, it’s important to note that many of the survey
questions were open-ended, which means the responses varied from participant to partic-
24
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:31==
ipant. The findings from these types of questions will therefore not be addressed until the
following section because they require further analysis than the closed-ended questions.
Of the 104 survey respondents (1 was removed for being inappropriate and completely
off-topic), most were female (64.4%), between the ages 18 and 34 (88.5%), and lived in
either Denmark (57.7%) or the USA (21.2%) although a total of 13 different countries were
reported. All demographic information can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Under 18
18-24
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
Over 64
0
10
20
30
40
50
What's your age?
 Everyone 
Age
count
(a) Age distribution
64.4%
34.6%
0.962%
Female
Male
Nonbinary
What's your gender?
 Everyone 
(b) Gender distribution
Denmark
USA
The Netherlands
France
Switzerland
Spain
Portugal
Canada
Mongolia
India
Germany
Ireland
UK
United States
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
What country do you currently live in?
 Everyone 
Country
count
(c) Country distribution
Figure 4.1: Demographics of the survey respondents
Half of the respondents read exclusively print books (n=52), while 20 respondents read
in both print and digital formats. Most reported reading 1-2 books per month in their free
time. In relation to the distribution of participants among the three question paths, as
seen in Figure 4.2, around 1/3 identified as current users of book-tracking (n=37). Only
6 respondents identified as past users and the remaining 61 respondents indicated that
they are non-users. The majority of non-users also revealed that they did not know of any
book-tracking apps prior to taking the survey (n=44).
Of the 37 current users, 24 specified that they used Goodreads, which Figure 4.3 clearly
shows was the most popular book-tracking method among respondents. Most rated their
current method a 4 and have been using it for at least one year. Almost 80% of these
respondents also reported not knowing about any other book-tracking apps aside from
the one they use, before the survey.
The current users were also asked about their most and least used features, as well as the
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
25
==PAGE:32==
58.7%
35.6%
5.77%
Never used
Currently using
Used in the past
Usage of any book-tracking method
 Everyone 
Figure 4.2: Experience of book-tracking among survey respondents
most and least enjoyed features of their current book-tracking method or app. The results
of these questions can be seen in Figure 4.4, Figure 4.5, Figure 4.6, and Figure 4.7.
Of the most commonly used features, the four features that received votes from more than
half of the 37 respondents include: ”organizing books into collections” (n=24); ”discovering
new books to read” (n=22); ”rating/reviewing read books” (n=20); and ”seeing what friends
are reading” (n=19). Accordingly, the least commonly used features of book-tracking in-
clude: ”reading or listening to books directly in the app” (n=21); and ”recommending books
to others” (n=19).
Similarly but not equivalently, the most enjoyed features reported include: ”discovering
new books to read” (n=11); ”organizing books into collections” (n=10); and ”seeing what
friends are reading” (n=9). The least enjoyed features consisted of: ”reading or listen-
ing to books directly in the app” (n=11); ”participating in reading challenges” (n=10); and
”tracking different aspects of one’s reading habits” (n=7).
Of the 104 total survey respondents, most indicated that they want to read more in their
free time (87.5%). When presented with an array of potential statistics one could view
regarding their own personal reading behavior, the most popular choices, as seen in Fig-
ure 4.8, are: ”total number of books/pages read each year (and ever)” (n=62); ”total time
spent reading” (n=56); and ”how many different genres read (and which)” (n=45).
The respondents also indicated that the most influential factors when selecting a book
to read include: ”recommendations from friends/family” (n=76); ”genre” (n=70); ”book
summaries” (n=57); and ”author” (n=56). Lastly, almost 70% of all respondents reported
that they are interested in knowing what their friends and family are currently reading
(n=70).
26
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:33==
Goodreads
Physical journal
Libby
Excel
Kindle
Notes app
StoryGraph
Google
Reddit
Apple Books
Mailing lists
Babelio
Digital journal
Libib
Google Play Books
Bookwalker
0
5
10
15
20
25
What app or method do you use for book-tracking?
 People who use book-tracking 
App
User count
Figure 4.3: Popularity of different book-tracking methods among survey respondents
4.2.4
Analysis
To analyze the survey results, we started by exporting the data from Google Forms to
an Excel sheet where we began cleaning it further, which essentially means that we did
simple standardizing adjustments wherever relevant, like with country names (e.g. ”US,”
”USA,” and ”United States” all became ”USA”), and ”not applicable” responses. We then
viewed the open-ended questions and began to code the responses into recurring themes.
For example, the question, ”Why don’t you use book-tracking?” targeted at the non-users,
received the following responses, among others:
• ”I didn’t know it was a thing”,
• ”I have never heard of it”,
• ”I did not know about it”,
• ”Never heard of it before”.
As part of our analysis, we coded these responses to all say, ”I didn’t know it existed.”
Ultimately, 24 out of 61 responses fit this theme, which can be seen in Figure 4.9. In
general, coding the responses as much as possible allowed us to create more informative
graphs so that we could better understand and make use of the data. This section will
thus report on the findings of these coded plots based on the open-ended questions from
the survey.
When the same 61 respondents were asked about what features, if any, would make them
interested in using book-tracking, the most common themes that emerged were: ”easy
to use” (n=9); ”recommendations based on past books” (n=8); ”none” (n=8); and ”I don’t
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
27
==PAGE:34==
Organizing the books you've read and want to read into
collections
Discovering new books to read (through recommendation lists,
reading reviews, browsing similar books, etc)
Rating/reviewing books you've read
Seeing what your friends are currently reading
Tracking different aspects of your reading habits (number of
books read, reading speed, etc.)
Participating in reading challenges (or setting reading goals)
Reading or listening to books directly in the app
Recommending books to others
Section marking
0
5
10
15
20
25
Which of the following features of book-tracking do you
do/use the MOST OFTEN with your current app/method?
 People who use book-tracking 
Feature
People count
Figure 4.4: Most often used features of book-tracking apps among survey respondents
know” (n=8). The majority of these users that did know about book-tracking apps prior to
starting the survey knew about Goodreads (n=10).
Similarly, of the six past users who responded to the survey, half of them had used
Goodreads, while the other three respondents reported using different apps, such as
Booknode, Kindle, or Friendspire.
We then asked the 37 current users why they use book-tracking. This received a wide
variety of responses, which we then coded in order to simplify the assortment without
over-generalizing the messages. As suggested in Figure 4.10, we found some of the most
common themes to arise were: ”to log past books” (n=19); ”to get book recommendations”
(n=8); ”to note future books” (n=5); ”to set goals” (n=5); and ”to rate books” (n=5).
When asked why they’ve chosen their current book-tracking method/app over other op-
tions, respondents most commonly offered answers associated with these themes: ”it
was the first method I found” (n=9); ”my friends use it” (n=7); and ”it’s the most popular”
(n=6).
Current users were also asked about what desires or improvements (if any) they wish
would be applied to their current method. We found that 45.7% of them had ideas for
development. To analyze the content of these ideas, we decided to create a word cloud
rather than code the responses into themes.
Apart from the graphs, we also created word clouds using a popular Python library wordcloud1.
The goal of creating word clouds was to get a quick overview of the topics mentioned by
the users in their answers. An example word cloud is illustrated in Figure 4.11.
4.2.5
Discussion & Key Takeaways
Our earlier assumption that Goodreads was likely the most common book-tracking method
among current users was found to be correct, according to our survey results. Neverthe-
1https://github.com/amueller/word_cloud (accessed: 2023-04-10)
28
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:35==
Reading or listening to books directly in the app
Recommending books to others
Participating in reading challenges (or setting reading goals)
Tracking different aspects of your reading habits (number of
books read, reading speed, etc.)
Organizing the books you've read and want to read into
collections
Rating/reviewing books you've read
Seeing what your friends are currently reading
Discovering new books to read (through recommendation lists,
reading reviews, browsing similar books, etc)
0
5
10
15
20
Which of the following features of book-tracking do you
do/use the LEAST OFTEN?
 People who use book-tracking 
Feature
People count
Figure 4.5: Least often used features of book-tracking apps among survey respondents
less, we recognize that 104 is a limited number of responses and by no means provides
an adequate sample size of readers, much less book-tracking users. This is especially
the case when considering that there were three different question paths available in the
survey. While it was valuable to hear from all user types, we only received 37 responses
from current book-tracking users, which were arguably the participants we were most in-
terested in hearing from. We could have attempted to distribute the survey further and
over a longer time period in order to collect more responses. However, we felt that the
distribution avenues with the highest potential had already been exhausted and the rate
at which we received new responses began to rapidly decline after just one week.
Fortunately, the survey was relatively straightforward in terms of processing and analyzing
the insights. The standardized questions made comparing responses and creating com-
prehensive plots that summarize the data much simpler than the analysis would be for
an interview, for example. However, we found that in general, the word clouds produced
were not as helpful as we initially anticipated they would be. Some were more helpful
than others. For example, the word cloud created for the question about why users don’t
enjoy using certain features of their book-tracking method seemed to be the most reflec-
tive of the general response sentiment). The other generated word clouds seemed to
be understandable only after having read through the written responses. Additionally, a
major disadvantage of the survey was that it was clear to us when processing the results
and coding the responses that there would have been value added if we would have been
able to ask follow-up questions or clarify some responses.
Specifically, reading challenges seem to work for some users but not for others. Many
reported opinions similar to ”reading should not be a competition”, but it was also found
that many readers enjoyed the reading challenge element because it effectively motivated
them to continue reading. We perceive this as a classic demonstration of how user expe-
rience is not one size fits all, which is important to keep in mind throughout this process.
It was also interesting that most people reported that they like receiving book recom-
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
29
==PAGE:36==
Discovering new books to read (through recommendation lists,
reading reviews, browsing similar books, etc)
Organizing the books you've read and want to read into
collections
Seeing what your friends are currently reading
Tracking different aspects of your reading habits (number of
books read, reading speed, etc.)
Participating in reading challenges (or setting reading goals)
Reading or listening to books directly in the app
Rating/reviewing books you've read
Tracking knowledge learn and emotions.
Section marking
0
2
4
6
8
10
Which of the following features of book-tracking do you
enjoy the MOST?
 People who use book-tracking 
Feature
People count
Figure 4.6: Most enjoyed features of book-tracking apps among survey respondents
mendations from friends and family, but ”recommending books to others” was one of the
least-used features of book-tracking, according to the survey. This could be because
people tend to recommend books to others in person or over messages, which may be
more suitable for a back-and-forth conversation. This inconsistency particularly sparked
our interest as a potential opportunity to intervene later on.
We found it especially useful to identify which features are most commonly used and how
they are perceived among book-tracking users. Discovering new books and organizing
books into collections were among both the most often used features and the most en-
joyed features of book-tracking. Similarly, rating and reviewing books ranked as the third
most often used feature; it can have implications for the recommendation algorithm, which
should take into account users’ perceptions of the books they have already read.
Among the common desires and improvements, many users mentioned the user interface
(UI) of their current app should be updated. They did not give further explanation, but we
can assume they are interested in more modern and simple design, as suggested by
Material Design2 or Human Interface Guidelines3.
To summarize, the key findings from our survey research are:
• most book-tracking users use Goodreads and don’t know about alternatives,
• most readers are reading either strictly print or a combination of print and digital
books,
• users tend to be polarized regarding the reading challenges,
• users highly value books recommended by friends, but don’t use the apps to do so,
2https://m3.material.io/ (accessed: 2023-06-10)
3https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/ (accessed: 2023-06-10)
30
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:37==
Reading or listening to books directly in the app
Participating in reading challenges (or setting reading goals)
Tracking different aspects of your reading habits (number of
books read, reading speed, etc.)
Organizing the books you've read and want to read into
collections
Rating/reviewing books you've read
Discovering new books to read (through recommendation lists,
reading reviews, browsing similar books, etc)
Recommending books to others
Glossary
Seeing what your friends are currently reading
0
2
4
6
8
10
Which of the following features of book-tracking do you
enjoy the LEAST?
 People who use book-tracking 
Feature
People count
Figure 4.7: Least enjoyed features of book-tracking apps among survey respondents
• users spend the most time discovering new books and organizing books into collec-
tions,
• many users desire an updated UI.
Moving forward, while these insights are limited both in number and depth, we will use
them to guide our future user research and inspire potential solutions.
4.3
User interviews
4.3.1
Introduction
After distributing our survey and while awaiting responses, we proceeded to organize
semi-structured user interviews with the goal of gaining a deeper understanding of our
users beyond the online survey. We wanted the interviews to be exploratory and informal,
with a predetermined outline for guidance. Overall, one of our main assumptions going
into user interviews was that the insights gathered would closely resemble those collected
from the survey.
The main difference between interviews and surveys is the ability for us to ask follow-up
questions, clarify answers, and further explore relevant topics as they arose. Responses
are also generally more in-depth in interviews, and being face-to-face provides more con-
text in the form of facial expressions and other aspects of body language, which enhances
the quality of the insights. Another strength of user interviews is that they allow us to po-
tentially form lines of communication with the interviewees, which we can utilize later on
in the design process to further clarify, inquire, or test ideas.
Despite these strengths, we also recognize that user interviews are much more time-
consuming both to conduct and to process the data. It’s also usually more difficult to recruit
participants compared with surveys because it requires scheduling in-person meetings
(in our case) and preparing additional materials (e.g., snacks, notes, etc.). Additionally,
interviews require much higher active engagement from both the interviewers and the
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
31
==PAGE:38==
Total number of books/pages you read each year (and ever)
Total time you've spent reading
How many different genres you've read (and which)
Most common qualities of the authors whose work you read (gender,
age, nationality, ethnicity, etc.)
Most common qualitative trends among the books you read (typical
length, genre, mood, pacing, ratings, etc.)
Your average reading speed (and progress over time)
Your progress towards your self-set reading goal
Average rating you've assigned to the books you've read
Most common publication dates of the books you've read
Most common qualitative trends among the books you read (typical
length, genre, mood, pacing, ratings,
None of these statistics would interest me.
Other
Spotify wrapped for books
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Which, if any, of the following statistics
about yourself would interest you?
 Everyone 
Statistic
People count
Figure 4.8: Statistics about reading regarded interesting among survey respondents
participants, which can be both a positive and a negative, depending on how well this is
considered during planning.
Our intention was to schedule a minimum of five in-person interviews with readers be-
tween the ages of 18 and 35.
4.3.2
Methodology
Ultimately, we conducted five semi-structured interviews with different individuals in the
span of three days, shortly after posting recruiting announcements on the DTU Inside
message board, the DTU Facebook group, and a Whatsapp group message of DTU in-
ternational masters students. We advertised to all readers, including those who do not
use book-tracking, as we felt that their insights would be mutually valuable as those who
do use book-tracking. All interviews lasted around 45-60 minutes and took place in DTU
Skylab meeting rooms, with snacks and drinks provided by us. One of us served as the
interviewer while the other took notes. We also recorded the audio of each meeting to
refer to as needed later on.
The interview guide we created resembled the questions we included in the survey (see
Appendix B). As previously described, these questions referred to the users’ general read-
ing habits as well as their behaviors and opinions related to book-tracking. We also in-
cluded multiple card sorting activities within each interview to allow users to visually group
certain aspects or features, depending on their own interests or priority spectrum. As seen
in Figure 4.12, the three card stacks included common features of book-tracking, potential
statistics about personal reading behavior, and influential factors that affect book discov-
ery or selection.
4.3.3
Results and analysis
Of the five interviews, three participants were Goodreads users, one was manually book-
tracking, and the fifth was not tracking at all. The participants expressed different opinions
in nearly every aspect of reading and book-tracking. For example, the subject of tracking
one’s reading progress elicited contrasting responses, with some being enthusiastic about
personal statistics while others disagreed. One even claimed, ”It’s not about the quantity,
it’s about the quality.”. Even among the few Goodreads users, there was a disparity. One
32
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:39==
I didn't know it existed
I don't need to
I don't read enough
It feels like too much effort
I never thought of it
Other
I don't like using mobile apps
It's not fun
0
5
10
15
20
25
Why don't you use book-tracking?
 People who don't use book-tracking and never did 
Reason
count
Figure 4.9: Reasons why survey respondents don’t book track
really enjoyed the social aspect of the app, mentioning that it was their main motivation for
initially downloading the platform, while the others felt indifferent about it. Still, they each
agreed on several flaws within the system, e.g., the search engine’s inflexibility, the diffi-
culty organizing books in the collections system, and the inconvenient recommendation
feature. An independent summary of each interview, with the results of the card sorting
activities, can be found in Appendix C.
To analyze the insights gathered from the interviews, we began by documenting all rele-
vant statements from the interview notes onto separate digital post-it notes on an online
whiteboard on Figma. We then mapped out the typical reader journey inspired by Prateek
Agarwal [7] and slightly adjusted it to reflect our own understanding of the journey based
on our user research and experiences thus far (see Figure 4.13).
A brief description of each stage of the process is written below:
• Discover is the stage in which users find and browse an assortment of books that
may or may not be interesting to them. Agarwal suggests there are two main types
of book discovery: incidental and intentional. Incidental discovery is described as a
passive approach where the user is not necessarily looking for book suggestions but
somehow is presented with them. Intentional discovery is thus more active because
the user is deliberately seeking book suggestions based on some aspect or other
(e.g., genre).
• Search involves the process in which readers seek additional, more detailed infor-
mation about a specific book (i.e., the book summary, reviews, number of ratings,
etc.).
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
33
==PAGE:40==
To log past books
To get book recommendations
To note future books
To rate books
To set goals
To read reviews
To track reading
To take inventory of owned books
To stay organized
To see what friends are reading
To save quotes with comments
To discover books
To share books with friends
To annotate books
To upload custom PDFs
To customize reading interface
To self-actualize
Included in digital reading app
To review books
To read more
To be notified of new releases
To increase self-esteem
To track reading time
0
5
10
15
20
Why do you use book-tracking?
 People who use book-tracking 
Reason
count
Figure 4.10: Reasons why survey respondents book track
• Catalog is the stage when users decide they want to save a book to read later and
then add it to some unified list or digital shelf somewhere. Some may call this list
their ”TBR” or ”To-be-read” list. Others call it their ”Want to read” list.
• Decide is when readers actually choose which book to start reading. Many factors
can ultimately influence this decision (e.g., mood, purpose, availability, etc.).
• Read is a more obvious stage in which readers hopefully receive the most satis-
faction. Many parallel tasks can happen during this time to support the reading ex-
perience like annotating, taking notes, doing research on the side, discussing with
others, etc.
• Judge is the stage after (and often during) reading in which readers form an opinion
about the book. For book-tracking users, this often looks like rating the book on a
five-point scale and/or writing a review.
• Recommend is the phase where readers are able to urge others to either read the
book or not read the book, depending on their experience.
• Discuss involves readers sharing their thoughts and opinions about a book, usually
- but not always - with other people who have read the same book. This can be
through in-person conversations or online through social media.
• Reflect is the phase we intentionally added and used to replace Agarwal’s ”Explore”
phase. In the context of this user journey, this stage is about reflecting on one’s read-
ing behavior or progress. Many book-tracking platforms implement various strate-
gies of self-tracking, whether it be the number of books read, reading speed, most
common genres explored, etc. This aspect of book-tracking may be more attractive
34
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:41==
interested
tedious
physicalputs
much
pressure
impractical
competition
user
friendly
look
good
recommendations
hyped
prefer
private
work
correctly
Figure 4.11: Word cloud made from answers to the question about not enjoying different
book-tracking app features
and relevant for some readers over others, however, we feel it is significant enough
that it should be incorporated into the reader journey.
We then proceeded to match each statement pulled from the interviews to one of the
previously outlined phases of the user journey, according to relevance. In each of these
phases, we used affinity mapping to group the statements into relevant categories, as
displayed in Appendix E. For example, Figure 4.14 depicts the Reflect stage, in which
we had a theme dedicated to reading challenges, as well as one dedicated to statements
against tracking, among various others.
We also consolidated the results from each card sorting activity, as illustrated in the light
grey text boxes at the bottom of the columns in Figure 4.15. Our findings from this analysis
will be commented on in the Discussion.
4.3.4
Discussion & Key Takeaways
When deciding which book to read, the least important factors for most of the interview
participants included book length, book sample, and book club. The most important fac-
tors for the majority were friend recommendations, online reviews, similar books, book
summaries, and online data-based recommendations. Again, we are seeing that recom-
mendations from friends and family seem to be the most popular source for book sugges-
tions. This was not only agreed upon by all five interview participants but also by 76 out
of the 104 survey respondents, making it the most influential book selection factor by far.
Meanwhile, three of the interview participants reported that they don’t use the Goodreads
recommendation feature and prefer to recommend books to others either in person or
over Messenger, which matches the survey results reporting that it was the second least
used book-tracking feature.
It’s important to note here that the three interview participants described above were
the only three participants who actively use a book-tracking app, which happened to be
Goodreads for all. This was not purposeful, as we only asked for readers. One partici-
pant was manually book-tracking using the notes on her phone, while the fifth did not use
book-tracking virtually at all. This is slightly limiting because while it does reinforce the
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.12: Card sorting exercises were based on these three topics: features of
book-tracking, personal statistics of interest, and factors that influence book discovery
for users
idea that Goodreads is a major player in the market, as we initially assumed, it also only
provides us insights into that one app rather than other potentially popular book-tracking
apps.
Participants appeared to be split over their interest in discussing books with others. Some
seemed to enjoy talking about what they’ve read with other people, while others felt that
their reading experience is personal and does not need to be shared. For one participant,
it depends entirely on the type of book. This, along with the dichotomy we saw regarding
tracking personal statistics and reading challenges, indicates to us there may exist some
major diversity of user types that would be important to acknowledge. This was also
unexpected to us, as before interviewing, we imagined that the participants would be
unique in some aspects (e.g., reading style, book interests, etc.) but would ultimately
echo the same or similar views and opinions as each other regarding book-tracking and
the card sorting activities. Instead, their perspectives deviated greatly, which resulted in
a wide variety of insights to sort through post interviews.
For example, the reading challenge feature appeared to conjure strong emotions in virtu-
ally all users, especially from the interviews. While some were enthusiastically grateful for
its existence and how it had helped them, others were adamantly opposed, stating that
it makes reading too competitive and superficial. Regardless, we’ve noted that participa-
tion in the Goodreads reading challenge is always voluntary, meaning that it is perfectly
acceptable for users to not engage with it if they so choose.
Similarly, tracking in general is a topic of contention. In three of the five interviews, partici-
pants indicated in some way that tracking aspects of one’s reading puts too much pressure
and strain on the hobby. However, during the card sorting activity about personal statis-
tics, they ranked some of the more qualitative measurements highly while the quantitative
ones were towards the bottom. This suggests that users may be hesitant to track numer-
ical data such as their reading speed or performance, but tracking aspects of the books
they’re reading could be of higher interest. Overall, the most interesting statistics, as
gathered from the card sorting summary, included qualitative book trends, genres, read-
ing goals, and average ratings. This is one example of how our analysis of the interview
insights demonstrated to us that people often contradict themselves. We also heard par-
36
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:43==
DISCOVER
SEARCH
CATALOG
DECIDE
READ
JUDGE BOOK
RECOMMEND
DISCUSS
REFLECT ON 
READING 
HABITS
Figure 4.13: Reader journey used to analyze interviews
ticipants describe Goodreads’ reviews and ratings as being trustworthy due to their high
quantity of users, then later pointing out that many reviews can be bought and the only
trustworthy evaluations come from people they know.
Regarding the reviews, it seemed that most readers we interviewed enjoyed reading them
but still wish there were improved ways for navigating them, such as through sorting and
filtering, or even searching by keywords. The same readers who read reviews indicated
that they also write reviews, even adding that they gain considerable enjoyment from
evaluating books after they’re finished with them. We believe this could be connected to
the idea of positive feedback when completing a difficult task. In this case, evaluating the
book may serve almost like a reward for users. Similarly to the findings from the survey,
one book-tracking user even mentioned to us her desire for using half stars, which would
help reflect more precise feelings about a book during the ratings.
From the five user interviews, our key conclusions are:
• even a small subset of readers can have vastly different needs and opinions,
• to account for the differences it might be valuable to establish various archetypes to
further guide the design process.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
37
==PAGE:44==
4.4
App reviews
4.4.1
Introduction
For our user research, we decided to also analyze the reviews of Goodreads, one of
the most popular book-tracking apps available in the App Store. We chose this app as
it appeared the most frequently in our survey. We will briefly explain how apps can be
rated in the App Store, why we conducted this research, what we were looking for, and
the assumptions we had going into the analysis. We will also examine the strengths and
weaknesses of this method. Then, we will present our findings and discuss them.
The App Store allows users to rate apps on a scale of 1-5 stars and leave written reviews.
Other users can then rate these reviews as helpful or not. However, the definition of
”helpful” is not clear, and every user can decide for themselves what they find helpful.
Some users might vote on the reviews before downloading the apps, as they find them
helpful in deciding whether to download the app or not. Others might already use the app
and mean ”I agree with the review” when marking the review as helpful. Reviews shown
in the App Store can be sorted by the viewer, based on criteria such as most helpful or
most recent.
Our objective was to gather a large database of app-specific opinions that includes both a
score and written feedback, providing both quantitative and qualitative data. By analyzing
reviews left by people themselves without additional encouragement, we hoped to get a
more honest appraisal of the app. Specifically, we aimed to identify common complaints,
needs, and likes, as well as the most prevalent issues with the app.
We went into this analysis with the assumption that people enjoy the app and would,
therefore, give it high scores. However, we expected that they would still write about
unmet needs or issues they had with the app.
One of the strengths of this method is that there are a large number of reviews to analyze,
providing a wealth of data. However, we also recognize that certain types of people are
more likely to write reviews, such as those with strong positive or negative opinions, while
people with more neutral feelings may not bother to leave feedback. Like surveys, reviews
lack context and follow-up questions, which means we must interpret the data ourselves.
Additionally, some reviews were not relevant to the app, as people wrote book reviews
instead of app reviews.
4.4.2
Methodology
To conduct our analysis, we collected 500 of the most helpful and 500 of the most recent
reviews of Goodreads from the AppStore. We chose to focus on the AppStore as opposed
to Google Play, as the rating on the AppStore was much higher (4.8 vs. 3.5 in the US as
of 02-04-2023). Additionally, we are more familiar with the iOS version of the app and
wanted to be consistent in considering only iOS versions of the compared apps (we also
described only iOS apps in the state-of-the-art section).
To collect the reviews, we used a JavaScript script and the open-source library app-store
-scraper4 to simplify the process. This library performs a web request to the iTunes
RSS feed, formats the response, and returns it as a JSON object array. An example of a
response is shown on Listing 4.1.
1
[
2
{
3
"id": "9769846833",
4
"userName": "Bored on the car ride home",
4https://github.com/facundoolano/app-store-scraper (accessed: 2023-04-10)
38
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:45==
5
"userUrl": "https://itunes.apple.com/us/reviews/id412755673",
6
"version": "4.5.0",
7
"score": 5,
8
"title": "Great App",
9
"text": "Love how you can keep track of all of your books read and
ones you want to read in one place! ’Its also cool how you can see
what friends are reading as well!",
10
"url": "https://itunes.apple.com/us/review?id=355833469&type=Purple%20
Software",
11
},
12
// More array elements
13
]
Listing 4.1: Part of the response returned by app-store-scraper
By using this script, we were able to easily and efficiently gather the necessary data for
our analysis. The whole code can be found in Appendix F.
4.4.3
Results
As App Store reviews do not contain personal information about the users apart from their
usernames, we were unable to collect demographic information about the reviewers. The
data we collected only includes the score and the text of the review. Examples of the
reviews from ”most helpful” and ”recent” sorting are shown in Table 4.1. Histograms of
the scores from the raw data are shown in Figure 4.16 and Figure 4.17.
While the histogram of the scores from ”most helpful” reviews resembles the histogram
of the scores from the App Store, the histogram of the scores from ”recent” reviews is a
bit more skewed towards lower scores. Also, as the ”recent” reviews were usually less
informative and shorter, we mostly focused on the ”most helpful” reviews. Unless stated
otherwise, all the results and analyses presented in this section are based on the ”most
helpful” reviews.
4.4.4
Analysis
In this section, we will provide an overview of the methods used to analyze the reviews of
the Goodreads app.
The first step was data cleaning. The response objects returned by the API did not require
any cleaning, as they were already in a format that was easy to work with. However, the
reviews themselves required some cleaning. After a quick look at the data, we noticed
that users spell ”Goodreads” in several different ways, e.g., ”good reads”, ”good-reads”,
”goodread” etc. so we used a simple Regular Expression (regex) to find all those vari-
ations and replace them with ”Goodreads”. Apart from that, we also replaced all single
quotation marks and apostrophes (‘ and ’) with single straight quotation marks (’) to make
the data easier to work with.
The starting point for the analysis methods was a literature review by Dąbrowski et al.
(2022). We used some of the mentioned methods, but we also added some of our own.
In the end, we used five methods: sentiment analysis, keywords, key phrases, GPT-3,
and word clouds. All of these methods were implemented using Python, as it has a lot of
easy-to-use libraries for natural language processing (NLP) and data analysis.
The first method we used was sentiment analysis, which involved using the transformers
and nlptown/bert-base-multilingual-uncased-sentiment model.
This
model was trained on 630,000 reviews from six languages (English, French, German,
Spanish, Italian, and Dutch), making it a good fit for our analysis. We conducted sentiment
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
39
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.1: Examples of Goodreads user reviews
Most helpful
Most recent
Goodreads had many uses: keeping track
of what I read; rating books and leaving re-
views others can read; finding other books
by the same author or finding a similar
book by a different author; reading reviews
to help me choose my next read; read-
ing book synopsis to assist in choosing my
next book. It also provides access to other
genres so I can add variety to my reading
choices.
Goodreads is the best way to keep track of
books I’ve read, want to read, or am cur-
rently reading. I can also see what friends
are doing, so we can nerd out after we’ve
read the same books.
Having a place to organize your books and
get ideas on what you might like is grand. I
am fortunate to have found this app. It is not
the most cutting edge, but it is simple and
the reviews are genuine. The book chal-
lenge is my favorite. You pick the amount
of books you want to read and you log your
progress. You can have friends join you in
the challenge and can watch each other’s
progress.
Despite receiving a Goodreads invitation
from a friend, I cannot figure out how to add
her to my friends list. If it is in fact possible
then it’s the least intuitive app of the many I
use.
With so many books out there, it is hard
to remember which ones you want to read,
with good reads you can keep a list of books
you want to read, along with reading re-
views from other book lovers, you can scan
the book even and get the information you
are looking for. You can join a club, follow
authors and keep up to date with the lat-
est books! Definitely the best app for book
lovers of any kind!!
I started using this app more regularly in Oc-
tober. It worked fairly well but the last few
weeks has been awful. The search doesn’t
work which makes it very hard to use the
app. Please fix this.
analysis to get a sentiment rating for each review and compare it with the user-assigned
score. An example of reviews and their sentiment rating is shown in Table 4.2.
Next, we used keywords and key phrases to better understand the most common themes
appearing in the reviews without having to read all of them. For keyword extraction,
we used the KeyBERT library5 and generated 1-, 2- and 3-word long keywords (or ”key
phrases”, but we will refer to KeyBERT output as ”keywords”). For key phrases, we used
Azure Text Analytics. Although we investigated various other methods, such as YAKE,
RAKE, and Top2Vec, they did not work as well as KeyBERT and Azure Text Analytics
or their usage was too complicated. An example of reviews and their keywords and key
phrases is shown in Table 4.3.
We also attempted to use word clouds to quickly visualize the most common themes in
the reviews. We generated word clouds using various text groups, e.g., whole reviews,
keywords, key phrases, and GPT-3 generated bullet points, usually grouped by the as-
5https://github.com/MaartenGr/KeyBERT (accessed: 2023-04-10)
40
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.2: Examples of Goodreads user reviews
Review text
Sentiment rating
Having a place to organize your books and get ideas on what you might
like is grand. I am fortunate to have found this app. It is not the most
cutting edge, but it is simple and the reviews are genuine. The book
challenge is my favorite. You pick the amount of books you want to
read and you log your progress. You can have friends join you in the
challenge and can watch each other’s progress.
5
With so many books out there, it is hard to remember which ones you
want to read, with Goodreads you can keep a list of books you want to
read, along with reading reviews from other book lovers, you can scan
the book even and get the information you are looking for. You can
join a club, follow authors and keep up to date with the latest books!
Definitely the best app for book lovers of any kind!!
5
I loooove Goodreads. It’s perfect for keeping track of all my books!
Unfortunately the app is nowhere near as interactive as the desktop
version. I wish the app was updated to better reflect everything you can
do on the desktop especially with groups and discussion boards! The
app is a little confusing to navigate and figure out the search features.
Also lots of glitches sometimes where the app freezes or doesn’t load.
4
signed score. Unfortunately, the word clouds didn’t provide much useful information, as
they were losing the context of the displayed words. An example of a word cloud is shown
in Figure 4.18.
To identify the most common complaints and needs in each review, we turned to GPT-3.
This autoregressive language model has proved very successful in various NLP tasks and
provided web API for access, so we decided that it might be worth testing. After several
tests using its chat interface, we ended up using the following introduction prompt: ”Below
is an AppStore review of a book-tracking application, Goodreads. I want to improve the
app, so I look for complaints/change suggestions from the user and summarise them
using very short and precise bullet points. Use ’-’ at the beginning of each of them. To
make them shorter, don’t use full sentences. Don’t write about features that exist and are
fine. If they don’t have any clear complaints/suggestions, just give one bullet point ’No
complaints/suggestions’ and nothing else.” together with every review. As a response, we
received a list of bullet points summarizing the most common complaints and needs. Out
of 500 reviews, GPT-3 found issues/suggestions in 300 of them. An example of a review
and its generated bullet points is shown in Table 4.4.
In summary, our analysis involved using various methods to create different views of the
data, which helped us gain a better understanding of the users’ needs and complaints.
We aimed to identify the most common complaints, needs, and likes to provide a good
starting point for designing the new app. We found that the generated bullet points from
GPT-3 were the most helpful in learning about the most common complaints and needs,
but we had to group them by hand manually. We also compared the sentiment analysis
and assigned scores and found that around 10% of the reviews had a difference of at least
2 points. Additionally, we compared data between ”most helpful” and ”most recent” re-
views and found that recent scores were much lower than the overall average app score.
Despite the different methods used, all pointed to similar topics, such as UI, search ca-
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
41
==PAGE:48==
Table 4.3: Example of keywords and key phrases extracted from a review
Review text
Keywords
Key phrases
Having a place to organize
your books and get ideas on
what you might like is grand.
I am fortunate to have found
this app. It is not the most
cutting edge, but it is sim-
ple and the reviews are gen-
uine.
The book challenge
is my favorite. You pick the
amount of books you want
to read and you log your
progress.
You can have
friends join you in the chal-
lenge and can watch each
other’s progress.
having,
log,
grand,
or-
ganize,
reviews,
join
challenge, place organize,
app cutting, simple reviews,
genuine book, app, grand
fortunate app, reviews gen-
uine book, place organize
books,
book
challenge
favorite
cutting edge,
book chal-
lenge, place, books, ideas,
app,
reviews,
amount,
progress, friends
Table 4.4: Example of bullet points generated by GPT model
Review text
Bullet points
Having a place to organize your books and
get ideas on what you might like is grand. I
am fortunate to have found this app. It is not
the most cutting edge, but it is simple and
the reviews are genuine. The book chal-
lenge is my favorite. You pick the amount
of books you want to read and you log your
progress. You can have friends join you in
the challenge and can watch each other’s
progress.
• Make the app more cutting edge
• Add more features to the app
pabilities, and bookshelves. These findings will be discussed in more detail in the next
section.
4.4.5
Discussion & Key Takeaways
Assumptions and limitations
Before deciding on using app reviews as a source of user insights for UX research, we
had to understand their limitations and make some assumptions about their aspects we
could not precisely determine.
Our first concern related to the meaning of the ”most helpful” review. Reviews are desig-
nated as helpful by receiving votes from users. However, we cannot determine at which
point the users vote on that and what exactly they mean. We considered two possible
interpretations of ”helpful” by the voters:
• ”helpful” describing a review with which the voter agrees as the current user of the
app,
• ”helpful” describing a review that the voter found helpful in determining whether they
42
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:49==
would enjoy using the app before downloading it.
In the end, we did not find a way to make sure any of those interpretations is more correct
than the other. Both seem equally realistic, as Apple does not force voting only before
or after downloading an app. To avoid drawing false conclusions we avoided all of those
which would depend on differentiating between the two mentioned meanings.
Another issue came from the bias of the users leaving the reviews. According to the
article posted by Klein et al. in Harvard Business Review [39], consumers leaving online
reviews without incentives often express only the most extreme opinions. It means that
by analyzing the app reviews we got to know only the viewpoints of those users who are
very satisfied with the app, use it frequently (”religiously”, as one reviewer stated), and may
want to convince other people to use it or those who stumbled upon problems they found
extremely annoying and completely unacceptable, sometimes even without giving the app
a bit more time. We miss all those opinions that might express general satisfaction with
the app, yet still point out minor issues negatively affecting their experience. That trend
of extreme opinions is especially visible on the histogram of the recent reviews - the total
number of reviews with the most extreme scores (1 and 5) makes up over half of all of
them. Being aware of this bias was one of the reasons why app reviews were not our only
source of user opinions.
GPT-generated bullet points
The most important outcome of the app review analysis was the list of bullet points sum-
marizing the most common complaints and needs. Although GPT saved us a lot of time
by extracting the essence of each review without us having to read all 500 of them, we
still had to code/summarize them by hand. As we read through several bullet points lists,
we noticed that they fell into several groups:
• UI - all issues/comments related to the app’s general look and feel,
• Bookshelves - all issues/comments related to bookshelves and categorization pos-
sibilities,
• Recommendations - all issues/comments related to the recommendations system,
• Search - all issues/comments related to the search capabilities,
• Social aspects - all issues/comments related to social aspects of the app, e.g.,
friends, groups, etc.,
• Reviewing & Rating - all issues/comments related to reviewing and rating books,
• Data flexibility - all issues/comments related to the integration with other apps and/or
using the app data in other apps,
• Other - all issues/comments which didn’t fit into any of the above categories, but still
appeared frequently.
Comments on UI
Plenty of reviewers commented on the Goodreads app’s UI. Complaints about outdated
design, in general, were the most common, but some users commented on more specific
parts. There were mentions of dark and cluttered UI in several reviews. On the other
hand, another user said that the UI is too bright for them. As making the UI both darker
and brighter at the same time is not possible, we realized that the simplest solution to
satisfy both groups is giving them control over the app look with simple customization
options or, at least, respecting the operating system settings. The customization aspect
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
43
==PAGE:50==
also appeared in other reviews, as some users also wanted to personalize their profile
or increase the font size across the app. Sometimes the comments about UI concerned
only the color scheme, but sometimes they were also related to the layout itself. Although
customizing the look of the whole app might be difficult to implement and not convenient
for many users, it might be worth considering giving users the option to adjust elements
of their home screen. This could also partially address another group of complaints which
were mentioning issues with navigation. Users find moving around the app counterin-
tuitive and some elements harder to do than they should be. The navigation should be
improved by itself, but customization of the home screen would allow users to add short-
cuts for the activities most important for them and thus make the navigation easier even
if the layout created by the developers is not optimal for their specific use case.
Comments on bookshelves
Comments on the bookshelves were much more varied than the interface ones, however,
definitely the most popular issue from both ”recent” and ”most helpful” reviews was the
lack of a simple ”Did not finish” (DNF) shelf. Although Goodreads support explains in their
knowledge base how to do it6, it is not intuitive and many users think it is not possible to
have any sort of DNF shelf in the app.
The other group of bookshelves-related issues revolved around their privacy settings. By
default, Goodreads creates three bookshelves (i.e., ”Want to read”, ”Reading”, ”Read”),
but users can add more, custom ones. Unfortunately, none of them (including the default
ones) have any way of setting the visibility - all the bookshelves of the users are public
and visible to every user of the app. On the other hand, the bookshelves can be only
edited by their owner. This is problematic for another group of users who want to have
shared bookshelves and be able to edit them together with their friends.
There were also other issues related to the bookshelves, but they were not as common
as the ones mentioned above. Some users wanted to be able to add books to multiple
shelves at once, while others wanted to be able to add notes to the books, especially the
ones on the ”Want to read” shelf. Another group of users wanted to have an easier way of
navigating through the shelves, e.g., by being able to reorder books, filter them by shelves
or tag them. There were also some usability issues, but they seemed to be bugs rather
than design issues.
In general, the whole idea of ”bookshelves” seems to be used frequently by the users,
hence so many reviews are mentioning them. However, the majority of the issues are re-
lated to relatively small improvements in the existing implementation, rather than a com-
plete overhaul of the concept. This means that the app could be improved by simply
adding the missing features, rather than completely redesigning the bookshelves.
Comments on recommendations
Many of the reviews mentioned recommendations. The issues there were a lot more
focused than those about e.g., bookshelves. Different users were often mentioning very
similar problems.
The most common complaint was that the recommendations were not personalized enough.
Although Goodreads support explains in their knowledge base which information affects
6https://help.goodreads.com/s/article/How-do-I-create-a-shelf-for-a-book-I-couldn-t-finish-
1553870934201 (accessed: 2023-03-28)
44
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:51==
the recommendations7, it is not clear to the users what exactly is used to generate the
recommendations while using the app. Some of them assume that e.g., following specific
authors should positively affect the recommendation system while, according to the men-
tioned website, it does not. This is a very important issue, as the users who are not aware
of the fact that the recommendations are not personalized might be disappointed by the
recommendations they get. This is especially important for users who are not sure what
they want to read next, but also don’t want to waste their time on books they will not like.
Another group of users wanted to have more control over the recommendations by ex-
cluding certain books, authors, or genres. While marking the book as ”Not interested” is
possible via the website, it is not possible to do it via the app.
There is also a paradox with the DNF solution proposed by Goodreads and the recommen-
dation algorithm - if the user adds a book to the DNF shelf, it will become more likely that
they will get recommendations for similar books, as, according to the mentioned knowl-
edge base, the app ”recommends based on each shelf you create”.
The last group of issues related to the recommendations was related to the search/filter
options. Currently, the app displays recommendations grouped by genres, but that is the
only way to filter them. Users often want custom filtering/sorting options, e.g., by author,
rating, or genre which is not possible to do currently.
Definitely, recommendations are one of the most important features of the app, so it is
important to make sure that they are as good as possible. This is why the app should
clearly explain to the users what information is used to generate the recommendations
and how they can improve them. Also, simply adding more search/filter/sorting options
would be a good improvement.
Comments on search
As, in essence, Goodreads is a huge database of books, it is important to have good
search functionality. Unfortunately, the current solution is not satisfactory for many users.
The most common complaint is that there are too few options to search by. Currently, the
app only allows searching by title, author, or ISBN. This is not enough, as the users often
want to search by other parameters, e.g., language, keywords, editions, or tags. Also,
the results are not sortable in any way.
Goodreads also has a feature called ”lists”. These are public lists of books created by the
users which can be used as a source of reading recommendations. They can be of mixed
length, some reaching over a thousand books or more. Therefore, users often also want
to be able to search inside those lists, without having to scroll through hundreds of books
manually.
On top of that, many complaints, especially among the ”recent” reviews, mentioned vari-
ous bugs and performance issues with the search functionality. Although it is not a design
issue, it should be noted that features that are used the most frequently should be the most
stable and performant.
Comments on social aspects
For social comments we considered all the reviews mentioning friends’ activity, newsfeed,
profile settings, and privacy options.
7https://help.goodreads.com/s/article/How-Can-I-Improve-my-Recommendations (accessed:
2023-03-
28)
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
45
==PAGE:52==
In general, many reviewers expressed a lack of control over their privacy settings and the
things they publish on the app. There are no settings e.g., to make reviews private and
limit which activities get published on the newsfeed. To make it worse, there is also no
way of deleting the activity posts after they get published. This lack of control over the
newsfeed works both ways - users can’t control what gets published there, but also can’t
control what they see there. Multiple users complained about seeing too many ads or
irrelevant posts instead of things they like, e.g., the activity of their friends.
Another group of reviewers was unhappy with the limited options to customize their pro-
files. Currently, user can change their personal information, like name, profile picture, or
bio. However, users want to decide on what book-related information they display on their
profiles - some of them want to show favorite books or authors, while others want to hide
the specific titles.
The last group of issues connected with the social features considered Goodreads’ ca-
pabilities as a social media platform. Many people complained about simple things, like
the inability to cancel friend requests, no option of tagging other users in posts, difficulties
with unfollowing people, or too many bots/spam accounts. There were also comments
on limited discussion/reply options under the reviews, e.g., the lack of a feature to reply
directly under the comment to create a thread. We also found mentions of a user missing
friend recommendations based on their common reading history or habits. An interesting
idea that appeared also in the surveys was the concept of visualizations summarizing e.g.,
reading over the last year, similar to a marketing campaign by Spotify (Spotify Wrapped),
which can be then shared on various social media platforms.
Comments on reviews & ratings
Another big group of issues was related to the reviews and ratings. Definitely, the most
frequently appearing feature request among the reviews and on various Goodreads fo-
rums is an extension of the rating system to include half-stars. A simple 1-5 scale is not
enough for many users, as they want to be able to express their opinions more precisely.
Another concept that appeared concerned rating specific aspects of the book, like e.g.,
the plot, characters, writing style, etc. It would allow the users to be more granular in their
ratings and also make it easier to find books that are similar to the ones they like.
Users often also get frustrated by the fact that reviews are only saved after being pub-
lished. There is no concept of a working copy/draft which can be saved and edited later.
This is especially problematic for users who want to write long reviews, as they have to
write everything in one go, which is not always possible. It also makes it harder to write
reviews on the go, as the users have to remember everything they want to write. Addi-
tionally, it forces the users to write their reviews only after they finish the book, possibly
forgetting some aspects which were thought-provoking in the moment of reading.
Many users mentioned issues similar to those of the social aspect or search function -
they had problems with searching/sorting/filtering reviews, e.g., by rating, length, or date.
Also, sometimes they do not always want to display their opinions publicly, keeping them
private or visible only to their friends.
Plenty of comments about reviews also mentioned suggestions for improving the review
writing experience. Although users write reviews, for some of them a kind of guidance
would be helpful to write them better. For example, some users would like to see a list
of questions that they should answer when writing a review. This would help them to
structure their thoughts and write more meaningful reviews. It would also solve another
46
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:53==
problem - reviews being too long and not getting to the point or too short and not providing
useful information.
Last aspect of the reviews which was mentioned pertained to review moderation. Users
complained about the fact that the reviews are not moderated, which leads to spam, low-
quality reviews with offensive content. As it is a general issue with the internet, it is not
surprising that it also appears on Goodreads. However, it is still a problem that should
be addressed. Currently, users can report reviews, but the number of moderators is lim-
ited, so they can’t process everything quickly enough. One possible solution would be to
use machine learning to detect potentially offensive content and automatically hide it in a
similar way it is done on e.g., Twitter.
Comments on data flexibility
The last group of issues considered data flexibility in Goodreads - e.g. how easy it is
to integrate it with other services or how easy it is to modify the data without using the
Goodreads app.
Many users mentioned the need for integration with various applications. While Goodreads
allows its users to export the library and personal data to CSV files, it does not expose
any form of API for other application developers. Therefore, other developers are not able
to extend Goodreads functionalities by creating e.g., widgets or plugins. It also makes it
impossible to use data stored by Goodreads in other applications. That isolation of the
data is problematic for some users who want to keep using Goodreads due to its large
community, but also want to use other applications to manage their libraries, for example.
The other issue mentioned several times was the lack of an offline mode. Currently, the
Goodreads iOS app only displays an error message when the user tries to access the app
without an internet connection. It makes its usage annoying in areas with poor internet
connection and completely useless in situations when a user does not have an internet
connection at all, like on a plane or in remote areas, e.g. during trips. While some features
of the app undoubtedly require an internet connection, like searching for books, others,
like displaying the library or updating reading progress, could be easily cached and made
available offline.
The last issue in this group pertained to adding custom books/articles/literary work in
general. Currently, Goodreads allows users to add only books that are already in the
database. If a user wants to add a book, they have to create a request with all the book
data and have it approved by the moderators (”librarians”). Even though it helps in some
scenarios, it does not work in situations when the user wants to add something which is
not a book, e.g., a scientific article, or if they do not want to make the added book public.
Users should be able to add any kind of content to their library, without having to wait for
the approval of the moderators.
Other comments
Other comments which appeared very frequently were not related to specific features,
but rather to the general Goodreads experience. Many users complained about the app
being slow and laggy. They were mentioning that particularly often in the context of the
search function, but also as a problem with the navigation across the whole app. Also,
there were plenty of mentions of a whole variety of bugs across the whole system.
Another commonly mentioned need was related to active reading - users often want to
have a way to save/store their favorite quotes, highlights, or thoughts about the book.
Goodreads partially supports it by allowing to add comments while updating the reading
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
47
==PAGE:54==
progress, but they are public, which is not always desirable. Also, it is not possible to add
comments to specific pages, which is a problem for users who want to highlight specific
parts of the book.
Analysis of the bullet points generated by the GPT model was definitely the most profitable
for us for discovering concrete issues of the users and the pain points they experience
while using the app. Apart from the multiple concrete problems mentioned above, it can
be easily noticed that they span various functionalities of the app. While some of the
reviews ask for new features, which is completely normal for any application, many of
them comment on very poorly working basic functionalities, like searching or cataloging
the books. Even though they get pointed out quite often, usually with concrete solutions
from the users, for some reason developers choose not to fix them. It is quite surprising,
as Goodreads’ parent company, Amazon, definitely has resources at its disposal, so a
shortage of e.g., developers should not be a problem.
Although this method was very helpful, it has several limitations. First of all, it was not
deterministic and sometimes returned incorrect/misleading results. One of the issues
easiest to spot concerned ignoring parts of the introduction prompt which gave instructions
on handling completely positive reviews. According to it, the model should return one
bullet point with very concrete wording stating there are no issues mentioned in the review.
However, it was failing to do so in two common ways:
• sometimes the wording was incorrect, which was causing issues with automated
parsing of the response,
• sometimes it returned bullet points for a completely positive review, mentioning all
the good things the user wrote about the app, then adding a ”No issues found” bullet
point at the end; quite often also using incorrect wording.
Those mistakes were usually easy to spot in the last stage of our analysis, the manual
grouping. Unfortunately, another problem was harder to notice without reading the whole
review. Several of the ”most helpful” reviews are about books instead of the app. We did
not expect that while creating the introduction prompt, therefore GPT model was behaving
in a completely unpredictable way when given those - it was making up a whole list of
perfectly reasonable issues which were, obviously, not related to the review at all. An
example is shown in Table 4.5. Although we were able to spot those made-up bullet
points several times during the manual grouping, it is possible that some of them went
unnoticed, adding artificial issues to our list. Another issue with using OpenAI web API
was purely technical. It happened several times that the OpenAI server did not respond
to our request which broke the script execution. As, in the beginning, we were making
the requests as quickly as possible, it was likely due to a DDoS protection mechanism.
Fortunately, after artificially reducing the number of requests per second, we managed to
circumvent the problem.
Other analysis methods
Other analysis methods (keywords, key phrases, sentiment, word clouds) were not as
helpful in getting concrete improvement ideas as the solution employing AI, but they
helped us to understand our data better and direct further investigation.
Sentiment analysis showed us an interesting thing about many of the reviews - many
users assigned the highest score to their review (5 stars), yet they still pointed out some
problems with the app, thus getting a lower sentiment rating. Usually, the differences
were small (+/- 1) or none at all, but in around 10% of ”most helpful” reviews users gave
a score at least 2 points higher than the one calculated from the sentiment of the text
48
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:55==
Table 4.5: Example of bullet points generated by GPT model from a book review found
in Goodreads app reviews
Review text
Bullet points
The book is a very inspiring reminder to all
of us, regardless of race, age or gender,
that given a passion to succeed, combined
with discipline, hard work and the right val-
ues, we can overcome even the most diffi-
cult blows Life can throw at us. The book
is a very engrossing read, one you can not
put down once started.
It engenders so
many emotions from the reader but, in the
end, there is a feeling of joy and vast re-
lief that, once more, good triumphs over evil
and success is given to the deserving. Very
inspiring read. And a true story at that.
• Slow loading times
• Limited sorting options
• Needs
more
personalized
recom-
mendations
• No way to track reading progress
• Needs a better search function
• Some bugs/issues with adding books
to ”Currently reading” list
they wrote. This assured us that even if people like the app, it has issues that need to be
investigated and all of the reviews have to be taken into account; not only those with lower
scores. Also, differences sometimes came from the possibility of editing the reviews - in
some reviews, users added an ”Edit” line at the end of a negative review stating that their
issues have been addressed by the developers and they are changing their rating from
e.g., 3 to 5. The simple model we used was not able to detect this complete change of
attitude due to the last sentence which led to scoring differences in several places.
When it comes to keywords, key phrases, and word clouds, we were hoping for getting a
quick understanding of the most common themes in each review. After generating key-
words and key phrases, we visualized them using word clouds. Unfortunately, usually,
displayed words were not very informative, e.g., Figure 4.19 shows a word cloud gener-
ated from key phrases for a sentiment rating equal to 5. It is hard to get any useful insights
apart from seeing that many reviews in this group mention ”review” and ”friend”. As they
are missing negations, it is impossible to quickly understand if reviews mention them in a
positive or negative context. However, the results of the word clouds and seeing the most
frequently occurring words helped us a bit in the later stages of grouping bullet points
created by GPT.
Key Takeaways
In summary, the key findings from the app reviews show that users:
• commonly complain about the outdated UI,
• desire a ”Did not finish” shelf,
• want more control over the privacy of shelves or reviews,
• are not satisfied with the app-generated book recommendations,
• would like to have more flexibility in searching, sorting, and filtering the books and
reviews,
• would like more control over profile customization,
• find the general five-step rating scale insufficient for expressing their opinions,
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
49
==PAGE:56==
• find writing book reviews intimidating,
• express a need for better integration with other applications,
• are dissatisfied with the app performance.
4.5
Archetypes
The insights we gathered from our user research led us to recognize a number of different
types of readers with different behaviors, needs, and goals. We decided to use these
insights to create archetypes, which would help us consistently refer to these common
user characteristics throughout the design process. While similar to personas, archetypes
are essentially clusters of user types based on key behaviors and differences without the
addition of personal characteristics that humanize the trends [40].
To form them, we began to map out some of the major distinct trends as they emerged in
our analysis of the survey, interviews, and app reviews, which can be seen in Figure 4.20.
From here, we put together different combinations of these characteristics to generate
archetypes of readers based on what we had most commonly seen in our research.
Below, we elaborate further on the six components that we first identified as making up
the major types of readers:
• Privacy - We found that readers are generally either more social with their reading
or they consider it to be more intimate or private. Social readers are more likely
to discuss the books they’ve read, be interested in seeing what they’re friends are
reading, and rate or write reviews of books. Private readers, of which there are
plenty, view reading as more of an intimate experience with themselves. This is
important to call out because with some apps, like Goodreads, the social aspect
is so central that it essentially alienates a large part of the reading community who
prefers to hold some level of control over the privacy of their reading activity.
• Format - The two most common format types used by the readers we surveyed are
print-only and a combination of print and e-books. In the context of this project, we
feel that it’s important to recognize that most readers enjoy reading print books, at
least partially, if not exclusively. This affects the importance of implementing an e-
reading feature directly in the app since it does not appear to be an obvious necessity
for most.
• Frequency - We find that most readers fall into one of the following three cate-
gories in regard to their reading frequency: occasional readers; frequent readers;
and binge readers. While frequent readers are the most consistent, binge read-
ers tend to go through periods of reading often and periods of reading very little.
This information influences the potential use expectations of the app. For example,
whether it is being opened multiple times a week or just a few times per month, this
should be taken into account when we consider what features and functionalities to
incorporate in the design.
• Intention - Our user research revealed various reasons why people read in their free
time. We have chosen to divide these reasons into two major categories. Casual
readers choose to read mainly for the mere purpose of entertainment and relaxation,
without a specific goal or intention. Goal-oriented readers have another layer of pur-
pose behind their reading, whether it’s to learn something new, to meet a previously
set goal, to develop oneself, etc.
50
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:57==
• Taste - Readers’ preferences range greatly, but we feel that it would be valuable
for us to differentiate between three broad taste categories: mainstream readers;
fixed-taste readers; and exploratory readers. Mainstream readers can technically be
associated with either fixed or exploratory taste, depending on the reader, however,
we chose to separate this category because it is common within book-tracking apps
for mainstream or trending books to be highly featured or frequently recommended
to users. Our research also suggests that users tend to have a more challenging
time discovering or receiving book recommendations that are more niche and not
already bestsellers.
• Engagement - The final element we identified was the level of engagement readers
have with the text. Active readers are more likely to annotate, take notes, underline,
do external related research, and engage with the book outside of just reading.
Passive readers, on the other hand, tend to stick simply to reading and internally
digesting the content of a book without taking further action. This factor translates
more or less into the level of expected engagement with the app specifically during
the reading phase of the user journey.
Then from various combinations of these factors that reflected what we most commonly
saw in our user research, we developed the following five archetypes outlined in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Reader archetype breakdown using the six main components outlined
Reader Archetype
Power
Print-
only
BookTok
Self-help
Novice
Privacy
Social


Intimate



Format
Print-only


Combination



Frequency
Occasional


Frequent


Binge

Intention
Casual


Goal-oriented



Taste
Mainstream


Fixed


Exploratory

Engagement
Active



Passive


Table 4.7 lays out a more detailed summary of each archetype. We recognize that not
every reader will perfectly fit into one classification or another, but by generating five typ-
ical user representatives, we can try to better empathize with the different types more
frequently. Otherwise, we could potentially find ourselves designing through one distinct
lens of our own biased view of what a user would think or do.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
51
==PAGE:58==
Table 4.7: Summaries of the five reader archetypes
Reader Archetype
Summary
Power Readers
Power readers are those who are proactive and serious about their
reading practice. They do not usually feel confined to one set of
genres and they are eager to learn from the books they read or
gain new perspectives.
Print-only Readers
Print-only readers are considered slightly more traditional. They ap-
preciate the physicality of print books and the sensory experience
that goes along with them. They are not often concerned with shar-
ing their reading experience with other people and while they read
frequently, they prefer to not add further pressure to their reading
by attaching further goals or expectations to it.
BookTok Readers
Booktok readers are generally tuned in to social media and are thus
social readers by nature. These readers are often relying on rec-
ommendations online and bestseller lists to choose their next book.
They can be driven by various goals such as being able to discuss
a popular book with friends or hitting a certain reading goal by the
end of the year.
Self-help Readers
Self-help readers are those who read occasionally with the goal of
bettering themselves in some way, whether professional, personal,
or other. These people tend to see reading as a more intimate
experience and gravitate towards psychology and philosophy self-
development books.
Novice Readers
Novice readers are essentially new to the hobby but are making an
effort to improve their habits over time. While some novice readers
may like the social aspect of reading, many consider reading to be
a more personal activity.
4.6
Revisiting Existing Solutions
During our user research, we were able to uncover more of the features and characteris-
tics of book-tracking systems that users find important or valuable. We then used these
insights to refer back to our study of the existing solutions in the market and further expand
the competitive analysis from Table 2.1 to reflect these findings. The updated results are
presented in Table 4.8. We also used this table as a tool to allow us to ascertain where the
opportunities lie for improving the user experience of book-tracking. We have included
our solution highlighted in yellow at the right end of the table to signify what we aim to
achieve in designing our solution. A comprehensive competitive analysis, which includes
both the original table and the added section, can be found in Appendix S.
52
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:59==
tracking is competitive
reading speed - if it 
estimates when you will 
finish the book, it can be 
great to plan
2 
uses GR to get the 
checked boxes; sense of 
achievement
2 
likes reading goals (one 
her most used features)
2
likes to know when she 
read a book
2
wants to know aggregate 
ratings over the years to 
see if one year she read 
shitty books
2
reading is not a job - 
doesn’t want to know 
reading speed
2
doesn’t like statistics in 
general
Wishes he read more 
normal books
Doesn’t track past books 
and doesn’t know why he 
doesn’t
Book qualities help with 
recommendations and 
knowing if you’re just 
reading the same type of 
books over and over

TOP of interesting 
statistics
Avg rating - it might be 
interesting to see own 
rating from 5 years ago

TOP of interesting 
statistics
Would like to read more 
and remember more from 
the books
Progress towards reading 
goal - doesn’t have any 
way to do it right now

TOP of interesting 
statistics
Occasionally tracks how 
long it took to read a book
Used to track how long it 
took to read a book in 
order to compare it with 
other activities when he’s 
busy
Usually tracks when 
there’s more going on in 
his life in general. 
Otherwise he feels more 
relaxed and doesn’t want 
to track (like now)
Used to track reading 
speed until he learned 
that reading faster is 
effective but ruins the fun 
and lowers 
comprehension
Feels that if you are 
reading for fun, tracking 
the time spent reading 
might make it more 
stressful
Would be interested if 
there were trends 
between author info and 
his book satisfaction
Not  interested in using 
book-tracking for past 
books
He found GR and the 
reading challenge feature 
which hooked him
Says reading challenge is 
like a game and is ahead 
of schedule
Content with how much 
he currently reads but 
sometimes he wishes he 
had more time
Collections help him keep 
track of what he has read
Would like to know the 
patterns among the books 
he reads 

(ex. maybe i spend 99% of 
time sci-fi, thriller, maybe i 
should try something else)
Really enjoys statistics in 
general
Has an idea to track how 
“explorative” readers are 
(how far they are from 
their normal taste)
REFLECT ON 
READING 
HABITS
Sometimes tracks reading 
habits
Rarely (if at all) uses GR 
reading challenge feature.   
”Reading shouldn’t be a 
competition.”
Tracks books manually on 
her phone since 2017 
(past and TO-READ)
Often participates in 
challenge
Really enjoys tracking 
books and reading goal
against tracking
past books
reading challenge
read more
book qualities
ratings
time/speed
other
Often uses GR to track her 
reading habits
Figure 4.14: Reflect stage of the user journey with themes discovered during the
interviews
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
53
==PAGE:60==
Most interesting statistics
 qualities of the author
 genre
 trends of books
Mid interesting statistics
 reading spee
 avg rating of boo
 comparing your rating 
vs others
Least interesting 
statistics
 publication date
 reading goal
 total tim>
 number of books/
pages
Least interesting 
statistics:`
 publication date
 reading spee
 progress towards 
reading goaJ
 total time spent 
reading
Mid interesting statistics:
mid lo}
 total number of books/
page
 your rating vs other 
peoples ratinu
 avg rating assigned to 
the books you’ve read
mid higc
 how many different 
genre
 qualitative trends of 
the books read
Most interesting statistics
 Path of creation of the 
book
 qualities of the author
Most interesting statistics
 avg ratinu
 diff genre
 progress towards 
reading goaJ
 qualitative trends of 
book
 avg reading spee
 total time spenª
 total number of books/
pages
Mid interesting statistics
 rating comparisoÄ
 path of creatioÄ
 highlighting passages
Least interesting 
statistics
 qualities of the author
 publication dates
least
most
mid
Most interesting statistics
 How many (and which) 
genres she’s rea
 Qualitative trends 
about the book
 Progress towards 
reading goaJ
 Avg rating assigned 
over the years
Mid interesting statistics
 Total # of books/pages 
rea
 Your rating vs other 
people’s rating
 Publication date
 Total time spent 
readinu
 Qualities of the authors
Least important statistics:`
 Total tim>
 Qualities of the author
 Reading spee
 Ratings comparisoÄ
 Number of genres
Most important statistics
 Path of creatioÄ
 Qualities of the book
 Avg ratinu
 Total number of page
 Number of book
 Publication date
 Progress towards 
reading goaJ
 Highlighting passages
Least interesting 
statistics
 Avg reading speed
Least interesting 
statistics
 Author qualities xz
 Publication dates xo
 Reading speed xo
 Reading goal xz
 Total time reading xo
 Total # books/pgs xg
 Rating vs rating xg
 Genres xg
 Path of creation xe
 Annotations xe
 Avg rating xe
 Book trends x0
Mid interesting statistics
 Author qualities xg
 Publication dates xg
 Reading speed xg
 Reading goal xe
 Total time reading xg
 Total # books/pgs xz
 Rating vs rating x¢
 Genres xg
 Path of creation xg
 Annotations xg
 Avg rating xz
 Book trends x1
Most interesting statistics
 Author qualities xz
 Publication dates xg
 Reading speed xg
 Reading goal xo
 Total time reading xg
 Total # books/pgs xz
 Rating vs rating xe
 Genres xo
 Path of creation xz
 Annotations xg
 Avg rating xo
 Book trends x 4
Figure 4.15: Card sorting topics related to the Reflect stage grouped and summarised
54
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:61==
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
200
Scores distribution among 500 "most helpful" Goodreads reviews
score
count
Figure 4.16: Scores distribution of ”most helpful” Goodreads App Store user reviews
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
200
Scores distribution among 500 "most recent" Goodreads reviews
score
count
Figure 4.17: Scores distribution of ”most recent” Goodreads App Store user reviews
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
55
==PAGE:62==
way
see
account
really
update
now
find
go
back
time
shelf
list
even
still
please
use
will
nothing
thing
make
hate
email
recommendation
people
reader
review
many
much
tried
using
dropped
password
site
better
instead
star
going
page
never
add
button
put
able
friend
already
new
delete
look
good
first
rating
screen
tell
try
access
said
work
know
say
something
went
got
thought
trying
whole
made
website
fix
difficult
finished
last
easy
log
let
option
otp
bookshelf
may
keep track
minute
others
might
give
share
facebook
contact
send
author
write
yet
disappointed
deleted
lot
open
track
based
next
scrolling
past
used
year
started
seem
shut
search
function
user
take
create
wo
old
adding
longer
sort
sign
kid
status
need
comment
date
actually
manga
confusing
data
online
number
worst
info
stopped
wanted
stuck
dislike
away
think
everyone
different
care
lose
issue
recently
blah
word
big
problem
count
every
recommended
response
keep
disappointing
asks
swipe
without
loaded
cover
title
continue
soon
slow
week
topic
reason
remove
kindle
show
interface
sure
support
saying
help
life
ugly
mess
home
full
navigate
bug
sometimes
added
unless
day
ended
done
mark
frustrating
well
description
provide
recommend
within
fact
setting
group
gone
extremely
thumb
social medium
listening
private
u
privacy
total
forced
least
personal
process
allow
horrible
picture
apply
potential
careful
form
behind
whatever
taste
explain
constructively
purpose
character
etc
enjoyed
compared
filled
ok
guess
though
sample
skip
searched
audiobook store
showing
stupid
hundred
scroll
two
left
management
place
dnf
thank
downloaded
set
rate
main
setup
experience
heard
hope
messy
welcome
ago
marked
written
rely
section
either
exact
fun
simpler
leave
future
looking
desktop
jot
sense
categorized
simply
feature
come
prior
currently
right
maybe
favorite
mine
login
change
logged
always
post
frankly
service
layout
pretty
bad
getting
order
profile
menu
item
posted
assume
loved
long
version
seriously
question
irritating
le
collection
barcode
pick
stack
finally
example
reflects
anything
honestly
answer
halfbaked
told
everything
automatically
similar
error
world
vivid
spiritual
ability
faith
perverse
instance
interpretation
often
feel
follow
stranger
took
sorry
anyway
enough
misleading
download
faq
pop
great
ipad
name
load
mobile
select
interested
simple
spend
frustrated
hoping
useful
series
progress
manually
joined
designed
preference
figure
typing
discussion thread
Figure 4.18: Word cloud generated from all review texts which had sentiment rating of 1
review
friend
time
author
new
many
track
year
list
thing
reader
way
recommendation
shelf
favorite
feature
challenge
series
people
story
great
progress
life
different
goal
library
page
good
love
place
character
rating
suggestion
title
version
genre
others
website
fun
world
best
everything
update
lot
star
future
great way
something
experience
family
order
lover
community
site
group
kindle
personal
category
search
interest
fact
phone
everyone
end
bug
someone
part
date
social medium
eye
problem
chapter
bookshelf
account
opinion
wonderful
first
option
next
beginning
idea
notification
copy
user
percentage
similar
note
issue
work
thought
child
point
amazing
day
little
word
person
giveaway
type
cover
free
number
taste
section
kind
ability
two
perfect
big
name
specific
mother
moment
last
audiobook
information
quote
avid reader
previous
main
school
language
heart
writing
enough
view
member
decision
request
current
example
thousand
right
amount
process
hard
night
short
case
novel
club
star rating
log
paper
yearly
social
system
human
history
real
librarian
quick
horror
message
sense
couple
support
event
age
side
description
ending
need
email
resource
plot
text
error
question
le
major
huge
function
profile
relationship
comment
interesting
long
awesome
old
improvement
page number
annual challenge
five star
upcoming
money
tbr
emotion
difficult
twist
theme
research
complaint
adventure
start
paranormal
reference
edition
job
opportunity
literature
past
private
period
positive
record
strong
journey
girl
picture
helpful
screen
store
particular
scale
multiple
tool
feeling
barcode
gr
honest
middle
desktop
aspect
discussion
useful
feel
style
subject
stuff
purchase
summary
change
platform
writer
notebook
beautiful
passion
easy
sequel
public
invaluable tool
online
status
bookworm
saving
grace
evil
god
adult
quality
several
minor
layout
small
digital
dnf
house
wish
addition
minute
southern
familiar
location
turn
topic
button
hope
connection
woman
hundred
college
daughter
man
physical
area
war
adam
game
culture
total
animal
edge
virtual
single
waste
space
bookstore
valuable
incredible
course
top
detail
contest
hour
link
reason
light
release
bar
service
week
vast
action
occasion
historical
romance
surprise
storyline
brother
exchange
access
memorable
habit
choice
bunch
fan
format
line
help
web
dating
collection
true
dream
deal
tear
popular
facebook
result
iphone
must
press
insight
content
u
twist turn
exception
annual
every
airball
separate
publication
setting
libby
january
holy
belief
faith
reality
source
month
spiritual
arm
fight
understanding
psychology
bible
depth
material
shot
compelling
level
exploration
general
million
room
credit
volume
director
patron
rollercoaster
base
lie
murder
sitting
truth
captivating
cast
purpose
tag
folder
database
regard
match
perspective
celebrity
standard
military
car
much
synopsis
dollar
back
terrible
disappointment
catalogue
card
sister
law
fiction
3rd
hiatus
nature
wisdom
fellow
creature
army
religion
barbara
sly
mobile
jewish
mystery
beauty
traditional
coming
pleasure
anger
confusion
humor
situation
tracking
dr
victim
dog
cause
professional
rabbit
extra
hassle
majority
browsing
martin
american
neighbor
tourist
second
youth
odd
bottom
home
selection
ton
spreadsheet
company
simple
development
answer
mode
white
background
look
response
overdrive
novella
fifteen
cool
scanner
thea
scottish
lord
nice
chance
loving
melissa
friendship
voracious
overall
sentence
functionality
bibliophile
highlight
follower
movie
computer
despair
hobby
chart
everyday
solid
window
fix
effort
mom
happy
john
control
kevin
criminal
entire
range
church
christian
explanation
paul
evidence
fascinating
thirst
midst
dark
alphabet
m
country
proper
endless
scan
outlet
variety
touch
paragraph
info
century
ireland
third
full
death
relief
virgin
download
historian
jamison
reviewer
cozy
thriller
psychological
front
feed
internet
ups
devon
scripture
mood
alex
killer
kid
mind
key
half
possibility
pleasant
design
actual
dozen
fantastic
manner
creator
activity
individual
retelling
blake
intention
hand
casual
joy
updating
algorithm
political
guy
gender
race
crime
art
audible
loss
downside
accessibility
kristen ethridge
english teacher
g expert
harry potter
Figure 4.19: Word cloud made from key phrases for sentiment rating equal to 5
56
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.20: User trends
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
57
==PAGE:64==
Table 4.8: Revisited competitive analysis based on user research
Goodreads
StoryGraph
Bookly
Amazon
Kindle
Apple
Books
Kobo
Books
Libby
Manual
Journal
Our
Solution
track reading progress
X
X
X
X
X
?
X
set reading goals
X
X
X
X
X
?
X
social aspect (follow friends)
X
X
insightful personal statistics
X
X
X
X
?
track print, digital, audio books
All
All
All
D
D, A
D, A
D, A
All
All
custom book collections
X
X
X
X
X
X
half star ratings
X
X
?
?
X
X
”Did not finish” shelf built in
X
X
X
X
shelf sorting
X
X
?
?
?
X
X
shelf filtering
X
?
?
?
X
X
shelf searching
?
X
?
?
?
X
X
tags system
X
?
X
X
descriptive ratings
X
X
X
clear rating on Book Info page
X
X
X
?
?
X
easy to navigate
X
X
?
?
?
X
context notes for shelved books
?
X
X
shared shelves
X
assisted reviews
X
X
precise privacy control
X
?
X
X
clean, simple, intuitive UI
X
X
?
?
X
book quick-add ability
X
X
?
?
X
X
customizable functionalities
?
?
X
X
X
save review drafts
?
X
X
feedback on finishing the book
X
?
?
?
X
58
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:65==
While revisiting the existing solutions with our new understanding of user needs and val-
ues from the user research, we were particularly surprised by StoryGraph. The more we
explored its features and functionalities, the more we believed it was made in response
to Goodreads and its wide list of limitations. For example, StoryGraph supports half-star
ratings, ”Did not finish” collections, and a better shelf search, sort, and filtering system.
These are all requested features that appeared various times within the Goodreads app
reviews and during our interviews with Goodreads users.
Although StoryGraph is equipped with a number of these desired features, we noticed
through exploring the app and its reviews that a few of these elements are underdevel-
oped. For example, although reviews are more structured, they are difficult to browse,
sort, or filter. Even though StoryGraph is young (2019) and clearly strives to improve
the correct areas, we believe it has attempted to implement too many features at once.
Regardless of its potential, we surmise that without a proper strategy for successfully de-
veloping a minimum viable product before expanding its functionalities, it will not be able
to compete with Goodreads in the future.
This analysis of how StoryGraph compares to Goodreads in terms of both included fea-
tures and development stage triggered a critical pivot within our design process. Where
we had initially envisioned ourselves developing the foundation for a new app with an
improved user experience, at this point we realized that we needed to narrow our scope.
In order to produce a solution of quality, we would not be able to address all aspects of
book-tracking at once. If we wanted to stand apart from solutions like StoryGraph, we
realized we needed to foster the growth of one or two major elements of book-tracking
before looking onward.
The two areas we chose to focus on include managing collections and evaluating books.
Managing collections is arguably the most central activity of book-tracking; it involves
tasks such as adding books to collections or shelves, browsing said shelves, and other
general interactions with the collections. We also found that managing collections was a
frequent topic of discussion in our user research. Many indicated that the collections in
their current system need to be updated and lack a number of seemingly obvious features
(e.g., Goodreads doesn’t provide a default ”Did not finish” shelf and StoryGraph doesn’t
support custom book collections). Therefore we felt that managing collections would be
an obvious aspect of book-tracking to include in our narrowed scope for this project.
Additionally, we were drawn to include evaluating books, which includes both rating and
reviewing after reading them. We found that most users of book-tracking interact with
ratings and/or reviews consistently, whether by writing their own or reading others’ sub-
missions. We also noted that Goodreads and StoryGraph operate at two different ends
of the spectrum in terms of providing assistance with this activity. Where Goodreads
presents users with a simple five-step star rating scale and an open-ended text box with
the placeholder text ”What did you think of the book?”, StoryGraph launches users into a
complex form of 11 distinct questions. These questions are designed to gather more spe-
cific and descriptive thoughts and opinions about the books, but consequently may also
serve as a barrier to some users who would otherwise write a review but are instead too
overwhelmed and unsure how to interpret certain phrasing (e.g., ”Is this book mainly plot-
or character-driven?). This polarity between the user experiences of these two platforms
intrigued us, which is why we selected it as our second focus area for this project.
The competitive analysis in Table 4.8 thus reflects our narrowed scope through the ”X”
marks in the highlighted column, which refer to elements in either of our two focus areas:
managing collections and evaluating books.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
59
==PAGE:66==
4.7
Problem Definition
From our user research, we learned that two of the core functionalities of book-tracking
include managing collections and evaluating books. Managing collections is often overly
complex, limited, and unclear, while the process of evaluating books is either considered
rigid and inflexible or difficult to navigate and confusing. Therefore, in the context of this
project, we have asked ourselves the following question:
How might we make managing collections and evaluating books more intuitive,
flexible, findable, and easy to navigate for both new and existing book-tracking
users between the ages of 18 and 35?
To clarify:
• intuitive - usable without needing instruction or direction,
• flexible - adapting to unique user preferences and providing freedom to sufficiently
express user views,
• findable - enabling easy way of locating essential features/functions,
• easy to navigate - easy to move around.
These terms conform to various facets of the User Experience Honeycomb [35]. Intu-
itive corresponds to usable, which can be further guided by Jakob Nielsen’s ”10 Usability
Heuristics” [41], and flexible corresponds to useful. Both findable & easy to navigate cor-
respond to findable from the honeycomb but we have distinguished them to emphasize
the difference between the visibility of important features and navigation of the app, re-
spectively.
In the following chapters, we attempt to answer this question while closely considering
the lenses of the five reader archetypes we developed from our user research.
60
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:67==
5
Iterations - Ideate, Prototype & Test
5.1
Introduction
After arriving at a place in our user research in which we felt we had developed a solid
foundation of understanding of our users and a specified problem direction, we began
prototyping and testing by following a build-measure-learn cycle strategy. In this chapter,
we therefore present four of our iterations using the following structure: what (as in what
did we test), how (as in how did we test it), and outcome (as in what was the outcome). The
fifth and final iteration is presented and discussed more broadly in the following chapter.
5.2
Process
While doing user research, we occasionally generated various solution ideas. These
premature, brief ideas were consistently documented in an ”idea parking lot” (see Ap-
pendix G). As we transitioned into the design phase with a more specified problem space,
we did an additional brainstorming session (first independently, then together) to gather
as many ideas as possible for the first round of testing. Results of this brainstorming can
be seen in Figure 5.1. Based on our project’s two domains, we were able to thematically
categorize our assortment of ideas into 11 focus areas presented in Table 5.1.
SOCAL. INTIMATEPRINT-COMBO. OCCASIONAL. FREQUENT. BINGE- MAINSTREAM. FIXED: EXPLORATORY: ACTIVE PASSIVE
LOGGING BOOKS INTO
COLLECTIONS
VISUAL
A
SIMPLE
BOOKSHELVES
APHYSICAL
A'PILE'
OPTION
TO
LIST OF BOOKS
FOLDERS OF
SEEN
COMPACT
SHELF
+SOME
OFBOOKS
SWITCH VIEWS
BOOKS
AND OPENED UP
E-BOOK LIBRARY
to DIFFERENTIATE
(HIST, GRID,ETC)
O
O
0
0
0
EING
GANL
S
o
SMART'
COLLECTIONS OF
EASY
SHELVES
WANT TO READ
READ BOOKS BASED
THAT DIVIDE TEM
HELEISDVDi
ON
YOUR STAR
FILTERING
VPNe
FOR YOU
BYGENRE MAYBE?
RATING
O
C
PRIORITY
& Aur OR MANAL
⑧
⑧
SETTINGS
ORGANIZING
BY DRAG
BST5
SHELES
& DROPPING
READ FUR
3DEFAULT
~4 DEFAULT
BOOKS
YN
SHELVES
⑧·
DNF!
s
⑧
CVETMIZABLE
·BOOKTAGS ARE
Iness
A
SEPARATE MING
DOUBLE TAP
GGING
-> MAYBEADARe
HOMESCREEN
A BOOK TO ADD
O
QUICK ADD AND
TINDER
SOMETING
A
WIDGET MAT
To MR
A WAY TO
SIMILART
ALLOWS YOU TO
ANOTHER METHOD
FOR BOOKS
LOG ANEW TITE
ADD CONTEXT
CAN BE ASLOWER
CMAYBE MORE
CART IN
IN NOTES WHEN
ADD W/ NOTES OPP
DISCOVERY)
COLLECTION
OR PROGRESS
WEBSHDS?
-
C
ABILITY TOTAG FORMAT
0
Saveun
(AVDIU, DIGITAL, PRINT)
-SWIPING
TEMPRARY
TEST
~doubletap
- swipe
COLLABORATIVE
TRACK BOOKS
REC
AT
- hold down
SHELVES YOU
OTHER
CANCREATE WI
+MOMES
END OF
- clear button
FRIENDS
A SHOWS
SHELF
0 (EASIER FORM OF eECS?)
30
(a) Initial ideas for managing collections
SOCAL. INTIMATEPRINT-COMBO. OCCASIONAL. FREQUENT. BINGE- MAINSTREAM. FIXED: EXPLORATORY: ACTIVE PASSIVE
RATNG/RANIEWING BOOKS
test GR vs SE
or show bookpl
and ask where they
↓think rating
Shouldbe
10-STEP SCALE
·IWDPIre
RATING Circles
RATE
DIFFERENT
REMOVE
BOOK?
VISIBLE
~
ASPECTS
- WRITING
RATING SHOULD
C CLEAR ON
emer-,
NOT
OVERALL wa
JUST OVERALL
POP UP AFTER
INFO PG
⑧
RATING?
"explanations
CLASSIFYING
+BOOKLISTS
O
0
- ENJOY ↑
W
Sta
DIFFERENT
·READ
HALF (&
DEFAULT RATING?
QUARTER?)
TEST
VISIBILIT
STARS!
SCALE & CONTEXTO!aboutread
0
Stick
inster
2
REVIW
OPEN-ENDED
REVIEWS
L
INTERACTION
PROCESS
NO LIMIT
&
⑧
⑫
REVIEW
15
INTERACTIVE
CAN LOOK LIKE
LIMITED TOX
UP VOTES
HINGE PROMPTS
RATINGB
WORDS ICHARACTERS
DOWN VOTES
SEARCH, SORT,
MAYBE? BUT
NEXTS
/TWEET AR LIKE
REVIEW PROMPTS
REVIEW POP-IP
COMMENTIREPLY
& FILTERING
WIT SUGGESTED
WITH LIMIT
SWORDS TOTAL)
OR LIKE FEATURE?
REVIEWS
O ANSWERS
CAN HAVE OPTION FOR
⑧
HOW COMPLEX?
MOREDETAILED/LONG
REVIEW
REVIEW CONTENT
REVIEW
ATTACH IMAGE
REQUIRES
ABILITY 5
OFBOOK BEING
IMAGE
A GIPH
CEAVE
VOICE
READ SOMEWHERE
& TeXT
NOTE(s) INSTEAD
(IFPRINT)
FORMATTING
OF WRITING A
REVIEW
OTHER
COULD LEAD
TO
PRIVACY
DIRECTLY INT
DRAFT REVIEW
ABILITY
WRITE
BOTH
SETTINGS FOR
AN OPPORTUNITY
MAT YOU CAN
A PUBLIC
&
RATNGS I
FOR RECOMMENDING
UPDATETRNGHAT
PRIVATE
RANENS
ME BOOK
REVIEW
(b) Initial ideas for rating and review process
Figure 5.1: Ideas developed for the first testing
We used these focus areas to guide our first iteration. After the first iteration, we began
developing and adjusting a User Story Map (USM), which helped us map out the activities
and tasks the users would need to accomplish to meet their goals when using a book-
tracking system.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
61
==PAGE:68==
Table 5.1: Focus areas
Managing collections
Rating & reviewing
Visual
Scale & context
Organization
Visibility
Shelves
Review process
Logging books
Interactions
Other
Review content
Other
In each round of testing, participants were first given an initial survey in which we asked for
their demographics (gender and age), whether or not they actively use book-tracking, and
a series of questions to better understand what type of reader each of them were based
on the archetypes we identified during our user research. To view the full survey template
and all resulting filled-out surveys, see Appendix H. The final archetype classifications for
each user we tested with are listed in each of the following iteration sections.
5.3
Iteration 1
5.3.1
What was tested
Our first iteration focused primarily on exploring different undeveloped ideas and their
initial appeal to the users to decide which to further evolve. For example, we explored:
• different shelf and library views (see Figure 5.2),
• possible shelf sorting approaches,
• ”up next” reading queues, in which users could line up their next reads,
• in-shelf book recommendations,
• private quick-notes appended to books to provide context while adding them to a
shelf,
• different methods of quickly adding a book to a shelf from the Discover page,
• home screen widget, which would allow the user to quickly log a new title or progress,
• shared shelves, which would allow users to collaborate and co-create shelves with
their friends, an alternative method for quickly and easily recommending books to
friends (see Figure 5.3),
• different scale options for book ratings,
• rating multiple book aspects (as opposed to a single overall rating)
• predicted book rating informed by user interests,
• question prompts to guide the book review process (review prompts),
• different privacy options of published reviews.
To see more sketches and initial prototypes check Appendix I.
5.3.2
How it was tested
To test these early ideas, we organized a small and informal focus group in which we
facilitated a discussion between three participants. The goal was to receive feedback on
62
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:69==
(a) Books displayed in a list
(b) Books displayed in a grid
(c) Books displayed on a shelf
Figure 5.2: Sketches of different options to display books inside a collection
the existing concepts and co-create new ideas together. A one-page testing plan that we
created can be found in Appendix J. The prototypes we created for testing were rough
sketches using two digital drawing tools (compare Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3). We inten-
tionally chose to do this first round of testing with a group of a few people rather than
testing with one person at a time because the prototypes were not very detailed at this
point and we felt that the potential discussion among a group that is comfortable speaking
up around each other would be more valuable in this case than their individual feedback.
This also allowed them to build off of each other’s ideas when co-creating rather than
feeling like they’ve been put on the spot.
5.3.3
Outcome of the tests
The results from the surveys indicated that two of the three users were an equal blend
of the Novice and Print-Only reader archetypes. The third participant was most closely
matched with the Print-Only archetype. From our discussions, we received a number of
comments, ideas, and conclusions, which we then used in creating our second iteration.
The main insights are described below.
With respect to the library and shelf views, we learned that participants would prefer to
have the option to toggle between a list and a grid view within a shelf. This would therefore
avoid the need to design only one layout, which limits the type of value offered to the user
(e.g. the list view can include short summaries of information while the grid view can
provide a more visual overview of the books in the shelf). Similarly, participants also
indicated that the Library page (or overview of shelves) should display book covers rather
than using some other imagery such as folders or book spines with only titles listed as
they would appear on a physical bookshelf.
The shared shelf concept as a simplified friend recommendation system was well-received,
but it was mentioned that it would be useful if users could include a short note with each
book entry about why it was added to the shelf. This would allow other collaborators to
understand the context or reason for the recommendation better.
To quickly add books from the Discover page into a shelf, users shared that they would
instinctively look for a button or icon rather than think to long-press or swipe on a book
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
63
==PAGE:70==
SHARED SHELVES
&SHARED
..
①STERBRO
HUS
gabiyerummerdementme
ener
audrey recommended-
by an u
M
*****
4.90
Ar
n
D
74,319 ratings
erise recommended
⑭
-
pia recommended
P
A man
Figure 5.3: Sketch of a shared shelf
entry. This was especially interesting because one of their specific comments was that
they would ”look for a heart icon,” which in retrospect, we feel may have been influenced
by a sketch we had just previously shown them thereby priming them to think this way
(note the heart-shaped ”save” icons in the shared shelf sketch in Figure 5.3).
In regards to evaluating books, participants liked the idea of rating different aspects of a
book and suggested that the system provide a limited number of (secondary) parameters
that the user can select depending on their interests and book relevance. We also dis-
cussed that in order to maintain some level of consistency among all users, there should
be one default overall rating that can be used to quickly assess books and would be
shared among everyone. We agreed that this common (primary) rating should be clearly
visible at the top of the Book Info page while the secondary rating parameters could be
listed further down on the page.
Rather than displaying a predicted rating based on the user’s interests, which might con-
fuse users already managing various types of ratings, the participants suggested we follow
the example set by Netflix, in which we report a percentage match between the book and
the user’s tastes (e.g., ”This book is an 84% match with your interests”).
Participants were enthusiastic about the idea to include review prompts, which would
help users structure their thoughts to better reflect on a book. They also mentioned that
enabling users to have control over the privacy of each of their published reviews would
be ideal.
A more exhaustive report of the findings and discussion from the first testing can be found
in Appendix K.
These findings helped us to create an initial User Story Map, which allowed us to map out
the activities and tasks users would need to accomplish in order to meet their goals when
using the book-tracking system (a shortened version can be seen in Figure 5.4). Some of
the more important activities we included in our USM include saving a book for later and
managing shared book collections. Saving a book for later can be done both ”quickly”
64
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:71==
USM 1
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Activity
Goal
Save book for later
Manage personal  
book collections
Quick add to want-
to-read shelf
Choose shelf or 
shelves
Add quick note
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Edit rating 
preferences
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Input general rating
Input additional 
chosen rating 
parameters
Review book
Finish rating
Receive prompt to 
review book
Write review
Slow add
Use review prompts 
for guidance
Indicate privacy 
level (public, private, 
friends only, etc.)
Finish review
Read quick notes of 
books
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book to shelf
Write short note for 
why
Discover new books
Browse book lists
Enter book info page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Browse library
Enter shelf/
collection
Toggle shelf view
Task - SLICE 1
Section 1
Figure 5.4: User Story Map iteration 1
(using a shortcut from the Discover page) or ”slowly” (going through the Book Info page
and having the opportunity to write a quick-note while adding). Moving forward from this
stage, we wanted to explore how these flows could look with some considerations in mind,
such as how to prevent the quick-add method from being too unclear or hidden and how to
make sure the ”slow-add” method doesn’t require too many taps, which could get irritating
for the user over time. With managing shared book collections, we really had to envision
what this could look like in terms of adding books to the shelf, writing the recommendation
note, adding collaborators, etc. Another important activity we outlined was evaluating the
book, which could look a variety of ways. While we wanted to augment the review process
with the additional ratings and review prompts, we also wanted to be cautious about not
making the process too complicated, as this would likely deter users from wanting to write
reviews at all. To see our expanded USM for this iteration and all subsequent iterations,
refer to Appendix M.
5.4
Iteration 2
5.4.1
What was tested
The second iteration, which was also our first interactive Figma prototype, focused on
the general experience of managing collections and evaluating books. However, we also
performed four more specific additional tests at this stage, which focused on:
• the flow of marking a book as ”read” and then subsequently accessing (or skipping)
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
65
==PAGE:72==
the review process,
• the potential ways in which the review prompt feature could look and be used,
• how to provide appropriate feedback to the user to communicate that a book has
been successfully quick-added to the user’s ”Want to read” shelf from the Discover
page,
• UI design.
As per the first item, we played around with the idea of whether the user should be au-
tomatically navigated to rate the book and write a review immediately after marking it as
”read”. Figure 5.5 displays another option, which would be to provide a prompt in which
the user is asked whether they want to rate and write a review with the option to skip the
action (and return to it later). The latter incorporates more taps in the flow, which is not
usually preferable, but may be necessary in order to give the user more control over the
sequence of actions (not all users have the desire or time to rate and write a review when
they mark it as ”read”).
Figure 5.5: Prompt shown to the user upon marking the book as ”read”
We had two different visions of what the review prompt feature could look like on the Rate
This Book page. One option was to include a button in which users would be redirected
to an inventory of prompts that they could then scroll through and select from in order
to have the chosen prompt appear back on the Rate This Book page as they write their
response (see Figure 5.6a and Figure 5.6b). Another option was to create a carousel of
review prompts situated directly on the Rate This Book page as illustrated in Figure 5.6c,
which users could then tap through to view other prompt options.
Providing appropriate feedback after quick-adding a book from the Discover page had
66
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:73==
(a) Button to show prompts
list
(b) Prompts displayed in a list
(c) Prompts displayed in a
carousel
Figure 5.6: Different variants of showing review prompts in the second iteration
more to do with the microinteraction of how and where the notification appears on the
screen rather than the contents or design of the notification itself. Figure 5.7a shows an
example in which the notification appears at the top of the screen, regardless of which
book was saved. Figure 5.7b, on the other hand, shows the notification appearing on top
of the saved book entry. While this change may seem trivial, we were interested in seeing
if the impact on the user was equal or if one communicated the action more clearly than
the other.
As it was our first non-sketched prototype, we were also interested in the general response
to the visuals - color scheme, clarity, and overall aesthetics. We didn’t strictly follow any
specific guidelines, but we tried to keep the UI minimalist, use commonly recognizable
icons, and stick to standard iOS controls.
5.4.2
How it was tested
The second phase of testing consisted of a thinking-aloud test, A/B testing, and a UI at-
tractiveness rating. We also invited two users to participate together. We felt that because
we were still early on in the prototyping process, having two users comfortable with one
another will allow them to build off one another and potentially help us co-create through
providing feedback and ideating.
For the thinking-aloud test, we asked that the participants essentially explore the features
and screens on their own while voicing their thoughts, opinions, and criticisms along the
way. In the Library page, we specifically mentioned that the purpose would be for the
user to manage their collections. On the Discover page, we instructed that the goal was
to save a book to a shelf and ultimately access the rating and reviewing process.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
67
==PAGE:74==
(a) Sticky notification on the top
of the page
(b) Notification centered on the
affected book
Figure 5.7: Different placements of the notification shown after quick-adding a book on
the Discover page
We then performed three A/B tests matching the items delineated above (i.e., the flow
of marking a book as ”read” and then accessing the review process; the review prompt
feature design; and the quick-add feedback on the Discover page).
Finally, we discussed the overall aesthetics and UI of the wireframes and asked the par-
ticipants to assign the UI a rating from 1-10 (10 being the best).
5.4.3
Outcome of the tests
The two participants from this testing were most closely aligned with the BookTok reader
archetype and the Power reader archetype. Both indicated that they actively use Goodreads,
but they do not enjoy it, which was unknown to us prior to testing.
A summary of their comments from the general thinking-aloud test is as follows:
• the ”Did not finish” shelf is great because Goodreads does not support it, and one of
the test participants often finds herself abandoning books she started with no clear
way to document this,
• the quick-notes feature in the ”Want to read” shelf was well-liked as a way to provide
context or to write notes while reading,
• the shared shelf was considered great for recommending books to friends,
• the participants found the overall look of the wireframes to be much more preferable
than the look of Goodreads,
68
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:75==
• the ability to rate different elements of the book was appreciated, as was the ability
for users to specify half-stars when rating a book (also not supported in Goodreads),
• at the same time, the additional ratings should be optional when submitting the re-
view,
• the review prompts would be good for helping users reflect more on the book,
• upon marking the book as ”read” and being redirected to the Rate This Book page
(the default flow we configured), the participants noted that it would be nice if they
could skip the rating and reviewing in the case in which they just want to log the
book as done,
• it would be nice if there was a simple way to add the book to a ”favorites” list after
reading.
As per the first A/B test we conducted, the participants preferred the flow in which the
user is prompted with a question of whether they want to rate and review the book (rather
than immediately redirecting them to the Rate This Book page). They shared that they
don’t always have time to review a book but like the satisfaction of marking it as done.
Regarding the two review prompt versions, the participants suggested we combine the
ideas. We discussed how users could access the inventory of prompts and after selecting
one, they could browse additional prompts using either arrow button on the Rate This Book
page version. The feedback about the two different quick-add notification placements was
inconclusive, as both participants preferred different versions. This suggested to us that
either choice would ultimately be acceptable.
The UI rating agreed upon between the participants was 7.5. They expressed that it
was minimalist and intuitive. When comparing to Goodreads, they said it was simpler
and easier to read but could be more distinguishable as it seems to have a somewhat
similar color scheme and aesthetic. This was understandable as we are familiar with the
Goodreads app after actively using it for over a year, making us biased and primed as
designers.
At this point, we updated the USM, as displayed in Figure 5.8 to separate the activities of
the quick-add and ”slow-add” methods, as highlighted by the stars in the image. We also
added an activity regarding managing the user’s library, which includes a unique set of
tasks compared to those related to managing the user’s shelves. The fourth key change
to the USM involved further developing the shared shelves to be interactive among collab-
orators, as specified by the starred task stating, ”like and comment on recommendations
from shared shelf collaborators.”
5.5
Iteration 3
5.5.1
What was tested
In the third iteration, we focused on incorporating comments from the previous round of
testing:
• changed the color scheme to blue to differentiate from Goodreads,
• added positive feedback upon marking a book as ”read”,
• added an option to mark a book as ”Favorite” using a heart icon,
• added opening the review prompt list by tapping the carousel item
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
69
==PAGE:76==
USM 2
“shelves” and “collections” 
are synonymous here!
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Activity
Goal
Task - SLICE 1
Manage personal  
library
Manage personal  
book collections
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Access rating 
preferences menu
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Decide to rate/
review now rather 
than skip for later
Input overall rating
Input additional 
ratings based on 
chosen parameters
Read and write 
quick notes for 
books
Easily remove 
books from shelf
Sort and filter 
books on shelf
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book from 
shared shelf to 
“want to read” shelf
Write short note for 
why
Quick add/remove 
books
Slow add book with 
context
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Enter book info 
page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Select ‘add to shelf’
Choose shelf or 
shelves to add book 
to
Write quick note for 
context (optional)
Quickly add book to 
“want to read” shelf
Quickly remove 
book from “want to 
read” shelf
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Like and comment 
on 
recommendations 
from shared shelf 
collaborators
Browse overview of 
collections
Enter shelf/
collection
Create new shelf
Search shelves
View currently 
reading books
Mark currently 
reading book as 
read
Toggle shelf view 
between grid and 
list
USM 2
Figure 5.8: User Story Map iteration 2
and tested different ways of showing current book status (e.g., ”Want to read” or ”Did not
finish”) on the Book Info page.
To add positive feedback for completing books, we experimented with multiple ideas. One
of which followed a gamification approach known from gaming platforms like Steam - the
user was presented with various achievement badges after marking the book as ”read”
(Figure 5.9a). Another approach mimicked the popular Goodreads ”Reading Challenge”
feature, which allows users to check their reading progress on their profile. Our adapted
version of this feedback method would appear as a pop-up once a book is marked as
”read” (Figure 5.9b). As we were not sure which set of information might be the most
interesting or important to the user, we prepared three different variants of the notification
- showing only the badges, showing only the progress bar, and showing both the badges
and the progress bar (Figure 5.9c).
When it comes to showing the current book status on the Book Info page, we had different
ideas using icons (Figure 5.10a, Figure 5.10b) and simple textual labels on the book
cover (Figure 5.10c). It was important for us to determine through testing which of these
strategies would be the most clear and easy to understand for users.
5.5.2
How it was tested
The third round of testing was done with two participants, each on different days. Similarly
to the previous round of validation, we conducted a thinking-aloud test, followed by two
A/B tests. However, unlike the previous round in which we felt the thinking-aloud was
somewhat chaotic and unstructured, this time we prepared a task list to ensure that users
70
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:77==
(a) Achievement badges
displayed in a list
(b) Progress bar
(c) Badges and progress bar
combined
Figure 5.9: Different variants of positive feedback upon finishing the book
explored all features and functionalities (see Appendix L), which was followed by some
free time for participants to explore the wireframes on their own. We then discussed
overall thoughts, opinions, and criticisms. After this, we performed the two A/B tests,
which both focused on forms of feedback provided to the user after marking a book as
”read”. Finally, we asked participants to rate the UI overall and explain the thought process
behind their choice.
5.5.3
Outcome of the tests
One of the participants from this round of testing could be classified as a Print-only reader,
while the other was an even mix of the BookTok and Self-help archetypes. Neither of them
had used a book-tracking app before, which was evident during the thinking-aloud test in
which they were unfamiliar with typical book-tracking concepts. This was especially useful
for us because it so happened that one of the major themes from this round of feedback
was clarity. From our perspective as designers, a strong user experience would need to
be clear not only to book-tracking users from other apps but also to non-users who are
just trying out book-tracking for the first time.
In the Library view, it was unclear to the participants that the shelves were clickable rather
than the individual books (see Figure 5.11a. We believe this could’ve been because the
shelf titles seemed secondary to the actual book covers, which were much more notice-
able and horizontally scrollable. The plus icon in the top left corner of the page, which is
meant to convey ”add shelf,” was understandable to previous test participants who were
familiar with book-tracking. However, in this testing round, the function was less clear
to participants, which suggested to us that adding a text label would help to clarify its
purpose and remove the need for new users to guess. Additionally, the search feature
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
71
==PAGE:78==
(a) Icon displayed next to the
button
(b) Icon displayed on top of
the book cover
(c) Text label displayed on the
book cover
Figure 5.10: Different variants of displaying current reading stages. All the books are in
the ”Want to read” stage.
(floating at the bottom of the page in Figure 5.11b) was confusing to participants both in
terms of visibility and functionality. For example, they were unsure if users could search
for their shelves, books, etc.
Again, the shared shelf was a popular concept, but it also seemed to be another point
of confusion for participants. For one, the group icon next to the shared shelf name on
the Library page (see Figure 5.11c) was not easily noticeable, making the shared shelf
difficult to discern among the other shelves. The naming of the shelf (”Østerbro Hus”) also
contributed to this issue, which we later learned was because they were looking for the
name ”Shared Shelf” rather than a customized name as we had chosen. Once inside the
shelf, there were also some questions about how to see the number of collaborators in
the shared shelf, which we agreed would be important information to provide to the user.
(a) Shelf visible in the Library
(b) Search button at the
bottom of the screen
(c) Shared shelf with its icon
Figure 5.11: Problematic elements of the Library page in the third iteration.
On the Book Info page, we learned that when asking users to locate the book’s ”pace”
rating (an example of a secondary rating parameter), most of them would instinctively
tap the overall book rating at the top of the page, which was not interactive at the time.
There was also confusion about the ”slow-add” process (adding a book to a shelf from
the Book Info page). Participants were able to easily understand how to add the book to
the ”Want to read” shelf using the button labeled ”Add to shelf.” However, when we later
asked them to mark the book as ”read” (past tense), which would be accessible through
the same ”Add to shelf” button, participants were unsure how to proceed. We believe
this issue was caused by two main factors - the first being that the users were unfamiliar
with typical book-tracking concepts, which often classify books into collections or shelves
which correlate to a stage of reading (i.e., ”Want to read”, ”Currently reading”, or ”Read”).
72
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:79==
The second reason we suspected was the phrasing of the task during testing, which said
”mark the book as ’read’”. This was likely misleading to users, especially after the previous
similar task was worded as, ”add the book to your ’Want to read’ shelf”.
This finding highlighted a key detail for us that we had previously overlooked, which was
that there are often two main use case scenarios in which users would be marking a book
as ”read”. In one scenario, the user could be moving a book from ”Currently reading”
to ”Read”. In another scenario, the user could immediately mark a book as ”read” when
using the app for the first time and logging books they had previously read in the past.
This learning prompted us to start to rethink the process of adding books to shelves in
order to make the process clear for both established and new users alike.
Some of the other aspects that were unclear to participants include:
• quick-notes in the ”Want to read” shelf (unclear whether they are filled or un-filled),
which can be seen in Figure 5.12,
• how to insert a half-star when rating a book (the intention was for a full star to appear
upon the user’s first tap and then be replaced by a half-star upon the second tap),
• the ”add to favorites” button at the bottom of the Rate This Book page (some par-
ticipants were unsure if it applied to the book or the review),
• how to use the review prompts feature (participants were unsure if it would be re-
quired to use or if the prompt would be published along with the review).
Figure 5.12: Books with and without quick-notes on the ”Want to read” shelf
As for the A/B tests, we found that both participants preferred the version in which text
banners were placed over the book cover to denote which shelf it’s in, as displayed in
Figure 5.10c. Regarding the positive feedback pop-up when marking a book as ”read”,
the participants had differing views; one preferred the version in which the achievement
badges and reading goal progress were combined (as in Figure 5.9c), while the other liked
the components individually but felt the combined version was too much information at
once. Regardless, our conclusion was that it would be safer to implement the combined
version for now and explore more tailored options at a later point in which users could
potentially control the level of feedback they receive.
Overall, we received positive feedback regarding the review prompts and shared shelf
concepts. The UI ratings for this iteration were an 8 and 9, respectively, but it’s important
to keep in mind that these users were not familiar with other book-tracking apps. To read
a detailed account of the testing and feedback for the third iteration, refer to Appendix K.
At the end of the third iteration, the main difference made to the USM involved the order
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
73
==PAGE:80==
of the tasks involving the review prompts, which are marked by the stars in Figure 5.13, to
reflect the fusion between the review prompt library and the review carousel. Besides this
change, most of the feedback we received during this iteration reflected issues of clarity,
as previously discussed.
“shelves” and “collections” 
are synonymous here!
USM 3
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Activity
Goal
Manage personal  
library
Manage personal  
book collections
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Access rating 
preferences menu
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Decide to rate/
review now rather 
than skip for later
Input overall rating
Input additional 
ratings based on 
chosen parameters
Review book
Browse carousel of 
review prompts
Browse library of 
review prompts
Select prompt to 
use for review 
writing
Write review
Indicate privacy 
level (public, private, 
friends only, etc.)
Add book to 
favorites
Finish review
Read and write 
quick notes for 
books
Remove books from 
shelf
Sort and filter books 
on shelf
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book from 
shared shelf to 
“want to read” shelf
Write short note for 
why
Quick add/remove 
books
Slow add book with 
context
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Enter book info page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Select ‘add to shelf’
Choose shelf or 
shelves to add book 
to
Write quick note for 
context (optional)
Quickly add book to 
“want to read” shelf
Quickly remove 
book from “want to 
read” shelf
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Interact with 
recommendations 
from shared shelf 
collaborators
Browse overview of 
collections
Enter shelf/
collection
Create new shelf
Search shelves
View currently 
reading books
Mark currently 
reading book as 
read
Toggle shelf view 
between grid and 
list
Section 2
Figure 5.13: User Story Map iteration 3
5.6
Iteration 4
5.6.1
What was tested
After the previous iteration, we decided to focus on two major aspects in the fourth round
of testing:
• improving Library view to clarify that tapping a shelf label opens the Shelf view
instead of individual books,
• changing the way of adding books to shelves, so it doesn’t require prior knowledge
of book-tracking concepts and is understandable for new users.
We developed several ideas for a new way of moving books between shelves. The first
one included adding a dynamic button that explicitly states what happens to the book
upon clicking it and changes according to the current book state (see Figure 5.14a and
Figure 5.14b). For example, when viewing a new book the button says ”Want to read” to
indicate that the book would be added to the ”Want to read” shelf after tapping it. After
being tapped, the button transforms to say ”Now reading” to inform that the book will be
moved to the ”Currently reading” shelf.
Another idea was a simple dropdown menu labeled ”Status”, which allows the user to
move the book to a different shelf depending on the book’s status, as demonstrated in
74
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:81==
Figure 5.14c. The third and final variant displayed a horizontal slider with all the available
reading stages (see Figure 5.14d). The user would simply drag the slider to the desired
stage to change the book’s designated shelf.
While the first solution look was the simplest, it was not as clear and flexible as the drop-
down and slider which allowed the user to see all the possible options and freely jump
between them. Also, although the slider nicely displayed all the stages and was more
visual than the dropdown menu, this type of control is typically used to express range in-
put instead of the stage/status of the system, and because of this, incorporating the ”Did
not finish” shelf was challenging. Thus, one of our goals during this stage of testing was
to determine which of these three variants was the most appealing and the simplest to
understand for users.
Additionally, we implemented various smaller changes mentioned by the test participants.
Those include:
• shared shelf improvements, like changing its name and showing information about
the number of collaborators,
• adding or completely replacing icons with text labels where possible, e.g., for quick-
notes and creating new shelves,
• changing star behavior from being fully filled after the first tap and half filled after the
second tap to half-fill on the first tap and full-fill on the second tap (Figure 5.15)
• adding/clarifying various help labels in different places, e.g., related to ”Favorites”
or review prompts,
• adding scrolling to different rating parameters upon tapping the overall rating.
As with every iteration, we continued investigating the UI appeal and general application
flow. We stuck to the blue theme, but this time changed the font across the whole prototype
and added an additional one which we used only for book titles.
5.6.2
How it was tested
The fourth round of validation involved three participants total, two of which tested to-
gether. With everyone, we oversaw another thinking-aloud test, followed by two A/B tests,
one of which pertained to the process of adding a book to a default shelf, for which we
had three working versions, as described in detail above.
The second A/B test focused more on the UI of the Library view and communicating the
user’s assortment of shelves as opposed to drawing more attention to the books. We
showed participants six versions, which can be found in Figure 5.16, and then we asked
them to choose and defend their top preference.
After a final discussion about the system overall and what worked for participants com-
pared to what didn’t, we again asked them to ascribe an overall UI rating to the system
thus far.
Separately, we performed a type of empathy exercise as designers in which we attempted
to adopt the point of view of the reader archetypes who had not yet been properly repre-
sented in our four iterations of testing. In our case, we identified the Novice and Self-help
archetypes to be the most under-represented. In this activity, we laid out the main char-
acteristics of each archetype and analyzed the prototype page by page, commenting on
and identifying elements that may be useful or challenging to use for said reader type.
We will refer to them as Point-of-View (POV) tests.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
75
==PAGE:82==
5.6.3
Outcome of the tests
Out of three participants, two of them were Power Readers, one was half BookTok, half
Print-only. When it comes to book-tracking experience, one of them was book-tracking
manually using Notion, the other one was using automatic Kindle tracking and the last
one was not tracking her reading at all.
We had two major points of interest during this iteration - picking one of six variants of the
Library view and the most intuitive and clear way of changing the book reading stage. In
the case of the Library view, users liked variants A, B, and E and the default one. The dif-
ferences between them were purely visual, not affecting functionality, therefore the users
explained their picks simply by saying that they were more ”aesthetically pleasing” or ”felt
more professional”. However, changing the reading stage sparked a bit more discussion,
as different variants had both different looks and functionality. Variant A (”dynamic but-
ton”) was considered fine, but only for the case when the user actively tracks the book in
the app and goes through all the stages there; logging past books required several un-
necessary clicks. All the users, on the other hand, valued the ability to see all the options
in the dropdown (both the default and new one) and the slider. However, they slightly
preferred the dropdown approach due to its simplicity and ease of use.
During that testing round, we had several interesting observations regarding the wording
and clarity of different terms. It turned out that users had problems understanding what the
”Read” shelf is due to the English language ambiguity - both present and past tense are
written the same way which led to misunderstandings. Also, one of the users understood
”Did not finish” as ”In progress” which was understandable after being pointed out but did
not occur to us while designing.
Another set of comments regarded shared shelves. First of all, the ”x” icon to remove a
book from the ”Want to read” shelf was unclear - users commented that it was not clear
whether it removes the book from the ”Want to read” shelf or from the shared shelf. Also,
they said that functionality of both the ”+” and ”x” icons were not immediately clear and
required tapping them to actually see what happens. On top of that, they commented that
tapping the ”Like” button under the recommendation should change it in a more visible
way than only swapping text from ”Like” to ”Liked”.
Part of the feedback concerned the Rate This Book page. One of the users was a bit
confused by rating parameters and the way they are assigned - she understood the overall
rating as an average automatically calculated from the partial ratings. Also, there was a
suggestion to divide rating parameters based on e.g., book type (fiction/non-fiction) or
platform (e-book/audiobook).
Other comments during this iteration were related to changing the quick-note icon on the
Book Info page and adding an option to create a new shelf while adding a book to a custom
shelf.
On the other hand, we received positive feedback about the review prompts and their
current implementation, new Library view, clarity of the updated quick-notes, and intu-
itiveness of shortcut scrolling to partial book ratings by tapping the overall rating on the
Book Info page.
Novice and Self-help POV tests
When it comes to POV tests, we started by looking at the app from the perspective of a po-
tential Novice reader. We found several app aspects which might be especially important
for this type of user:
76
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:83==
• privacy of the shelves should be clearly visible and modifiable, as they might not
want to show all of their activity at the beginning,
• it’s important to help them easily find generally likable books, so they should be able
to sort their saved books by popularity,
• words and terms in the app should be clear and unambiguous, as that type of users
are probably not familiar with book-tracking ”jargon”
• seeing progress over time and being given positive feedback is important to keep
the motivation up for users who only recently started reading more,
• interface should be as simple as possible, without too many unnecessary features
visible by default, so the user does not feel overwhelmed when opening the app for
the first time.
Another archetype whose point of view we examined was the Self-help reader. Our at-
tention was mostly drawn to the following aspects:
• grouping of rating parameters might be helpful for them, as they will likely be inter-
ested in different book aspects than fiction readers,
• as active readers, they might use quick-notes a lot, so they might want to see them
when writing a review,
• also, they might want to write a review while reading a book, so review drafts might
be important for them,
• they might group books in the Library according to their professions and hobbies
(e.g., ”gardening”, ”painting”), so they might benefit from in-shelf recommendations
which would suggest a book matching the current shelf’s theme.
At the end of the fourth iteration, our goal was to create one final prototype before pausing
the cycle. With this, we wanted to incorporate as many of the comments and suggestions
we received in the fourth round of testing as possible. To reflect this, the USM expanded
vertically greatly, as visible in Figure 5.17, which shows the ”manage personal library”
activity including various new tasks regarding sorting and filtering, which we felt would
be important in a ”final” solution. Additionally, we wanted to finally add a way to view the
shared shelf collaborators, as it had been included on the USM for every iteration but had
not been developed yet.
5.7
Discussion
One of the major trade-offs we had to make during this phase of the design process was
choosing between testing with more people or developing more iterations. Ideally, we
would have liked to conduct at least five different tests for each iteration in order to obtain
a substantial amount of feedback to consider moving forward. Ultimately, we tested with
only two to three users per prototype (until the final iteration), which therefore limited us in
the quality of the overall feedback. However, this afforded us more time to refine the Figma
prototype during each iteration and experiment with more aspects of the app, resulting in
five total iterations. Taking into account the difficulties with organizing a workshop early
on, we also expected difficulties in finding volunteers for prototype tests. This convinced
us even further to prioritize the number of iterations over the number of user tests.
Within our iterations, we also struggled to incorporate more quantitative validation meth-
ods aside from the UI ratings. Doing more quantitative tests would have given us more
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
77
==PAGE:84==
objective data to clearly analyze and harness in arguing for or against certain changes.
Instead, we relied heavily on qualitative feedback, which was always subjective and re-
quired interpretation to make conclusions. During the third iteration, we attempted to
perform an error-counting test while the user carried out the various tasks we described.
This was unsuccessful and felt futile because the Figma prototype was often not properly
registering the users’ taps. Upon further reflection, while it would have been beneficial
to conduct more quantitative tests, we also feel that the approach we took in testing with
only two to three users per iteration would severely limit the value of that quantitative
data, which would be more effective coming from a larger sample size of users. The
UI ratings, for example, would have been particularly helpful in the event in which there
was a drastic shift in rating between two iterations, which would’ve indicated to us that
we had made some considerable upgrade or downgrade to the design overall. However,
because the ratings we received were all in the same range of 7-9, we felt that this test
was unremarkable and somewhat inconclusive.
Additionally, we also recognized the importance of preparing task lists, which would guide
users to explore relevant features during the thinking-aloud tests. Without them, we had
to periodically inform participants of certain functionalities they had missed. This could
indicate that some features were not as clear or intuitive to use, but in the context of this
prototype, we believe it was also partly because we were using Figma and there were
many pieces of the wireframes that were not interactive. This made it difficult for users to
know what they can tap and explore during testing as opposed to what is purely a visual
element of the prototype.
Another element of the prototyping phase that we found noteworthy was the division of
participants who use book-tracking versus those who were unfamiliar with it. We inten-
tionally wanted to include both types because, ideally, a book-tracking system with an im-
proved user experience would be intuitive to users from other platforms as well as users
completely new to book-tracking. The insights between these user types can be charac-
terized by some general differences. For one, people who don’t use book-tracking may
have less knowledge of the typical concepts used, such as shelves and ratings. They’re
especially useful for testing how clear and usable a system is because they don’t bring in
much prior knowledge or ideas of what everything should look like or how it should work.
On the other hand, users who already use book-tracking may have certain expectations
and biases, which influence their opinions. It’s still important that we try to meet these
minimum expectations because they might dictate whether or not a user would switch
platforms or not.
Overall, we feel that using Figma both had its advantages and disadvantages. The pro-
gram allowed us to prototype a system that looked similar to real applications and was
interactive to an extent. However, there were multiple instances in which Figma would
crash or components would disconnect from their original implementation. That ultimately
forced us to spend a substantial amount of time correcting issues or re-implementing cer-
tain elements.
78
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:85==
(a) Dynamic button - book not
on any default shelf
(b) Dynamic button - book on
the ”Want to read” shelf
(c) Status dropdown
(d) Slider
Figure 5.14: Different ways of changing the book reading stage in the Book Info page.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
79
==PAGE:86==
(a) Old star behavior - the first
tap fills the whole star, the
second tap makes it half-full
(b) New star behavior - the first
tap fills the star halfway, the
second tap makes it fully filled
Figure 5.15: Change to star rating behavior introduced in Iteration 4.
80
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:87==
(a) Default view
(b) Variant A
(c) Variant B
(d) Variant C
(e) Variant D
(f) Variant E
Figure 5.16: Different variants of the Library page presented to the users during AB
testing in Iteration 4.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
81
==PAGE:88==
“shelves” and “collections” 
are synonymous here!
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Activity
Goal
Task - SLICE 1
Manage personal  
library
Manage personal  
book collections
Search by title, 
author, genre, etc.
Search by title, 
author, genre, etc.
Sort by date added, 
alphabetical, genre, 
ratings, etc.
Filter by genre, 
ratings, quick notes, 
etc.
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Access rating 
preferences menu
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Decide to rate/
review now rather 
than skip for later
Input overall rating
Input additional 
ratings based on 
chosen parameters
Review book
Browse carousel of 
review prompts
Browse library of 
review prompts
Select prompt to 
use for review 
writing
Write review
Indicate privacy 
level (public, private, 
friends only, etc.)
Add book to 
favorites
Finish review
Read and write 
quick notes for 
books
Remove books from 
shelf
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book from 
shared shelf to 
“want to read” shelf
Write short note for 
why
Quick add/remove 
books
Slow add book with 
context
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Enter book info page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Select ‘add to shelf’
Choose shelf or 
shelves to add book 
to
Write quick note for 
context (optional)
Quickly add book to 
“want to read” shelf
Quickly remove 
book from “want to 
read” shelf
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Interact with 
recommendations 
from shared shelf 
collaborators
Browse overview of 
collections
Enter shelf/
collection
Create new shelf
Search shelves
View currently 
reading books
Mark currently 
reading book as 
read
Toggle shelf view 
between grid and 
list
View book 
recommendation
Add book to shelf or 
refresh 
recommendation
Hide book 
recommendation in 
shelf
USM 4
Section 1
Figure 5.17: User Story Map iteration 4
82
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:89==
6
Final Iteration & Evaluation
6.1
Introduction
In this chapter, we present the key parts of our final prototype, together with the last round
of validation, and more detailed comments about all the elements we managed to create
in relation to our initial problem statement.
6.2
What was tested - final prototype presentation
Our final prototype consists of four main screens - the Library and Shelf page, the Book
Info page, and the Rate This Book page. The Library, Shelf, and Rate This Book pages
were strictly required to tackle issues related to managing collections and evaluating
books we discovered during our user research. While the Book Info page contains a
number of elements outside the scope (e.g., the book summary, tags) it also serves as a
critical component for performing tasks within both focus areas, such as adding a book to
a shelf or accessing the Rate This Book page. The top parts of the pages can be seen in
Figure 6.1.
6.2.1
Managing collections
In our case, collections management consists of various smaller activities, e.g., managing
the whole library and its shelves, adding/removing books to specific shelves (with optional
additional context information), or managing shared collections. All of them include dif-
ferent, smaller tasks to accomplish and provide value to the user. To see the whole User
Story Map which guided us for the last iteration, refer to Appendix M.
When it comes to library management, our prototype allows its users to perform seven
tasks, starting from browsing all the available shelves and adding new ones to searching
all the books by title or author name. The whole library consists of four default shelves
(”Currently reading”, ”Want to read”, ”Finished”, and ”Did not finish”) and additional custom
shelves created by the user. All the shelves present their books as horizontally scrollable
lists. The ”Currently reading” card allows users to quickly perform the most common
action on the books in this reading stage, which is logging progress and marking them as
”finished”. All of the relevant interface parts can be seen in Figure 6.1a.
Once users tap on a shelf in the Library view, they enter the collection. In this view, at
first glance, the user can see all of their books presented in a vertical list. Every book
entry includes the book cover, title, author, rating information, and a quick-note. Users
can sort the books by several predefined criteria (e.g., title or author), search them, and
filter by e.g., genres or tags (Figure 6.2a). At the top of the page, the user is shown a book
recommendation which is based on the shelf contents. By default, shelves are displayed
as a list, but there is also an option to view them as a grid of book covers (Figure 6.2b).
As the ability to control privacy appeared frequently in our user research and is not well-
supported in the existing book-tracking platforms, it’s also possible to change this aspect
of the shelf at the top of the screen. Another commonly occurring theme, which is novel
to our solution, was the concept of context information or quick-notes about the books.
These are visible and editable directly from the Shelf view, as seen in Figure 6.2c.
A special type of shelf we have implemented, which none of the competitors have, is a
shared shelf, which allows users to see and edit shelves together. This shelf looks similar
to others in terms of book presentation, but instead of displaying the rating and the private
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
83
==PAGE:90==
quick-note, it includes a recommendation note provided by the user who added the book
to the shared shelf, and a button to quickly add it to one’s personal ”Want to read” shelf
(Figure 6.3a). Collaborators can also ”Like” the book or discuss it in the comments. The
shelf owner can add and remove collaborators using a simple modal (Figure 6.3b).
Moving books between shelves is the last important part of collection management. In
our prototype, the most common operations of this type are performed directly from the
shelves and the rest can be done from the Book Info page. Using a status dropdown,
the user can move the book between the four default shelves (”Want to read”, ”Currently
reading”, ”Finished”, and ”Did not finish”) (Figure 6.4a). As seen in Figure 6.4b, when the
default shelf is changed, it is also indicated by a different book label and outline color of
the card. Below the status dropdown, there is a collapsible section showing the user’s
custom shelves together with a button opening a modal used to move the book between
them (Figure 6.4c). On the Book Info page, the user can also change book format (writ-
ten/audiobook), access their quick-note, and add the book to their ”Favorites” shelf using
the icons on the right side of the header.
6.2.2
Evaluating books
The second area we focused on during our design phase was the process of evaluating
books after finishing them. We wanted to make it easy for the users to accurately express
their views and simplify the process of writing a review to encourage more users to add
them.
To rate a book, the user first needs to mark it as ”finished”. Then, the Book Info page
displays a button that brings the user to the Rate This Book page (Figure 6.5). This page
can be divided into two major sections - the top consists of the interactive star ratings
and the bottom displays a text box used to input the user’s review, as well as the review’s
privacy settings.
As plenty of complaints during the user research pertained to the users’ inability to ex-
press opinions more precisely in Goodreads, we implemented the concept of secondary
rating parameters. As is done in StoryGraph, these rating parameters focus on sepa-
rate aspects of the book the user can rate independently from the overall rating. Unlike
in StoryGraph, however, with our solution users have control over deciding which of the
parameters they deem relevant for the given book and can select them through a ded-
icated menu (Figure 6.6a). The only required, common rating is the overall one. Also,
to allow users to express their ratings more precisely than Goodreads currently allows,
although there are only five stars visible, users can also rate using half-stars making the
scale effectively have ten steps (Figure 6.6b).
When it comes to the book reviews, users mentioned multiple issues with the varied quality
of published reviews and the lack of structure and control of the open-ended reviews
of Goodreads. In the end, we focused on helping them structure their thoughts while
writing, which should translate into more reviews of better quality. Instead of guiding users
through a lengthy step-by-step process like in StoryGraph, we help them by providing
optional review prompts, which users can access using the button right above the text
field. These questions allow users to better articulate their thoughts while writing their
review (Figure 6.7a). After tapping a question, users are redirected back to the previous
page where the prompt is then displayed above the text field (Figure 6.7b). A prompt can
be easily swapped with others by tapping the arrows on either side of it. To make it easier
for users to recall their thoughts, they can access their quick-notes or write the review
while reading the book and consistently save it as a draft (Figure 6.7c). As the privacy
of the review was another commonly occurring theme, we added a dropdown that allows
84
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:91==
users to select who will be able to see the published review (Figure 6.7c).
The Book Info page includes both the primary and secondary ratings as well as the reviews
of the book. At the top of the page, the average overall rating is displayed (Figure 6.5a).
Upon tapping this general rating, the view scrolls down to the secondary rating parameters
where users can see the average ratings of different book aspects (Figure 6.8a). They
can also select which parameters they want to see using the same menu as the one used
on the Rate This Book page (Figure 6.6a). At the bottom of the page, there is a list of
reviews submitted by other readers (Figure 6.8b), which can be ”liked” or commented
on. When the user submits their own rating and review, the page slightly changes - the
user’s rating is displayed at the top, just below the status dropdown, and their review is
displayed at the top of the review section (Figure 6.8c, Figure 6.8d). Both can be edited
at any moment in time.
Links to the interactive final prototype and map of micro-interactions can be found in Ap-
pendix N and Appendix O.
6.3
How was it tested
For the final iteration, we tested with five users independently, so as to gather as many
final comments as possible to better understand how well our solution confronts the de-
fined problem. Three of the five users had participated in user testing with us during an
earlier iteration and were therefore familiar with the project while the other two were learn-
ing about it for the first time. We followed a similar framework as our previous iterations
by again performing a thinking-aloud test with each user. After this, we asked each user
to complete the NASA Task Load Index (NASA TLX)[42] survey followed by the System
Usability Scale (SUS)[43] survey. To simplify the process, we skipped the pairwise com-
parison step of NASA TLX and just asked the users to complete the survey. We also
created our own survey, as depicted in Figure 6.9, which attempts to refer back to the
major elements of our problem statement. We ended each user test by having one final
discussion about the system overall to receive each user’s final thoughts.
For our final evaluation, we wanted to then supplement the user testing by doing our own
round of analytical testing, critically comparing our system to the guidelines set forth by
Jakob Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design [41].
6.4
Outcome of the tests
We will describe the outcome of the final testing in two sections based on the main focus
areas of our design process. Also, compared to the previous iterations, we will include
possible improvements while describing the flaws found during testing.
6.4.1
Managing collections
The first tested area related to collections management was the main Library view. In
general, users were happy with its aesthetics and functionality. In the final version, we
managed to get rid of the problem with the ambiguous naming of the ”Read” shelf by
renaming it to ”Finished”. One of the main issues we were struggling with throughout the
whole design process was wording and naming various app aspects. The only comments
regarding this part of the design pertained to the ease of closing the feedback modal after
marking the book as ”finished” and the position of the ”Currently reading” shelf. In the last
version, the modal could be closed by pressing anywhere outside it which was not clear
for one user who preferred having a dedicated button to do it. According to another user,
the position of the ”Currently reading” shelf was too much at the top of the page which
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
85
==PAGE:92==
made them consider it an advertisement at the beginning and suggested putting this shelf
more in the middle of the screen.
When testing the Shelf view (using the ”Want to read” shelf as an example), users were
particularly fond of the book recommendation feature. They found it easy to understand,
but one user suggested adding a way of going back to the previous recommendation and
another proposed changing colors, as the current ones made it look like an advertisement
for them. Another functionality that did not cause any issues or misunderstandings was
privacy - all of the users easily found the current shelf privacy settings and were able to
change them. A feature particularly interesting to test was removing a book from a shelf
by swiping. We had not clearly indicated that it was possible and relied heavily on users’
intuition derived from the usage of other apps having this functionality. To our positive
surprise, three out of five users intuitively performed the required gesture and said that it
was ”like Instagram or email”. The other two were looking for an explicit icon or tried long-
pressing the book to open a context menu. This also made us think about adding an option
to multi-select books after long-pressing, as that is another common functionality in apps
like email or messages. The most confusing feature on this page was filtering. While the
filtering sheet itself was intuitive to use, users had problems with finding an icon to open
it. Nearly all of them said they were looking for the ”Filter” option somewhere around the
”Sorted by” label, not next to the search bar at the bottom of the page. Grouping these
three elements likely makes sense, as they contribute to the same goal of finding books
and, according to the fourth Guiding Principle for Experience Design by Whitney Hess1,
they should be kept together.
Throughout all the iterations, the shared shelves idea was met with enthusiasm, but we
were consistently struggling with making them easily identifiable among the other shelves
in the library. In the last iteration, the shelf had a dedicated icon next to its name which
opened an information modal upon tapping (Figure 6.10a and Figure 6.10b). It helped
some of the users, while others were still unsure how to locate it. We suspect it might
also be related to the phrasing of the task we were giving and users looking for a shelf
named literally ”Shared”. Using the shared shelf itself was looking much better. When
asked to add the top book from the shared to their ”Want to read” collections, none of
the users had problems. When asked to add collaborators to the book, some users first
clicked the ”Info” icon, but when it did not allow them to perform the required action, they
were opening the correct modal (Figure 6.10c). If clicking the ”Info” icon would explain
how to add users, it might make the experience even smoother.
The final design of the Book Info page in terms of collection management was mostly fine
and users usually pointed out rather minor issues. The biggest one revolved around the
dropdown to change the reading status of the book. When asked to move the book to
their ”Want to read” list, for one user it did not occur to them that it could be done through
the dropdown labeled ”Status”, but later they said it made perfect sense after the first
usage. Another user commented that the dropdown did not draw enough attention taking
into account how key functionality it represents. On the other hand, none of the users had
problems using the dropdown itself and changing the book reading stages once they found
it for the first time. Therefore, although it is not a perfect solution and might be improved
by e.g., making the dropdown more prominent, it is also not abnormal that users need
to learn some aspects of using an app. When it comes to the custom shelves, all users
considered it simple to find the shelves the book is currently added to. Removing the book
1https://whitneyhess.com/blog/2009/11/23/so-you-wanna-be-a-user-experience-designer-step-2-guiding-
principles/ (accessed: 2023-06-15)
86
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:93==
from the custom shelf was a bit more confusing, as the modal to add and remove a book
from different shelves was hidden under ”Add to custom shelf”. That issue, however, can
be easily mitigated by changing the label of the button to ”Edit custom shelves” or similar,
which makes it clearer that it allows for both addition and removal. After changing the
icon of quick-notes, the task to view them on the Book Info page ceased to be a problem
for all of the testers. Additionally, we rephrased the task and separated it from moving the
book to the ”Want to read” shelf which probably also made it simpler to understand. All
of the participants also successfully changed the book format to an audiobook, yet some
had reservations about the icon itself, e.g., mentioned that it was not clear enough and
did not clearly depict the different formats.
6.4.2
Evaluating books
While targeting issues with evaluating books, we focused on the two most important as-
pects - assigning a book a quantitative rating using stars and a qualitative rating using
reviews.
To give a star rating, users had to tap the star once (half-filled) or twice (fully-filled). None
of them had any problems understanding this concept, yet some suggested that it would
be more convenient to drag to fill the stars (like a slider). Although we got this feedback
also in the previous iterations, we were not able to implement it due to Figma limitations.
However, it is definitely worth noting, as that suggestion appeared multiple times. When
it comes to rating parameters, which allow the users to rate different aspects of the book,
the whole idea was generally well-received. Only one user had issues understanding how
they work - they assumed that they had to input the secondary ratings and the overall
rating would be automatically calculated as an average of the others. This issue can
probably be easily solved by adding an ”Info” icon and modal which briefly explain the
concept of rating parameters. The menu in which users can select rating parameters
that are relevant to them was also clear and understandable for all. One user noted the
usefulness of the info button for added clarity. Another user was not sure where the search
bar applies, but that can be mitigated by improving the wording (e.g. changing ”Search
for parameters” to ”Search all parameters”).
Our proposal of the review prompts to guide users while writing was also met with positive
feedback. No one had problems understanding how to use them and what they do. All of
the users performed tasks related to them without any issues. Specifying the privacy of
the review also was clear and did not cause any problems.
Viewing the ratings and reviews on the Book Info page also did not pose any problems.
When tasked to check the specific rating parameters, some of the users tapped the overall
rating which automatically scrolled them down to the correct section, some scrolled there
manually. Both groups, however, were able to find the required piece of information.
Viewing the reviews and changing their sorting order was very clear - all of the users
immediately knew what to do. Also, marking the book as ”finished” and navigating to the
Rate This Book page itself was performed by everyone effortlessly.
6.4.3
Other comments
In general, users had a good impression of our prototype. They found it easy to navigate
and said that interaction feels better than with Goodreads. One of them also liked that
there were various ways to personalize the experience in the app and various reminders or
tips regarding all the additional options. Another user also appreciated this, yet suggested
that there can be even more provided.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
87
==PAGE:94==
6.4.4
Survey results
As mentioned before, at the end of testing every participant filled in NASA TLX, SUS, and
our custom survey.
As we skipped the pairwise comparison step in NASA TLX, the scores presented in Ta-
ble 6.1 are raw averages without any weighting. Nevertheless, it is clear that all of the
users performed the tasks without much effort, as the total average of all the user scores
is 9.5 on a scale from 0 to 100 with 19.17 being the highest score from user P2 and 2.5
being the lowest score from user P3. When it comes to individual metrics, Frustration has
the lowest average value of 2, with only two users marking it above 0. Both Performance
and Mental have relatively high values, 18 and 15, respectively.
Table 6.1: Results of NASA TLX surveys completed by the participants at the end of the
fifth iteration.
User
Mental
Physical
Temporal
Performance
Effort
Frustration
Average
P1
25
5
5
30
0
5
11.67
P2
30
15
25
20
20
5
19.17
P3
0
5
0
0
10
0
2.5
P4
15
0
0
20
10
0
7.5
P5
5
5
5
20
5
0
6.67
Average 15
6
7
18
9
2
9.5
Results of the SUS survey can be seen in Table 6.2. The total average score for all
the users is 93 which is satisfactory, especially taking into account that the commonly
agreed average value is 68. Average scores for each of the users vary between 87.5 and
97.5 with three users scoring 95 or higher. From the question perspective, the highest
average score, 4.8, was for Q3 (”I thought the system was easy to use.”), while the lowest
(for ”positive” questions) was 4.2 for Q9 (”I felt very confident using the system.”). When it
comes to ”negative” questions, nearly all of the answers are 1, except for Q10 (”I needed
to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system.”) in which one user, P5,
selected 2.
Table 6.2: Results of SUS surveys completed by the participants at the end of the fifth
iteration.
User
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Final score
P1
5
1
5
1
5
1
5
1
4
1
97.5
P2
4
1
5
1
4
1
4
1
3
1
87.5
P3
4
1
5
1
5
1
4
1
5
1
95
P4
4
1
4
1
4
1
5
1
4
1
90
P5
5
1
5
1
4
1
5
1
5
2
95
Average
4.4
1
4.8
1
4.4
1
4.6
1
4.2
1.2
93
Table 6.3 shows the results obtained from our custom survey. The total average of all
the user scores is 89.5 with values varying between 78.75 and 97.5. Out of the four
key areas of our problem statement, it seems that flexible was implemented the most
successfully, with a score of 95. The other aspects are slightly below 90, with findable
having an average score of 89 and intuitive and easy to navigate being both at 87.
88
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:95==
Table 6.3: Results of our custom surveys completed by the participants at the end of the
fifth iteration.
User
Intuitive
Flexible
Findable
Easy to navigate
Average
P1
90
100
100
100
97.5
P2
75
85
85
70
78.75
P3
100
90
95
95
95
P4
80
100
70
80
82.5
P5
90
100
95
90
93.75
Average
87
95
89
87
89.5
6.5
Analysis using 10 Usability Heuristics for UI Design
6.5.1
Visibility of system status
There are multiple ways in which the system provides appropriate and timely feedback,
such as with notifications (e.g., adding a book to ”favorites”), the book status banners
overlaid on the cover in the Book Info page, and the clear information about shelf and
review privacy settings. There are, however, also elements that remain unclear, such as
the book format icon on the Book Info page, which was custom-made. This could be made
better by merely testing different kinds of icons to see which is the most clear to users. We
also found through user testing that for a couple of users, it was unclear that the overall
rating on the Rate This Book page was meant to be manually indicated by the user rather
than being automatically calculated based on the user’s other rating parameter inputs.
One way this issue could be addressed is by hiding the secondary rating parameters
until after the user inputs his/her overall rating. These interactive ratings on the Rate
This Book page could also be made more clear by displaying the numerical value of the
inputted rating next to the stars.
6.5.2
Match between system and the real world
Using language that is familiar to our users was an interesting challenge for us in some
respects because we have various user types. Beyond the five archetypes we identified,
we also attempted to design for users who are familiar with book-tracking, as well as
for those who are not. As examined in the previous chapter, this particular difference in
background accounts for a different foundational understanding of book-tracking language
and concepts. For example, while the word ”read” is commonly used in the past tense
as the name of the shelf or collection of books users have read, we found that for newer
users, the word was misleading. Some interpreted it in the present tense, which could
indicate something similar to ”reading” or even as a note-to-self of books the user wants
to read. We decided to confront this by replacing the term with ”finished”, which we found
was more clear for all users. On the other hand of the spectrum, we also incorporated a
default shelf called ”Did not finish”, which is meant to refer to the books the user started
but discontinued. This phrase is well-known in most book-tracking communities and was
requested a number of times in the Goodreads app reviews. During testing, we quickly
found that users who were not familiar with book-tracking had to ask what it meant. While
we considered swapping it for a clearer term, we ultimately decided that the phrasing was
too distinct and it had become too customary within book-tracking to easily replace in this
context.
Additionally, we experimented with the terms ”Add to shelf” and ”Status”, for saving a
book from the Book Info page, which each resonated more with different users. For new
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
89
==PAGE:96==
book-tracking users particularly, it seemed that the first term was intuitive when adding the
book to their ”Want to read” shelf. However, when marking the book as ”finished”, which
is essentially the same as moving it to their ”Finished” shelf, they were more inclined to
understand the term ”Status”. While our fifth and final prototype incorporates the latter
term, we would ideally like to further iterate this element to better refine it.
Many of the icons used are standard graphics meant to convey typical functionalities (e.g.,
the heart icon is used to favorite a book, the pen and notepad icon is used to write a quick-
note, etc.). Certain icons can still be improved, however, such as the book format icon
mentioned above.
6.5.3
User control and freedom
The system includes various opportunities to cancel or exit unwanted or mistaken actions,
such as:
• the ”Undo” button, which appears after removing a book from the Shelf page,
• the ”Cancel” option on various pop-ups and modals (e.g., when adding a new shelf
or when writing a quick-note),
• the ”Back” button to navigate to a previous page.
While some of these features are consistent across the system, such as the ”Back” button,
others are not (e.g., there is no clearly labeled ”cancel” option on the ”Congratulations”
feedback modal). There should also be more ”Undo” buttons (or something equivalent),
such as when a user accidentally dismisses a book recommendation within a shelf or
marks a book as ”finished” from the Library page.
6.5.4
Consistency and standards
In order to maintain consistency and standards to better eliminate the need for users to
guess functionalities, we tried to follow various industry practices and common solutions
by incorporating the following:
• sticking to one accent color for all interactive elements,
• using a swiping gesture to remove a book from a shelf,
• using common icons and control (e.g., buttons),
• sticking to a similar UI layout of book-tracking apps,
• maintaining a fixed color scheme and font styles throughout,
• using the same terms everywhere (e.g., the ”Finished” shelf, the status dropdown
menu, etc.).
We believe we could improve by fixing the term ”Status” to something more relevant be-
cause it led to issues during testing. Few users recognized that it was how to place a book
in their ”Want to read” shelf. It then worked better when asking people to ”mark the book
as ’finished’”, but we suspect this might also be because they had familiarized themselves
with the term by then. We were also somewhat inconsistent with the info icons in some
places (e.g., in the shelves).
6.5.5
Error prevention
The system does not request confirmation after the user indicates they want to remove
a book from a shelf. Instead, users are presented with an ”Undo” button, as described
earlier in Section 6.5.3. Our intention in doing this was to minimize the number of clicks
(i.e., taps) required for the action, but this could be unnecessary if it’s an infrequent action.
90
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:97==
There is also no way to prevent accidentally publishing a review/rating of a book if the ”Fin-
ish” button is tapped. However, the published reviews/ratings are editable, as indicated
by the pen icon. One way we can better prevent premature publishing is by presenting
users with a brief preview of their ratings and review after indicating they are finished,
which can then serve as confirmation that the user wants to proceed or go back.
Another unresolved issue would arise if the user accidentally changes the status of a book
to ”finished”. It’s unclear still how the system would handle ”re-reads” or books that users
have read multiple times. If the user designates a book as ”Finished” and then changes it
to ”Want to read”, should the book remain in the ”Finished” shelf? We have yet to develop
a clear approach for this matter.
One way in which we do implement a form of error prevention in the system is through our
use of inactive buttons in certain pop-ups (e.g., writing a quick-note). In these cases, the
continue buttons remain inactive until the interactive fields are sufficiently filled in, which
prevents the user from advancing before properly completing the action.
6.5.6
Recognition rather than recall
To minimize the need for users to recall information, we have implemented various mea-
sures of providing help in context (e.g., info icons and explanatory text). We also received
a comment from one of the users during our final testing that while the system contains
many unique features, it also does a good job of reminding the users of what they can do
wherever relevant.
Nonetheless, we have identified multiple instances in which the users have to remember
the meaning or functionality of an element, such as with several icons that include no
explanation. The phrase ”Did not finish” is also only explained in the Library page but
nowhere else, even though it is a default shelf option and is therefore always present in
the status dropdown menu.
6.5.7
Flexibility and efficiency of use
To promote flexibility and ways to tailor the user experience of the system for both new and
expert users, we have implemented various shortcuts. For example, to remove a book
from a shelf, a new user can do this by going into the Book Info page and either changing
the status to ”None” or editing the custom shelf menu, depending on which shelf the user
wants to remove the book from. A quicker way to complete this action is by going directly
to the shelf and swiping left on the book entry. If not for the limitations we encountered
with using Figma, we would have also liked to incorporate swiping left on the screens in
order to navigate to a previous page (i.e., a ”back” shortcut), as is customary in many
mobile applications.
Another example involved marking a book as ”finished”, which can either be done through
the Book Info page using the status dropdown menu or directly from the Library page
using the shortcut button labeled ”Mark as finished”. While this shortcut is not necessarily
”hidden” from new users, which is often characteristic of typical shortcuts, it still allows for
flexibility in the user experience, depending on what feels most intuitive for users.
The Book Info page also includes a shortcut that originated from feedback during some
of our user tests, which suggests that it might be helpful for both new and expert users
alike. This shortcut involves tapping on the book’s overall (primary) rating at the top of
the page to be navigated directly to the secondary rating parameters, which are otherwise
accessed by scrolling down on the page.
We noticed during some thinking-aloud tests that users were attempting to long-press the
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
91
==PAGE:98==
book entries to complete certain actions. Interestingly, we had intentionally avoided im-
plementing any long-press actions because in the first user testing, we received feedback
saying that users would not think to do this. While further testing is required, this could be
an example in which users sometimes don’t know what they really want.
6.5.8
Aesthetic and minimalist design
We did our best to maintain a simple design throughout the system by including only rel-
evant and important information and elements. Regardless, we are also aware that we’re
not experienced UI designers and because of this, there is definite room for improvement.
For example, we received feedback during our final user testing that the book recommen-
dation feature in the ”Want to read” shelf resembles an advertisement, which may cause
users to subconsciously disregard it. This could be a result, in part, of using a generally
subdued color scheme, which was a challenge for us to develop throughout the prototyp-
ing phase. We tried to find a balance between being visually modern and interesting but
not overly childish. We also used two main font faces across the pages, which helped to
convey hierarchy; one was used exclusively for page headers and book titles while the
other was used for all other text (except, by mistake, in the shared shelf collaborators pop-
up). We also tried to implement a visual hierarchy through the use of shadows, colors,
and the sizing of elements (e.g., book covers). Additionally, by minimizing the number
of sharp corners (i.e., using rounded corners) throughout, we hoped to strengthen the
modern appeal of the system. Ultimately, we feel that the UI does feel minimal, but lacks
visual interest and could be improved by experimenting more with color themes and other
visual elements.
6.5.9
Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors
As our prototype is still in a relatively early stage, we have not yet considered errors and
how users would interact with them.
6.5.10
Help and documentation
As described in Section 6.5.6, we have attempted to incorporate help in context, by using
the info icons or plan informational text. We did not, however, develop a ”Help Center”,
as we considered that out of scope for this project, which is focusing on aspects of an
app rather than the full app. For the same reason, there is no tutorial page. However, it
might be beneficial to have more in-context and brief tutorials, which could appear during
the user’s first time using the different parts of the app. We believe this would amount to
a simpler user experience than if the system presented an overall, longer app tutorial in
the ”set-up” phase of the app, which would then require users to recall specific notes of
information and have to re-read or re-watch the tutorial if necessary.
92
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:99==
(a) Library page
(b) Shelf view
(c) Book Info page
(d) Rate This Book page
Figure 6.1: Main pages available in the prototype
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
93
==PAGE:100==
(a) Filtering sheet
(b) Grid view
(c) Quick-notes
Figure 6.2: Different parts of the Shelf view available in the prototype
(a) Overall shared shelf view
(b) Modal to edit
collaborators
Figure 6.3: Shared shelf view
94
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:101==
(a) Status dropdown options
(b) ”Currently reading” status
and custom shelves
(c) Modal to manage custom
shelves
Figure 6.4: Moving book between shelves using parts of Book Info page
(a) Book Info after finishing a
book
(b) Rate This Book page
Figure 6.5: Opening the Rate This Book page after finishing a book
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
95
==PAGE:102==
(a) Rating parameters menu
(b) Half and full stars used for
rating
Figure 6.6: Parts of the Rate This Book page used to give the book a star rating
(a) List of review prompts
(b) Rate This Book page
with the prompt selected
(c) Privacy options and
”Draft” button
Figure 6.7: Parts of the Rate This Book page used to write a review
96
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:103==
(a) Average ratings of different
book aspects
(b) Other users’ reviews
(c) User’s own rating
(d) User’s own review
Figure 6.8: Parts of the Book Info page related to ratings and reviews
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
97
==PAGE:104==
INSTRUCTIONS: Mark each spectrum with an X.
INTUITIVE -> Is the app usable without needing instruction
or direction?
TEMPLATE
-
Notat all
-pidionthe
appessaweiergneinte
-
Not at all
completely
-
FINDABLE -
were the most important features/functions
clear and easy to access?
-
Notatall
completely
-
EASY TO NAVIGATE- Was iteasy togetaround the app
and get to where you wanted to go?
-1
Not at all
Completely
Figure 6.9: Custom survey distributed at the end of the testing
(a) Shelf info icon in the
library view
(b) Shared shelf info modal
(c) Shared shelf header
Figure 6.10: Important aspects of the shared shelves
98
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:105==
7
Discussion
7.1
Our solution via the lens of the problem statement
Based on the results from the final validation, we believe that our solution for evaluat-
ing books was ultimately stronger than our solution for managing collections. First and
foremost, managing collections is a more comprehensive activity that involves a broad
number of tasks, some of which we failed to implement (e.g., deleting shelves, editing
shelf names, etc.). Comparatively, evaluating books is more straightforward, allowing us
to spend more time developing fewer features.
Our defined problem statement based on the user research was: how might we make
managing collections and evaluating books more intuitive, flexible, findable, and easy to
navigate for both new and existing book-tracking users between the ages of 18 and 35?
In the following subsections, we evaluate how the final prototype addresses these four
specified objectives to improve the user experience of book-tracking overall.
7.1.1
Intuitive
For the system to be successfully intuitive, it should be usable without needing instruction
or direction.
Managing collections
The results from the thinking-aloud tests using the itemized task list suggest that the man-
aging collections aspect of the system was only partially successful in this respect. Some
tasks were more intuitive to complete than others. For example, the quick-add function
(i.e., quickly adding a book to one’s ”Want to read” shelf directly from either the Discover
page or a shared shelf) caused no issues. However, the slow-add process (i.e., adding a
book to one’s ”Want to read” shelf from the Book Info page) was not immediately intuitive
to most users. They did not easily make the connection between the task ”add the book
to your ’Want to read’ shelf” and the status dropdown.
When examining the issue using the 10 Usability Heuristics, we are able to further isolate
and understand this problem. We suspect the word ”status” didn’t register with users for
two main reasons; the first is that the word deviates from typical book-tracking terminol-
ogy, which usually sounds more similar to e.g., ”add to shelf” or ”save book”. This irreg-
ularity reflects a potential issue with heuristic #2, Match between system & real world,
because it may be that users are generally more inclined to seek buttons that use the
above-mentioned book-tracking language. In regards to the users who were not pre-
viously familiar with book-tracking, we believe the wording of the given task, which also
used typical book-tracking terms, misled them during the thinking-aloud. This also closely
relates to heuristic #4, Consistency and standards, because no other part of the system
uses the word ”status”, but in multiple areas the word ”shelf” is used. Moreover, we used
the concept of a library containing various shelves as the base structure for organizing
books in the system.
To resolve the uncertainty around the slow-add process, one possible strategy would be to
revert the word ”status” back to ”add to shelf”, which we had previously implemented. The
reason we had initially changed from the ”Add to shelf” button to the status dropdown in the
fourth iteration was that users who were unfamiliar with book-tracking did not understand
that the button would also be used for marking the book as ”finished”. Unlike the issue
that arose in the final prototype testing, users found it more intuitive when adding the book
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
99
==PAGE:106==
to their ”Want to read” shelf, but not for the subsequent task, which was ”mark the book as
’read’”. In retrospect, this problem was likely also a result of the task wording as well as
the fact that the button maintained the label ”add to shelf” even after the user had added
the book to their ”Want to read” shelf.
Ultimately, the slow-add button or dropdown should be labeled with a term that is familiar to
users, consistent with the system, and ideally clear to newcomers. We speculate that the
original ”Add to shelf” button could be a better fit if the words were automatically revised
to, e.g., ”Change shelf” after users first add the book to a shelf. We also believe that in
some cases, new users merely need to learn certain aspects of a system. In the context of
our solution, it’s probable that users would learn the slow-add process in a short amount
of time.
We found that the rest of the managing collections portion of the system had a moderately
clear UI. Aside from the slow-add process, the remaining tasks in the thinking-aloud test
posed few to no issues among users. Nevertheless, in a future iteration, we would want
to modify the in-shelf book recommendation card to appear less like an advertisement.
We would also like to adjust the placement of the filter icon in the Shelf view so that it is
closer to the sorting dropdown.
In relation to the Usability Heuristics, managing collections performs well on the following
fronts:
• Visibility of system status,
• Consistency and standards (not including the slow-add process),
• Recognition rather than recall,
• Flexibility and efficiency of use,
• Help & documentation.
Conversely, improvements could be focused in the following areas:
• User control and freedom - with more consistent cancel and undo buttons,
• Error prevention - with a plan to prevent accidentally marking a book as ”finished”,
• Aesthetic and minimalist design - with an overall design update.
Evaluating books
It was clear to us that the book evaluation page was more straightforward based on the
ease with which users completed the associated tasks during the thinking-aloud tests.
They were able to easily assign both full-star and half-star ratings and understood how to
use the rating parameters menu without requiring further direction or guidance. Operating
the review prompts feature also appeared to be intuitive.
In general, the process of evaluating books adequately adheres to most of the Usability
Heuristics. The most room for improvement lies within heuristic #5, Error prevention,
and heuristic #7, Flexibility and efficiency of use. In regards to the former, there could be
some confirmation prompt prior to users publishing a review in order to prevent them from
accidentally doing so. To promote the latter, we could implement some shortcut methods
for rating a book quickly, such as by allowing users to assign the book’s overall rating
immediately after marking it as ”finished” (on the Book Info page).
100
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:107==
As a whole, the book evaluation process is likely a familiar process to new and experi-
enced book-tracking users alike because it resembles typical rating and reviewing sys-
tems from other platforms (e.g., shopping websites).
NASA TLX and SUS surveys
Overall, the NASA TLX and SUS survey results were generally positive, which may give
some indication of the intuitiveness of the system overall. However, although they pro-
vided us with quantitative data to compound the qualitative feedback we obtained, the
surveys were not as useful as we hoped they would be. The main issue comes from the
lack of data we could use to compare them to and the very limited number of responses.
When distributing the NASA TLX survey, we did not ask users to perform pairwise com-
parisons, as we understood them to be optional. In the end, we learned that it is also an
important step in conducting this survey, but we were not able to collect the missing data.
This makes the results of NASA TLX less accurate and relevant than they could be, yet we
still think they are helpful as they show us the general impression of the workload coming
from using our prototype. When it comes to the SUS survey, the fidelity of our prototype
might be considered too low to be properly assessed by this tool. Our implementation is
only part of the potential whole book-tracking application. Although we tried making the
testing experience as smooth as possible, there were plenty of elements that were not in-
teractive in any way. It significantly simplifies the whole system, hiding potential usability
problems in case of the full solution, and may cause the scores to be artificially high.
7.1.2
Flexible
For the system to be successfully flexible, it should adapt to unique user preferences and
provide users sufficient freedom to express their views. This objective also closely relates
to the general usefulness of the system as described in Morville’s UX Honeycomb [35].
Managing collections
Within the library and shelves, we believe the following features contribute to the overall
flexibility of our solution:
• ability to add custom shelves,
• shared shelf,
• search, sort, and filter capabilities,
• toggle between list and grid view of a shelf,
• ”Currently reading” card in the Library view,
• quick-notes to provide context to books in shelves,
• privacy settings for each individual shelf.
Notably, the shared shelf concept provides an added layer of flexibility to managing collec-
tions that we had not seen in any book-tracking platform during our research. By allowing
users to collaborate within shelves, the system presents users with a unique opportunity
to stay connected with friends and their latest reads. We also felt the shared shelf would
be an interesting approach to bridging the gap we observed within our user research.
While users highly value book recommendations from friends, they rarely use the exist-
ing book-recommending features within the current platforms. The shared shelf poses
a unique, more connected way in which users can recommend books, and users were
excited by the idea during testing. Even still, further testing with a higher fidelity prototype
is required to evaluate how successful this idea actually is.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
101
==PAGE:108==
Unlike the shared shelf, which was a new idea, the ”Currently reading” card in the Library
view is something we observed in existing platforms (e.g., Goodreads). We intentionally
incorporated this element in our solution because we felt that it works well at providing
users flexibility in how they interact with the books they’re currently reading. Depending
on their preferences, users can quickly mark a book as ”finished” directly from the Library
page, or they can enter the Book Info page to modify the book’s status there. Additionally,
multiple books can be displayed simply through horizontal scrolling.
The quick-notes feature was an idea that sparked during user research in response to
a need expressed in the interviews and app reviews. Users wanted to be able to add
context to certain books when adding them to a shelf, so as to remember why they saved
the book in the first place. We believe that when taking the user journey from Section 4.3.3
into account, implementing the ability to write quick-notes for saved books will benefit the
Decide phase. This essentially means that in the circumstances when users are browsing
their shelves to find the next book to read, having contextual notes will hopefully simplify
the process and decrease the amount of work users need to do to make said decision.
During testing, we received positive feedback from all users regarding this feature, which
further validates its usefulness. We also believe that there may be circumstances in which
users don’t want to add context to a book. In this case, the quick-notes feature is versatile
enough to provide users the freedom to decide what information gets attached to the
book. For example, in one of the thinking-aloud tests, a user expressed that the quick-
notes feature could also be useful for actually documenting important notes while reading.
This is why we have also ensured that users can access their quick-notes while evaluating
the books. We wanted to be sure to provide sufficient flexibility for users to decide how
the feature would be most helpful to them.
Lastly, more specific privacy control was another common need expressed during user
research. We, therefore, implemented individualized privacy settings in various parts of
the system. Within managing collections, users are able to dictate the privacy of each of
their shelves, including the default ones. This allows them the power to decide how visible
their saved books are and to whom, which we believe makes the system more flexible
than existing solutions (e.g., one overall privacy setting determines whether users’ entire
profiles are public or private in Goodreads).
Evaluating books
Within the Rate This Book page, we believe the following features contribute to the overall
flexibility of our solution:
• secondary rating parameters,
• review prompts for assistance,
• privacy settings for each review,
• quick-notes access during evaluation,
• ability to save drafts and edit reviews.
Two of the most popular features of our entire system include the descriptive rating param-
eters and the review prompts. Users were often most excited about these components
because of the way in which they help to specify, articulate, and structure users’ thoughts
on a book.
The rating parameters idea is similar to what we had observed in another platform, Sto-
ryGraph. There, the parameters are predefined and inflexible, although each is optional
to complete. While we see this being more useful than Goodreads’ single rating and
102
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:109==
open text field, we also feel that the list of questions can be daunting to some, and poten-
tially discourage users from evaluating the books. This is why in our solution, the rating
parameters are chosen by the user, depending on which aspects of the book they find
most relevant to rate. The layout of the ratings is also intentionally concise, so as to not
overwhelm users.
The review prompts idea was inspired by online dating apps, e.g., Hinge. Users of these
platforms are provided with question prompts when constructing a profile to help them
think about the most relevant or interesting details about themselves. In the context of
book-tracking, we felt that the review prompts feature would make a useful tool for users
who sometimes struggle to articulate or structure their thoughts about a book after read-
ing. We designed this feature to be included as extra assistance and not as a default
component of the evaluation page so that users are not overwhelmed unnecessarily.
7.1.3
Findable
For the system to be successfully findable, it should present an easy way of locating
essential features and functions.
In general, to make it easy for the users to locate all the interactive and most important
features we tried to tie semantic meaning to colors. The vast majority of the elements
which are clickable have a specific shade of blue. Also, normal text (e.g., book descrip-
tions or reviews) is black, while secondary, slightly less important text (e.g., book series
name, review posting date) is grey. Although it is not written explicitly anywhere, users
quickly notice those semantics and expect interactivity from all the elements matching the
pattern. This helps us to highlight the most essential elements.
Another thing globally helping with locating important elements is the usage of shadows
and size hierarchy. In the Library, for example, book sizes are smaller, as we want to
draw attention to the individual shelves. On the other hand, in the Shelf view, the book
sizes are larger as they are more important for this page. The biggest book covers are
visible on the Book Info page, as that is the crucial part of book representation. Similarly,
we have two standard button types - bigger, solid blue buttons (”hard buttons”) which
allow the users to perform the most important actions in the given context, and smaller,
blue buttons without background (”soft buttons”) to provide access to secondary actions.
Also, to spotlight unique and important elements of the pages we added shadows to their
frames in order to add depth and make them appear closer to the user, e.g., the book
recommendation on the Shelf view.
Managing collections
An essential feature of the managing collections area is the ability to search, sort, and
filter the books on a shelf. In our prototype, users can find the books they are interested
in by their title, author, genres, and other criteria. It allows them to narrow down their
search rather than scroll through a long list of books. When it comes to the placement of
the three functionalities, although they are present, they are located in two separate parts
of the screen. We learned in the last iteration that they should be in close proximity, as is
typical in other platforms.
Another thing we learned through user testing is that users value positive feedback when
finishing a book. In Goodreads, users need to intentionally navigate to their profile to view
their updated reading challenge progress. In our solution, the users are automatically
presented with a modal showing all their progress and achievement information upon
finishing a book. This immediate feedback attaches a greater sense of achievement to
the action of marking the book as ”finished”.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
103
==PAGE:110==
Evaluating books
On the Rate This Book page, maintaining an interface that is both concise and simple
was important to us to prevent overwhelming users. The page consists of four basic sec-
tions divided by subtle horizontal lines. The sections include the overall rating, secondary
ratings, review text box, and privacy settings, all of which include only the most essen-
tial pieces of information for completing the form. Additional features, which can aid the
review process (e.g., review prompts), are accessible via the blue ”soft buttons”.
On the Book Info page users can access the secondary rating information by tapping
the overall, primary rating at the top of the page which automatically scrolls the view
down to the secondary parameters section. This was implemented based on behaviors
we observed during testing in which users were intuitively performing this action with the
expectation that it would reveal the secondary parameters.
7.1.4
Easy to navigate
For the system to be successfully easy to navigate, it should be easy for users to move
around.
While we initially envisioned more distinction between the terms ”easy to navigate” and
”findable”, we have come to the conclusion they are closely related, and ”easy to navigate”
involves elements that are findable and help the users move around the app. Therefore,
the ways in which we view the system to be easy to navigate overlap with the way in which
it is findable.
To make sure that the prototype is easy to navigate, we focused on making interactive ele-
ments easy to click - the buttons are sized according to the industry standards1, collapsible
fields are interactive all over their area instead of single spot where the arrow/”Read more”
text is located, and a Shelf view can be opened by tapping any part of its card in the Li-
brary view. On the other hand, we were not fully able to test and get realistic feedback
on the ease of interaction - very often Figma was not correctly registering taps, especially
on smaller elements, preventing the users from moving around smoothly. For example,
this issue occurred often when tapping the ”Back” arrow, which is a frequently performed
action.
Also, to keep the navigation consistent, we kept the general layout of the pages as similar
as possible - all of them include a header consisting of a ”Back” button, optional title, and/or
icons, then the main content of the page which is vertically scrollable and tab navigation
at the bottom. We left the last piece undeveloped, as it was outside our scope, yet it was
still important to include it in the prototype as a placeholder. The other functionality we
are missing from the prototype is swiping to go back. We think it would be a valuable
addition to the smooth navigation experience, but it was not easily achievable in Figma,
so we decided to leave it out.
7.1.5
Custom survey
While our custom survey showed us user opinions directly related to the problem state-
ment, it was not as informative as we had hoped. The main reason is the lack of any
baselines or standard ways of interpreting the scores. Even though the average scores
for all the statements were around 90, it is hard to put those numbers into perspective or
compare them with other ways of evaluation. Maybe it would be beneficial if we asked
the test participants to fill out the surveys for each of our focus areas (i.e., managing col-
lections, and evaluating books). This way we would be able to better pinpoint the origin
of the issues.
1https://uxmovement.com/mobile/optimal-size-and-spacing-for-mobile-buttons/ (accessed: 2023-06-17)
104
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:111==
The best use of the data from our custom survey is to compare individual scales with
each other. Doing this suggests that users believe the aspect we succeeded in the most
is ”flexible”, meaning the users felt satisfied with the freedom to express their views and
preferences.
7.2
Our high-level goal and the book-tracking market
As stated in the Introduction of this report, our high-level goal was to promote reading and
its inherent benefits. Based on our research, we believe that book-tracking is a valuable
tool for enhancing the reading experience. With our solution - although confronting only
a segment of the user journey - we contribute to an improved user experience of book-
tracking, and therefore reading in general.
As we inferred early on, Goodreads holds the throne of dedicated book-tracking apps
which support all book formats (i.e., print, digital, audio). Platforms like Amazon Kindle
and Libby have also paved their own paths in the market by supporting in-app reading
and listening. Questions still remain, however, regarding what kind of similar app will be
able to compete with Goodreads in the future. From our point of view, StoryGraph, while
young and filled with potential, presents a risk of losing users early on by promising too
much and executing important features inadequately. We believe that for an app to fully
challenge the leading platform, it needs to do the basic functions Goodreads does, and
it needs to do them well. On top of this, the app would need to tap into one or more
of the stages of the user journey in which Goodreads is weak or nonexistent. We see
opportunities in the following stages:
• Decide - users still struggle when making a choice of which book from their shelves
to pick up next,
• Read - Goodreads has no presence here,
• Judge - the book evaluation is arguably oversimplified,
• Recommend - there exists a notable gap between users wanting book recommen-
dations from friends and using the recommending feature in the app,
• Reflect - the Goodreads reading challenge is a popular feature, but the statistics are
limited.
In others, the platform owned by Amazon does a good job and can be used as a source
of inspiration. Competing with Goodreads there might be significantly harder, especially
taking into account its well-established position on the market.
When it comes to comparing our solution to the existing products, we can say that we
technically achieved all of our implementation goals presented in Table 4.8. However,
depending on their complexity, some features were tested more thoroughly than others.
Regardless, all of them are visually represented in the final Figma prototype. For ex-
ample, we investigated ”context notes for shelved books” in more detail than a ”tagging
system” because it was a new concept that was not yet represented in other book-tracking
platforms. We iterated the former consistently, while the latter was implemented early on
and largely left alone. We did this because we felt that it would require testing with a
high-fidelity prototype (i.e., a real smartphone app) to check its usefulness in the book-
searching process.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
105
==PAGE:112==
7.3
Reflections on the design process
When considering our timeline as a whole, we can safely acknowledge that we managed
to wrap up the final iteration and testing on schedule. This is not to say, however, that
the entire project went as planned. The user research phase, for example, carried on
much longer than we expected it to. We underestimated the time it would take to both
process and analyze the data we obtained and we did not want to sacrifice the quality of
the user research by rushing through it. Ultimately, we feel it is worth spending the time to
truly understand the context of the users and their needs. Because of this and due to the
nature of design thinking, up until the last iteration, we continued revisiting and redefining
our problem statement as we continued to learn about our users.
We then encountered an impasse when revisiting the existing solutions using the insights
we had learned from our research. At this point in the middle of the design process, we
realized that if we were to attempt to design an entire book-tracking app, we would be
over-extending ourselves in the allotted time frame. Doing so would essentially prevent
us from the opportunity to create tangible, impressionable change. Thus, we pivoted and
narrowed our scope. From this point on, we used the defined stages of our user journey
to examine and select the two areas of book-tracking on which to center our efforts.
Afterward, we reached the prototyping phase of the process, which was therefore more
compact than we intended it to be, as we wanted to iterate around five times before finaliz-
ing. This meant in our limited remaining time, we developed each iteration over the course
of about one week, then tested the updated prototypes each weekend. While it would’ve
been useful to have extra time for this stage of the process, we also felt that the quick
turnaround times for the iterations forced us to prioritize our efforts and try ideas rather
than potentially pondering them for more time. We also noted that we spent a substan-
tial amount of developing aspects of the book-tracking system that were not necessarily
part of our scope, e.g., the overall layout of the Book Info page. We did this because the
Book Info page was necessary for various actions related to both managing collections
and evaluating books. The whole Book Info page layout, while not immediately relevant
to either managing collections or evaluating books, could have potentially influenced the
user experience of the prototype overall. Therefore, in order to ensure that testing pro-
ceeded smoothly, we had to spend time developing this page so that it achieved a level
of completeness that matched the rest of the system.
Throughout the design process, one thing we had initially set out to do but ultimately
skipped was the workshops. We still hold that the workshops would’ve provided great
value to the design process, however, we had to make an executive decision to omit
them. Scheduling one distinct time to meet with four or more people at once was more
challenging than we initially thought it to be. Eventually, we felt that the time required to
organize the workshops would’ve been better spent in other ways and that we could not
afford to further delay our timeline.
7.4
Reflection on methods and tools
7.4.1
Prototyping and testing
Beyond the limitations of the surveys we administered during our final evaluation, we also
want to highlight the weaknesses of the other testing methods we used (i.e., thinking-aloud
and AB testing). With the thinking-aloud tests, users were asked to perform a series of
tasks and verbalize their passing thoughts while doing so. We noticed, however, that
some users were not voicing their unfiltered opinions as much, preventing us from fully
understanding their experience using the prototype. Additionally, we suspect that the
106
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:113==
wording of the tasks strongly biased users in some cases, especially users who were new
to book-tracking. For example, the task ”go to your shared shelf” was meant to prompt
users to find which shelf may be the collaborative shelf, based on some visual indicator.
Instead, users looked for a shelf literally named ”Shared Shelf”. In retrospect, because
of this, it was sometimes challenging for us to decipher whether the issues users ran into
were a result of poor design or misleading task wordings (or both). In regards to the AB
tests, if we could redo them, we would try to be more mindful of changing the order in
which the options were shown, for example using Latin Square Design. This may not
have had a major effect on the final results, but we do still feel that the sequence did bias
the users in some respect.
In total, we maintain that testing with more users would’ve been beneficial. A broader
range of perspectives would not only illuminate a more diverse set of advantages and
disadvantages in the design; it would also potentially provide a stronger sense of vali-
dation (or invalidation), which ultimately makes for stronger reasoning for various design
decisions. Using more reliable quantitative methods would also aid in providing concrete
reasoning for or against certain decisions, which could strengthen the design overall.
When developing the different iterations, we also consistently updated the User Story Map
(USM), which helped loosely guide us to implement a number of the outlined tasks. We
believe, however, that if we spent more time refining the USM, we would’ve been able to
prioritize elements of the design better. We also may have incorporated other important
aspects in the design that we excluded on accident (e.g., deleting shelves or editing shelf
names).
7.4.2
User research
Of all the user research methods we used, each provided its own value. For one, the
survey gave us an initial insight into the values and needs of both book-tracking users and
non-users. It also pointed us towards the features of book-tracking which are the most
and least used, suggesting to us potential opportunities for intervention. While distributing
the survey was relatively easy and we received over 100 responses, only 1/3 came from
current book-tracking users. Knowing this now, we would distribute the survey in more
places over a longer period of time to gather more relevant data. It was still useful for us
to hear from non-users, but a more balanced ratio would have been ideal. Also, although
we attempted to structure the survey in a way that was clear for users and beneficial for
us, in retrospect we see that we could have done better by outlining the user journey
beforehand rather than later. This would have helped in various areas, e.g.:
• preparing the survey - questions would better reflect the different activities involved
in book-tracking compared to us coming up with a list of typical features,
• answering the survey - users could be guided through the survey using the concepts
from the user journey to better understand the questions and avoid misinterpreta-
tions,
• analyzing the results - it would be much easier for us to identify areas of opportunity
or pain points.
The five user interviews allowed us to dive deeper into the minds of a few users to gain
a more thorough understanding of their desires and behaviors. At this point, we outlined
a basic user journey to begin mapping out a typical chain of activities for readers who
use book-tracking. Doing this allowed us to better visualize the different stages and what
obstacles or barriers they might include. It also allowed us to better pinpoint the goals of
each stage and how different design elements might impact these goals. After framing the
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
107
==PAGE:114==
reader journey, we used affinity mapping to then categorize the comments from the inter-
views into each associated journey stage. This was useful in assessing the overall trends,
but with only five users who differed greatly, we found it difficult to make final conclusions
based on these trends. Instead, we found ourselves labeling the trends merely by subject.
Thus, while the interviews were useful, we felt the biggest takeaway was the realization
that we were dealing with a diverse set of users, which needed to be recognized more
precisely moving forward. On the other hand, if we were to conduct the interviews again,
we would have also liked to use the user journey as a guide. Similar to the survey, we
believe that walking through the user journey with the participants would not only provide
a wider range of insights but it would also have simplified our analysis later.
The last of our three main user research methods, the analysis of the Goodreads app
reviews allowed us to quickly scan a large amount of data to see common trends of com-
plaints or unmet needs specified for the platform. Compared to the survey and interviews,
this dataset was significantly larger and more representative of book-tracking users. It
gave us insights into the problematic features of Goodreads, allowing us to develop im-
proved versions of them in our prototype. This led to positive feedback from Goodreads
users during testing. These results were also used to further validate or invalidate the
feedback we received from both previous user research methods. To obtain more value
from this analysis method, we would have liked to access both a larger number of reviews
to better represent the user views and reviews of other book-tracking platforms. This
would have improved our competitive analysis as we would have a better understanding
of popular features or pitfalls of apps aside from Goodreads.
While we initially set out to create personas based on our user research, we ended up
finding more value in generating reader archetypes. Rather than spending time develop-
ing specific details of our users, we wanted to identify and highlight the major behavioral
and motivational trends we observed from the research. Because we had noticed a wide
variety of user types from our interviews, it was important for us to acknowledge these
distinct blends of characteristics in a way that was not too detailed or inflexible.
The competitive analysis was another useful tool in that it allowed us to fully take inventory
of and compare each of the notable players we had identified in the book-tracking market.
It also showed us the most common functionalities of book-tracking solutions. We learned,
however, that just because an app or platform supports some function or feature does not
imply that it does so effectively. This was difficult for us to convey in the competitive
analysis tables, although there may be an alternative way of scoring the platforms in each
category rather than simply assigning a binary value, which could help mitigate this issue.
7.5
Future work
The current state of the prototype can give an idea of how collection management and
book evaluation should be implemented. It is, however, by no means a prototype that
could be used instantly as a base for developing a market-ready mobile application for
book-tracking.
Even taking into account only its two focus areas, they should be developed and tested
further. The prototype should include important functionalities which are currently missing,
e.g., deleting or renaming shelves. Then, a higher fidelity prototype should be developed.
The development process itself is likely to reveal other issues which should be addressed
at this point.
Before full implementation, there should also be much more user testing. By the end
of our last iteration, we managed to perform only 15 tests. While at this early stage, it
108
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:115==
was enough to get plenty of comments for improvement, the tests were not necessarily
exhaustive - we did not reach the point where the majority of the feedback repeats. Ac-
cording to Nielsen and Landauer [44], five testers should be enough to reveal many of the
usability problems and that should be the target number of tests for every iteration.
It might be also beneficial to research popular features and pitfalls of the other apps on
the market. While we performed a competitive analysis and discovered what these apps
can do, we do not know user opinions about how well are they performing. App reviews
analysis turned out to be very valuable in discovering problems of that type and it should
be performed also for the other existing book-tracking apps. It can help in understanding
what users want much better as well as avoid mistakes in implementing potentially useful
features.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
109
==PAGE:116==
110
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:117==
8
Conclusion
We initially set out to improve the user experience of book-tracking in order to contingently
further promote reading for pleasure. At the outset of this project, we aimed to answer
the general question:
How might we improve the user experience of book-tracking mobile apps?
Through 104 survey responses, five user interviews, and nearly 1000 app reviews, we
learned that the experience of managing collections is often overly complex, limited, and
unclear. Additionally, the process of evaluating books is either considered rigid and inflex-
ible or difficult to navigate and confusing. Taking these findings into account, we asked
ourselves:
How might we make managing collections and evaluating books more intuitive,
flexible, findable, and easy to navigate for both new and existing book-tracking
users between the ages of 18 and 35?
Through an iterative design process, which involved a total of 15 user tests across five
iterations, we confronted this question by ultimately creating a prototype that is usable
without needing instruction, adapts to unique user preferences, and provides the freedom
to sufficiently express user views. We also ensured the solution enables an easy way of
locating essential features and functions and of moving around in general.
This solution was ultimately evaluated by five users through thinking-aloud tests, the
NASA TLX and SUS surveys, and our own custom survey. The users were both pleased
and enthusiastic about the system overall, often inquiring about whether we planned to
fully develop and publish the app in the future. An expert evaluation was also conducted
utilizing usability heuristics, in which the system effectively fulfills the objectives, not with-
out limitations.
Although the prototype is not a full application, it provides a compelling example of how we
might foster a better user experience in book-tracking. While our solution would benefit
from further development, we have already seen promising results that indicate the impact
it can have on book-tracking as a whole.
In addition to our mid-fidelity prototype, our project outputs include an outline of system
micro-interactions, user validation notes, defined reader archetypes, an adapted user
journey, iterated user story maps, and a competitive analysis of the book-tracking market.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
111
==PAGE:118==
112
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
[1]
Avni Bavishi, Martin D. Slade, and Becca R. Levy. “A chapter a day: Association
of book reading with longevity”. In: Social Science & Medicine 164 (2016), pp. 44–
48. ISSN: 0277-9536. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.07.014. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277953616303689.
[2]
Gregory S Berns et al. “Short- and long-term effects of a novel on connectivity in
the brain”. en. In: Brain Connect. 3.6 (Oct. 2013), pp. 590–600.
[3]
David Comer Kidd and Emanuele Castano. “Reading Literary Fiction Improves The-
ory of Mind”. In: Science 342.6156 (2013), pp. 377–380. DOI: 10 . 1126 / science .
1239918. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1239918. URL:
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1239918.
[4]
7 Best Book Tracking Apps In 2022 - Insightful Reading by Bookly. URL: https:
//blog.getbookly.com/best-book-tracking-apps/ (visited on 03/11/2023).
[5]
Simona Tolcheva. 6 Reasons Why You Should Stop Using Goodreads. May 2021.
URL: https://www.makeuseof.com/6-reasons-why-you-should-stop-using-goodreads/
(visited on 03/11/2023).
[6]
Angela Lashbrook. Almost Everything About Goodreads Is Broken. Sept. 2019.
URL: https://onezero.medium.com/almost-everything-about-goodreads-is-broken-
662e424244d5 (visited on 03/11/2023).
[7]
Prateek Agarwal. What could a better Goodreads look like? June 2021. URL: https:
//uxdesign.cc/what- could- a- better- goodreads- look- like- 99b97e9e37c1 (visited on
03/11/2023).
[8]
Prateek Agarwal. Why has no one made a better Goodreads. Mar. 2021. URL: https:
//uxdesign.cc/why-has-no-one-made-a-better-goodreads-dfc9cb9e149a (visited on
03/11/2023).
[9]
Leisure Reading: A joint position statement of the international reading association,
the Canadian children’s book centre, and the national council of teachers of English.
International Reading Association. URL: https://www.literacyworldwide.org/docs/
default- source/where- we- stand/leisure- reading- position- statement.pdf (visited on
03/11/2023).
[10]
David Moher. “Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses:
The PRISMA Statement”. In: Annals of Internal Medicine 151 (4 Aug. 2009), p. 264.
ISSN: 0003-4819. DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00135.
[11]
Yasaman Jafari, Nazanin Sabri, and ∙Behnam Bahrak. “Investigating the effects
of Goodreads challenges on individuals reading habits”. In: (Dec. 2020). DOI: 10.
48550/arxiv.2012.03932. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.03932v3.
[12]
Dr Grace Castronovo. “The doctor wellbeing toolkit”. In: InnovAiT 13.5 (2020), pp. 262–
267. DOI: 10.1177/1755738020904398.
[13]
Margaret Kristin Merga. “What motivates avid readers to maintain a regular reading
habit in adulthood?” In: Australian Journal of Language and Literacy 2017 (JUN
June 2017), pp. 146–156. ISSN: 18394728. DOI: 10.1007/BF03651992/METRICS.
URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF03651992.
[14]
Daniel Marchalik et al. “The impact of non-medical reading on clinician burnout: a
national survey of palliative care providers”. In: Annals of palliative medicine 8 (4
Sept. 2019), pp. 381–389. ISSN: 2224-5839. DOI: 10.21037/APM.2019.05.02. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31431021/.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
113
==PAGE:120==
[15]
Laura Bruneau and Dale Elizabeth Pehrsson. “Read two books and call me next
week: maximizing the book selection process in therapeutic reading”. In: Journal
of Poetry Therapy 30 (4 Oct. 2017), pp. 248–261. ISSN: 15672344. DOI: 10.1080/
08893675.2017.1364507. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/08893675.
2017.1364507.
[16]
Josie Billington. Reading Between the Lines: the Benefits of Reading for Pleasure.
2015. URL: https://www.letterpressproject.co.uk/media/file/The_Benefits_of_Reading_
for_Pleasure.pdf (visited on 03/11/2023).
[17]
Felicity Sedgewick et al. “Gender Differences in the Social Motivation and Friend-
ship Experiences of Autistic and Non-autistic Adolescents”. In: Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders 46 (4 Apr. 2016), pp. 1297–1306. ISSN: 15733432.
DOI: 10.1007/S10803-015-2669-1/FIGURES/1. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.
1007/s10803-015-2669-1.
[18]
Melissa Chapple et al. “An analysis of the reading habits of autistic adults com-
pared to neurotypical adults and implications for future interventions”. In: Research
in Developmental Disabilities 115 (2021), p. 104003. ISSN: 0891-4222. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ridd.2021.104003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0891422221001529.
[19]
Biljana Stanisic. “Fantasy versus Reality: How video game and book genres asso-
ciate with creative thinking”. In: (2019). DOI: 10.17605/OSF.IO/VSK25. URL: http:
//urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:lnu:diva-85441.
[20]
Edwin A. Locke. “Toward a theory of task motivation and incentives”. In: Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Performance 3 (2 May 1968), pp. 157–189. ISSN:
0030-5073. DOI: 10.1016/0030-5073(68)90004-4. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/abs/pii/0030507368900044.
[21]
Sebastian Deterding. “Gamification: Designing for motivation”. In: Interactions 19
(4 July 2012), pp. 14–17. ISSN: 10725520. DOI: 10.1145/2212877.2212883. URL:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2212877.2212883.
[22]
Sebastian Deterding et al. “From game design elements to gamefulness: Defin-
ing ”gamification””. In: Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek
Conference: Envisioning Future Media Environments, MindTrek 2011 (Sept. 2011),
pp. 9–15. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 2181037 . 2181040. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net /
publication/230854710_From_Game_Design_Elements_to_Gamefulness_Defining_
Gamification.
[23]
Rebecca D. Watkins, Janice Denegri-Knott, and Mike Molesworth. “The relation-
ship between ownership and possession: observations from the context of digi-
tal virtual goods”. In: https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2015.1089308 32 (1-2 Jan.
2015), pp. 44–70. ISSN: 14721376. DOI: 10.1080/0267257X.2015.1089308. URL: https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0267257X.2015.1089308.
[24]
Kindle Store Terms of Use. URL: https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.
html?nodeId=201014950 (visited on 03/11/2023).
[25]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A stage-based model of personal informatics
systems”. In: ACM, Apr. 2010, pp. 557–566. ISBN: 9781605589299. DOI: 10.1145/
1753326.1753409. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1753326.1753409.
[26]
Elisabeth T. Kersten-van Dijk et al. “Personal Informatics, Self-Insight, and Behavior
Change: A Critical Review of Current Literature”. In: https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2016.1276456
32 (5-6 Nov. 2017), pp. 268–296. ISSN: 07370024. DOI: 10.1080/07370024.2016.
1276456. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07370024.2016.1276456.
[27]
Thomas Fritz et al. “Persuasive Technology in the Real World: A Study of Long-Term
Use of Activity Sensing Devices for Fitness”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer-
114
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:121==
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’14. Toronto, Ontario, Canada:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, pp. 487–496. ISBN: 9781450324731.
DOI: 10.1145/2556288.2557383. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557383.
[28]
Sunny Consolvo et al. “Flowers or a Robot Army? Encouraging Awareness & Activ-
ity with Personal, Mobile Displays”. In: Proceedings of the 10th International Confer-
ence on Ubiquitous Computing. UbiComp ’08. Seoul, Korea: Association for Com-
puting Machinery, 2008, pp. 54–63. ISBN: 9781605581361. DOI: 10.1145/1409635.
1409644. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/1409635.1409644.
[29]
Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “A Mobile Personal Infor-
matics System with Interactive Visualizations of Mobility and Social Interactions”.
In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Workshop on Personal Data Meets
Distributed Multimedia. PDM ’13. Barcelona, Spain: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 2013, pp. 27–30. ISBN: 9781450323970. DOI: 10.1145/2509352.2509397.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2509352.2509397.
[30]
Yingying Li and Hong Chen. “Research on Experience Design of Social Reading
Platforms Based on Social Presence Theory”. In: HCI International 2022 - Late
Breaking Papers. Interaction in New Media, Learning and Games. Cham: Springer
Nature Switzerland, 2022, pp. 73–80. ISBN: 978-3-031-22131-6.
[31]
Mike Thelwall and Kayvan Kousha. “Goodreads: A social network site for book
readers”. In: Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology
68.4 (2017), pp. 972–983. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23733. eprint: https:
//asistdl.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/asi.23733. URL: https://asistdl.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/asi.23733.
[32]
Dorothee Birke. “Social Reading? On the Rise of a “Bookish” Reading Culture On-
line”. In: Poetics Today 42.2 (June 2021), pp. 149–172. ISSN: 0333-5372. DOI:
10.1215/03335372-8883178. eprint: https://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-
pdf/42/2/149/925761/149birke.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1215/03335372-8883178.
[33]
Fabio Calefato and Filippo Lanubile. “Chapter 6 - Communication Media Selection
for Remote Interaction of Ad Hoc Groups”. In: Advances in Computers: Improving
the Web. Vol. 78. Advances in Computers. Elsevier, 2010, pp. 271–313. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2458(10)78006-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0065245810780062.
[34]
A H Allam et al. “User Experience: Challenges and Opportunities”. In: (2013). ISSN:
2289-1358. URL: http://seminar.utmspace.edu.my/jisri/ (visited on 03/13/2023).
[35]
Peter Morville. User Experience Design. June 2004. URL: http://semanticstudios.
com/user_experience_design/ (visited on 06/10/2023).
[36]
What is Design Thinking? URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/
design-thinking (visited on 03/13/2023).
[37]
What is User Research? URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/
user-research (visited on 04/03/2023).
[38]
Chittaranjan Andrade. “The Limitations of Online Surveys”. In: Indian Journal of
Psychological Medicine 42.6 (2020). PMID: 33354086, pp. 575–576. DOI: 10.1177/
0253717620957496. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/0253717620957496.
[39]
Nadav Klein et al. Online Reviews Are Biased. Here’s How to Fix Them. Mar. 2018.
URL: https://hbr.org/2018/03/online-reviews-are-biased-heres-how-to-fix-them (visited
on 04/03/2023).
[40]
Page Laubheimer. Personas vs. Archetypes. May 2022. URL: https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/personas-archetypes/ (visited on 06/06/2023).
[41]
Jakob Nielsen. “Enhancing the Explanatory Power of Usability Heuristics”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
115
==PAGE:122==
CHI ’94. Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1994,
pp. 152–158. ISBN: 0897916506. DOI: 10.1145/191666.191729. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/191666.191729.
[42]
TLX @ NASA Ames - Home. URL: https://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/groups/TLX/
(visited on 06/01/2023).
[43]
John Brooke. “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale”. In: Usability Eval. Ind. 189
(Nov. 1995).
[44]
Jakob Nielsen and Thomas K. Landauer. “Mathematical model of the finding of us-
ability problems”. In: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Pro-
ceedings (1993), pp. 206–213. DOI: 10.1145/169059.169166. URL: https://dl.acm.org/
doi/10.1145/169059.169166.
116
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:123==
A
User Research - Surveys - Survey
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
117
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
==PAGE:134==
==PAGE:135==
==PAGE:136==
==PAGE:137==
==PAGE:138==
B
User Research - Interviews - Interview
Guide
132
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:139==
Reminders 
- 
Ask to record the interview if possible 
- 
Try to avoid yes or no questions 
- 
Go with the flow. Follow up their responses with more questions. Always ask WHY. 
- 
Try to not lead them into saying something specific. Keep the questions open-ended.  
 
Questions 
- 
How would you describe yourself as a reader? 
o Do you read frequently? Are you consistent? 
o When do you usually read? For how long? 
o What genre of books are you most drawn to? 
o What format(s) do you read? Print, digital, audio, other? Why? 
▪ 
If more than one, how would you describe the ratio between the time you spend with each? 
o How do you feel about the amount of time you spend reading?  
 
- 
If you read digitally, what app do you use? Why? 
o How would you describe the main features of this app?  
o How do you feel about this app as a whole? Why? 
o What stands out to you about what works well and what doesn’t work well? 
 
- 
Do you keep track of the books you’ve read? If so, how? If not, why not? 
o How do you remember how you felt about those books? 
 
- 
How do you find new books you want to read? Walk me through your process? 
o If you use an app, how do you feel about the recommendations it gives you? 
 
App features we can ask about 
- 
Customizable display preferences for e-book 
- 
Ability to organize personal collections of books 
- 
Social community aspect (friends) 
- 
Social community aspect (chat forums or online book clubs) 
- 
Star rating ability  (half-star ratings?) 
- 
Book progress information (or DNF function) 
- 
Reviews  
o Privacy (public or private) 
o Prompts or no prompts 
- 
Annotation abilities 
- 
Recommendation algorithm  
- 
Personal statistics (tracking your reading) 
- 
Setting reading goals 
- 
Setting reading reminders 
- 
Integration with other reading apps 
- 
Badges/achievement aspect with progress 
- 
Discovering new books 
- 
TBR list 
- 
Up-next queue  
- 
Ability to add books that you already own in print to collections 
==PAGE:140==
C
User Research - Interviews - Interview
summaries
C.0.1
Results
This section will introduce each of the five users we interviewed (using pseudo names)
and summarize the insights gathered from each. To read more detailed notes from each
interview, please refer to Appendix D.
I1 - Samantha
The first user we interviewed was Samantha, a 25-year-old female student at DTU who
generally reads 3-5 books per month, often wavering between science fiction and self-help
or philosophical books. She shared with us that she has been using Goodreads for 4-5
years and originally downloaded it to keep up with what her friends are reading. Now, she
uses Goodreads primarily to keep track of the books she wants to read and overall, she
rates it five out of five stars. We asked her about why she thinks Goodreads is so popular
and she said, ”It has so many users, which makes the reviews feel more trustworthy.”
Interestingly, she shared with us that she usually waits to read reviews until after reading
a book so that she can prevent being spoiled or biased. She also said that some online
reviews can be purchased, which is important to look out for as a user. Regardless, if a
person she knows leaves a review, she knows she can trust it.
During our first card-sorting activity, we asked Samantha to categorize a variety of com-
mon book-tracking features based on how frequently she uses them, with as many tiers as
she feels are needed. Her resulting groups are seen in Figure C.1. We also encouraged
her to add a feature to the list if she feels anything is missing. Accordingly, she chose
to add two features, which were ”reading reviews of other people” and ”finding books
through author”; both of which were included in her top tier or ”most used features” group,
including the following others:
• ”rating/reviewing books you’ve read”,
• ”seeing what your friends are reading”,
• ”discovering new books to read”,
• ”organizing the books you’ve read and want to read into collections”.
Her least used feature was ”participating in reading challenges”, which she explained by
saying she has ”this philosophy that reading should not be a competitive sport.” She went
on to say ”the whole point of reading is to get new viewpoints; get new ideas about your
life. So it’s not about the quantity, it’s about the quality.”
We then asked Samantha how she would rank the features based on which she enjoys
using the most, as opposed to the previous prompt about which she objectively uses the
most. Her ranking leaned toward categorizing based on ease of use, which is captured in
Figure C.2. It shows ”reading reviews of other people” at the top (and therefore easiest to
do) and ”organizing the books you’ve read and want to read into collections” at the bottom.
On ”discovering new books to read”, she described that many apps and websites provide
recommendations merely based on what books users have previously read, without taking
into account what exactly they enjoyed or didn’t enjoy, or what they want. ”Usually the
algorithm doesn’t understand this,” she said, ”they’re just like suggesting based on what
you read and sometimes it just doesn’t make sense.”
134
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:141==
Figure C.1: I1 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) used features of book-tracking
Our next card sorting activity involved categorizing a collection of personal statistics based
on the user’s interest level. Samantha’s resulting grouping is shown in Figure C.3, which
places ”most common qualities of the authors whose work you read”, ” how many different
genres you’ve read (and which)”, and ”most common qualitative trends among the books
you’ve read” as the most interesting data. She also later brought up an idea for a new
statistic, which was ”your rating vs other people’s ratings”, which she ultimately ranked in
the middle tier according to her personal interest level in it.
The final card sorting activity focused on influential factors during book selection. For
Samantha, she described her categories, which can be seen in Figure C.4, from left to
right by saying, ”these are the most that I depend on when I’m trying to find a new book.
These [...] I take [...] into consideration, but not that much. These are the ones that I really
don’t care that much about.” She was especially enthusiastic about ”author” as a factor
because, ”usually when you read one book from an author... and you like the writing style,
then you know the next book is good.” She also mentioned that the subject of a book is
important to her, but not as much as writing style, which often determines if a book is great
in her mind.
Due to having extra time, we then incorporated a short design activity with Samantha in
which we co-created ways to improve some of her least enjoyed or least used features of
book-tracking. The ideas we generated included:
• reading challenges that are more creative or qualitative (not just based on numbers,
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
135
==PAGE:142==
Figure C.2: I1 card sorting results: most enjoyed features of book-tracking
but also type of book, etc.)
• keywords and tags incorporated not only for book collections but also for review
filtering
• more privacy settings (not everyone wants their reviews to be public)
We then wrapped up the interview with Samantha (as with all of the others) by thanking
her for her time and for sharing her insights and experiences with us.
I2 - Emma
Our second interview was with 26 year old Emma, another DTU student who claims she is
always reading at least one book, but doesn’t necessarily go through them quickly. In total,
she says she reads about 12-13 books annually and may sometimes switch between read
the same book in print and in audio format, which she prefers when she is doing activities
around the house like cleaning or cooking. Her genre of choice is usually fiction, at one
point also mentioning a love for Greek mythology.
To Emma, book-tracking gives her an inner sense of achievement. ”It’s really satisfying
to have it recorded, even if I don’t always write reviews,” she shared with us, ”There’s
something really satisfying about [completing] a checklist.” She likes browsing the books
136
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:143==
Figure C.3: I1 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) interesting personal statistics
she’s read on Goodreads, as well as looking for new books to read, which is partly why
she’s been using it since around 2012. Additionally, she told us she doesn’t know of any
other book-tracking apps besides Goodreads.
In terms of the core social aspect of Goodreads, Emma explained that she doesn’t really
care for those features such as scrolling through her newsfeed, seeing what her friends
are reading, joining the online discussion boards or groups, etc. What’s more is that
some of her friends use the platform as well, but not frequently so she sometimes gets
worried about spamming them and can feel embarrassed. Considering this, she would
rate Goodreads four out of five stars overall.
We then began the card sorting activities with her, again starting with categorizing an
assortment of features based on how frequently she uses them. Figure C.5 displays her
four-tiered ranking, which she ultimately also regarded as being equivalent to how she
would rank the features based on how much she enjoys using them. ”Participating in
reading challenges (or setting reading goals)” and ”discovering new books to read” were
positioned the highest. Two features that were not previously included until she added
them were: ”monthly trending books” and ”book choice awards”, which she place in the
third tier.
Figure C.6 exhibits Emma’s ranking of the personal statistics we presented to her, which
included ”how many different genres you’ve read (and which)”, ”most common qualitative
trends among the books you’ve read”, ”your progress towards your self-set reading goal”,
and ”average rating you’ve assigned to the books you’ve read” all in the highest tier. At the
bottom, she placed ”your average reading speed (and progress over time)”, saying that
reading is something she does for fun when she has time, not necessarily professionally.
Overall, even the highest ranked statistics were not very important according to Emma,
but she may occasionally peruse them if they’re available to her.
In the final card sorting activity about influential factors during book selection/discovery,
she ended up assigning only three different tiers rather than four, as seen in Figure C.7.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
137
==PAGE:144==
Figure C.4: I1 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) influential factors of book
discovery
Among her top ranked included ”recommendations from friends, family, etc.” which she
explained further by saying, ”it’s nice because then you can talk about it... It might not be
[a new favorite book] but it’s like a shared experience.”
One of our final topics of discussion before closing the interview was about the Goodreads
search function, ”I guess you kind of have to know the name [of the book] beforehand,”
she thought aloud, ”It feels kind of old sometimes.”
I3 - William
We interviewed William third. At 23 years old, William rarely reads printed books. Instead
he uses his computer or reads e-books, usually about non-fiction topics like poker strategy
or mathematical books, but sometimes about science fiction or fantasy. He described
himself as someone who reads around eight total books per year, but often starts books
without finishing them. He finds it especially challenging to find books that really interest
him; which only becomes more challenging when he often doesn’t know what exactly he’s
looking for.
William does not nor has he ever used a dedicated book-tracking app. Instead, he keeps
a short list of want-to-read books in his phone’s notes app with titles usually recommended
to him by friends or discovered in internet forums. Because he only keeps a list of books
to read in the future and does not log the books he has previously read in any way, we
chose to regard William as a non-user. For this reason, we felt it was unnecessary to
present the first card sorting activity regarding common book-tracking features.
Alternatively, we moved right into the card sorting activity involving statistics. His resulting
138
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:145==
Figure C.5: I2 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) used features of book-tracking
categorization can be seen in Figure C.8, which includes ”path of creation of the book (why
was it made)” and ”most common qualities of the authors whose work you read” in the
top spot. The former was an additional statistic that he personally suggested including.
When asked about why he would want to know about the authors he reads from, William
explained that having an overview of their educational background and work experience
would help him manage his expectations better and provide a sense of credibility of the
authors.
While he had never heard of the term ”book-tracking” previously, William shared with us
that he is interested in finding an app that tracks and does data collection for him. He
mentioned that he would especially like if the tracking could then inform the recommen-
dations he receives, which could say something along the lines of ”there’s a 70% chance
you will enjoy this book.”
Our second and final card sorting activity with William involved the influential factors during
book selection/discovery. As is visible in Figure C.9, he created six tiers for this activity,
with the highest ranked factors being:
• ”recommendations from friends, family, etc.”,
• ”online data-based recommendations for you”,
• ”written online reviews”.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
139
==PAGE:146==
Figure C.6: I2 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) interesting personal statistics
He subsequently added ”controversy attached,” a new factor, to his second tier as shown
in Figure C.10. Regarding controversial books, he told us, ”It’s completely new and com-
pletely opposite from standard literature... Is it good? Is it bad? I don’t know, but it also
caught my attention.”
We then asked William about how social he is when it comes to reading. In response, he
told us, ”it’s more of a personal experience.” He also said that he doesn’t often discuss
books with friends ”unless it’s motivational books, which are kind of popular right now,
then yeah, some of them we are discussing but not that much.”
In closing, William said that he’s generally not really interested in keeping a list of all his
past read books, but he would be interested in using a book-tracking platform for the
purposes of discovery and tracking.
I4 - Anna
Our fourth interview was with a 28 year old woman we’ll refer to as Anna. While she
mostly reads print books, Anna shared that she also occasionally reads audio-books or
borrows e-books for free using an app called Libby. Furthermore, she has recently started
to compound reading physical or e-books with the synchronized audio-book in order to
help her improve her focus and retention.
On average, Anna reads around one big book per month. She’s most interested in thriller
or suspense books, especially those with spies or war involved that she can then use to
learn something new. She also shared with us that reading in other languages has helped
her learn those languages. In terms of note-taking or annotating, Anna made it clear that
she refuses to mark up a print book, but will sometimes take photos or screenshots of
140
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:147==
Figure C.7: I2 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) influential factors of book
discovery
pages and digitally highlight important parts to refer to later. One of her biggest frustrations
she shared with us is her feeling that she cannot retain more information from the books
she has read.
When describing her reading habits, Anna often referred to her dad and brother, reflecting
on how much they have guided and influenced her as a reader. ”This year I asked my
older brother (he reads a lot - way more than I read - and my dad is also on another level)...
how can I start again,” she shared with us, ”because last year it was really hard to keep
up with a book.” She expressed that she always trusts their recommendations.
Anna began book-tracking in 2017 when she started reading more often by manually
updating a page in her phone’s notes app. She typically writes the title, the year in which
she read the book, and the author. Additionally, she keeps a want-to-read list in another
page of her notes app. ”I think for me it started as a challenge... How many books can
you actually read?” Now, she also uses her notes app to sometimes keep track of context
changes (like shifting between multiple time periods) in the books she reads. Rating a
book is also unnecessary to her because she often remembers more or less what the
book was about and how she felt about each one, especially if she sees the book cover.
Keeping a log has even helped her overcome reading slumps, because she knows if
she’s struggling, she can revisit one of her known favorite books to re-energize herself
once again.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
141
==PAGE:148==
Figure C.8: I3 card sorting results: most (A) to least (D) interesting personal statistics
In regards to the most interesting statistics card sorting activity, Anna’s personal ranking
is shown in Figure C.11. She formed only two categories, indicating a ”yes” on the right
and a ”no” on the left column. Among her ”yes” statistics included the ”path of creation of
the book (why was it made),” which she explained adds character to the book.
We also had her do the card sorting activity involving influential factors for book selec-
tion/discovery, in which she ranked ”book cover or title” and ”recommendations from
friends, family, etc.” among others in her top priority group, as seen in Figure C.12. She
also included ”availability of book” as a new addition to the assortment of cards, explaining
that because she uses a library-based app called Libby to borrow certain books, many
are not available at a given time, which leaves her needing to explore different options.
As we concluded the interview, Anna shared with us that her current approach to book-
tracking is somehow working well enough for her, but there are certain aspects that she
would like to know more about.
I5 - Oliver
Our fifth and final interview of the week was with Oliver, a 23 year old self-proclaimed
”newcomer” to the world of reading. Oliver shared that reading used to feel like a chore
to him until a few months ago when he set a new year’s resolution to read one book per
month. This drive led him to Goodreads and its built-in reading challenge feature. He
described to us that he ”started seeing it almost as a game. It’s just about getting that
percentage as high as possible. And then I started doing that more and more, and I found
that I actually enjoyed most of the books that I had read.” Now, he finds reading to be less
of a chore and more of a leisure activity, and he’s way ahead of schedule. ”It’s a habit
now even though it’s only been two months or something.”
Oliver checks Goodreads around once per day. He has even gotten some of his friends
on board, although he says he doesn’t usually share similar taste in books with them. For
142
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:149==
Figure C.9: I3 card sorting results: most (A) to least (F) influential factors of book
discovery
his needs, Oliver told us that Goodreads gets the job done and he would rate it five out of
five stars.
Because he uses a book-tracking app, we had Oliver do the card sorting activity that
involved categorizing common features based on his frequency of use. The resulting
three groups he created are displayed in Figure C.13. Although he told us he uses all of
them, Oliver’s most frequently used features included:
• ”rating/reviewing books you’ve read”,
• ”tracking different aspects of your reading habits”,
• ”reading reviews of other people”,
• ”discovering new books to read”,
• ”participating in reading challenges”,
• ”organizing the books you’ve read and want to read into collections”.
When asked how he would then rank these features based on enjoyment, he grouped
them as shown in Figure C.14, with ”participating in reading challenges” and ”tracking
different aspects of your reading habits” at the top. ”I love statistics...” he told us, ”It’s
interesting to see what kinds of patterns I follow.”
This led us into the next card sorting activity, which was to categorize a number of statistics
based on interest level. Figure C.15 showcases Oliver’s ranking. In the top category, he
included:
• ”average rating you’ve assigned to the books you’ve read”,
• ”total number of books/pages read each year”,
• ”most common qualitative trends among the books you’ve read”,
• ”how many different genres you’ve read (and which)”,
• total time you’ve spent reading”,
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
143
==PAGE:150==
Figure C.10: I3 card sorting results: ranking of ”controversy attached” card
• ”your average reading speed (and progress over time)”,
• ”your progress towards your self-set reading goal”.
Of the statistics in the bottom category, he said that it wasn’t that he did not care about
them, just that he was less interested in them than the others.
Our final card sorting activity with Oliver involved the influential factors for book selec-
tion/discovery, to which his thoughts are reflected in Figure C.16. He added a new card
to the assortment, which read, ”difficulty of reading (vocab, etc.)”, explaining that if the
writing style of a book is too advanced, he’s often discouraged from reading it and will
instead look for other options. He ranked this factor highly, along with the following:
• ”online data-based recommendations for you”,
• ”summaries or book descriptions”,
• ”the number of and average ratings”,
• ”author”,
• ”displays of similar books to what you’ve previously read”,
• ”genre”,
• ”written online reviews”,
• ”recommendations from friends, family, etc.”.
Overall, Oliver shared with us that he has been having a generally positive experience
using Goodreads and is grateful that he no longer views reading as a chore.
144
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:151==
Figure C.11: I4 card sorting results: least (B) to most (A) interesting personal statistics
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
145
==PAGE:152==
Figure C.12: I4 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) influential factors of book
discovery
146
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:153==
Figure C.13: I5 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) used features of book-tracking
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
147
==PAGE:154==
Figure C.14: I5 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) enjoyed features of
book-tracking (of his most used features)
148
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:155==
Figure C.15: I5 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) interesting personal statistics
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
149
==PAGE:156==
Figure C.16: I5 card sorting results: most (A) to least (C) influential factors of book
discovery
150
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:157==
D
User Research - Interviews - Interview
Notes
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
151
==PAGE:158==
Interview 1; Monday, 6.03, 14:00 
Reading habits: 
- 
Uni, work – before going to sleep, 30 mins, a chapter 
- 
Free time – more, in the morning 
- 
Reading amount – 3-5 books/month, reading a bit more or less every day, feels good with her usual 
reading time 
- 
Genres – free time, sci-fi; reading in transit – then something self-help, easy to read books which can 
be interrupted, also philosophy books 
- 
Devices – prefers physical book, uses Kindle, a lot on the phone, it’s more natural to read on the 
phone ex. On the metro; no audiobooks because of short attention span 
- 
Active reading – story, no annotations; noting some interesting, deep quotes; philosophy books 
involve placeholders/tabs; on Kindle it’s easier for her to highlight; physical have no markings 
- 
Reading setting/environment – usually in bed, in her parents quiet living room; enjoys reading in 
libraries 
Tracking: 
- 
Uses Goodreads for 4-5 years (comment: easy integration with Kindle), uses Libby borrow books 
from libraries 
o Reason for downloading - “I want to know what my friends read” 
- 
Adds to GR to remember what they read; also to make “to-do” reading list 
- 
Couldn’t really define book tracking, as it’s sort of obvious 
- 
Bookstores have so many books and it can be distracting when you want to buy something 
- 
Opens GR after reading the books, doesn’t want to be biased by reading review; doesn’t want to 
read spoilers or negative opinions 
- 
If a person she knows leaves a review, she can trust their opinion 
- 
Heard about Storygraph, but GR is fine and there’s no need to change 
- 
GR reviews are quite trustworthy; “if a book is above 3.5 stars, it’s good”; other apps don’t have that 
many users 
o BUT Online reviews can be biased because people are paid to write them, so not all of them are 
trustworthy 
- 
Amazon (as a big company) attracts people 
- 
GR Rating – 5, it’s good, it does everything she wants it to do 
- 
Usually uses website or the Kindle integrations 
 
Card sorting 1 – most/least frequently used features (and most/least liked) 
- 
Excluded from GR app– reading directly in the app  
- 
Added – reading reviews by other people; searching for books by author 
- 
--- TOP reading reviews, rating/reviewing books, seeing what friends are reading, discovering new 
books to read, organizing books into collections, finding books through author 
- 
--- MID: tracking habits, recommending books to others  
o Tracking is competitive 
==PAGE:159==
o Recommending she does through messaging friends rather than through the app 
- 
--- LOW participating in reading challenges 
- 
Reading shouldn’t be competition; tracking pages or speed is pointless; hates reading 
challenges; point of reading is to get new viewpoints, ideas; it’s not about the quantity, but 
about quality; she only checks the statistics from time to time to compete with her brother who 
uses the same device 
Card sorting 2 – most/least enjoyed features  
(1 being the most interesting) 
1. Reading reviews of other people 
2. Seeing what her friends are reading 
3. Finding books through the author 
4. Writing and reviewing the books you’ve read 
5. Discovering books is always very hard 
a. Apps recommend based on genre/author/category, BUT when you read a book about 
ex. sword fighting it’s not necessarily equally good in every book 
6. Organizing book into collections (she considers herself not very organized); after some time she 
can’t remember “why is book in this collection” 
a. Doesn’t know if GR has any tags system 
 
Cards sorting 3 – interesting statistics 
- 
--- TOP 
- 
Qualities of the authors 
o Trying to understand viewpoints of different people (authors; nationalities) 
- 
Most interesting genres 
o Trying NOT to read too much sci-fi to have some broader vision 
- 
Common trends about the books 
o It’s nice to know general info about the things you read 
- 
--- MID 
- 
Reading speed – if it shows you when you finish the book with the current reading speed, you 
can plan, that’s nice [this data comes from Kindle] 
- 
Rating the book – you can recall your own feelings about the book 
- 
Added - compare your rating VS others (“other people enjoyed it more than me”) 
- 
--- LOW  
- 
publications dates; doesn’t care 
- 
Progress towards reading goal 
- 
Total time spent reading 
- 
# of books/pages read 
 
Card sorting 4 
==PAGE:160==
- 
----- TOP 
- 
Author 
o You like one author writing style, you’re likely to like the other books 
o You like authors subject 
- 
Summaries 
o Just easiest way to understand what’s the book about 
- 
Samples 
o to understand the writing style (checks any part of the book, not necessarily the first 
pages); spoilers are not a big problem 
- 
Social Media 
o “bookstagram”, Booktube, TikTok, some books are overhyped, but whatever 
- 
Friends recommendations 
o opposite friends – when they recommend, DON’T read; knows that some people have 
bias, so that’s not important 
o after reading the same books with friends you can talk about them 
o used to follow (strangers) people; people can get obsessed about the book; some 
“incident” and then just started sticking to her friends 
o Finding people with very similar people – prefers to stick to her close friends 
o Her friend – made connections with people all over the world with similar friends 
- 
Ratings 
- 
----- MID 
- 
Book clubs 
o Go by themes, which are nice, but sometimes recommended books are not that great 
(not the books I would choose);  
o feminism bookclub – theme is good, but recommended books not really good; just non-
fiction, social justice etc. 
- 
Genre 
o Looks at it, but not that important (hates romantic books) 
o “but if it’s a good written book, then I just read it” 
- 
Online (other) recommendations 
o Sometimes she gives it a shot 
o Recommending similar good books after each other doesn’t work, as it changes 
expectations 
o Sometimes, she would read a recommended book at first and not like it but then she 
rereads it years later and loved it 
▪ 
Each time you read a book, it’s still a different book, in a way  
• 
You will experience it totally differently  
- 
Online reviews 
o Trust? 
- 
----- LOW 
- 
Similar books 
o It just doesn’t matter 
- 
Book cover/title 
o Can be clickbait-y 
==PAGE:161==
o Doesn’t like kitschy marketing with super cool covers or titles 
o Ick 
- 
Book length 
o Doesn’t matter 
- 
Best seller lists 
o All of the books are on some “bestseller” lists, so it’s not reliable 
 
 
What makes the book “great” for you? 
- 
Writing style TOP TOP 
- 
Subject (w/o good writing style, it’s just “flat”) 
Seeing what your favorite authors are reading 
- 
If author is in Goodreads, they don’t know if they want to read their books (joking, but well) 
- 
Author still may have different tastes than her 
- 
Reading what her favorite authors read – haven’t tried, but maybe wants to actually try it 
 
Design time   
- 
Reading challenges  
o now it’s just number of books, but it would be more interesting [about book 
subscriptions] to have a challenge ex. Based on the author nationality (14:47) 
o Also maybe a challenge to read NEWLY published books that aren’t well known yet 
- 
Recommending 
o Recommending some new, unknown authors 
o Talking on GR is not really great; just uses Messenger 
- 
Writing reviews after reading the books 
o Keywords recommendation – take keywords from the review and summarize them 
under the review 
- 
Searching books by keywords/tags? 
o Uses different search engines for fan fiction (name around 14:50); keywords word there 
nicely 
- 
Tracking 
o Doesn’t care much about sharing “wrapped” thing, but guesses many people would like 
it; would like to see other peoples wrapped 
o Doesn't care about her statistics, but it would be interesting to see other people’s  
- 
Privacy  
o Doesn’t like being too public about her life, so would like to post sometimes more 
privately; also to avoid fights 
- 
Collections  
==PAGE:162==
o doesn’t care about organizing; leaves it for her brother to do; gives the collections to her 
family when they ask her what to buy 
o “if it was easier, maybe I would care more” 
o Would be nice to prioritize TBR list and make notes about why the book is in the TBR list 
- 
Writing a review and rating  
o would like to give .5 star ratings;  
o some filtering through reviews would be better (review age-likes ratio) 
▪ 
Some OLD reviews have many likes over time so they’re always the ones 
shown.. 
▪ 
Idea: trending reviews?? 
==PAGE:163==
Interview 2; Tuesday, 7.03, 11:00 
Reading habits: 
• 
Always reading a book, doesn’t have to finish one per month 
• 
Usually 12-13 per year 
• 
Sometimes reads multiple books at once 
o Usually, one normal book, another as audiobook 
• 
Genre – fiction 
• 
Reads audiobooks, usually print books, also has a Kindle 
• 
When starts something, then reads every day, in the evening, after dinner, on the bus, 
audiobooks while cleaning 
• 
Active reading – never any notes or anything 
• 
Good books = keeps her interested, writing style, “Addicting”, “I couldn’t have written it myself”, 
then I’m impressed 
Book tracking 
• 
Book tracking – likes having this “checked  ” book in Goodreads; sense of achievement; likes 
seeing all the books she’s read; likes browsing and looking for new books 
• 
How often – when starts a book, after finishing, once a month to look for something new 
• 
Only desktop app 
• 
Since 2012-2013 
• 
Friends use it, but not that much, so she feels sort of embarrassed as if she is spamming them 
• 
Follows random people with similar taste; 
o Trusts reviews of people who had similar feelings about the books as herself 
• 
Doesn’t know about other tracking apps 
• 
Rating GR – doesn’t know about any other options, some things are annoying, so 4 
• 
What’s annoying/not using – scrolling the feed (not used), doesn’t track her friends 
o Social part of GR is not really needed 
o Doesn’t use groups 
Card sorting (8:10) – most/least frequently used features 
• 
Removed – reading or listening to books directly in the app 
• 
Maybe – recommending books to others (unsure if it’s there),  
• 
Added - monthly trending books, choice awards 
• 
----- TOP 
• 
Challenges/goals 
o Nice to have in the back of your mind 
o Usually sets herself a realistic goal 
o Before studying she used to set it higher, ex 30 
• 
Discovering new books to read 
• 
----- MID HIGH 
• 
Reading reviews of others 
==PAGE:164==
• 
Finding books through the author 
• 
Tracking reading habits 
• 
--- MID LOW 
• 
Monthly trending books 
o Sometimes looks through them accidentally 
• 
Rating own books 
o Just for herself to remember years later if she liked it 
• 
Choice awards 
o Sometimes looks through them accidentally 
• 
--- LOW 
• 
Organizing books you’ve read/Want to read 
• 
Seeing what your friends are reading 
o She prefers to talk to her friends about that 
• 
Recommending books to others 
Card sorting (15:20) – most/least enjoyed features (the same as previous) 
• 
She’s been using GR for so long that it’s hard to gauge them this way 
Improvements 
• 
GR is very English-based, it’s harder to find local (here:  Danish) books 
• 
Book choice awards are also only among British/American stuff 
Tracking 
• 
Doesn’t care about how much time in general, but sometimes it might be interesting why it took 
so long 
• 
Likes to know WHEN she read a book 
• 
Organizing in different categories is sometimes confusing (?) 
o There’s a weird behavior – when adding two different editions of a book, it shows it as 
two separate entries 
o It’s weird how it shows up when you read some book twice 
Card sorting (18:30; 21:00) – statistics  
• 
--- TOP 
• 
How many (and which) different genres she’s read 
• 
Qualitative trends about the books you’ve read 
• 
Progress towards you reading goal 
• 
Avg rating you’ve assigned 
o it might be interesting to see that “oh, this year I wasn’t reading too good books” 
• 
--- MID HIGH 
• 
Total number of books/pages you’ve read 
• 
Your rating VS other people rating 
• 
--- MID LOW 
• 
Most common publication dates 
==PAGE:165==
o never thought of looking at that 
• 
Total time you’ve spent reading 
• 
Qualities of the authors 
o Info about the author doesn’t matter 
• 
--- BOTTOM 
• 
Avg reading speed 
o Doesn’t care about time, speed etc. 
o It’s not a “job”, just 4fun activity 
• 
In general, statistics are not that important for her 
• 
No other special statistic which she can think of 
Card sorting (23:50; 25:50) – factors to consider while choosing a book 
• 
----- TOP 
• 
Similar books 
o GR functionality 
o Audiobooks… 
• 
Written online reviews 
o What is a good review – “short, 1 star” – doesn’t care; if she follows someone who reads 
a lot, then trusts them more  
o She doesn’t only read books that have reviews by people she follows, but it does 
influence her a lot 
• 
Best seller list 
o Influence her mainly because they are always “on display” 
• 
Recommendations from friends/family 
o Sometimes recommendations are wrong 
o It’s nice you can talk with them about the books 
o It’s nice to have this shared experience 
o Likes talking with friends about them 
o Reading at the same time – they message each other 
o Reading at different times – they just talk after both know the book 
• 
--- MID 
• 
Book clubs 
o With friends 
o Very informal; just agree to read a book together and talk about it 
• 
Genre 
o If there’s genre she really likes, then she’ll seek it out, such as ancient Greek mythology 
• 
Author 
o She may follow some authors on Instagram and see if they write something else 
o Used to check what her fav authors are reading, not anymore 
• 
Number or ratings/Avg rating 
o They can positively influence her, but it doesn’t bother her if they are low 
• 
Summaries/Book descriptions 
• 
--- LOW 
==PAGE:166==
• 
Samples of the books 
o Never does it, too long 
• 
Social media 
o Avoid Instagram etc. because it feels like they might be sponsored 
• 
Data based recommendations 
o She’ll look at them once in a while, but it’s not a big factor for her 
• 
Book cover/title 
• 
Length 
o Esp. not important in case of audiobooks 
Book discovery 
• 
Amazon 
o It’s easy to order instantly with Kindle 
• 
On GR, you have to know the name beforehand 
• 
Searching on GR feels kind of old 
• 
She likes book discovery process on her audiobook app more 
==PAGE:167==
Interview 3; Tuesday, March 7, 2023, 12:00 
23, male 
Reading habits 
• 
Mostly home & travelling 
• 
Mostly computer or e-book 
• 
Rarely printed books 
• 
Apart from uni stuff, once or twice a week 
• 
Mostly articles (up to ex. 10 pages) instead of normal books 
• 
Books per year – around 8 from start to finish, frequently starts and doesn’t finish 
• 
Genres – biography, literature of fact, rarely sci-fi/fantasy (used to be more), many popular 
science math books, biotech books, statistics in poker games, controversial books 
• 
Ex. 80% digital, 20% printed 
• 
Doesn’t like reading on phone 
• 
Likes audiobooks, just doesn’t listens to them to often; switched mostly to podcasts 
• 
Active reading – rarely, sometimes keywords; if it’s something interesting he switches to 
internet and looks for more information 
• 
Amount of reading – he wished he read more, especially normal books; articles are fine but they 
are a bit too specific/limited 
• 
Hard to find a book about a subject he is actually interested in 
o Ex. Poker – many books about psychology there, but not much about statistics 
o He can’t get the idea of the book from the title or the short description; doesn’t matter 
that much with fiction books, but important for non-fiction books 
o Rarely reading overviews of the books 
• 
Good book = writing style, simplicity – if it’s some science book, he likes simple and clear 
explanations “explain it to me like I’m 5” 
o For sci-fi/fantasy – it’s mostly topic, likes surprising books, the more mystery the better 
Tracking 
• 
Doesn’t use anything to track past books 
• 
Doesn’t know why he doesn’t track 
• 
Small “TODO” reading list (now: 2 books) 
o Recommended by someone 
o Simply noted it down in his phone 
• 
New books 
o Recommendations by someone 
o Internet forums 
o Rarely picks a book just by going to the store (ex. by title) 
o If really needs a problem to be solved by a book, then it takes him a week to find the 
correct one 
o Recommended by friends/good sources are usually good 
o Overall book selection satisfaction is about 50% or less 
==PAGE:168==
▪ 
Recommendations can be based off of sth else than what he’s actually looking 
for 
o Sometimes doesn’t know himself what is he looking for in the book (14:30) 
o The books are broad and they don’t have the exact thing he’s looking for 
Card sorting (16:15; 18:20) – choosing a book 
• 
--- LEAST 
• 
Author 
• 
Book club 
• 
--- MID LEAST 
• 
Genre 
o Not that important, unless super interested in some specific area (1900) 
• 
Sample 
o Not important 
• 
Book summary 
o Moved from middle to the end (2000) 
• 
--- MID LOW 
• 
Book cover/title 
• 
--- MID MID 
• 
Best seller list 
o Very rarely 
• 
Social media 
• 
Avg rating/Number of ratings 
o Very rarely 
• 
--- MID HIGH 
• 
Displays of similar books 
• 
Book length 
o Too long are not good 
• 
Added – controversy (he likes controversial books) 
o Book with different opinion from the standard are particularly interesting 
• 
--- TOP 
• 
Recommendations from friends 
• 
Recommendations from data 
• 
Reviews 
Random stuff (a.k.a. social questions) 
• 
Giving recommendations – he sometimes recommends books he finds particularly interesting 
o Always just by talking 
• 
Following friends 
o It would be interesting for some of them 
• 
Discussing books with friends 
o Sometimes, but not really that much 
o It’s more of a personal experience 
==PAGE:169==
o Never about sci-fi books 
o About motivational books; discussed about them a bit 
• 
After reading the books 
o Only finishes good books (8-10), usually they are < 200 pages 
o When does, then re-reads them, makes some notes 
o Unfinished ones – sometimes 2nd chance 
▪ 
Sometimes works if his perspective/experience change, but not always 
▪ 
2nd attempt is shorter, then give up 
▪ 
2nd try is always from the beginning; doesn’t remember after a break 
• 
Active reading 
o Keywords, mind-maps, but very rarely  
o He knows about note-taking approach with reading, but doesn’t do that 
▪ 
[mentioned earlier] he still researches ex. internet when some topic is 
particularly interesting 
Tracking 
• 
Used to track how long it took to read a book 
o Trying to see how long it takes when doing other stuff, like studying 
• 
Mostly tends to track when there’s more going on in his life in general 
o Otherwise, he feels more relaxed about it and doesn’t want to track 
• 
Mostly reads in transit 
• 
Now doesn’t track time spent 
Card sorting (3230) – statistics 
• 
--- LOW 
• 
Publications dates 
• 
Reading speed 
o He used to track this until he learned [below] 
o Reading faster is effective, but it ruins the fun and lowers the comprehension 
• 
Progress towards reading goal 
• 
Total time spent reading 
o If you are reading for fun, it might make it more stressful 
• 
--- MID LOW 
• 
Total number of books/pages 
• 
Your rating VS other people rating 
• 
Avg rating assigned to the books you’ve read 
• 
--- MID HIGH 
• 
How many different (and which) genres 
o Number of genres – just interesting, but not influencing anything 
• 
Qualitative trends of the books you’ve read 
• 
--- TOP 
• 
Added – path of creation of the books 
• 
Qualities of the authors 
==PAGE:170==
o Author background etc – helps with understanding why authors write like they write; 
helps with managing expectations 
o More about education, works experience 
o Nationality/demographics doesn’t matter 
o It’s not about getting broader point of view, more about “credibility” of the authors 
o All of the above would affect his choices only if he noticed a trend between author info 
a book satisfaction 
• 
Publication date doesn’t matter 
o Buuuut always looks at the newest revisions 
• 
No other stats needed 
Book tracking 
• 
Never heard the term before 
• 
Book tracking = all of the stats together 
• 
Was looking for an app that does data collection for him 
• 
It would be really nice if using all of the stats they could recommend (“70% you’ll like it”) 
• 
Some reading assistant which learns your preferences over time 
• 
Likes poker because his first book was good… and then many of them were bad 
• 
[Often mentioned scientific books] 
• 
He wants to know more about the book than just the overview 
o Ex. keywords (more detailed) 
• 
He would be rating/reviewing books if it were to help his recommendations 
• 
Wouldn’t probably use book tracking for past books 
 
 
==PAGE:171==
Interview 4; Thursday, March 8, 2023, 11:30 
28, female 
Reading habits 
• 
Physical books mostly 
• 
When moving, reading online, uses dad’s account on Kindle 
• 
Also audiobooks 
• 
Usually tries to borrow books from library, often uses Libby 
• 
Sometimes also gets free books from Apple Books 
• 
Easily distracted – sometimes read + audiobooks at the same time, as it helps her to focus 
o Started recently and significantly helped her 
• 
Audiobooks while biking 
• 
Blinkist – chooses books/podcasts based on your interests; she’s just trying it out right now 
o Tried one recommendation and is listening it right now on Libby 
• 
Both on the phone and tablet (tablet in her home); audiobooks from the phone 
• 
If the same book is for both devices, uses it on Libby, so it’s not spread between different apps 
• 
One big book per month  
• 
Audiobooks – 30 mins one way to uni, 30 mins back 
o When she’s distracted on the bike and misses something, usually restarts the whole 
section (at least for self-help, leadership book) 
o If she has a physical copy, she would also scan it at home 
o She has to be intentional 
o Gets distracted while cleaning etc., so listening doesn’t work that well 
• 
Genre – thrill/suspense books, spies, war (realistic, down to the ground) 
o Likes learning more about stuff from books 
• 
Fiction in Spanish, non-fiction in English 
• 
Likes short audiobooks by some Spanish author GGM 
o Short stories helped her to go back into reading 
• 
Reading in different language helped her learn the language 
o It was hard to focus and frustrating to read in English  
o While preparing to TOEFL she read a lot in English 
o Likes learning language from books in general 
• 
Active reading 
o Never touches books themselves 
o Notes things on her phone 
o Learns new words (in her native language) from reading 
o Takes notes by taking screenshots and highlighting the important parts 
o Researching more about the topic during breaks in reading 
• 
Amount of reading – tries to read at least one book per month 
• 
She gets frustrated when she doesn’t remember more information from the books 
• 
Would like to read more and retain more information 
• 
Reads in the morning or in the evening after coming back home 
==PAGE:172==
• 
It’s more practical to use digital tools than printed books 
• 
Talking about books with her brothers and dad 
o Asked her dad how to re-start reading habit 
o Got recommended to start with the Spanish author (short books) 
o For reviews, she asks her dad, as he reads a lot 
• 
Great book = book that forces the reader to come to the conclusion themselves; she likes feeling 
realistic books, when she can connect with the characters more 
o She unexpectedly enjoyed self-help book 
o Likes realistic books which can be “researched” around 
o Didn’t like – book about ML King; weird; frustrating; jumping between events (dates) 
and hard to keep track of the events; she doesn’t like books that take a long time to say 
on thing 
• 
Tracking 
o Started in 2017 
o Started reading a lot when she got older 
o Started reading a lot in university because of the big library available there 
o Tracks her reading manually on the phone 
▪ 
Categorizes by year and book title 
▪ 
Started w/o the author, now it’s also there 
o Has her TO-READ list on the phone as well 
o Started tracking as a challenge for herself 
o She remembers more or less the content and especially the covers 
o She used to force herself to finish, but not anymore 
o She uses notes to keep track of the context (year changes) throughout the book 
o She sometimes rereads books that she loved to get back into reading 
• 
She pays as much attention as possible when reading 
• 
Likes to read in the morning before starting her day 
• 
When she takes a break from reading, it’s difficult for her to start again 
• 
She likes to write something (helps with feeling overwhelmed) 
• 
Used inspiration from the books she read to write a speech at her brother’s wedding 
• 
Looking for new books 
o Instagram – from various pages; saves/bookmarks book recommendations on Instagram 
o NY Times – most read books from long time ago (ex. 2012, 2013) so they are likely free 
abd available on Libby  
o Libby – ex. just random Spanish ones, as there are not that many available   
Card sorting (3100-3340)  
• 
--- TOP 
• 
Book title/cover 
o If the title/cover is very good, she can just pick the book w/o considering anything else 
o If the cover has something she can relate to, it’s easier for her to imagine  
o Bad cover doesn’t eliminate the book 
o They are more important the author 
o If both of them are bad, then maybe check the description 
==PAGE:173==
o Worked with one of her favorite book (just by title, didn’t read the description) 
• 
Samples 
o Done several times 
o Tries the first chapter; sometimes leaves it for later if it doesn’t work 
• 
Summaries 
o Description (not summaries; no spoilers) 
o Often doesn’t finish reading the whole description, so no spoilers 
• 
SM 
• 
Online data based recommendations 
• 
Written online reviews 
• 
Recommendations from people 
o Dad, brother know a lot; similar likes, so it’s probably matching her preference 
o With some friends; trusts them more than online reviews 
• 
Added – book availability 
o She moves a lot, so she doesn’t like buying them 
• 
--- MID 
• 
Similar books 
• 
Best sellers 
o It’s some option, but it’s more about what she wants to read, not the popularity 
• 
--- LOW 
• 
Author 
o Not relevant 
o Tried that 2 times (searching for another book by the same author), but it didn’t work 
• 
Genre 
o Doesn’t classify them at all 
• 
Controversy 
o Never thought about that 
• 
Number/Avg rating 
o Happened that book has good rating, but is boring 
• 
Book length 
o Good book can be super long 
• 
Book club 
o Never been in one 
Random 
• 
Doesn’t document the book, because she remembers enough without notes 
• 
Doesn’t write book reviews to avoid being biased if she rereads them 
• 
Rereading – not often, but when she wanted to get into reading a lot again, she restarts with 
books she likes 
Tracking 
• 
How long 
• 
Libby sort of does it, as the rental period is limited 
==PAGE:174==
o The limits is slightly stressing her out 
o She rarely finishes by the deadline; often has to renew 
• 
If it’s unlimited, then she tracks 
Card sorting – statistics (4700- 
• 
TOP 
o Path of creation 
▪ 
It’s just amazing 
▪ 
It adds character to the book 
o Qualities of the books 
▪ 
Helps with recommendations 
▪ 
Also can be helpful to know if you’re just reading the same type of book over 
and over 
o Avg rating 
▪ 
It could be interesting to just see how you liked the book 5 years ago 
▪ 
She cares about friends rating more than strangers 
o Total number of pages 
▪ 
She would like it very much 
o Number of books 
o Publication dates 
▪ 
Just curiosity 
o Progress towards reading goal 
▪ 
Doesn’t have a systematical way of doing it right now 
o Added – highlighting passages and storing them in ex. profile 
• 
MID 
• 
LOW 
o Total time 
▪ 
Doesn’t work, sometimes not focused, it takes longer 
o Qualities of the authors 
▪ 
It might be interesting, but doesn’t impact her, she doesn’t look for that 
o Reading speed 
▪ 
More discouraging  
o Ratings comparison 
▪ 
Prefers to ask somebody she knows 
o Number of genres 
▪ 
Not really tracking them 
Related apps 
• 
Haven’t looked for that too much 
• 
It would be interesting 
The current approach is working somehow, but there are some things she would like to know more 
about 
==PAGE:175==
Interview 5; Thursday, 8 March 8, 2023, 13:00 
Sebastian, 23, male 
Reading habits 
• 
“Newcomer” 
• 
It was a chore for him 
• 
He wants to read more 
• 
New years resolution to read one book per month 
• 
Got caught up by a book 
• 
He found GR and the challenge thing 
• 
He treats it as a game 
• 
He enjoys it and is ahead of his schedule 
• 
Genre – fiction, thrillers, sci-fi 
• 
Print books only, wants to try audiobooks, doesn’t like screen and he likes to see how far he is in 
the book 
• 
Reads every day before sleeping 
• 
Active reading – not doing any of that, too much work; maybe if he’ll get into non-fiction 
• 
Reading amount – it’s fine now, but sometimes he wishes he had more time 
• 
Good book = how believable is the book; immersive; 
o He read two books by the same author – one cool, another one not 
Goodreads 
• 
Started GR recently (January) by random Googling & reddit 
• 
Mostly app 
o Although there are more things on the website 
o But app has the most important things 
• 
How often – pretty often; quick look once per day 
• 
Challenges with his friend; he made use it as well 
• 
Talking with friends 
o Challenge 4 fun 
o They don’t have any common books 
o They have different book taste 
• 
Doesn’t know any other apps (forgot name of the app right now) 
• 
Rating – nothing wrong, so 5 
o You can’t add own book manually 
Card sorting – most/least frequently used features (1130-1510) 
• 
Uses all of them 
• 
--- TOP 
• 
Rating/reviewing 
o Just likes to keep an overview; for every book 
• 
Tracking aspects 
==PAGE:176==
• 
Reading reviews 
o Discovering books he might want to read 
• 
Discovering 
• 
Challenges 
o Personal challenge for him 
• 
Organizing into collections 
o Helps with keeping track of what he read 
• 
--- MID 
• 
Seeing friends 
• 
Books through authors 
o Looks at the books themselves 
• 
--- LOW 
• 
Choice awards 
o Did it once, didn’t vote 
Card sorting – most/least enjoyed features (2000-2130) 
• 
Tracking & reading goal 
o He likes it and is sort of exciting 
• 
Organizing & discovering books 
o Fun, but top is funnier 
• 
Reviewing/reading reviews 
o It’s just useful, not super exciting 
o Ways to distinguish between spoilers/non-spoilers 
Card sorting – tracking statistics (2300- 
• 
--- TOP 
• 
Avg rating 
• 
Diff genres 
• 
Progress towards reading goal 
• 
Qualitative trends among the books 
o Just likes to know the patterns 
o Maybe I spend 99% of time sci-fi, thriller, maybe I should try sth else 
• 
Avg Reading speed 
o Seeing progress 
• 
Total time spent 
• 
Total number of books/pages 
• 
--- MID 
• 
Rating comparison 
• 
Path of creation 
• 
Highlighting passages 
• 
--- LOW 
• 
Qualities of the authors 
• 
Publication dates 
==PAGE:177==
He really enjoys statistics in general 
- 
Idea to track how “explorative” readers are (how far from their normal tastes) 
Qualitative challenges – maybe too many challenges would ruin the fun 
• 
Might help coming out of the comfort zone, but don’t overdo it 
 
Card sorting – book choosing factors (3150-3 
• 
--- TOP 
• 
Author 
o Reads about the author themselves and their style 
• 
Genre 
• 
Number of avg ratings 
o Ex. 3.5 rating makes him skeptical 
• 
Online Reviews 
o Still checks the reviews 
• 
Data based recommendations 
o Used that and that worked  
• 
Summaries/descriptions 
• 
Similar books 
• 
Recommendations from friends/family 
o Not that many yet, but they worked 
o Gets recommended some classics 
o Doesn’t talk much about them 
• 
Added - readability 
o It’s frustrating to read book with old vocab and check ex. phone all the time 
• 
--- MID 
• 
Availability 
o English book might be harder to get in Danish library 
o You cant read books you can’t get 
• 
Book cover/title 
o Gets initial attention 
o Bad cover doesn’t matter that much 
• 
--- LOW 
• 
Controversy 
o Doesn’t care 
• 
Samples 
o Too vague 
• 
Best sellers 
o Just doesn’t care 
• 
Social media 
• 
Book club 
==PAGE:178==
o Just a concept with a friend 
• 
Book length 
o Doesn’t matter 
 
Improvements 
- 
Adding books which isn’t yet in the app 
- 
Doesn’t look for Danish books that much (at least for now) 
o But usually he didn’t find anything 
- 
GR – I like it, Idk why I haven’t heard of it before 
o GR made reading much more fun instead of chore 
==PAGE:179==
E
User Research - Interviews - User Journey
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
173
==PAGE:180==
READING AMOUNT
30 min per day
3/5 books per month
2 
reads 12-13 books/year
reads at home or traveling 
once or twice a week
Reads mostly physical 
books
Recently started reading. 
It used to be a chore for 
him.
WHEN THEY REAe
n if busy with uni, work = 
before bel
n if free time = in the 
morning
GENRES
scifi 
self-help
philosophy
whe commuting, likes to 
read books that are more 
easily interrupted (less 
attention required)
DEVICES/PLATFOR¾
n prefers mostly print 
book¶
n some Kindle table¨
n sometimes phone 
when on the train
ACTIVE READINÝ
n notes some quotes 

Non-fictioná
n uses tabs for 
placeholding
Annotates digitally but 
NOT print
Goodreads user for 4-5 
years
uses Goodreads because 
it easily integrates with 
Kindle
Uses Libby
started using GR to see 
what friends are reading
Bookstores can be 
overwhelming with so 
many books so its difficult 
to find something
Doesn’t want to be spoiled 
or biased by reading GR 
reviews before reading 
the book
Trusts friends’ reviews of 
books way more than 
strangers
Believes GR reviews are 
trustworthy because there 
are so many users
Acknowledges that some 
online reviews seem like 
they’ve been bought
GR rating - 5
It does everything she 
wants it to do
Uses GR as website
tracking is competitive
recommends books to 
others through messaging 
rather than the app
organization system is not 
intuitive, tedious, and hard 
to keep up with
doesn’t like the 
recommendation 
algorithm
Most interesting statisticsÆ
n qualities of the author¶
n genre¶
n trends of books
Mid interesting statisticsÆ
n reading speel
n avg rating of booÙ
n comparing your rating 
vs others
Least interesting 
statisticsÆ
n publication date¶
n reading goal¶
n total tim
n number of books/
pages
Wants to know author 
qualities to understand 
viewpoints of different 
people
Wants to expand her 
genre list
reading speed - if it 
estimates when you will 
finish the book, it can be 
great to plan
rating can help you 
remember how you felt 
about a book
Most important discovery 
factorsÆ
n authoW
n sumarie¶
n sample¶
n social mediM
n friend rec¶
n ratings
Less important discovery 
factorsÆ
n book clu_
n genreá
n online rec¶
n online reviews
Least important discovery 
factorsÆ
n similar book¶
n cover/titl
n lengtx
n bestsellers
Really likes writing style, 
so likes to find books 
through favorite authors
Reads sample of middle of 
book to understand 
writing style
social mediaá
n IÝ
n youtub
n TikTok

overhyped but whatever
likes to discuss books 
with friends (if they’ve 
also read)
doesn’t follow strangers; 
only friends
bookclubs are nice
changes perspectives 
after some years which 
can completely change 
perception of book
cover and title can be 
clickbaity
bestseller lists are not 
reliable
great book = writing style 
(1) and subject
would be interested in 
seeing what SOME 
authors are reading
idea to see keywords from 
reviews
wants a better search 
engine
would be interested in 
better privacy settings
Doesn’t care about 
organizing better
Wants .5 star ratings
wants better review 
filtering (show trending 
reviews, not just the most 
liked)
2 
genre - fiction
2 
platform¶
n usually print book¶
n audiobook¶
n kindle
2 
audiobooks while cleaning
2 
“good” booksá
n writing styl
n engaging
2 
uses GR to get the 
checked boxes; sense of 
achievement
2 
likes browsing new books 
on GR
2 
uses GR only desktop


long time user
2 
feels embarrassed about 
spamming friends
2 
trusts reviews of people 
with the same tastes as 
her
2 
GR rating - 4
2 
doesn’t scroll the feed or 
track her friends

2 
social aspect is not 
needed
2 
likes reading goals (one 
her most used features)
2 
sometimes looks through 
monthly trending books & 
choice awards by 
accident (mid-low used 
feature)
2
rating books helps her 
remember how she felt 
about a book (mid-low 
used feature)
2
prefers to talk to friends 
about books in person 
(seeing friend book 
updates is not used 
feature)
2
not enough local (danish; 
new) books on GR
2
likes to know when she 
read a book
2
organizing sucks 
(categories$
n multiple editions are 
flawed
2
wants to know aggregate 
ratings over the years to 
see if one year she read 
shitty books
2
reading is not a job - 
doesn’t want to know 
reading speed
2
doesn’t like statistics in 
general
2
bestseller lists are easily 
accessible so they 
influence her book choice
likes to discuss books and 
have a shared experience
2
likes to create informal 
book club to agree on a 
book to read and talk 
about
2
likes to browse in 
preferred genres for new 
books
2
doesn’t read samples of 
the books because it 
takes too long
2
avoids social media recs 
because they seem 
sponsored
2
likes to discover books 
through amazon because 
she can quickly order to 
kindle
2
search process sucks
readings on computer or 
e-books, rarely printed 
books
around 8 books per year, 
but frequently starts and 
doesn’t finish
preferred genres: 
biography, literature of 
fact, science, rarely sci-fi, 
some poker
doesn’t like reading on 
phone
Wishes he read more 
normal books
Finds it difficult to find 
books that he is really 
interested in
active reading - rarely but 
sometimes keywords & 
mindmaps; if something is 
interesting he switches to 
internet to do additional 
research
Rarely reads overviews of 
books
Doesn’t feel like he can 
get the idea of the book 
from the title or short 
description (non-fiction 
books)
to him, a good book = 
writing style and 
simplicity/clarity (non-
fiction)

ex. science books ELIF
a good sci-fi/fantasy book 
is mostly about the topic 
and the mystery or plot 
twists
Keeps a small TBR list in 
the notes app of his phone
Doesn’t track past books 
and doesn’t know why he 
doesn’t
his TBR list usually 
includes books that have 
been recommended by 
someone
Finds new books usually 
through 
recommendations, 
internet forums
If he really needs a 
problem to be solved by a 
book, then it takes him a 
week to find the correct 
one
Rarely picks a book just by 
going to the store (ex. by 
title)
Usually tries to use library 
& Libby
Listens to audiobooks 
while biking, ex. to and 
from uni, so 60 mins a day
Reads & listens to 
audiobooks at the same 
time to help with focus
Uses both phone and 
tablet for digital reading
Reads around 1 big book 
per month
Thrill/suspense books; 
realistic & down to the 
ground
Has to be fully focused 
while listening to 
audiobooks, so NOT 
during ex. cleaning
Likes learning (general 
knowledge & languages) 
from the books
Likes short stories on 
audiobooks
Doesn’t annotate etc. 
physical books
Reading in English helped 
her learn the language
Takes notes about the 
books on the phone
Great book = one which 
forces the reader to think 
and come to conclusions 
themselves; she likes 
feeling connection to the 
characters (realistic)
Likes being fully focused 
while reading
Best sellers lists can 
affect choice a bit, but it’s 
more about the book itself

MID of book choice 
factors
Book qualities help with 
recommendations and 
knowing if you’re just 
reading the same type of 
books over and over

TOP of interesting 
statistics
Dives deeper in the books 
topics after/between 
reading
Books which take long 
time to say one thing are 
frustrating to her
Looks for new books on 
Instagram, NY Times lists, 
Libby
Choosing book by author 
didn’t work too well

LOW of book choice 
factors
Avg rating - it might be 
interesting to see own 
rating from 5 years ago

TOP of interesting 
statistics
Reads in the morning or 
evening after coming back 
home
Tracks books manually on 
her phone since 2017 
(past and TO-READ)
Occasionally reads sample 
of the first chapter

TOP of book choice 
factors
Doesn’t write book 
reviews
Highlighting and storing 
quotes/passages would 
be very interesting

TOP of interesting 
statistics
Would like to read more 
and remember more from 
the books
Doesn’t like books which 
jump between events/
dates
Cover/Title are more 
important than the author

TOP of book choice 
factors
Doesn’t document the 
book; just remembers 
what happened and that’s 
enough
Progress towards reading 
goal - doesn’t have any 
way to do it right now

TOP of interesting 
statistics
Finds digital tools more 
practical than printed 
books
Sometimes rereads the 
books she liked
Doesn’t force herself to 
finish the books if it’s bad
Sometimes reads the 
book description, but 
never summaries to avoid 
spoilers

TOP of book choice 
factors
Occasionally tracks how 
long it took to read a book
Author qualities - might be 
interesting, but doesn’t 
impact her in any way

LOW of interesting 
statistics
Finds recommendations 
from her brother and dad 
very valuable. Friends are 
also helpful
Uses notes to keep track 
of the book if it’s 
complicated
Book covers and titles are 
important for her

Nice cover helps her 
imagine the story/content
Finds book availability 
important when choosing 
it; she prefers borrowing 
them from libraries to 
buying

TOP of book choice 
factors
Finds path of creating of 
the book amazing; it adds 
character to the book

TOP of interesting 
statistics
She doesn’t know about 
other apps/methods than 
the current one
His overall book selection 
satisfaction is about 50% 
or less

Many books don’t have 
exactly what he’s looking 
for (too broad)
Sometimes he doesn’t 
even know what he’s 
looking for in a book
Mid important factors 
when choosing a book:
mid lo
n book cover/title
mid mil
n best seller lis¨
n social mediM
n avg rating/# of ratings
mid higx
n displays of similar 
book¶
n book lengthá
n controversy
Least important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n authoW
n book club
(mid least below$
n genr
n sampl
n book summary
Most important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n recommendations from 
friend¶
n recommendations from 
datM
n reviews
Genre is not that 
important to him unless he 
is super interested in 
some specific area
He is less interested in 
books that are too long
Enjoys books with 
opinions that are not 
mainstream
Sometimes gives 
recommendations through 
word of mouth
Would be interested in 
following what some of his 
friends are reading
Sometimes discusses 
books with friends but not 
that much
Feels that books are more 
of a personal experience
If he is discussing a book, 
its never sci-fi. Usually 
motivational books
He only finishes good 
books (usually less than 
200 pages)
With unfinished books, he 
sometimes gives a 2nd 
chance
Used to track how long it 
took to read a book in 
order to compare it with 
other activities when he’s 
busy
Usually tracks when 
there’s more going on in 
his life in general. 
Otherwise he feels more 
relaxed and doesn’t want 
to track (like now)
Least interesting 
statistics:á
n publication date¶
n reading speel
n progress towards 
reading goaµ
n total time spent 
reading
Mid interesting statistics:
mid lo
n total number of books/
page¶
n your rating vs other 
peoples ratinà
n avg rating assigned to 
the books you’ve read
mid higx
n how many different 
genre¶
n qualitative trends of 
the books read
Most interesting statisticsÆ
n Path of creation of the 
book¶
n qualities of the author
Used to track reading 
speed until he learned 
that reading faster is 
effective but ruins the fun 
and lowers 
comprehension
Feels that if you are 
reading for fun, tracking 
the time spent reading 
might make it more 
stressful
Says that the author 
background helps with 
understanding why 
authors write the way 
they do, which helps to 
manage expectations
Cares to know about the 
authors for credibility 
purposes, not for 
expanding point of view
Would be interested if 
there were trends 
between author info and 
his book satisfaction
Would be interested in 
book-tracking if it used 
the stats to recommend 
books with probability 
attached (eg. 70% chance 
you’ll like this book)
Would like to see more 
about the book than just 
the overview. Maybe 
keywords
Would be willing to rate/
review if it helped tailor 
the books he is 
recommended
Not  interested in using 
book-tracking for past 
books
Wanted to read more so 
he made a resolution to 
read one book per month.
He found GR and the 
reading challenge feature 
which hooked him
Says reading challenge is 
like a game and is ahead 
of schedule
Reads print books only. 
Wants to try audiobooks 
but doesn’t like screens 
and he likes seeing how 
far he is in the book
Favorite genres = fictions, 
thrillers, sci-fi
Reads daily before bed
Does not do anything 
extra while he reads
To him, a good book is 
believable and immersive 
(fiction)
Content with how much 
he currently reads but 
sometimes he wishes he 
had more time
Mostly uses the GR app 
because it does what he 
needs
Checks GR app once a 
day
Has different book taste 
from his friends
Convinced his friend to 
use the app also (to both 
use the challenge feature)
Doesn’t know any other 
BT apps
Rates GR a Á
n nothing wrong
Wishes the you could add 
your own books manually 
(has newer danish books 
that don’t exist in GR)
Rarely uses the choice 
awards list
Rarely votes for the choice 
awards list
Rating/reviewing - He likes 
to keep an overview for 
every book
Reading reviews helps him 
discover books he might 
want to read
Collections help him keep 
track of what he has read
Wants a way to distinguish 
between reviews with 
spoilers and reviews 
without
Most interesting statisticsÆ
n avg ratinà
n diff genre¶
n progress towards 
reading goaµ
n qualitative trends of 
book¶
n avg reading speel
n total time spen¨
n total number of books/
pages
Mid interesting statisticsÆ
n rating compariso)
n path of creatio)
n highlighting passages
Least interesting 
statisticsÆ
n qualities of the author¶
n publication dates
Would like to know the 
patterns among the books 
he reads 

(ex. maybe i spend 99% of 
time sci-fi, thriller, maybe i 
should try something else)
Really enjoys statistics in 
general
Has an idea to track how 
“explorative” readers are 
(how far they are from 
their normal taste)
Some qualitative 
challenges could be cool 
but maybe too many 
would ruin the fun. They 
might help with coming 
out of the comfort zone.
He tends to read about 
the authors and their 
styles
Ratings of 3.5 or less 
make him skeptical
Hasn’t received many recs 
from friends but when he 
does, they’re pretty good
Doesn’t discuss books 
with anyone much
Finds it frustrating to read 
a book with old vocab or 
something (on readability)
Book cover/title gets initial 
attention but a bad cover 
doesn’t matter that much
Says GR made reading 
much more fun instead of 
a chore
DISCOVER
SEARCH
CATALOG
DECIDE
READ
JUDGE BOOK
RECOMMEND
DISCUSS
REFLECT ON 
READING 
HABITS
Often uses reviewing 
system
Often looks at friend’s 
book updates
Often uses GR to discover 
news books
Is often organizing books 
into collections
Often finds books through 
the authors
Sometimes tracks reading 
habits
Sometimes recommends 
books to others
Rarely (if at all) uses GR 
reading challenge feature.   
”Reading shouldn’t be a 
competition.”
Really enjoys reading 
reviews
Really enjoys seeing 
friends’ book updates
Enjoys finding books 
through author
Enjoys reviewing books
Enjoys discovering books
Enjoys organizing books 
into collections
OTHER
Uses GR once a month to 
look for new
Uses GR before and after 
reading a book
Would be willing to rate/
review if it helped tailor 
the books he is 
recommended
Tracks books manually on 
her phone since 2017 
(past and TO-READ)
Often uses rating/
reviewing system
Often reads reviews
Often discovers new 
books
Often participates in 
challenge
Often organizes into 
collections
Sometimes looks at what 
friends are reading
Sometimes finds books 
through authors
Really enjoys tracking 
books and reading goal
Really enjoys organizing 
into collections
Really enjoys discovering 
new books
Really enjoys reviewing 
books
Really enjoys reading 
reviews
Most important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n authorá
n genr
n number of/avg rating¶
n online review¶
n data based rec¶
n summaries/
description¶
n similar book¶
n recs from friends/faW
n readability
Mid important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n availabilitz
n book cover/title
Least important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n controversz
n sample¶
n best seller¶
n social mediM
n book clu_
n book length
other
samples
summaries
authors
reviews
manual
enjoys
dislikes (or no interest)
other
meta data
If he does finish and enjoy 
a book, he sometimes re-
reads and makes some 
notes
dnf
audiobooks
conditions
amount
active reading
platform
disliked
good book
reviews/ratings
outside app
other
other
don’t
friends
bookclubs
against tracking
past books
reading challenge
read more
book qualities
ratings
time/speed
other
recs
search engine
genre
friends
public recs
other
authors
discovery
cover/titles
bookstores
least
most
mid
least
most
mid
Often uses GR to read 
reviews of others
Often uses GR to find 
books through the author
Often uses GR to track her 
reading habits
Rarely recommends books 
to others on GR
Most interesting statisticsÆ
n How many (and which) 
genres she’s real
n Qualitative trends 
about the book¶
n Progress towards 
reading goaµ
n Avg rating assigned 
over the years
Mid interesting statisticsÆ
n Total # of books/pages 
real
n Your rating vs other 
people’s rating¶
n Publication date¶
n Total time spent 
readinà
n Qualities of the authors
Least important statistics:á
n Total tim
n Qualities of the author¶
n Reading speel
n Ratings compariso)
n Number of genres
Most important statisticsÆ
n Path of creatio)
n Qualities of the book¶
n Avg ratinà
n Total number of page¶
n Number of book¶
n Publication date¶
n Progress towards 
reading goaµ
n Highlighting passages
Least interesting 
statisticsÆ
n Avg reading speed
Most important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n authorá
n genr
n number of/avg rating¶
n online review¶
n data based rec¶
n summaries/
description¶
n similar book¶
n recs from friends/faW
n readability
Mid important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n availabilitz
n book cover/title
Least important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n controversz
n sample¶
n best seller¶
n social mediM
n book clu_
n book length
Most important discovery 
factorsÆ
n authoW
n sumarie¶
n sample¶
n social mediM
n friend rec¶
n ratings
Less important discovery 
factorsÆ
n book clu_
n genreá
n online rec¶
n online reviews
Least important discovery 
factorsÆ
n similar book¶
n cover/titl
n lengtx
n bestsellers
sometimes tries online 
recommended but doesn’t 
always work
idea for more qualitative 
challenges (not based on 
number, but like author 
nationality, etc.)
2
ratings can positively 
influence but not 
negatively
Mid important factors 
when choosing a book:
mid lo
n book cover/title
mid mil
n best seller lis¨
n social mediM
n avg rating/# of ratings
mid higx
n displays of similar 
book¶
n book lengthá
n controversy
Least important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n authoW
n book club
(mid least below$
n genr
n sampl
n book summary
Most important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n recommendations from 
friend¶
n recommendations from 
datM
n reviews
bookclubs sometimes 
choose undesired books
other
social
least
mid
most
Mid important factors 
when choosing a book:
mid lo
n Similar book¶
n best seller lists
Least important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n AuthoW
n Genr
n Controversz
n Number/Avg ratinà
n Book lengtx
n Book club
Most important factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n book title/coveW
n sample¶
n summarie¶
n Social mediM
n Data based rec¶
n Friends rec¶
n Online review¶
n Book availability
Most influential factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n Similar book¶
n Written online review¶
n Best seller lis¨
n Recommendations 
from friends/family
Least important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n Author xA
n Availability x0O
n Best sellers x2O
n Book club x3O
n Book length x4O
n Controversy x+
n Cover/Title x2O
n Data based recs x+
n Friend recs x>
n Genre x2O
n Number/Avg rating x+
n Online reviews x>
n Sample x3O
n Similar books x+
n Social media x2O
n Summary x1
Mid important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n Author x1O
n Availability x+
n Best sellers x2O
n Book club x2O
n Book length x1O
n Controversy x+
n Cover/Title x2O
n Data based recs x+
n Friend recs x>
n Genre x2O
n Number/Avg rating xA
n Online reviews x+
n Sample x0O
n Similar books xA
n Social media x2O
n Summary x1
Least important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n Author x2O
n Availability x+
n Best sellers x1O
n Book club x0O
n Book length x0O
n Controversy x>
n Cover/Title x1O
n Data based recs xÔ
n Friend recs x
n Genre x1O
n Number/Avg rating xA
n Online reviews x
n Sample x2O
n Similar books xÔ
n Social media x1O
n Summary x3
Mid influential factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n Book clu_
n Genr
n AuthoW
n Number of/avg ratinà
n Summaries
Least influential factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n Samples of book¶
n Social mediM
n Data-based rec¶
n Book cover/titl
n Book length
Most influential factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n Similar book¶
n Written online review¶
n Best seller lis¨
n Recommendations 
from friends/family
Mid influential factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n Book clu_
n Genr
n AuthoW
n Number of/avg ratinà
n Summaries
Least influential factors 
when choosing a bookÆ
n Samples of book¶
n Social mediM
n Data-based rec¶
n Book cover/titl
n Book length
Rarely organizes the 
books into collections
Least interesting 
statisticsÆ
n Author qualities xA
n Publication dates xÔ
n Reading speed xÔ
n Reading goal xA
n Total time reading xÔ
n Total # books/pgs x+
n Rating vs rating x+
n Genres x+
n Path of creation x>
n Annotations x>
n Avg rating x>
n Book trends x0
Mid interesting statisticsÆ
n Author qualities x+
n Publication dates x+
n Reading speed x+
n Reading goal x>
n Total time reading x+
n Total # books/pgs xA
n Rating vs rating x
n Genres x+
n Path of creation x+
n Annotations x+
n Avg rating xA
n Book trends x1
Most interesting statisticsÆ
n Author qualities xA
n Publication dates x+
n Reading speed x+
n Reading goal xÔ
n Total time reading x+
n Total # books/pgs xA
n Rating vs rating x>
n Genres xÔ
n Path of creation xA
n Annotations x+
n Avg rating xÔ
n Book trends x 4
Least important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n Author xA
n Availability x0O
n Best sellers x2O
n Book club x3O
n Book length x4O
n Controversy x+
n Cover/Title x2O
n Data based recs x+
n Friend recs x>
n Genre x2O
n Number/Avg rating x+
n Online reviews x>
n Sample x3O
n Similar books x+
n Social media x2O
n Summary x1
Mid important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n Author x1O
n Availability x+
n Best sellers x2O
n Book club x2O
n Book length x1O
n Controversy x+
n Cover/Title x2O
n Data based recs x+
n Friend recs x>
n Genre x2O
n Number/Avg rating xA
n Online reviews x+
n Sample x0O
n Similar books xA
n Social media x2O
n Summary x1
Least important factors 
when choosing a book:á
n Author x2O
n Availability x+
n Best sellers x1O
n Book club x0O
n Book length x0O
n Controversy x>
n Cover/Title x1O
n Data based recs xÔ
n Friend recs x
n Genre x1O
n Number/Avg rating xA
n Online reviews x
n Sample x2O
n Similar books xÔ
n Social media x1O
n Summary x3
needs/wants related to reviews
SEARCH: 
PERSONA A usually reads reviews after reading the book so as not to be spoiled or biased. 
PERSONA B suspects that some reviews may be bought.
PERSONA C wishes there were different ways of filtering reviews.
PERSONA D cares more to read reviews of friends or people with similar taste rather than strangers. 
PERSONA E is interested in seeing more about the path of creation of the book and the author. 
PERSONA F thinks that book summaries can be misleading and not show the full picture.
CATALOG: 
PERSONA A manually tracks TBR list in notes app of phone.
PERSONA B uses a BT app but finds the organizing/collections 
feature to be messy and not intuitive. They dislike not being able 
to provide context for books on TBR list (why is this book here).
PERSONA C enjoys using BT app to organize books but wishes 
he could add books manually if not in app’s database.
wishes you could provide 
context to TBR list books 
(prioritize?)
DECIDE: 
PERSONA A sometimes doesn’t know really 
what he’s looking for in a book until he’s 
reading it. 
PERSONA B forgets info about their TBR 
books and has to re-familiarize with each 
book before choosing.
PERSONA C doesn’t remember why she 
added certain books to her TBR (Was it 
recommended by a friend? Did she see it on 
IG?)
READ: 
PERSONA A often doesn’t finish books.
PERSONA B likes to highlight quotes and 
bookmark pages to come back to later. 
PERSONA C likes to do external research 
about topics they read about in books.
PERSONA D reads a combination of physical, 
digital, and audiobooks often.
PERSONA E usually reads on the go (train, 
bike, etc.).
JUDGE BOOK: 
PERSONA A really values good writing style 
and books that make her think. 
PERSONA B likes to remember how he felt 
about past books. 
PERSONA C feels that rating and reviewing 
books would only be worth his time if it 
helped the system recommend better books.
RECOMMEND:
PERSONA A recommends books to her 
friends in person or through messages rather 
than the app.
DISCUSS:
PERSONA A feels that reading is a personal 
experience so rarely discusses books. If 
anything - motivational books. 
PERSONA B likes to discuss books with 
friends.
PERSONA C likes informal book clubs to read 
and talk about agreed books.
REFLECTING ON READING HABITS:
PERSONA A feels that tracking is too 
competitive and stressful.
PERSONA B really wants to read more.
PERSONA C wants to read different types of 
books from time to time.
PERSONA D wants to track his reading 
speed/time spent reading but he primarily 
reads print books. 
PERSONA E really enjoys gamification.
PERSONA F really enjoys seeing insights 
about themselves in a simple, visual way.
PERSONA G often forgets to manually input 
data but wants to track their reading habits.
DISCOVER:
PERSONA A wishes there was a better way 
to search for new books to read. 
PERSONA B finds that the online system 
recommendations suck. 
PERSONA C really likes to see what friends 
are reading but doesn’t want to spam them.
PERSONA D likes to browse bestseller lists 
but doesn’t feel they’re super reliable.
PERSONA E feels lost/overwhelmed in 
physical bookstores but prefers reading 
physical books.
PERSONA F really loves recommendations 
from friends but rarely gets them.
==PAGE:181==
F
User Research - App Reviews - Gathering
reviews
1
const store = require('app-store-scraper');
2
const fs = require('fs');
3
4
const ids = {
5
'gr': 355833469,
6
}
7
const currentSort = store.sort.HELPFUL;
8
const currentId = ids.gr;
9
10
// Get 10 pages of reviews, combine them into one array, and write to file
11
let reviews = [];
12
for (let i = 1; i <= 10; i++) {
13
store
14
.reviews({
15
id: currentId,
16
sort: currentSort,
17
page: i,
18
})
19
.then((responseString) => {
20
reviews = reviews.concat(responseString);
21
fs.writeFileSync(`reviews.${currentSort}.json`, JSON.stringify(
reviews));
22
})
23
.catch(console.log);
24
}
Listing F.1: JavaScript script used to collect app reviews from App Store
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
175
==PAGE:182==
G
Iterations - Process - Idea parking lot
176
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:183==
Figure G.1: ”Idea parking lot”
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
177
==PAGE:184==
H
Iterations - Process - Archetype survey
178
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:185==
Figure H.1: Survey filled by the test participants at the beginning of the testing
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
179
==PAGE:186==
I
Iterations - Iteration 1 - All sketches
180
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:187==
SIMPLE LIST OFBOOKS
ROUDERS
GR LIB
~
YOUR
LIBRARY
YOUR LIBRARY
WANT-TO-READ BOOKS
CURRENTLY
WANT-50-
M
READING
READ
mytrate
ofNormal:
Fra.e
W
PROGRESS:170%
2 books
75 books
READ
DID-NOT-FINISH
.
31 books
4books
#
sREAD
a4.48
· 946,552 ratings. 2018
OWNED
TO-BUY
#
s
⑲4.47.55,905 ratings. 2021
29 books
10 books
an
RECS
#
NOT
FINIS
4.39. 1,362,895 ratings. 2021
AUDIO
BOOK CLUB
53 books
S books
COMPACT SHELF VIEW
OPENED SHELF
YOUR
LIBRARY
WANT TO READ
ricyneasingI
irPTR
re
Miner
of inc.
Were
#XD].
DIGITAL (
B.NOT
FINISH-
ArD10
==PAGE:188==
SORING BASED ON GENRE
PRIORITY
SORTED BY RATING
WANT TO READ
READ BOOKS
UP NEXT...
-.
.. %
-
AnGn
METRY- wn-win
forme
BEST FORYN OPTON
WIDGET
SHARED SHELVES
15:34
111 4G
&SHARED
..
WANT TO READ
①STERBRO
HUS
We think you
↳4D
should read
this next... ↳
000
gabiyerummerdementme
ener
audrey recommended-
by an u
M
*****
4.90
g
↳
mytet
Dr.Needher
Ar
n
D
74,319 ratings
erise recommended
800O
⑭
-
400
pia recommended
P
A man
BOTTOM OF SHELF NEW REC
I↳win...
Wemanda
==PAGE:189==
==PAGE:190==
==PAGE:191==
==PAGE:192==
==PAGE:193==
J
Prototyping - Iteration 1 - Testing plan
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
187
==PAGE:194==
MAY 1:USER TESTNG/FOCUS GROD I
CINITIAL PROTOTYPING
- SKETCHING INKSCAPE WIREFRAMES)
AGENDA:PROBLEM STATEMENTS-DISCUSSION
· LOGGING/COLLECTIONS - REVIEW ASPECTS -> INDEPENDENT
IDEATION-S GROUP IDEATON - TESTING IDEAS- DISCUSS
· RATNG/REVIEWING- REVIEW ASPECTS- INDEPENDENT
IPEATON - GROPIDEATON- TESTINGIDEAS- DISCUSS
-
PROBLEM STATEMENT:
->WE WANT TO IMPROVE THE EXPERIENCE OF LOGGING BOORS
AND MANAGING EXISTING COLLECTIONS FOR BOOK-RACKING
USERS BETWEEN THEAGES 18 AND IS SO THATLOGGINE
IS FAST AND INTUITIVE
AND THE COLLECTIONS ARE EASY
&
NALGATE AND PROVIDEMORE VALUE TO THE 18ER.
-WE WANT TO IMPROVE TMERATING AND REVIEWING SYSTEM
IN BOOK-RACKING FOR USERS BETWEEN THE AGES OF 18-35 So
THAT THE RAMNG
PROCESS IS CLEAR AND GRANVAR, AND
THE REVIEWING PROCESS IS TIMELY, ACCESSIBLE, ASSISTED,
EASY TO NAVIGATE,
AND INTERACTIVE-
↓REFER
TO GRISE FOREXAMPLES!
-
LUGGING/CUUECTONS
RARNG/RENEWING
-> VISUAL:HOW SHOULD YOUR LIBRARY LOOK?
-> SCALE & CONTEXT:WHAT SHOULD THERATING SCALE
WHATABOUT THE COLLECTIONS WITHIN IT!
BE? BASED ON WHAT?
-> VISIBILITY:NONEARATINGS BE ON BOOK
-> ORGANIZATION:HE
COLLECTIONS BE
-> REVIEW PROCESS:WHAT SHOULD THE REVIEW PROCESS
AMEREBE?IS CUSTOM IMPORTANT? I
LOOK LIKE?OPEN? GUIDED? HOW?
->SHELVES: HOW MANY DEFAULTSHELVES SHOULD
- INTERACMON:WENE
-> LOGGING: HOW SHOULD SAVING A BOOK TO YOUR
-- REVIEW CONTENT:WHAT EXACTLY SHOULD GO IN A
WANT-TO-READ LIST LOOK? QUICK VS SLOW?
REVIEW? ISTHEREANOTHER WAY?
-> OTHER:ANY OTHER COOL IDEAS?
-> OTHER: ANY OTHER IDEAS? WHAT ABOUTAN EASIER WAY
TO RECOMMEND BOOKS TO
OTHERS?
Figure J.1: Testing plan for iteration 1
188
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:195==
K
Iterations - Testing notes
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
189
==PAGE:196==
ITERATION 1 TESTING  
Three users: 
- 
P1 – Print-only archetype 
- 
P2 – Print/Novice archetype 
- 
P3 – Print/Novice archetype 
 
 
⁃ 
Default shelves  
⁃ 
P1 - collections in collections might be 
confusing  
⁃ 
P1 -it could be collections just divided by 
genre and no separate “want to read” or 
“read” shelves, and then the titles that you 
have read look different from the titles you 
haven’t read  
⁃ 
P1 -Maybe the collections themselves 
can have tags and then when you search, you 
can search by tags that are associated with the 
books  
⁃ 
P2 - I don’t like too many filters and 
categories. I would be fine with general 
categories within each of the default shelves 
but I just don’t want to be presented with a 
bunch of categories at once. It makes me feel 
lost.  
⁃ 
GAB - So basically, you want to be able 
to easily find certain types of books within your 
shelves 
⁃ 
Grid vs list vs shelf view (VISUAL) 
⁃ 
P1 - the grid and list are nice, especially 
because seeing the cover would be most 
important to me. It’s also nice to have the 
possibility to scroll faster or have more details 
if you want to.  
⁃ 
P2 - what about like a tag line for each 
book? like a pitch?  
⁃ 
GAB - (told them about our user 
research and how many forget why they’ve 
added certain books to their list) So there’s the 
idea of being able to add some quick note for 
context when adding the book 
⁃ 
ALL - agreed and liked the idea 
⁃ 
P1 - It could be that you have to click on 
the book and get more info to see your note, 
rather than it being immediately visible in the 
shelves.  
⁃ 
P3 - You probably don’t want too much 
detail when browsing the shelves because then 
with just 3 books, you have to scroll a lot.  
⁃ 
Library View (VISUAL) 
⁃ 
P1 - I like the horizontal display because 
you can clearly see the covers. And you don’t 
really need much detail here because you’re 
not inside the collection yet.  
⁃ 
P2 - the bookshelf visual looks nice but 
for user friendliness, it doesn’t make as much 
sense. But it could be like the first screen you 
have when opening the app and it could be 
personalized and with some kind of button that 
allows you to ‘enter your library’  
⁃ 
Book rec based on shelf  
⁃ 
P1 - I think it would be a good idea as 
long as you have the option to say “no” and 
potentially refresh the recommendation.  
⁃ 
GAB - Would you want the rec at the top 
or bottom of the shelf? 
⁃ 
P1 - I think at the bottom you would see 
it less so it would be hard to get there 
⁃ 
GAB - Or should this be something that 
you can also hide whenever? 
⁃ 
P3 - Yeah maybe you should be able to 
close the recommendation 
⁃ 
P1 - Or just make it smaller and maybe 
just the title or something 
⁃ 
P2 - But maybe it will be too much info 
when you read it.  
⁃ 
P1 - Yeah but it could be that the rec is 
clear and small so it’s not taking up all the 
screen  
⁃ 
Prioritizing books (‘up next’) 
⁃ 
P2 - I like that 
⁃ 
P1 - I think I personally wouldn’t use it 
because I can’t make choices. I have so many 
books. And if I do have something that I really 
want to read then I guess I will remember, so I 
would never use it but I can see why you would 
use it 
⁃ 
Sorting read books by your given rating 
==PAGE:197==
⁃ 
P2 - that’s good  
⁃ 
P3 - maybe also it could be possible to 
search in your want to read shelf and like filter  
⁃ 
Shared shelves  
⁃ 
P1 - I think it would be nice if the one 
that is recommending the book could add a 
sentence  or a ‘why’ 
⁃ 
P2 & P3 - That’s nice, I’d like that 
⁃ 
GAB - Would you still want to see the 
book rating here or is the sentence more 
important? 
⁃ 
P1 - I’d rather see the sentence over the 
rating because I feel like the rating is so 
subjective 
⁃ 
P1 - Would it be different shared shelves 
or do you just add all of your friends and then 
recommend to all ? What if you had group 
shelves and then on the main page of the app, 
you had some news that said “oh Gabi is really 
recommending XXX” 
⁃ 
Social aspect 
⁃ 
P1 - it could be that while you’re reading 
a book, the app asks “do you want to share 
this?” and you can just say no (similar to my 
running app) 
⁃ 
Logging the books 
⁃ 
GAB - if there were no clear buttons, 
what would you each intuitively assume you 
need to do to log it? 
⁃ 
P1 - I would click on the book and look 
for a heart or something (GAB note- I think she 
was influenced by me showing hearts in one of 
the sketches) or like 3 points and then save to 
my shelf 
⁃ 
P3 - or like a plus button 
⁃ 
GAB - Ok so you’re saying you would 
look for an icon or a button 
⁃ 
P2 - yes something easy  
⁃ 
P1 - I would never double click on the 
book  
⁃ 
P3 - if theres nothing directly accessible, 
I would go into the book’s info page 
⁃ 
P1 - I also feel like if I want to add a book 
to my shelf, I need to read the summary 
⁃ 
P3 - yeah but sometimes you see one 
that you’ve already hear about and want to be 
quick with it 
⁃ 
Shopping cart idea 
⁃ 
P1 - it might get too confusing, I don’t 
think I would go through all the saved books 
after  
⁃ 
P3 - I think for some people it could be 
confusing 
⁃ 
P2 - when you have too much options or 
icons or too much stuff to click on then it’s too 
much 
⁃ 
P1 - because you could always add it to 
your want to read list and never read it  
 
Rating/reviewing 
⁃ 
Rating scale/context 
⁃ 
P2 - could you allow the user to set up 
new parameters that THEY want to use to rate? 
When you subscribe, you could indicate which 
of like 10 parameters you want to use to rate 
the books you read. Everyone can personalize 
their own experience and then also change in 
settings.  
⁃ 
GABI - ok so giving them choice but also 
providing limited choices so that they can still 
compare to others? 
⁃ 
P2 & P1 - yes  
⁃ 
GAB - (showed them the list of possible 
rating questions we created) 
⁃ 
GAB - do you think it would be harder to 
gather the numbers to make the ratings 
credible if you had all these parameters? 
⁃ 
P3 - yeah and how do you compute the 
final rating with all of these parameters? 
⁃ 
P1 - I would maybe within the 10, make 
a general and like 3 default kind of reviews that 
are basic questions + the general review of the 
book. then you can ensure for those few 
categories that everyone is voting  
⁃ 
P2 - yeah like maybe just one common 
parameter for everyone using the stars and 
then when you go on the book info page, you 
can see a bunch of statistics like “80% of 
==PAGE:198==
people recommended because the writing style 
was really good” or something showing what 
parameters are appealing to people 
⁃ 
Visibility of ratings in book info page  
⁃ 
GAB - should it be clear from the start or 
should you need to scroll down for it? 
⁃ 
P1 - maybe the global rating on top with 
the number of people voting and then scrolling 
down for the details or the 10 parameters  
⁃ 
“Predicted rating” 
⁃ 
P3 - maybe like in netflix they give the 
percentage match to your preferences based 
on what you’ve seen. maybe not 2 ratings but 
instead having the average rating and then the 
percentage  
⁃ 
Review content 
⁃ 
P2 - it could be cool to be able to draw 
or mindmap stuff with an ipad  
⁃ 
GAB - explained hinge prompts idea 
⁃ 
P1 & P3 - I think that’s really good 
⁃ 
P1 - also because sometimes it’s just 
really hard to structure your thoughts so that 
would be really good   
⁃ 
Limited characters review 
⁃ 
P1 - I feel like people that write long 
reviews should not expect people to read all of 
it so maybe giving them a reminder to try to be 
concise for people but not limiting them  
⁃ 
Private vs public reviews 
⁃ 
ALL - yes  
⁃ 
P2 - yeah sometimes you’re just typing 
shit and you don’t want it to be public 
 
 
==PAGE:199==
ITERATION 2 TESTING  
Two users: 
- 
P1 – BookTok archetype 
- 
P2 – Power Reader archetype 
 
 
TEST PLAN: 
Intro  
what is our project about 
what are we focusing on? what are we NOT 
focusing on? 
give survey! talk through some of the “reader 
types” 
this is our 2nd prototype and we are not attached 
to anything. we want it to be better! 
explain how figma prototypes generally work 
ask if we can voice record just to help us remember 
insights (the recording won’t go anywhere)  
 
Thinking Aloud test 
first entry point = Library (managing your shelves) 
second entry point = discovery page (saving to read 
shelf and rating/reviewing) 
 
A/B Testing 
Book info page (saving to read shelf -> 
rating/reviewing) 
Adding a review (review prompt versions) 
Discovery QA (Quick add notifications) 
 
Overall attractiveness/UI rating  
(1-10) 
Then discuss what works and what doesn’t 
 
 
Notes: 
did not finish is nice 
quick notes would be nice in the shelf 
i also like for taking notes throughout  
shared shelf is nice to recommend to people  
the look - i like it much better than goodreads 
 
 
ratings on different elements of the book are nice 
i also like half stars 
match system percentage is nice  
choose a prompt is nice to help you reflect 
would be nice to skip the rating stuff if you just 
want to log the book 
would be nice to add books to your favorites 
rating stuff should not be required  
 
a/b testing  
they like the question prompt if they want to 
review or not  
they don’t always have the time to write a review 
they like the satisfaction of finishing a book 
 
they like the review prompts COMBINED  
 
they both liked different quick add notifications  
 
UI rating 
7 or 8 
brown aesthetics of goodreads 
would want it to be more distinguished 
other than that, it’s simpler and easy to read 
minimalistics but intuitive  
dark background maybe? 
types can be a bit bigger maybe (maybe the option 
in settings) 
 
favorite thing is that you can rate different aspects 
of the book 
 
 
==PAGE:200==
ITERATION 3 TESTING  
Two users: 
- 
P1 – Print-only archetype 
- 
P2 – BookTok/Self-help archetype 
 
 
Testing 3: Tasks 
 
# Iteration 2 tasks 
 
Library: 
 
Mark one of your currently reading books, Circe, as 
read 
1 e 
Create a new shelf 
0 
Search for "Crime books" shelf (didn’t see button) 
2 e 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list 
2 
couldn’t find it, trying to click 
icon is too far from shelf name 
no problem adding book 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
no problem 
Read an existing [quick note] of one of the books in 
your "Want to read" shelf 
couldn’t tell the difference between empty or 
existing 
“maybe orange” 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf 
perf 
View "Want to read" shelf in grid view 
perf 
 
Discovery: 
 
Add 5 books from the "Discovery" page to your 
"Want to read" shelf 
perf 
Check which series does the first book belong to 
got to the book info page 
series is not so clear to her 
 
Book info page: 
 
Mark the book as a favorite 
perf 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars 
was not sure where to go 
Read Emily's full review 
got it 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf with a 
quick note 
got it 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
maybe instead of “add to shelf” it should be 
“change” 
maybe tutorial for new users 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
she thought overall rating was calculated from 
others 
Edit your rating parameters 
was a bit confused 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?" 
maybe the prompts could be beginning 
statements… 
Publish the rating and review only to friends 
got it 
 
what am I adding to favorites ??? (in 
rating/reviewing) 
 
 
library view 
likes that currently reading is grey 
likes progress bar 
likes ‘mark as read’ 
what is ‘did not finish’ and how do you indicate it? 
 
shared shelf 
how to see who the shelf is shared with 
 
want to read shelf 
likes list and grid view 
not too much information per book but nothing to 
compare it to 
 
book info page 
==PAGE:201==
good 
 
rating/reviewing 
loves the review prompts 
 
ABC TESTING - positive feedback after marking the 
book as read  
likes the combined version with badges and reading 
goal progress ! 
likes that the badges are interactive 
ABC TESTING - classifying the book as part of shelf 
in book info page  
likes the text option because it’s the most obvious 
 
UI/attractiveness rating from 1-10 
it’s nice but she felt she was dumb 
8 
 
 
2ND USER (THURSDAY) 
 
Library: 
 
Mark one of your currently reading books, Circe, as 
read 
she got it! 
Create a new shelf 
plus could be 
Search for "Crime books" shelf (didn’t see button) 
wanted to scroll 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list 
doesn’t see the icon 
go it to the want to read 
didn’t know where the plus icon would add the 
book 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
Read an existing [quick note] of one of the books in 
your "Want to read" shelf 
the note icon seems like it is already written 
color is not visible enough 
maybe extra icon (+) 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf 
View "Want to read" shelf in grid view 
got it 
 
PAUSE - TALK ABOUT LIBRARY AND SHELF VIEW 
-likes the idea of a shared shelf 
-wasn’t sure what was going to open in library view 
 
Discovery: 
 
Add 5 books from the "Discovery" page to your 
"Want to read" shelf 
wasn’t intuitive where the book is going from the 
plus 
Check which series does the first book belong to 
got it 
 
PAUSE- TALK ABOUT DISCOVERY IN GENERAL 
 
Book info page: 
 
Mark the book as a favorite 
easy 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars 
found it 
Read Emily's full review 
got it 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf with a 
quick note 
PAUSE - TALK ABOUT BOOK INFO PAGE IN GENERAL 
touching stars should scroll you down 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
confusing 
beginning use case is very different from other use 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
Edit your rating parameters 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?" 
would just click through until she found it 
Publish the rating and review only to friends 
 
PAUSE - TALK ABOUT RATING/REVIEWING SCREEN 
IN GENERAL 
should reviews be editable during reading? 
first click of star could be half star and second click 
could be full star 
 
ABC TESTING - positive feedback after marking the 
book as read 
likes the reading goal one the most but if they 
haven’t set a goal 
==PAGE:202==
maybe just a number of books read per year ? 
likes the 2 individual versions more than the 
combined version because it’s too much 
ABC TESTING - classifying the book as part of shelf 
in book info page 
likes the text more. probably wouldn’t have known 
the icons without seeing the color associated with 
the text. 
 
UI/attractiveness rating from 1-10 
aesthetically pretty 
dark mode 
9 (couldn’t tell you what a 10 looks like) 
search button is slightly unclear.. on top? what am I 
searching for? a book or a shelf? 
 
“ I would definitely use this app!” 
==PAGE:203==
 
ITERATION 4 TESTING  
Three users: 
- 
P1 – Print/BookTok archetype 
- 
P2 – Power Reader archetype 
- 
P3 – Power Reader archetype 
 
 
Testing 4: Tasks 
 
# Iteration 4 tasks 
 
1st test of day - 
 
Library: 
 
Mark one of your currently reading books, Circe, as 
read - Thought that “read” shelf was “currently 
reading” at first - then completed it (thought it was 
sliding) - “read” and past-tense “read” is 
CONFUSING! 
 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list - the name of the shared 
shelf helped her identify it as shared 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
Read an existing [quick note] of one of the books in 
your "Want to read" shelf 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf - the undo is useful!! 
View "Want to read" shelf in grid view - no 
problems 
 
 
Book info page: 
 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars - no problems! 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf with a 
quick note - we have 2 “add to shelf” buttons on 
book info page - quick note icon is not obvious. 
should there be a separate notification or pop-up 
prompting you to 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
Edit your rating parameters 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?" - review prompt 
carousel is slightly mis-aligned 
 
OVERALL THOUGHTS? 
UI RATING? 
shared shelf is more clear 
what if you forget your bookmark and where you 
are in the story ? log progress could have both 
percentage and page number 
likes that the cover is visible on the currently 
reading card 
the “search” feature in the library is confusing. 
search for new books? or search within your 
shelves? or search for shelves? 
UI rating = 7 - doesn’t like the search button 
overlapping the last shelf 
likes seeing the covers in the shelves 
the multiple ratings are a bit too much (but de-
selecting preferences is fair) 
 
AB Testing - Library view 
dislikes C! 
E looks old 
likes B and the default one the most (likes to be 
able to slide the book carousel) 
 
AB Testing - Book info 
“if it’s a new book, I only need want to read and 
currently reading but if tracking history, it’s 
confusing” 
didn’t like version A because of this (the dynamic) 
liked the default version more than the status one 
(dropdown version) 
likes that you can see the options immediately in 
the spectrum one 
says it is similar to the drop down version 
the default one looks better 
the spectrum is kind of ugly 
the DNF button + slider in one line is not good 
the section looks like it doesn’t fit in the design 
would end up picking the default version 
 
Overall she seemed to really value simple and clear 
stuff. 
 
 
==PAGE:204==
2nd test of the day (TWO PEOPLE)- 
 
Library: 
Mark one of your currently reading books, Circe, as 
read - “did not finish” sounds like “currently 
reading” to some 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list - took a second to find 
shared icon - the “quick add” and “quick remove” 
are not totally clear about what it’s doing (like in 
shared shelf) is it removing from the shared shelf?? 
can only admin do it? 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
Read an existing [quick note] of one of the books in 
your "Want to read" shelf - they liked the quick 
note feature 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf 
 
 
Book info page: 
 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars - clicked on the overall rating and then 
understood 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf and 
then add a quick note - got it!! - the icon with the + 
maybe should be the pencil one instead - unsure 
about the heart icon 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book - not 
totally clear how to do this... (as expected) - then 
they remembered that its a shelf 
 
Rating: 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall - they thought the 
“overall” rating was an average of the other ratings 
- 4 stars was also manageable but not the MOST 
clear from the beginning - wanted to be able to 
slide to change stars 
Edit your rating parameters - got it! - still unclear 
what the overall rating is - made point about 
parameters that would be different for non-fiction 
books as opposed to the fiction books 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?" - very cool 
 
 
OVERALL THOUGHTS? 
UI RATING? 
nice to see grid and list view 
view note and add note are different colors so it’s 
good that you can see the different 
“like” and “liked” are not different enough colors 
(on the shared shelf) 
quick add and quick remove buttons are confusing 
could use single person or group icon with + and - 
to say add/remove the book from single shelf or 
group shelf 
UI= 8-9. but most things are bound by functionality 
(figma) 
 
 
AB Test - Library view 
liked option A 
C is chaotic 
he likes E because its clear the book covers and (if 
scrollable) would be nice (and is similar to kindle) 
professional 
version D would be cool if it was less white and 
moved like a carousel 
She likes version A more because it looks like a 
book cover and is more aesthetic but E would be 
cool for scrolling init 
 
AB Test - Book Info Page 
like default most from the beginning 
like to see all options in a menu or something 
did not finish is confusing term to new users 
default still the favorite 
or the drop down 
anything that contains lists 
status (dropdown menu) aspect makes sense for 
marking a book as “read” 
when adding book to shelf - there should be an 
immediate option to create a new shelf 
 
 
==PAGE:205==
ITERATION 5 TESTING  
Five users: 
- 
P1 – Power Reader archetype 
- 
P2 – Print/Novice archetype 
- 
P3 – Print-only archetype 
- 
P4 – Print-only archetype 
- 
P5 – Print-only archetype 
 
 
A Testing 5: Tasks 
 
# Iteration 5 tasks 
SUNDAY 
(vera) 
 
Discover: 
add book and remove to want to read list  
very understandable 
 
Library: 
 
Mark both of your currently read books as finished  
congratulations page is confusing to remove. where 
is the x? 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list  
wasn’t working 
Add collaborrators  
“I don’t quite get it.”  
pressed the info icon first  
eventually got it and said it made sense 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
change shelf privacy to only me  
immediately understandable 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf  
clicked on the book (to go to book info page and 
change status)  
thought there would be a clear icon to remove or 
an ability to long-press the book to delete it from 
the shelf  
then we showed her what we did and she was 
impressed but said she would have never thought 
about it  
implement some indicator to swipe? 
sort by title (A-Z)  
pressed the list view icon for sorting at first and 
then found the “sorted by” feature 
filter by genre  
also went through sorting to filter but was confused  
then went into book info page looking for tags that 
apply to genres  
“yeah sorry it’s not very visible to me”  
once we pointed it out, she asked why it is with the 
search bar  
when she saw the filter feature itself, she liked it  
feels that both the search bar and filter icon should 
be in the upper part 
book recommendation refresh  
got it and liked it  
maybe there should be an undo button  
could implement swiping  
could have a swiping icon 
 
Book info page: 
 
classify the book as an AUDIO BOOK  
found the icon in the top but says it’s unclear 
because the headphones are not very visible  
suggested different icon designs 
view which custom shelves you’ve added the book 
to 
remove it from funny shelf and create new custom 
shelf 
View (sort) most popular reviews of the book 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall  
pressing half then full is understandable  
again thought that the overall rating was 
automatically calculated !!!! 
Edit your rating parameters: Change rating 
parameter from Humor to Open-mindedness  
really nice!  
liked the info buttons for each parameter 
 
Then she did the NASA survey, the SUS, and then 
OUR survey 
 
OVERALL THOUGHTS? 
Comparing Notion & our app: 
[in notion], she has the option to sort these things 
by most recently read .. 
can put the link to the book which is nice 
==PAGE:206==
sometimes 
status - completed or in progress 
super simple 
[in our app] she just wishes it had more finished 
other features so she could use the rest of the app! 
(hard to compare a full app notion to our “parts” of 
an app 
 
 
B Testing 5: Tasks 
 
# Iteration 5 tasks 
MONDAY 
(audrey) 
 
Discover: 
add book and remove to want to read list 
got it 
big book covers 
 
Library: 
 
Mark both of your currently read books as finished 
got it quickly 
likes the reading goal 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list 
a bit confused 
read the shelf name but was unsure 
title was throwing her off 
likes that you can interact with the 
recommendations 
Add collaborators 
got it very quickly 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
easy, got it 
change shelf privacy to only me 
got it quickly 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf 
unclear. wanted a trash icon or to long press the 
book entry 
sort by title (A-Z) 
got it no problem 
filter by genre 
got it but had explored it earlier 
book recommendation refresh 
got it quickly 
 
Book info page: 
 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars 
touched the overall star rating and then got a little 
lost but figured it out 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf 
took her a while. she looked in custom shelves. 
write a quick note 
no problems! super quick 
classify the book as an AUDIO BOOK 
super quick also. icon was clear to her 
view which custom shelves you’ve added the book 
to 
no problem. had explored it before 
remove it from funny shelf and create new custom 
shelf 
figured it out quite easily but tried pressing the 
custom shelf tag before opening to custom shelf 
menu 
View (sort) most popular reviews of the book 
very easy 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
got it 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
no problems 
Rate the book 2 stars 
thought a bit about dragging the stars but figured it 
out quickly 
Edit your rating parameters: Change rating 
parameter from Humor to Open-mindedness 
got it 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?" 
got into the review prompts and found it 
If you wanted to quickly browse the review 
prompts, what would you do 
had the right idea but figma failed 
publish the review as visible to only friends 
 
Then did the NASA survey, the SUS, and then OUR 
survey 
 
OVERALL THOUGHTS? 
would like to have titles between reviews and 
==PAGE:207==
ratings because she feels she gets lost between 
them (on book info) 
wants trash icons on the want to read shelf 
confused about no titles on grid view of wtr shelf 
but likes the moodboard vibe 
likes the book rec feature 
would maybe like some more HELP options 
 
 
C Testing 5: Tasks 
 
# Iteration 5 tasks 
MONDAY 
(pia) 
 
 
Discover: 
add book and remove to want to read list  
got it 
 
Library: 
 
Mark both of your currently read books as finished  
immediately marked as finished both 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list  
inferred from the icon  
figma is broken 
Add collaborators  
went to the info icon first  
then went into the shared statement button and 
got it 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
change shelf privacy to only me  
got it easily 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf  
got it easily! 
sort by title (A-Z)  
got it quickly 
filter by genre  
found the filter button quickly but wanted it to be 
at the top 
book recommendation refresh  
got it quickly 
 
Book info page: 
 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars  
got it quickly and feels that the separate rating 
thing is nice and important 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf  
got it quickly 
a quick note  
got it quickly 
classify the book as an AUDIO BOOK  
found it but was sort of hard to see  
thinks it’s clear but wishes it was empty because it 
looks pressed 
view which custom shelves you’ve added the book 
to  
got it 
remove it from funny shelf and create new custom 
shelf 
also wanted to click the funny TAG rather than the 
immediate menu 
View (sort) most popular reviews of the book  
got it 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book  
got it 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall  
was unsure but got it 
Rate it 2 stars  
got it 
Edit your rating parameters: Change rating 
parameter from Humor to Open-mindedness  
got it quickly 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?"  
got it 
If you wanted to quickly browse the review 
prompts, what would you do  
got it 
publish the review as visible to only friends  
no problem 
 
Then did the NASA survey, the SUS, and then OUR 
survey 
 
 
OVERALL THOUGHTS? 
wanted a profile or home page to see what friends 
are reading 
==PAGE:208==
wants to be able to say what chapter they are on 
and be able to connect with other people also in 
that place to collaborate (new feature) 
likes the book info page and what information it 
provides 
thinks it’s great 
thinks the interaction with this app is much nicer 
than Goodreads 
 
 
D Testing 5: Tasks 
 
# Iteration 5 tasks 
TUESDAY 
(elo) 
 
Discover: 
add book and remove to want to read list 
got it 
Library: 
 
Mark both of your currently reading books as 
finished 
got it “wow” 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list 
is confused about it at first 
was looking for the words “shared shelf” at first but 
then got the icon 
was about to add the top book to wtr list (figma 
limited) 
Add collaborators 
got it easy 
but was also thinking it could the info icon 
Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
easy 
change shelf privacy to only me 
got it once she read the top but at first she clicked 
on the list view icon 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf 
got it very easy 
“like instagram or email” 
sort by title (A-Z) 
easy 
filter by genre 
went into sort feature first then found the filter 
icon at the bottom 
book recommendation refresh 
got it 
 
Book info page: 
 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars 
did NOT click the overall rating, she just scrolled 
down to look for pace rating (she was a part of the 
first testing where we discussed these ideas) 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf with a 
quick note 
added to favorites first, thought it was the same 
thing 
scrolled for a while looking around, confused 
found the quicknote icon after a few seconds 
classify the book as an AUDIO BOOK 
found the icon quickly (may be because this task is 
asked right after the quicknote task and it’s close 
proximity..) 
view which custom shelves you’ve added the book 
to 
is unsure about which shelves the book is a part of 
right now 
remove it from funny shelf and create new custom 
shelf 
was able to create a new shelf immediately and 
then found how to remove from custom shelf 
thought that you had to select the custom shelf tag 
and then select the “add to custom shelf” button to 
add it 
View (sort) most popular reviews of the book 
easy 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
got it 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
tried dragging the stars at first 
Rate the book 2 stars 
touched around but got it 
Edit your rating parameters: Change rating 
parameter from Humor to Open-mindedness 
navigated pretty easily! 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?" 
completed easily 
quickly navigate between review prompts 
easy 
==PAGE:209==
publish to friends only 
easy 
 
Then did the NASA survey, the SUS, and then OUR 
survey 
 
OVERALL THOUGHTS? 
easy to navigate except for adding to custom 
shelves because it was unnatural that the book was 
already saved to custom shelves 
status makes sense but it was not the first thing to 
come to mind, “but now that she knows, it makes 
sense” 
likes the tags but had questions about whether 
they’d be standard or not 
likes the rating parameters and being able to sort 
for the rating, her first thought was to drag the 
stars rather than to tap (figma limitation) 
overall very easy to navigate through the different 
things 
there are a lot of things you can do and a lot of 
ways to personalize the app to you which can be 
forgotten but it’s nice that there is “need help” and 
reminders of the different features and abilities 
the recommended book background was grey so 
she ignored it. thought it was an ad or something. 
wants it to be light yellow. 
 
 
E Testing 5: Tasks 
 
# Iteration 5 tasks 
THURSDAY 
(steven) 
 
Discover: 
add book and remove to want to read list - got it no 
problem 
Library: 
 
Mark both of your currently reading books as 
finished  
skipped over currently reading card stack at the top 
because his eyes went to the lower default shelves 
first  
wants currently reading to be more in the middle of 
the screen rather than the top 
Go to the [shared shelf] and add the top book to 
your "want to read" list  
recognized the shared icon  
clicked the icon to see what it means  
figured out how to add the top book to his want to 
read list 
Add collaborators  
tapped the shared icon at the top which worked 
great - says he remembers using some app with a 
similar feature 
Go to "Want to read" shelf:  
no issues 
change shelf privacy to only me  
first looked for an icon but there is none. the text 
was in the same vicinity he was looking so he 
figured it out 
Remove the first book from your "Want to read" 
shelf  
first long pressed expecting some context/action 
menu (which didn’t work)  
then swiped and got it  
expected there to be some other action when 
swiping in the opposite direction of the delete 
function 
sort by title (A-Z)  
no issue 
filter by genre  
looked near sort at first but then found the filter 
icon at the bottom 
book recommendation refresh  
book rec was a bit hard to notice  
looks like an ad  
maybe some ribbon or something on it would call 
more attention  
once he identified it, he was able to refresh no 
problem 
 
Book info page: 
 
See how many people rated the book pace with 4 
stars  
tapped on the overall rating at the top of the book 
info page then got the rest easily 
Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf  
was looking in the custom shelf section (probably 
because the term “shelf”)  
then clicked around and got to status menu but 
was a bit confused about why it was different from 
custom shelves 
write a quick note  
found icon without issue 
==PAGE:210==
classify the book as an AUDIO BOOK  
found icon but more so through process of 
elimination rather than because the icon was clear  
maybe it should go somewhere else? 
view which custom shelves you’ve added the book 
to  
easy 
remove it from funny shelf and create new custom 
shelf 
tried to long press the shelf tag names  
once he got to the custom shelf menu, it was easy 
to complete the task 
View (sort) most popular reviews of the book  
no issue 
Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
no problem 
 
Rating: 
 
Rate the book 3.5 stars overall  
easy 
Rate the book 2 stars  
figured it out 
Edit your rating parameters: Change rating 
parameter from Humor to Open-mindedness  
figured it out well  
how does the search function work here? does it 
search all categories at once or just one? 
Find and select the review prompt "How did you 
enjoy the author's writing style?"  
got to the review prompts page  
the top text (informative) kind of blends with the 
rest of it. maybe it should be a pop-up info thing 
attached to an info icon 
quickly navigate between review prompts  
no problem  
swiping would be nice 
publish to friends only  
got it  
it would be nice if it remembered the previous 
selection so that users don’t have to input every 
time 
maybe the default could be everyone 
 
Then did the NASA survey, the SUS, and then OUR 
survey 
 
OVERALL THOUGHTS? 
I like that you can edit your rating and review after 
publishing 
it’s nice that everything is written pretty plainly and 
I don’t have to guess about what to do 
figma limitations suck 
most confusing task was putting the book in the 
want to read shelf in the beginning (on the book 
info page). in the other pages, marking it as want to 
read is very clear with a big blue button but on the 
book info page, it’s suddenly very unclear (until you 
learn it) 
library is clean and nice, I like it 
==PAGE:211==
L
Iterations - Testing tasks
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
205
==PAGE:212==
ITERATION 3 TESTING TASKS 
• Library: 
o Mark one of your currently reading books, 
Circe, as read 
o Create a new shelf 
o Search for "Crime books" shelf 
o Go to the shared shelf and add the top book 
to your "want to read" list 
 
• Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
o Read an existing quick note of one of the 
books in your "Want to read" shelf 
o Remove the first book from your "Want to 
read" shelf 
o View "Want to read" shelf in grid view 
 
• Discovery: 
o Add 5 books from the "Discovery" page to 
your "Want to read" shelf 
o Check which series does the first book belong 
to 
 
• Book info page: 
o Mark the book as a favorite 
o See how many people rated the book pace 
with 4 stars 
o Read Emily's full review 
o Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf 
with a quick note 
o Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
 
• Rating: 
o Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
o Edit your rating parameters 
o Find and select the review prompt "How did 
you enjoy the author's writing style?" 
o Publish the rating and review only to friends 
ITERATION 4 TESTING TASKS  
• Library: 
o Mark one of your currently reading books, 
Circe, as read 
o Go to the shared shelf and add the top book 
to your "want to read" list 
 
• Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
o Read an existing quick note of one of the 
books in your "Want to read" shelf 
o Remove the first book from your "Want to 
read" shelf 
o View "Want to read" shelf in grid view 
 
• Book info page: 
o See how many people rated the book pace 
with 4 stars 
o Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf 
with a quick note 
o Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
 
• Rating: 
o Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
o Edit your rating parameters 
o Find and select the review prompt "How did 
you enjoy the author's writing style?" 
 
 
 
==PAGE:213==
ITERATION 5 TESTING TASKS 
• Discover: 
o add book and remove to want to read list 
 
• Library: 
o Mark both of your currently read books as 
finished  
o Go to the shared shelf and add the top book 
to your "want to read" list  
o Add collaborrators  
 
• Go to "Want to read" shelf: 
o Change shelf privacy to only me  
o Remove the first book from your "Want to 
read" shelf  
o Sort by title (A-Z)  
o Filter by genre  
o Refresh book recommendation  
 
• Book info page: 
o See how many people rated the book pace 
with 4 stars 
o Add the book to your "Want to read" shelf  
o Add a quick note 
o Classify the book as an AUDIO BOOK  
o View which custom shelves you’ve added the 
book to 
o Remove it from “Funny” shelf and create new 
custom shelf 
o View (sort) most popular reviews of the book 
o Mark the book as "Read" and rate the book 
 
• Rating: 
o Rate the book 3.5 stars overall 
o Rate the book 2 stars overall  
o Edit your rating parameters: Change rating 
parameter from Humor to Open-mindedness 
o Find and select the review prompt "How did 
you enjoy the author's writing style?" 
o If you wanted to quickly browse the review 
prompts, what would you do 
o Publish the review as visible to only friends 
 
==PAGE:214==
M
Iterations - User Story Maps
208
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:215==
“shelves” and “collections” 
are synonymous here!
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Activity
Goal
Task - SLICE 1
Manage personal  
library
Manage personal  
book collections
Search by title, 
author, genre, etc.
Sort by date added, 
alphabetical, genre, 
ratings, etc.
Filter by genre, 
ratings, quick notes, 
etc.
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Access rating 
preferences menu
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Decide to rate/
review now rather 
than skip for later
Input overall rating
Input additional 
ratings based on 
chosen parameters
Review book
Browse carousel of 
review prompts
Browse library of 
review prompts
Select prompt to 
use for review 
writing
Write review
Indicate privacy 
level (public, private, 
friends only, etc.)
Add book to 
favorites
Finish review
Read and write 
quick notes for 
books
Remove books from 
shelf
Sort and filter 
books on shelf
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book from 
shared shelf to 
“want to read” shelf
Write short note for 
why
Quick add/remove 
books
Slow add book with 
context
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Enter book info page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Select ‘add to shelf’
Choose shelf or 
shelves to add book 
to
Write quick note for 
context (optional)
Quickly add book to 
“want to read” shelf
Quickly remove 
book from “want to 
read” shelf
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Interact with 
recommendations 
from shared shelf 
collaborators
Browse overview of 
collections
Enter shelf/
collection
Create new shelf
Search shelves
View currently 
reading books
Mark currently 
reading book as 
read
Toggle shelf view 
between grid and 
list
View book 
recommendation
Add book to shelf or 
refresh 
recommendation
Hide book 
recommendation in 
shelf
USM 4
“shelves” and “collections” 
are synonymous here!
USM 3
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Activity
Goal
Manage personal  
library
Manage personal  
book collections
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Access rating 
preferences menu
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Decide to rate/
review now rather 
than skip for later
Input overall rating
Input additional 
ratings based on 
chosen parameters
Review book
Browse carousel of 
review prompts
Browse library of 
review prompts
Select prompt to 
use for review 
writing
Write review
Indicate privacy 
level (public, private, 
friends only, etc.)
Add book to 
favorites
Finish review
Read and write 
quick notes for 
books
Remove books from 
shelf
Sort and filter books 
on shelf
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book from 
shared shelf to 
“want to read” shelf
Write short note for 
why
Quick add/remove 
books
Slow add book with 
context
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Enter book info page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Select ‘add to shelf’
Choose shelf or 
shelves to add book 
to
Write quick note for 
context (optional)
Quickly add book to 
“want to read” shelf
Quickly remove 
book from “want to 
read” shelf
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Interact with 
recommendations 
from shared shelf 
collaborators
Browse overview of 
collections
Enter shelf/
collection
Create new shelf
Search shelves
View currently 
reading books
Mark currently 
reading book as 
read
Toggle shelf view 
between grid and 
list
USM 1
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Activity
Goal
Save book for later
Manage personal  
book collections
Quick add to want-
to-read shelf
Choose shelf or 
shelves
Add quick note
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Edit rating 
preferences
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Input general rating
Input additional 
chosen rating 
parameters
Review book
Finish rating
Receive prompt to 
review book
Write review
Slow add
Use review prompts 
for guidance
Indicate privacy 
level (public, private, 
friends only, etc.)
Finish review
Read quick notes of 
books
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book to shelf
Write short note for 
why
Discover new books
Browse book lists
Enter book info page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Browse library
Enter shelf/
collection
Toggle shelf view
Task - SLICE 1
USM 2
“shelves” and “collections” 
are synonymous here!
Keep track of want-
to-read books
Book-tracking users 
18-35 yrs old
User
Activity
Goal
Task - SLICE 1
Manage personal  
library
Manage personal  
book collections
Evaluate read books
Set rating 
preferences
Access rating 
preferences menu
Choose from limited 
rating parameters
Rate book
Indicate book as 
‘read’
Decide to rate/
review now rather 
than skip for later
Input overall rating
Input additional 
ratings based on 
chosen parameters
Read and write 
quick notes for 
books
Easily remove 
books from shelf
Sort and filter 
books on shelf
Manage shared  
book collections
Create shared shelf 
by adding 
collaborators
Add book from 
shared shelf to 
“want to read” shelf
Write short note for 
why
Quick add/remove 
books
Slow add book with 
context
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Browse book lists in 
discovery page
Enter book info 
page
Browse book info 
(ratings, reviews, 
etc.)
Select ‘add to shelf’
Choose shelf or 
shelves to add book 
to
Write quick note for 
context (optional)
Quickly add book to 
“want to read” shelf
Quickly remove 
book from “want to 
read” shelf
Browse 
recommendations 
from friends
Like and comment 
on 
recommendations 
from shared shelf 
collaborators
Browse overview of 
collections
Enter shelf/
collection
Create new shelf
Search shelves
View currently 
reading books
Mark currently 
reading book as 
read
Toggle shelf view 
between grid and 
list
Task - SLICE 1
Search by title, 
author, genre, etc.
Sort by date added, 
alphabetical, genre, 
ratings, etc.
Filter by genre, 
ratings, quick notes, 
etc.
Task - SLICE 2
Review book
Browse carousel of 
review prompts
Browse library of 
review prompts
Select prompt to 
use for review 
writing
Write review
Indicate privacy 
level (public, private, 
friends only, etc.)
Add book to 
favorites
Finish review
Search by title, 
author, genre, etc.
Sort by date added, 
alphabetical, genre, 
ratings, etc.
Filter by genre, 
ratings, quick notes, 
etc.
View book 
recommendation
Add book to shelf or 
refresh 
recommendation
Hide book 
recommendation in 
shelf
Task - SLICE 2
Task - SLICE 3
Search by title, 
author, genre, etc.
Sort by date added, 
alphabetical, genre, 
ratings, etc.
Filter by genre, 
ratings, quick notes, 
etc.
View book 
recommendation
Add book to shelf or 
refresh 
recommendation
Hide book 
recommendation in 
shelf
Task - SLICE 2
Task - SLICE 3
The order of these tasks 
were changed to reflect a 
new flow
Gabriela Abello
Section 1
==PAGE:216==
N
Final Iteration - Prototype
Figma prototype: https://www.figma.com/proto/qbJRgKRXfTCvAVH3akOqa8/Book-tracking-
Wireframes?type=design&node-id=848-27411&page-id=848%3A25037&starting-point-node-
id=848%3A27411
210
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:217==
O
Final Iteration - Microinteractions
Microinteractions FigJam: https://www.figma.com/file/tcuUpIe7ZazP3f8O70mZ1X/Iteration-
5-Micro-Interactions?type=whiteboard&node-id=0%3A1&t=YpyqaydS5KXAku48-1
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
211
==PAGE:218==
Remove from shelf
read less
Trigger: User presses 
“Create” button
Rule: System saves 
inputted text as new shelf 
name
Feedback: Modal is closed 
and library is updated witht 
he new shelf
Trigger: User presses “Add 
shelf” button
Feedback: The modal to 
provide shelf name is 
opened
Trigger: User presses 
“Mark as finished” button
Rule: System moves the 
book from “Currently 
reading” shelf to “Finished”
Feedback: Notification with 
badges and progress is 
displayed
Trigger: System waits 
300ms
Rule: System increases the 
count of finished books by 
one
Feedback: The progress 
bar expands by an 
increment of one
Trigger: User presses shelf 
label
Feedback: System 
navigates to the selected 
shelf
Trigger: User taps on sort 
menu
Feedback: Sorting 
dropdown is shown
Trigger: User taps on 
privacy dropdown menu
Feedback: Privacy 
dropdown is shown
Trigger: User taps on 
privacy dropdown option
Rule: System changes. 
privacy settings of review
Feedback:  Privacy 
dropdown is updated with 
selected option
Trigger: User taps back 
arrow icon
Feedback: System 
navigates to the previous 
page
Trigger: User taps on 
sorting option
Rule: System sorts book 
entries according to the 
selected option
Feedback: Books are 
displayed in the selected 
sorted order
Trigger: User taps 
“change” button
Feedback: Shelf privacy 
pop-up is opened
Trigger: User taps grid icon
Feedback: System 
navigates to grid view
Trigger: User taps refresh 
icon
Rule: System fetches new 
recommendation based on 
shelf contents
Feedback: New book 
recommendation is 
displayed
Trigger: User taps book 
entry
Feedback: System 
navigates to the book info 
page
Trigger: User taps “View 
note” icon/label
Rule: System fetches saved 
user note associated with 
the book
Feedback: Icon moves 
down, below book and 
filled text box appears
Trigger: User swipes the 
book entry to the left
Rule: System removes the 
book from the shelf
Feedback: Red box 
appears while swiping and 
shelf is shown without the 
book after complete swipe
Trigger: User taps list icon
Feedback: System 
navigates to list view
Trigger: User taps “Read 
more” button
Feedback: Full book 
summary is shown
Trigger: User taps heart 
icon
Rule: System adds book to 
“Favorites” shelf
Feedback: Notification is 
momentarily displayed and 
heart icon becomes filled in
Trigger: User taps “Want to 
read” button
Rule: System adds book to 
“Want to read” shelf
Feedback: Notification is 
displayed, a “Want to read” 
banner is applied to the 
book, the button text 
changes to “Remove from 
shelf”
Trigger: User taps “Read 
more” button
Feedback: Full review text 
is shown
Trigger: User taps a rating
Feedback: Rating 
distribution is shown
Trigger: User taps on sort 
menu
Feedback: Sorting 
dropdown is shown
Trigger: User taps on 
status dropdown
Feedback: Status menu 
drops down
Trigger: User taps on 
“Want to read” option
Rule: System classifies 
book into “Want to read” 
shelf
Feedback: “Want to read” 
banner is applied to the 
book, book card outline 
matches banner color, and 
status displays “Want to 
read”, Quick note icon 
appears in header
Trigger: User taps “your 
shelves with this book” 
button
Rule: System fetches 
custom shelves with 
associated book.
Feedback:  Section 
expands with custom shelf 
tags and “Add to custom 
shelf” button
Trigger: User taps “Save” 
button
Rule: System  places book 
within selected shelves
Feedback:  Custom shelves 
tags are updated
Trigger: User taps “Add to 
custom shelf” button
Feedback:  Custom shelf 
menu opens
Trigger: User taps quick 
note icon
Feedback:  Pop up opens
Trigger: User taps book 
format icon
Feedback:  Pop up opens
Trigger: User types in field
Rule: System recognizes 
that the field is filled
Feedback: “Save” button 
becomes active
Trigger: User taps “Save” 
button
Rule:  System saves quick 
note associated with. book
Feedback:  Quick note icon 
gets filled
Trigger: User taps on 
“Finished” option
Rule: System moves the 
book to “Finished” shelf
Feedback: Notification with 
badges and progress is 
displayed
Trigger: User taps “Add 
rating” button
Feedback:  System 
navigates to rating page
Trigger: User taps “View 
notes” icon/label
Rule: System fetches saved 
user note associated with 
the book
Feedback: Pop up with 
associated quick notes 
appears
Trigger: User taps “Try 
using a review prompt” 
button
Feedback:  System 
navigates to review 
prompts page
Trigger: User taps heart 
icon
Rule: System adds book to 
“Favorites” shelf
Feedback: Heart icon 
becomes filled in and text 
changes
Trigger: User taps “Finish” 
button.
Rule:  System saves and 
publishes review and 
ratings
Feedback:  System 
navigates back to 
“Finished” book info page 
and displays users ratings 
and review
Trigger: User taps “See 
other ratings” button
Feedback:  User’s other 
ratings are shown
Trigger: User taps “Edit  
rating parameters” button
Feedback:  System 
navigates to rating 
parameters page
Trigger: User taps info icon
Feedback: System shows 
information pop-up
Trigger: User taps rating 
parameters tabs
Feedback:  System 
navigates to associated tab 
page
Trigger: User a review 
prompt
Rule: The system saves 
selected prompt
Feedback:  System 
navigates back to the 
rating page and displays 
selected review prompt
Trigger: User taps arrow 
icons
Rule: The system fetches 
other review prompts
Feedback:   System 
presents next/previous 
review prompt
Trigger: User taps the stars
Rule: System records 
number of filled stars as 
rating
Feedback:  Stars fill until 
selected star, which fills 
halfway.
Trigger: User taps half star
Rule: System records 
number of filled stars as 
rating
Feedback:  Half star fills to 
full star
Trigger: User taps on “Did 
not finish” option
Rule: System classifies 
book into “Did not finish” 
shelf
Feedback: “Did not finish” 
banner appears on book 
cover card, card outline 
matches banner color, 
status displays “Did not 
finish”
Trigger: User taps on 
“Currently reading” option
Rule: System classifies 
book into “Currently 
reading” shelf
Feedback: “Currently, 
reading” banner appears on 
book cover, card outline 
matches banner color, 
status displays “Currently 
reading”
Trigger: User taps on 
sorting option
Rule: System sorts reviews 
according to the selected 
option
Feedback: Reviews are 
displayed in the selected 
sorted order
Trigger: User selects an 
option and taps “Save” 
button
Rule: System changes shelf 
privacy according to the 
selection
Feedback: Pop-up is 
closed and privacy text is 
updated
Trigger: User selects an 
option and taps “Save” 
button
Rule: System tags book 
with selected format
Feedback: Pop-up is 
closed and book format 
icon updates to. 
headphones
Trigger: User taps “Apply 
filters” button
Rule: System filters shelf 
using selected options
Feedback: Updated shelf is 
displayed
Trigger: User taps on filter 
icon
Feedback: Filter sheet 
slides up from the bottom
Trigger: User presses shelf 
label
Feedback: System 
navigates to the selected 
shelf
Trigger: User taps info icon
Feedback: System shows 
information pop-up
Trigger: User taps “Shared 
with” text
Feedback: System shows 
“Shared with” pop-up 
including all collaborators
Trigger: User adds/
removes collaborators and 
selects “Save” button
Rule: System adds/
removes collaborators to 
the shelf
Feedback: System closes 
the pop-up and updates 
the text with collaborators 
number
Trigger: User taps “Want to 
read” button
Rule: System adds book to 
“Want to read” shelf
Feedback: Notification is 
displayed, a “Want to read” 
banner is applied to the 
book, the button text 
changes to “Remove from 
shelf”
Trigger: User taps info icon
Feedback: System shows 
information pop-up
Trigger: User taps outside 
the notification
Feedback: The notification 
is closed
Trigger: User taps a badge 
icon
Feedback: Selected badge 
size increases, pre-
selected badge size 
decreases, associated 
badge description appears
Trigger: User types in field
Rule: System recognizes 
that the field is filled
Feedback: “Create” button 
becomes active
==PAGE:219==
P
Final Iteration - Completed NASA TLX
Surveys
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
213
==PAGE:220==
↑
PT
Vera
04.06,2023
~
-
w
w
W
-
W
w
==PAGE:221==
P2
-
X
L
↓
2
2
A
I
==PAGE:222==
P3
O
0
I
0
0
0
O
==PAGE:223==
p4
5
I
z
f
g
ze
==PAGE:224==
p5
5
X
⑰
⑳
⑧
⑧
==PAGE:225==
Q
Final Iteration - Completed SUS Surveys
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
219
==PAGE:226==
P1
04
0
4
04
0
4
04
0
4
04
0
4
0
3
⑧
4
I
39
2.5x39=
==PAGE:227==
P2
O
3
O
4
04
O
4
O
3
0
4
0
3
O
4
O
2
O
4
2.3 x35=
I
3
==PAGE:228==
P3
-
-
0
3
0
4
04
0
4
04
0
4
0
3
0
4
84
0
4
-
2.5438= ⑮
t
38
==PAGE:229==
p4
Interpreting:
sus scaring
odds -> scaleposition minus 1 Zallfabedbeg..
ag
evens -> 5-scale position
then sum up and multiply by
203
0
3
⑧
4
0
3
O
q
0
3
O
4
04
0
4
②
3
O
↑
-
2.3436 :0
36
==PAGE:230==
DS
0
0.
0
0
0
⑧·
0
O
O
0
3
⑮
s
==PAGE:231==
R
Final Iteration - Completed Custom
Surveys
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
225
==PAGE:232==
⑪INSTRUCTIONS: Mark each spectrum with an X.
INTUITIVE -> Is the app usable without needing instruction
or direction?
1
x
Notat all
completely
-tionthe
Peressareen desert
r
*
Not at all
completely
-
FINDABLE -
were the most important features/functions
clear and easy to access?
r
Notatall
completely
-
EASY TO NAVIGATE- Was iteasy togetaround the app
and get to where you wanted to go?
r
*
Not at all
Completely
==PAGE:233==
&INSTRUCTIONS: Mark each spectrum with an X.
INTUITIVE -> Is the app usable without needing instruction
or direction?
11
Notat all
-pidionthe
appessaweiergneinte
* 1
Not at all
completely
-
FINDABLE -
were the most important features/functions
clear and easy to access?
--
1
Notatall
completely
-
EASY TO NAVIGATE- Was iteasy togetaround the app
and get to where you wanted to go?
1- 1
Not at all
Completely
User A2
==PAGE:234==
⑬INSTRUCTIONS: Mark each spectrum with an X.
INTUITIVE -> Is the app usable without needing instruction
or direction?
-
Notat all
-pidionthe
appessaweiergneinte
-
1
Not at all
completely
-
FINDABLE -
were the most important features/functions
clear and easy to access?
-
Notatall
completely
-
EASY TO NAVIGATE--wasiteasytogetarounderofthe
r
x
Not at all
Completely
User#3
==PAGE:235==
⑭INSTRUCTIONS: Mark each spectrum with an X.
INTUITIVE -> Is the app usable without needing instruction
or direction?
1-1
Notat all
completely
-tionthe
Peressareen desert
-
Not at all
completely
-
FINDABLE -
were the most important features/functions
clear and easy to access?
1
Notatall
completely
-
EASY TO NAVIGATE- Was iteasy togetaround the app
and get to where you wanted to go?
-
Not at all
Completely
UseN*
==PAGE:236==
.INSTRUCTIONS: Mark each spectrum with an X.
INTUITIVE -> Is the app usable without needing instruction
or direction?
-1
Notat all
completely
-tionthe
Peressareen desert
-*
Not at all
completely
-
FINDABLE -
were the most important features/functions
clear and easy to access?
n
*
Notatall
completely
-
EASY TO NAVIGATE--wasiteasytogetarounderofthe
1
x
1
Not at all
Completely
User#S
==PAGE:237==
S
Comprehensive Competitive Analysis
Table
This table combines the initial competitive analysis done before user research as well as
the updated competitive analysis done post user research. The greyed out section of the
table was not included in our scope for this project.
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
231
==PAGE:238==
232
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
==PAGE:239==
Goodreads
StoryGraph
Bookly
Amazon
Kindle
Apple
Books
Kobo
Books
Libby
Manual
Journal
Our
Solution
read in app
X
X
X
X
purchase books in app
X
read samples of books
X
X
X
X
X
customize reading interface
X
X
X
X
track reading progress
X
X
X
X
X
?
X
bookmark & annotate
X
X
X
X
X
X
set reading goals
X
X
X
X
X
?
X
social aspect (follow friends)
X
X
insightful personal statistics
X
X
X
X
?
unlock achievements
X
X
?
?
X
track print, digital, audio books
All
All
All
D
D, A
D, A
D, A
All
All
custom book collections
X
X
X
X
X
X
half star ratings
X
X
?
?
X
X
”Did not finish” shelf built in
X
X
X
X
shelf sorting
X
X
?
?
?
X
X
shelf filtering
X
?
?
?
X
X
shelf searching
?
X
?
?
?
X
X
tags system
X
?
X
X
descriptive ratings
X
X
X
clear rating on Book Info page
X
X
X
?
?
X
easy to navigate
X
X
?
?
?
X
context notes for shelved books
?
X
X
shared shelves
X
assisted reviews
X
X
precise privacy control
X
?
X
X
clean, simple, intuitive UI
X
X
?
?
X
book quick-add ability
X
X
?
?
X
X
customizable functionalities
?
?
X
X
X
save review drafts
?
X
X
feedback on finishing the book
X
?
?
?
X
Improving UX in book-tracking platform through design thinking
233
==PAGE:240==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
