==PAGE:1==
A Model Coupling Framework for Adequate
Long Term Energy System Planning
Master Thesis
s212364
HAMBURGER Hugo, BERG ROSENDAL Mathias, M ¨UNSTER Marie,
HEGGARTY Thomas, PLESSIEZ Paul, JANIN Jean-Marc, GIRARD Robin
Abstract
Growing shares of renewable energy sources (RES) are increasing spatio-temporal variability in energy systems. Capacity
Expansion Models (CExMs), a key family of tools used in long-term investment planning, struggle to express such variability,
leading to well-understood biases in results, including security-of-supply concerns. Soft-linking CExMs with more detailed
Production Cost Models (PCM) has been identified in academic literature as a promising solution to these problems.
Building upon existing work, we propose an improved, automated bi-directional framework soft-linking two such models, with
a feedback loop based on multi-temporal flexibility provision constraints. The framework’s behaviour is systematically analysed and
fine-tuned, ultimately providing long-term investment pathways for the European energy system that both reach carbon neutrality
and meet an exogenous security-of-supply criterion.
Index Terms - Model Coupling, Automated Bi-Directional Soft-Linking, Long-Term Adequacy, Generation and
Transmission Expansion Planning
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Division for Climate and Energy Policy
DTU - Technical Unitversity of Denmark
Denmark
R&D Department - Long Term Climate, Balancing and Transmission Grid
RTE -R´eseau de Transport d’´Electricit´e
France
28/07/2023
==PAGE:2==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am deeply grateful to my advisors, M ¨UNSTER Marie and BERG ROSENDAL Mathias, for giving me the opportunity to
do this MSc thesis project, for their flexibility in the supervision as well as for their rich guidance throughout this work.
Furthermore, I’m also deeply thankful to RTE for providing me with the chance to conduct my research and for all of the
resources and support they provided. I would particularly like to thank PLESSIEZ Paul and JANIN Jean-Marc for all the
time they gave me, for their extensive support as well as for the welcome they and the ANTARES team in general gave me.
Furthemore, I would like to say a special thank to HEGGARTY Thomas for all the extensive backing it has brought me and
in particular for the chance he gave to explore his rich work.
I would also like to thank GIRARD Robin for his wise and helpful advice and for the great opportunity it gave me to continue
this work as part of a PhD.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents and my family for everything they have given me so far and for having contributed
so greatly to making me the person I am today.
1
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
I
Introduction
1
II
Methodology
2
II-A
A Bi-Directional Soft-Linking Framework for adequate long term energy system planning
. . . . . . .
2
II-B
A dive into the system behaviour : the Modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
II-C
A quantification of the system flexibility requirements: the Flexibility Target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
II-D
A quantification of the flexibility provision : the Flexibility Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
III
Test Case
5
III-A
Capacity Expansion Model - OSeMOSYS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
III-B
Production Cost Model - ANTARES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
III-C
Description of the modelled System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
IV
Results
6
IV-A
An aggregated metric combining adequacy and cost related informations on the system . . . . . . . . .
6
IV-B
Soft-linked-model general behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
IV-B1
Convergence toward a local optimum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
IV-B2
Flexibility Targets and Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
IV-C
Convergence Sensitivity to the Hyperparameters Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
IV-D
Analysis of the resulting expansion plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
IV-E
Discussion on the framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
V
Conclusion and Outlook
13
Appendix
14
A
Literature Review on Model Coupling
14
B
Extra Models Description
17
C
Implementing a CO2 Budget Management in a Myopic PCM
18
C.1
Pre Allocation of the carbon budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C.2
Relaxation of the CO2 Budget Pre-Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
C.3
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
D
A short overview of the modulation
21
E
Data Overview
22
F
Extra Results Figures
26
References
30
2
==PAGE:4==
A Model Coupling Framework for Adequate
Long Term Energy System Planning
HAMBURGER Hugo
BERG ROSENDAL Mathias
M ¨UNSTER Marie
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
DTU, Kgs Lyngby, DENMARK
hamburger.hugo@gmail.com
{mberos;maem}@dtu.dk
HEGGARTY Thomas
PLESSIEZ Paul
JANIN Jean-Marc
R´eseau de Transport d’Electricit´e
RTE, Paris, FRANCE
{first-name.last-name}@rte-france.com
GIRARD Robin
Mines Paris PSL
PERSEE, Sophia Antipolis, FRANCE
robin.girard@minesparis.psl.eu
Abstract—Growing shares of renewable energy sources (RES)
are increasing spatio-temporal variability in energy systems.
Capacity Expansion Models (CExMs), a key family of tools
used in long-term investment planning, struggle to express
such variability, leading to well-understood biases in results,
including security-of-supply concerns. Soft-linking CExMs with
more detailed Production Cost Models (PCM) has been identified
in academic literature as a promising solution to these problems.
Building upon existing work, we propose an improved, au-
tomated bi-directional framework soft-linking two such models,
with a feedback loop based on multi-temporal flexibility provision
constraints. The framework’s behaviour is systematically anal-
ysed and fine-tuned, ultimately providing long-term investment
pathways for the European energy system that both reach carbon
neutrality and meet an exogenous security-of-supply criterion.
Index Terms—Model Coupling, Automated Bi-Directional Soft-
Linking, Long-Term Adequacy, Generation and Transmission
Expansion Planning
I. INTRODUCTION
The energy transition and its related growing penetration
of variable renewable energy sources (VRES) is transforming
the operation and thus the planning of energy systems. These
rising shares of VRES are increasing energy systems’ spatio-
temporal variability [1]. The system ability to cope with both
the variability and uncertainty is called flexibility [2]. There-
fore, ensuring security of supply requires way more system’s
flexibility to cope with these additional multi-scale system
variability and uncertainty [3]. Consequently, ensuring that
this system flexibility is reliably represented in the modelling
tools is becoming a key element in the adequate planning of
future energy systems. This is especially true for the long-term
scenarios, in which VRES plays a predominant role.
In the domain of long-term investment planning, Capacity
Expansion Models (CExMs) have historically been essential
tools, providing the basis on which stakeholders decide when,
where, how much and what technology type to build or decom-
mission [4]. Nevertheless, they face challenges in effectively
incorporating multi-scale variability and its related flexibility
needs. Traditionally, these models rely on aggregated or repre-
sentative time-steps to ensure their computational feasibility.
While efforts have been made to optimize the selection of
these time slices (TS) to condense information, this approach
falls short in adequately capturing spatio-temporal interde-
pendencies and extremum quantiles/peak events, while both
of which significantly impact the dimensioning process of
adequate power system planning. As a result, well-documented
biases emerge in their results, with notable over-estimations
of base load and variable renewable energy sources (VRES)
capacities [2, 5, 6], while concurrently underestimating peak
load capacities, system flexibility needs, loss of load, opera-
tional costs, and emissions [6–10]. Furthermore, this approach
also does not manage properly storages and interconnections
which is problematic considering their growing importance
as flexibility sources [11, 12]. In the end, these biases raise
significant concerns regarding the security of supply in the
resulting plans [2, 13, 14].
The task of ensuring system adequacy and complying with
exogenous security-of-supply criteria, which impose maxi-
mum levels of Loss of Load Expectation (LOLE), becomes
particularly challenging for transmission system operators
(TSOs) [2]. To achieve this, a proven methodology consists
in the assessment of various scenarios of VRES production,
demand, and technical outages, making it increasingly diffi-
cult for Capacity Expansion Models (CExMs) to adequately
incorporate this complexity. By incorporating hourly Monte
Carlo simulations1, production cost models (PCM) serve as a
versatile tool for system operators to evaluate system adequacy
of a mix defined beforehand, considering multiple potential
futures and compliance with security-of-supply regulations
[15]. Typically, such PCM simulations of the systems proposed
by CExMs with harmonized parameters tend to lead to high
levels of loss-of-load expectation (LOLE), questioning the
ability of CExMs models to make adequate plans [5]. As a
1Considering the uncertainty of the future is essential in adequacy as-
sessments. To achieve this, multiple scenarios of weather, along with their
associated demand, variable renewable energy sources (VRES) production,
and technical outages, are sampled using a Monte Carlo approach and modeled
in the PCM. Going forward, the term ’Weather Year’ will designate an
aggregated yearly scenario.
==PAGE:5==
consequence, it becomes imperative to enhance and improve
these models so that they can provide relevant insights on
future system developments .
The current literature strongly advocates for the coupling of
CExMs with more detailed energy system models (ESMs) like
PCM as the preferred strategy to enhance the capabilities of
CExMs [2, 11, 16, 17]. This methodology enables improved
technical, spatial, and temporal representation in the CExM
while ensuring manageable computational complexity of the
linked-model. In the context of addressing adequacy concerns,
the coupling of CExMs with a Monte-Carlo based PCM
emerges as a highly effective solution, given its widespread us-
age for adequacy assessments and the opportunity to leverage
state-of-the-art models existing knowledge. Here, the concept
behind this model-linking approach is twofold: gaining a
comprehensive understanding of the operational aspects of
the proposed systems trajectories and utilizing this detailed
insight to refine the flexibility consideration within the CExM
framework (through a proxy of the PCM).
However, although this solution is often mentioned in the
literature, only a handful of articles implemented linked model
framework. Moreover, apart from a few papers [5, 6], those
who did were essentially seeking for a proof of the concept,
and so worked on simple cases (single node ...), thereby
limiting the difficulty of setting up the coupling and encounter-
ing its design flaws (single node and a couple of iterations).
In addition, there is a clear gap on the question of system
planning integrating adequacy issues through model linking
as well as on the understanding of the behavior of such cou-
pled models, especially on long simulations2. Building upon
Heggarty’s PhD proposed coupling design [5], this paper seeks
to address those gaps by proposing an improved, automated
bi-directional framework soft-linking two such models, with
a generic feedback loop based on multi-temporal flexibility
provision constraints. The framework’s behaviour is analysed
and fine-tuned, ultimately providing long-term investment
pathways for the European energy system that both reach
carbon neutrality and meet an exogenous security-of-supply
criterion3 while keeping a form of cost optimisation.
The article is structured as follows. Section II elaborates on
the coupling methodology and provides insights on the design
choices made. Section III presents the case study along with
its key parameters. The obtained results are reported in Section
IV. Lastly, Section V offers a discussion on the potential
benefits and drawbacks of implementing the proposed concept,
gives perspectives for additional work and concludes the paper.
II. METHODOLOGY
For this work, we adopted the terminology that seems to
be the most widespread in literature. As the subject of energy
system models coupling is still in its infancy phase, some of
these notions are not yet set in stone and may variate among
papers. Here, the concept of soft-linking involves the indirect
2Simulation has to be understood as a set of iterations of the soft-linked
model. Also, by long simulation, we mean a number of iterations of ≈O(102)
3 i.e. a maximum of 3h of LOLE per year and region (used in France)
exchange of information between models through a proxy.
The information may be transformed before being fed into
the receiving model, differentiating it from hard-linked models
where one model’s output directly contributes as parameters
in another model. On the other side, the concept of Bi-
directional linkage has to be understood in the sense that both
models are alternatively receiver and provider of feedback,
which implies an iterative loop process between these models.
Also, the considered linked-model was implemented with two
open-source energy system models adopting a central planner
approach (OSeMOSYS and ANTARES). The CExM assumes
perfect foresight with a low temporal and technical resolution
(there is no consideration of ramping, min/max power, min
up/down times ...), while the PCM uses myopic foresight, a
Monte-Carlo approach, and a higher technical and temporal
resolution. All the implemented models extensions will be
presented in the following section.
The methodology is divided into five parts: the general de-
scription of the model-linking framework, the post-processing
approach used to derive system component modulation across
different time scales from PCM outputs, the update of flexi-
bility proxies and target values, and a brief discussion on the
importance of parameter harmonization between models.
A. A Bi-Directional Soft-Linking Framework for adequate
long term energy system planning
The design choices made in this paper aim to adopt a
TSO perspective in order to tackle the specific problem of
adequate long-term energy system planning. The primary
objective is to ensure long-term security of supply, with system
cost optimization as a secondary objective. This problem is
addressed by the enhancement of the CExM through its bi-
directional soft-linking with a PCM under the prism of system-
adequacy and -flexibility.
The linking framework, designed with these considerations
in mind, uses a mathematical aggregated approach to represent
power system concepts, including flexibility and adequacy
under a generic and aggregated mathematical constraint. The
idea behind the PCM feedback is to constraint the CExM, to
simultaneously guide it towards adequate investment plans
through the expression of region- and timescale-specific
flexibility needs and expected provision per technology.
In other words, we expect to implement a target ban on
inadequate solutions from the feasible solution space. The
Flexibility Constraints (1) enforces a minimum of region r,
year y and timescale ts4 specific flexibility level of investment
FTr,y,tl for the system such that :
FTr,y,tl −FTDr,y,tl ≤
X
t
Ct,r,y.FPt,r,y,tl
(1)
The constraint (1) is built such as the sum of the installed
capacities Ct,r,y of a given technology t, region r and year y
weighted by their respective timescale tl specific flexibility
4 i.e. Annual, Weekly and Daily timescale with respective frequency ranges
of [1; 6], ]6; 180], ]180; 8760]
2
==PAGE:6==
Fig. 1: Flowchart of the the bi-directionnal soft-linking process
proxies FPt,r,y,tl directly express a scale specific degree
of flexibility. It is built under the form of soft constraint
and allows flexibility target deviations FTDr,y,tl to manage
transitory infeasibilities. The respective penalty is large enough
to be avoided at all costs. That way, it enable an homogeneous
formulation in the expansion problem, facilitating the adequate
cost minimization. As illustrated by Figure 1, the flexibility
constraints are updated at each iteration according to the
following methodology:
1) The CExM is run, and the resulting mix is sent to the
PCM, for several target years in the investment period.
2) These systems are simulated using the PCM for all of the
selected target years, for a set of different hourly weather
conditions5. The resulting hourly generation plans and
loss of load expectation (LOLE) are handed over to a
post-processing layer.
3) LOLEs are used to derive System Flexibility Targets,
while the hourly generation plans are used to obtain
Flexibility Proxy values, using a mix of signal process-
ing, filtering and statistical analysis.
4) These targets and proxy values are fed back to the
OSeMOSYS problem, and expressed through the afore-
mentioned flexibility constraint.
Other linking approaches are possible for the considered
problem but have not been investigated here. We could for
exemple think of an economic feedback where we would aim
to express the economic utility of each technology additional
capacity.
5Impacting the load and VRES load factor time series
B. A dive into the system behaviour : the Modulation
Before updating the feedback parameters values, the hourly
behaviour of the system components for each weather year
is post treated to disaggregate the effective flexibility contri-
bution of each component on the Annual, Weekly and Daily
timescales. As highlighted in several papers, ESM’s variability
and its related flexibility are multi-scale objects [1]. In other
words, the ability of a technology to provide flexibility is
specific to its location and to the timescale considered (i.e.
annual, weekly, daily ...) [18]. Therefore, we considered that
the higher the resolution at which flexibility is considered, the
more accurately the need can be met and hereby reducing the
cost of making the system compliant to the resource adequacy
criterion.
Fig. 2: General overview of the flexibility solutions
modulation calculation methodology
To do so, the frequency spectrum of each system compo-
nents production curve is processed through a discrete trans-
form, filtered on the yearly, weekly and daily corresponding
frequencies range and then transformed back to the tem-
poral dimension through inverse discrete Fourier transform.
Those technology-, region-, weather-year- and timescale-
specific modulation hourly time series are assumed to be the
effective flexibility contribution of a system component and
are called: Modulation. This process is illustrated in Figure 2.
Note that the considered timescales4 were not obtained through
3
==PAGE:7==
an optimization process but were based on common practices
and knowledge of power system management
C. A quantification of the system flexibility requirements: the
Flexibility Target
The flexibility target imposes a minimum of investment in
flexibility sources as highlighted in (1). This target has to
be read in the light of two fundamental underlying concepts.
Firstly, it represents the trade-off between two antagonistic
dynamics, the minimization of both the system imbalance and
investments costs. Secondly, the flexibility target values don’t
have a direct physical meaning and must be interpreted in
regard to the proxies of the available flexibility sources, as
well as by the system mix initially proposed by the CExM
without any feedback. Targets updates are based on :
FT n+1
r,y,tl = FT n
r,y,tl.(1 + Γn(LOLEn
r,y).Θtl(LOLEn
r,y)) (2)
Θtl(LOLEn
r,y) =
(
min(
∥modLOLEn
r,y,tl
∥
∥LOLEn
r,y∥, 1)
if LOLEn
r,y > 0
1
otherwise
(3)
Equation 2 gives the update process of the flexibility target
value based on the previous iteration one FT n
r,y,tl and on the
resulting LOLEn
r,y of a given year y, region r and timescale
tl. The function Γn outlined in Figure 3 gives the adjustment
of the target based on the LOLE hourly volume LOLEhn
r,y
at iteration n. An asymmetric learning rate decay LRD is
applied to the function to regularize the learning and reduce
push pull effects between nodes. This learning rate factor LR
of a given iteration it is LR = (1−LRD)it. More aggressive
profiles were also tested throughout this work, the optimal
choice of profile depend of the complexity of the study and
of the balance the modeller prefers between the speed of
convergence and the optimality of the solution. The target
adjustment function seeks to find the lowest value respecting
the resource adequacy criterion3 while the function Θtl (3)
make the adjustment timescale-specific in accordance to their
respective LOLE modulation amplitude6.
Fig. 3: Flexibility Target Adjustment function Γn(LOLEn
r,y)
for a downward adjustment learning rate of decay of
LRD = 0.01
6Equation 3’s norm corresponds to the amplitude of the discrete signal
A feedback based on energy volumes of LOLE expressed
in a volume of energy instead of a number of hours (LOLEh)
may be more stable, but it would be more tricky to integrate
the resource adequacy criterion. Also, according to our results,
it may be interesting from a techno-economic perspective to
think that criteria in term of energy volume as it would be
more representative of the exact system needs (e.g. a lack of
10 MW over a few hours is less demanding in flexibility than
a lack of several GWs over the same number of hours).
D. A quantification of the flexibility provision : the Flexibility
Proxies
Flexibility proxies reflect the effective flexibility contribu-
tion per installed capacity of a specific technology at a certain
scale and for a given mix which is a result of the production
plan optimized by the PCM. It was preferred over using the
potential available flexibility margins in order to ease the proxy
calculation and to add stability to the coupled model. Also, it is
consistent considering that the PCM minimizes the operational
expenditure as well as the imbalances (due to the loss of load
cost), reflecting in the end to the optimization of flexibilities’
usage and costs. The proxies are updated such as:
FP n+1
t,r,y,tl = I.FP n
t,r,y,tl + (1 −I).(
qntl0.5
wy(qntl0.8(
modF S
r,y,tl,wy,ts
P
F S modF S
r,y,tl,wy,ts
)
P
F S CF S,r,y
CF S,r,y
)) (4)
ts ∈{ts ∈TS|
|P
F S modF S
r,y,tl,wy,ts|
maxts(|P
F S modF S
r,y,tl,wy,ts|) ≥0.2}
(5)
The aggregation process outlined in Equation 4 consolidates
the contribution to the system of an individual flexibility
source FS evaluated on region r, year y, and timescale tl
on the ground of its modulation on several weather year wy.
The core component of that equation is the quantile of the
flexibility source’s modulation share.
It is worth noting that only time steps ts with a total system
modulation absolute value greater than 20% of their maximum
are considered to avoid instabilities arising from lower values.
Then, the median of all those weather year wy modulation
share quantile is used to aggregate flexibility informations
related to the future uncertainty. These aggregated values are
weighted by their share of installed capacity in the mix of
flexible sources to avoid penalizing sparsely deployed flexible
sources. Additionally, the 80% quantile seek to express a
situation where an inflexible system would be likely to meet
imbalanced situations (i.e. near peak of demand) in and
so to reflect a flexibility source’s specific contribution [18].
Therefore, the aggregate that we assume to be the effective
flexibility contribution of a flexibility source is assimilated as
its marginal7 potential to contribute to the system flexibility.
Adding an inertia factor I avoid excessive overfitting on the
previous iteration system’s behaviour since the new proxy
values aims to be a representative anticipation of the next
iteration flexibility marginal potential
7marginal in term of installed capacity
4
==PAGE:8==
Before going further, it is essential to discuss the notion of
’Flexibility Source’. For the considered framework, it corre-
spond to each system component that may reduce the LOLE at
a given scale. Therefore, it concern every technology referred
in Figure 5, i.e. power plants, storages, interconnections and
renewables. Even if some of those components such as VREs
can be considered as inflexible, it will be reflected by null or
negative proxy if their modulation is in opposition with the
one of the load. Also, a special consideration is applied to
VRES, backed by several PCM simulation results, we made
the hypothesis that the energy spillage can be assimilated to
VRE curtailement. Hence, tt is shared among their production
based on the share of a given VRE production among the
total VRE production of that node. It is assumed to be their
ability to offer down balancing and so, a form of flexibility.
This relation is therefore similar for their modulation and is
detailed in (6), with V RE being the set of VRES considered in
the system. Furthermore, considering the flexibility proxies of
all components available for investment enables to maximize
the economic optimization in the sense that the flexibility
constraint can act as a substitute/supplement of the demand
balancing constraints. Put in another way, for the cases where
the flexibility constraint are more restrictive for the CExM
than the balancing constraints, only the technologies consid-
ered as flexibility sources allows to provide all informations
related to the effective system flexibility and so to ensure cost
minimization.
modF S∈V RE
r,y,tl,wy,ts =
modF S
r,y,tl,wy,ts.(1 −
modSpillage
r,y,tl,wy,ts
P
vre∈V RE modvre
r,y,tl,wy,ts
)
(6)
III. TEST CASE
This section presents the model as well as the data used
to implement the framework. Note that the CExM and PCM
used in this studies are interchangeable with others similar
models on condition of harmonizing the data used as well as
the problem considered. The main reason behind the choice of
OSeMOSYS and ANTARES was to capitalize on the signif-
icant existing and directly accessible knowledge/expertise on
those models. It also allowed us to reuse an existing data set.
In the end, it was essentially a choice of convenience which
can be the case for anyone as the proposed framework was
designed to be generic.
A. Capacity Expansion Model - OSeMOSYS
The open-source CExM used in this paper is OSeMOSYS.
It was made publicly available in 2008 by KTH university
and first described in a peer-reviewed paper in 2011 [19].
and since then, has been used in many peer-reviewed case
studies. OSeMOSYS was designed with a heavily modular
structure easing its integration with other tools, thus making
it a practical solution for model-coupling. This CExM en-
ables long-term expansion trajectory planning using a central
planner approach and assumes perfect foresight. Its objective
function minimises the discounted total cost consisting of the
annualised CAPEX and OPEX assigned to each technology,
year and region minus their 2050 salvage value, the unsupplied
energy costs and the penalties considered. Annualised CAPEX
and salvage value are considered to avoid late investment
disincentive. Its temporal granularity relies on the aforemen-
tioned timeslices. In addition to the open-source OSeMOSYS
version, we also used a power transmission module developed
in [5] as well as an home-made decommissioning module. The
Power Transmission module allows homogeneous investment
in interconnection compared to the other technologies. It
considers linear power losses while enforcing only Kirchhoff’s
current law at a rough geographical granularity. The full
description of the upto-date OSeMOSYS problem is available
online in the OSeMOSYS manual [OSEMOSYS.] Also for
the purpose of this study, only continuous investment options
were allowed for OSeMOSYS.
B. Production Cost Model - ANTARES
On the other hand, ANTARES is the open-source PCM
composing the linked-model. The primary objective behind its
design is to support resource adequacy studies by producing
a least-cost hydro-thermal unit commitment and economic
dispatch, for several weather years at hourly resolution and
over large interconnected systems. It is being developed by
the French TSO RTE and is now a core element of several
institutions’ for both short-term and long-term prospective
studies (e.g. [20]), as well as a tool routinely used in academic
studies [5, 6, 14]. The version that was used for this paper is
the V8.2.0. For the resolution of the problem, each soft-linked
year8 consists of several weather-year scenarios, themselves
broken down into weekly problems solved independently but
coupled to some degree for a considered weather year using
various heuristics, hence implementing a myopic foresight.
Each problem consists in a minimisation of the operational
costs, defined as the sum of the thermal costs, CO2 costs
and their associated virtual usage values, Hydro costs, and
transmission costs (a small hurdle cost proportional to power
flow). Simple asymmetric Net Transfer Capacities (NTC)
values were used to model power flows, though Antares is able
to model them more accurately. Note that thermal generation is
grouped into clusters of units with similar characteristics, they
are determined through heuristics based on the OSeMOSYS
continuous investments. The behaviour of controllable plants,
interconnections, as well as long- and short-term storages is
optimised by Antares while VRESs (including biomass in
this study case) are modelled as must-run9 (but curtailable)
generation. Reserves are accounted for within each hour of the
unit-commitment schedule. They are defined separately in each
region with uniform contracted volumes scaled on their annual
load. The reconciliation between the weekly problems and
the long-term storage management is handled either through
heuristic based on the load weekly load levels over the year
or through usage values. ANTARES doesn’t allow explicit
8the CExM investment years assessed in ANTARES (i.e. 2020, 2030...2050)
9their hourly load factors are provided by the weather years time series
5
==PAGE:9==
emission constraint. They were implemented using stocks
managed in a virtual system through a mix of heuristics and
usage values. Although it may lead to a sub-optimal use of the
fossil based power plants, the difference was found acceptable
for the considered study case. Also, it was an essential addition
to avoid a total bypass of OSeMOSYS’ carbon budget with
both the flexibility constraint and unrestricted emissions in
ANTARES. The full description of the upto-date ANTARES
problem is available online in [21];
Fig. 4: Description of the technologies and fuels considered
in the modeled system
C. Description of the modelled System
The studied model and most of its related data are based
on the open source European project OSMOSE 2020 [22]. In
accordance with European TSO requirements, our modelling
work covers the European power system, composed of 33
countries aggregated to 17 nodes. A subset of the model
consisting of 3 nodes (France, Germany and British Islands
aggregates) was used to fine tune the linkage in order to lighten
the computation. Both are presented in Figure 5. The scope of
the modeled system was restricted to the electric vector alone
but we expect consistent results for coupled systems.
TS and WY time-series values are derived from a set of
35 reanalysis historical weather data. The temporal period
modeled in this work is the 2020-2050 horizon. OSeMOSYS
use a 5 years interval while ANTARES uses a 10 years
interval. Note that the flexibility constraints for the years
not assessed in ANTARES are assumed to be similar to
the previous assessed one (e.g. 2025 flexibility constraint’s
is equivalent to the 2020 one, 2035 is equivalent to 2030
...). Considering the temporal granularity of the models, 24
TS were used for the CExM, using 1 representative day
per season split in 6 period and based their average values
over the weather years considered. This small number of TS
aims to reduce the computational load considering that the
operational aspects relies essentially on the PCM. Moreover,
literature highlight that below a few hundreds of TS, their
number has nearly no impact on the optimal mix [23]. This
is especially the case here with the multi-node study and the
several WY considered. The technologies considered in this
work are described in Figure 4. The technologies modeled
in ANTARES simulations are the same as those considered
in OSeMOSYS, except onshore and offshore wind which are
considered as a single technology, and hydro which is split
into run-of-river and long term storage. Also, in ANTARES,
batteries may only be used for short-term storages storage over
independent weekly problems. The cost of unsupplied energy
was set to 10k EUR/MWh while curtailment was free. CO2
budgets are based on a country-wise linear emission trajectory
compliant with the Paris agreement The maximum deployment
rhythms are based on the most ambitious deployment rate
found in RTE study Energy Pathways 2050 for France [20]. It
was then scaled according to the demand level of the countries.
Fig. 5: Modeled System, aggregates are modeled as single
nodes
IV. RESULTS
This section presents the results obtained by implementing
the proposed bidirectional soft-linked model framework on the
afore-mentioned test case. Most of the work was carried on
the 3 node system in order to reduce the computing burden
and to allow us a deeper study of the framework behaviour.
The framework and the obtained results were then validated
by simulating the full model. However, we did not have the
opportunity to study it in greater depth due to time constraints.
The soft-linked-model was simulated with the Xpress solver on
an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6140 CPU, resulting in computation
duration of approximately 6000 seconds per iteration for the
17 nodes model and 500 seconds per iteration for the 3 nodes
one. These performance may be improved by ≃10% with
an optimisation of both the PCM post treatment and results
writing. Also, a lot more of weather years may be used for the
PCM with an adapted CPU considering that their optimisation
is solved in parallel.
A. An aggregated metric combining adequacy and cost related
informations on the system
During this work, there was an important need of having an
aggregated metric describing both the cost of a system as well
as the spread to the 3h resource adequacy constraint which are
both objectives that the soft-linked-model seeks to minimise,
hence the need for such a metric that provide an holistic
evaluation of the soft-linked-model performance evolution.
Note that the question of identifying the best investment
6
==PAGE:10==
Fig. 6: Score, CAPEX and System Adequacy Evolution over
a 3-nodes simulation of 400 iterations with LRD = 0. The
”3h - Spread” correspond to P
r,y max(LOLEn
r,y −3, 0)
and the ”Capex Ratio” to the normalised CAPEX CAP EXn
CAP EX0
pathways among a simulation is a tricky one and is not really
the role of the score considering the difficulty of the arbitrage
between system cost and system adequacy. For these reasons,
such questions will be answered using a Pareto equilibrium
approach while the score will be used to provide insights on
the behaviour of the soft-linked-model, i.e. the way the system
cost as well as the region- and year-specific LOLE evolve
among a simulation.
Scoren =
log((CAPEXn
CAPEX0 )4.(
X
r,y
max(LOLEn
r,y −3, 0)2
8760
+ 1)) (7)
That score is defined in the equation (7). Considering the
difficulty of assessing the system costs, between the potential
bias that may come from very low operational expenditures
(OPEX) of highly renewable systems, the totally distorted
OPEX of system with high volume of loss of load, the
consideration of salvage values ... We chose to consider only
the total capital expenditures (CAPEX) as a proxy of the
investment level in extra capacities for adequacy purpose. To
only visualize the increase of investments made by the model
for flexibility purpose, it was weighted by the CAPEX ob-
tained by OSeMOSYS for a non binding flexibility constraint
CAPEX0 (i.e. the one obtained with null flexibility targets),
note that CAPEX0 represent a lower bound of the soft-
linked model global optimum. This CAPEX ratio was then
up-scaled by an arbitrary exponential factor chosen to ensure
clarity and consistency. For the consideration of the loss of
load, it was inspired by the mean squared error (MSE) metric.
Here, each year- and region-specific LOLE updward spread
to the 3h ressource adequacy criterion max(LOLEn
r,y −3, 0)
are considered as the deviation to the optimal objective of
the model. The squared factor represents an aversion toward
an heterogeneous distribution of the LOLE, between countries
and years. The logarithm ensure readability of the score. It
could also be noted that the LOLE MSE can be seen as a
proxy of ANTARES OPEX among the simulation considering
that the cost of loss of load represents most of the OPEX in
imbalanced iterations. An improvement would be to substract
the cost of LOLE from the OPEX and then to consider
them. However, the results of this formulation were deemed
unsatisfactory due to a prevailing trend in the expansion plans
towards low average marginal costs, accompanied by signif-
icant volumes of cost-less curtailment. These outcomes were
attributed to an inaccurate representation of the future market
structure and the negligence of sector-coupling aspects, which
have a substantial impact on the energy system dynamics. As
a consequence, the model failed to accurately represent OPEX
and they were therefore ignored by the score metric.
An illustration of the score evolution of a 400 iterations
simulation using 3 nodes is presented in Figure 7a. Due to all
the multi-scale adjustments of the flexibility constraints that
takes place simultaneously, there is a lot of local instabilities
in the evolution of the score, therefore it is preferable to have
a windowed mean approach10 to observe the trend of the sim-
ulation combined with the evolution of the score’s minimum.
An other way of visualising the soft-linked-model behaviour
is showed in Figure 6, although the direct chronology between
simulations is loss, it erases the short term instabilities while
aggregating informations on adequacy, costs and on the trend
of the simulation. Here, the score helps to synthesize those
informations by a quick identification of the best iterations.
B. Soft-linked-model general behaviour
1) Convergence toward a local optimum :
Using the afore-described score metric, we observed substan-
tial short-term variability (i.e. the variation of the score from
two successive iterations). That variability observed in the evo-
lution of the score can be attributed to various factors, with the
primary one being the fluctuation in scale-specific flexibility
constraint relaxation (1). Additionally, these instabilities may
arise due to a substantial increase in scale-specific Loss of
Load Expectation (LOLE) resulting from minor reductions
in the corresponding flexibility targets, particularly on nodes
with low demand levels. Further implementation of self-
adaptive regularization should ensure a smoother and more
stable optimization process. However, these instabilities are
not constraining as what really matters for meta-heuristic like
algorithm is the improvement of the best solution. Also, a
windowed mean of score gives its trend while getting rid
of its short-term variability. Such metrics are illustrated by
Figure 7a. It was observed on several studies with varying
hyperparameters that we could generally identify three phases
in the behaviour of the soft-linked model.
10here, the windowed mean was assessed on the 10 previous iterations
7
==PAGE:11==
Fig. 7: Evolution of the Score, Adequacy and CAPEX of a simulation, the adequacy is assessed through the sum of the
up-ward spread toward the adequacy criteria and the CAPEX is normalized by the one found by OSeMOSYS alone without
the flexibility constraint
(a) 3-nodes — 400 iterations — LRD=0
(b) 17-nodes — 100 iterations — LRD=0.01
1) The first one being rapid and significant improvement of
the score due to the ease of reaching low levels of LOLE
by strongly increasing the flexibility target, it generally
represents O(101) iterations (e.g. 50 in Figure 7a).
2) The second phase can be seen as the fine tuning of the
flexibility target and proxies, it is a slower and less sig-
nificant improvement of the score than the first phase but
it reduces the costs, that second phase generally required
approximately (O(102) iterations. Typical markers of
that phase are visible in Figure 7a where LOLE spread
to the adequacy criterion is frequently reached while the
capex follows a decreasing trend.
3) Finally, the last iterations may repeat a decaying pseudo-
periodic evolution pattern that is considered to be the
exploration of a local optimum.
Although that third phase doesn’t provide notable improve-
ments, it refines the Pareto front and provides almost equiva-
lent solutions in term of scores but that may slightly change
in term of scale specific investment (i.e. adding marginal
capacity in a node A may be quite similar to adding them in
a neighbouring interconnected node B). Furthermore, as the
near-optimal solution space of ANTARES and of the PCM
in general is considered to be relatively flat , it can results in
several equivalent solutions ultimately reflected on the proxies
and so on the expansion plan. Those equivalent solutions of
the PCM are mostly located among a same weekly problem
and can be divided into spatial equivalencies (interconnections)
and temporal equivalencies (storages). For these reasons, it
is considered that a simulation may be stopped once it is
identified to be in its third phase with identified pseudo-
periodic patterns and no more improvements on the score. This
is the case in Figure 7a after the 300th iteration. However,
it may only be beneficial to push the simulation further to
explore the near-optimal solution space. In addition, it seems
that these phases are shortened for the 17 nodes system, which
can be explained by the wider pool of flexibility solutions
(i.e. more interconnections and opportunity of arbitrage ...).
As showed in Figure 7b, there is also lower instabilities for
that model due to smoothing effects induced by the higher
number of nodes.
8
==PAGE:12==
2) Flexibility Targets and Proxies:
If the score, CAPEX and adequacy metrics provides aggre-
Fig. 8: Multi-Scale Flexibility Targets evolution over a
3-nodes simulation of 200 iterations with LRD = 0.1
gated informations on the evolution of the mix and on the
convergence, it remains important to observe the behaviour of
the scale-specific flexibility proxies and targets as they are the
ones driving these evolutions. The convergence is also clearly
visible on the target evolutions as highlighted on Figure 8,
it can as well be observed on the evolutions of the proxies:
although it is more noised and unstable, the tendency to
converge remains as showed in Figure 9. Along the same lines,
there is a clear multi-scale interdependence of the flexibility
proxies and flexibility targets evolution. As an example, once
a proxy at a given scale converged around a new ”central”
value, it enables the evolution of an inter-dependant proxy at
another scale, e.g. in Figure 9 it is clearly visible bewteen
iterations 50-70 for the annual flexibility provision, where
CCGT and OCGT are successively substituted with VRES and
nuclear). This phenomenon repeat itself until this succession of
proxies evolution end up in a cyclic loop, resulting in the third
phase of the score’s convergence mentioned earlier. Those
periodic oscillations may be explained by both the inertia and
substitutability between technologies. Their evolution can be
seen as interdependent noised stairs functions. To sum up, the
convergence toward the local optimum is also visible on the
feedbacks as each of them tend to converges for a number
of iterations that is big enough. Although some of them may
still follow a periodic pattern potentially due to equivalent
solutions.
A general trend observed with this study case was that the
daily flexibility target tends to be way bigger than the weekly
target, which tends to be be itself bigger than the annual flex-
ibility target (FT N
r,y,daily ≫FT N
r,y,weekly ≫FT N
r,y,annual),
for N big enough. This observation is consistent with the
occurrence of the loss of load, typically happening during high
daily demand peaks (i.e. on winter weekdays around 6 p.m.).
The scale-specific relaxation of the flexibility target is a
transitory process that happens locally and expresses a flexibil-
ity target being higher than the maximum flexibility in which
the system can invest on that given scale. It is transitory in
the sense that the flexibility proxies have a lag effect coming
from both the inertia and the fact that they are built on
the the previous iteration, hence are not fully anticipative of
the current one. It was observed that the relaxation always
decrease to zero in a few iterations if maximizing all the
investment on that node allows to nullify the loss of load
on that node. Furthermore, the transitory relaxation doesn’t
block the evolution trends of the linked-model and generally
provides an improvement of the solution.
An other phenomenon interesting to observe on these figures
is the evolution of the flexibility provision by a given tech-
nology. It generally variate among years as well as with the
iterations. By extension, the ability of a technology to provide
flexibility depends on the system mix and on the considered
timescale, confirming that way the hypothesis on which this
model was built: the multi-scale nature of flexibility.
To conclude on the flexibility proxies, it is important to
note that these valued must be interpreted in regard to the
targets and to the other proxies. Also, it must be remembered
that these values represent a quantile and are strongly related
to their frequency domain and the results may change by
considering distinct frequency domains, such as with a more
detailed short term resolution.
C. Convergence Sensitivity to the Hyperparameters Choices
On the whole set of simulations made for this study, a
lot of hyperparameters combination were tried to assess the
sensitivity of the soft-linking framework to their choice. It
was observed thorough the study and on Figure 10 that, for
a number of iteration that is high enough11 the convergence
of the soft linked model toward a global Pareto Front opti-
mum seems to be independent of the hyperparameters choice.
However, this conclusion changes slightly if we consider the
convergence from the perspective of the score. With that prism,
the model always converges toward an local optimum, however
this local optimum may slightly change depending on the
hyperparameters choice, where for some combinations, the
score evolution may look to a form of over-fitting, in particular
for the one with aggressive approaches. Still, even these
simulations tend to find similar Pareto fronts and therefore
to result in equivalent generation mix expansion planing for
their best iterations.
Building on the sensitivity analysis results, it seems that
using more gentle approaches may help to refine the Pareto
Front while an aggressive approach produces a faster but
rougher evaluation of the Pareto Front and may ultimately
lead to some over-fitting. It is expected that more learning
regularization may overcome this downside.
9
==PAGE:13==
Fig. 9: Multi-Scale Flexibility proxies evolution over a 3-nodes simulation of 100 iterations with LRD = 0.1
D. Analysis of the resulting expansion plans
A simulation provides a set of investment pathways varying
over the iterations in terms of costs and adequacy levels as
well as by their distribution on the different scales. Some of
these pathways can be seen as local Pareto optimums, enabling
the construction of a Pareto front on which the analyst can
arbitrage the balance between the cost of the system and
the violation of the resource adequacy criteria. With enough
iterations and a bit of near local optimum solution space
11around 50 iterations for both 17 and 3 nodes models, which correspond
to the transition between the afore-mentioned phase 1 and phase 2
exploration, it may provide consistent Pareto fronts as the one
displayed in Figure 10.
Moreover, in the several studies conducted, it was observed
that the maximum deployment rate significantly influences
the planning process. The evolution of invested capacities
throughout the simulations reveals a common trend among
many nodes, where investments in wind, solar, and nuclear
technologies are maximized. It is indirectly visible on Fig-
ure 11 where some capacity increases are linear (the maxi-
mum investment rhythms being constant through the years,
it is only decreased by natural decommissioning). Maximum
10
==PAGE:14==
deployment constraints was sometimes blocking for VRES as
well. The adequacy criterion is another identified determining
factor in the investment trajectories proposed by the soft-linked
model. The one considered in these study, i.e. LOLEr,y ≤3h
which is extracted from the French law, isn’t really founded by
socio-economic or technico-economic studies. Furthermore, it
says nothing on the energy volume of loss of load, hence it is
not really adapted to the perspective offered by demand side
management as well as the challenges implied by strong VRES
penetration. For these reasons, it should at least be questioned
given the dimensioning role it plays alongside maximum
deployment rhythm. Although this is not directly visible in the
results very low considering the shares of fossil-based energy
generation in the energy mix, the carbon budget constraint is
also an impacting factor, since it limits the flexibility potential
of fossil fuels by limiting their utilization in the PCM. It can
be observed in proxy values of the first iterations, where they
increase sharply until being constrained by the carbon budget
to finally end up with low flexibility proxies values compared
to other solutions due to their limited use. They are nonetheless
essential, but are used here as peak flexibility.
The general trends that were therefore observed are the
following ones: the linked model tends to maximise inter-
connections and VRES generation, however it can partly be
biased by the absence of spillage cost. On another side, the
linked-model aims to secure some guaranteed base load with
nuclear. Although some concerns may be raised about the
adequate storages valuation’s by the proxies (where some of
their flexibility may be attributed to VRES instead), the model
naturally invests a lot in them. Then it remains a strong need
of peak generators that will only be used during a few hours to
cover strong peaks of load. For these study, this role is covered
by CCGT and OCGT. The typical related energy mix is visible
on Figure 11b, the notable aspect here is the important volume
of energy spillage (i.e. VRE curtailment) representing around
O(101%) of the final energy demand.
Yet, going further in the analysis of the resulting investment
pathways would not make much sense in regard to the partial
consideration of sources of flexibility lack of representative-
ness of the data for the 2050 horizon. In particular, demand-
side management and sector-coupling were not considered in
this study although they are expected to play a key role in
the future of energy systems. This is all the more true for this
work considering the vast amount of energy spillage of the
resulting optimal systems visible in the aggregated energy mix
of the system in Figure 11b, it would have been particularly
Fig. 10: Pareto fronts and convergence sensitivity to the different combinations of hyperparameters. The ”3h - Spread”
corresponds to P
r,y max(LOLEn
r,y −3, 0) and the the ”normalised CAPEX” corresponds to CAP EXn
CAP EX0
The key describing the simulations correspond respectively to : the number of nodes, the number of timeslices used in the
CExM, the aggressiveness of the Flexibility Target Adjustment function Γn(LOLEn
r,y) (3), the inertia and the quantile
considered in the update of the flexibility proxies ((4)), and finally the initialisation levels of the proxies and target.
11
==PAGE:15==
Fig. 11: Generation mix and energy mix trajectories of the 17-nodes system that minimizes the score over a 100 iterations’
simulation
(a) Aggregated generation mix
(b) Aggregated energy mix
interesting to observe how electrolysers would impact the
energy mix. In the other hand, the vast amount of marginal
capacities in which the model invested (here CCGT and OCGT
on Figure 11a) to cope with the highest daily peak of demand
should also be strongly reduced by demand side management,
bringing that way more economic consistency in the results.
E. Discussion on the framework
As the linked model is totally deterministic by construction,
both the models and the feedback loop being deterministic
themselves, it ensures the reproducibility of the results. Hence,
in addition to its convergent nature, this linked-model frame-
work offers the opportunity to develop a machine-learning
based meta-model. Although it may be specific to the study
considered and require a substantial training, once established,
the meta-model could serve as a powerful tool for TSOs
considering its enormous potential for accelerating calcula-
tions. The integration of machine learning techniques could
significantly enhance computational efficiency, making it a
valuable asset for TSOs seeking to optimize their planning
processes and decision-making.
In the end the proposed coupled-model behaviour is consis-
tent with what was expected of its design, it seems to converge
toward a local optimum independently of its hyperparameters
choice. Although several flaws remain, the main ones being
the lack of regularization. However, it is expected that scale-
specific and self-adaptive learning rate may strongly improve
that aspect. Additionally, it could be interesting to add some
noise in the feedback process to verify its stability and to
give the model the possibility of getting out of blocking local
12
==PAGE:16==
optimums. The evaluation of the local optimum proximity
to the global optimums is another complicated aspect to
tackle, especially if the noising of the feedbacks appears
to be insufficient to solve that question, it may need the
implementation of an integrated model 12. An other question
that remains unsolved due to the lacks of the study case
concerns the correctness of the evaluation of flexibility proxies,
here we think in particular about the balance between batteries,
interconnections and VRES flexibility proxies. Although being
from a different nature, another of its limits is that setting-up
such kind of soft-linked model requires an important initial
work of implementation for handling both models updates,
initialization, archiving and results analysis. On an other
hand, it also requires some knowledge of the models used.
It may also need an important work on the data to ensure
their harmonization. Once this preamble is done, it becomes
particularly efficient to use the soft linked model to make any
kind of studies on an established study case. Theoretically,
these results should be reproducible by implementing the
model with other PCMs and CExMs than ANTARES and
OSeMOSYS (as they relies on common structure), given that
the coupling framework is designed to be generic.
V. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
As the energy transition progresses and VRES experience
significant growth, energy systems are subject to a pronounced
increase in spatio-temporal variability, hence increasing the
system complexity. This constitutes a challenge for energy
planning studies as the conventional historical approach to
long-term energy system expansion planning primarily relied
on CExMs. Although their known biases used to be acceptable,
they now struggle to address the complexity of low-carbon
systems, resulting in a impossible dilemma between using a
more detailed operational representation and maintaining the
problem tractability. The final outcome is that it is highly
complex to plan low carbon adequate representative systems
using CExM alone. In response to this issue, the literature
advocates for coupling these models with more detailed oper-
ational models. Yet this approach has been little studied and
rarely implemented on representative cases.
That paper deals with this issue, by proposing a generic
bidirectional soft-linking framework between a CExM and a
PCM under the prism of the system adequacy. The proposed
soft-linking framework was then applied to a multi-node elec-
trical system, each node corresponding to a European region
assimilated to a copper plate with both models problems and
parameters being harmonized. The framework’s behaviour was
systematically analysed and fine-tuned to provide an outline
of the underlying processes involved by the framework. It
effectively resulted in long term generation and transmission
expansion plans with LOLE levels meeting ENTSO-E’s re-
source adequacy criterion and integrating a cost minimisation
of the adequate system mix. Acknowledging the intricacies
12i.e. a CExM integrating PCM operational constraints and temporal
resolution
in accurately evaluating the costs of the 2050 mix due to
uncertainties in future market design, load levels, and other
factors, our chosen strategy to confront the issue of cost-
effectiveness involves a Pareto equilibrium approach. The
linked-model effectively converged toward a consistent local
Pareto optimum that minimise both the loss of load and the
system costs in a tractable way. Those local Pareto optimums
seem independent of the hyperparameters choices, even if a
form of over-fitting may append in latter iterations depending
of those hyperparameters, strengthening the need for further
regularisation. In the end, the balance between the finesse of
the local optimum and the convergence speed remains in the
hands of the modeler. Finally, the following framework ensures
the tractability of the results, by providing transparency on the
underlying processes of the model and reproductibility of the
studies. Therefore, these features enhance the applicability of
the outputs, making them more valuable for informed political
decision-making.
Future work will be focused on two aspects. The first one
being the improvement of the feedbacks coming from the PCM
with the rework of storages and interconnections flexibility
proxies, the implementation of scale-specific and self-adaptive
regularization as well as the exploration of the near-optimal
feasible space stability. Another area where we anticipate
substantial enhancements is the convergence speed, that may
be improved through the optimization of the flexibility con-
straints’ initialization. Finally, the second aspect of this future
work will focus more on analytical aspects, with studies in-
corporating sector coupling. This aspect seems essential given
the considerable impact that other energy vectors can have on
system flexibility. Hence, our expectations are that the systems
will exhibit enhanced consistency and cost-effectiveness, even
if this entails greater complexity, further emphasizing the need
for an improved regularization.
13
==PAGE:17==
APPENDIX
LITERATURE REVIEW ON MODEL COUPLING
Climate change is now an established phenomenon docu-
mented by a strong scientific consensus [26]. To reduce its
impact, almost all countries committed themselves to reduce
their greenhouse gases emissions to net-zero arround 2050
[27]. The electrical vector supported by low-carbon generation
will be the key to achieve these objectives [28, 29] which rely
essentially on a massive recourse to VRES [20, 28, 29].
In their study, Engeland et al. [1] observed that VRE shares
in the energy mix adds a significant spatio-temporal variability
due to the intermittent nature of renewable energy. Therefore
it significantly increases the complexity of operating and
planning the electrical system [2]. These changes resulted in a
change of paradigm for the system planners. In comparison to
a system based on controllable conventional generation units
as it used to be the case in the 2000’s, the planning of a low
carbon system requires now to optimise the system expansion
not only in regard to its cost but also to its flexibility and
security [2, 3, 18, 20, 30, 31].
Until now, energy system planners used classical operational
research techniques to realise techno-economic studies on
energy systems, generally the systems are approximated to
mixed integer linear problem [4, 15, 25, 28, 32]. The most
common types of models used by energy system planners
are Production Cost Models (PCM) and Capacity Expansion
Model (CExM), some of their characteristics are described in
Table I. CExM are used to optimise trajectory of investment
problems, the important complexity of these problems led to
the use of a low temporal resolution (a few dozens of time
steps per simulated year). To keep a certain form of represen-
tation of the variability of the system’s operating dynamics,
these time steps are based on pondered and aggregated time
series called time slices [7–9]. However, even well selected
time slices fail to accurately evaluate operational dynamics
especially as it is difficult to represent a temporal chronology
and smooth peak events. It result in biased operational costs
which totally distort optimal investment trajectories [2, 8].
In the end, it can lead to highly insecure systems, Heggarty
et al. [5] assessed CExM solutions obtained under different
framework in a PCM and observed that it can lead to hundreds
of hours of LOLE. The scientific literature underlines that
these biases are amplified by the spatial dimension and the
VRES penetration; the mains related biases are listed here
under :
1) Base-load, VRE and system security overestimation [2,
5, 6]
2) Peak-load, flexibilities (storage, interconnections ...), op-
erational costs and emissions (under high VRE penetra-
tion) underestimation [5–10]
These biases and especially their growing importance with
VRE penetration make CExM unable to comply to the current
system planner paradigm and thus, it result in a clear lack of
performing tools to plan future systems trajectories [2, 13,
14]. This justify the need of enhancing CExM, in particular
their ability to consider operational dynamics, i.e. renewable
variability and flexibilities [11, 12]. The literature explores
different ways to strengthen expansion models with two major
trends :
The direct upgrading of the expansion problem; improving
time slices construction and number [7, 8, 33–35], adding
technical constraints to the model (ramping with a form of
chronology ...) [36–39] or adding reserve requirements and
eventually with capacity credits assessing the potential of the
contribution of VRES [2, 37, 39–41].
The second one concerns the linking of CExM to a more
detailed operational model such as a PCM [2, 11, 16, 17]. The
scientific literature distinguish several types of energy system
model linking, illustrated in Figure 12 and detailed here-below;
1) Integrated model in which the constraints of the sec-
ondary model are integrated in the main model, either
through its Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions [42, 43] or
through a direct addition of the constraints [36, 44, 45]
2) Hard Linked model in which the link between the
models relies on a direct informations exchange between
the models (ie a variable of model A became a parameter
in model B) [43, 46]
3) Soft Linked model which has a similar structure to the
hard linked model at the exception that the informations
are exchanged indirectly i.e. through a proxy and are
transformed before being fed in the other model [6, 17,
31]
Also, Hard-Linking and Soft-Linking can be split into two
subcategories depending on the feedback framework.
1) Uni-Directional linking where feedback are made in
only one direction, the objective here is to provide a
better insight of master model optimal solution through
a more detailed model. It will not improve the optimal
solution but can be use to compare different solutions or
scenarios and chose the best. For example, the linking
can be done under the prism of security [5, 47], of
operations and market prices [31, 38, 48–51] or of
environmental impact [10, 52]
2) Bi-Directional linking in which the feedbacks are ex-
changed in both directions. It is generally used to
iteratively improve the optimal solution found by the
main model based on insights provided by a more
detailed secondary model. This is generally done by
implementing extra constraints in the main model that
act as a proxy of the secondary model and which is
updated on each iteration [13, 42, 46, 53, 54]. An
important part of the literature implementing ESM Bi-
Directional linking concerns the coupling between a
Top-Down model (i.e. Macro Economic Models) and a
CExM. In this framework, the Top-Down model send an
updated demand level and the Bottom-Up provides more
representative energy costs [55, 56] ] and/or an energy
mix with its associated load factors [57, 58]. A few paper
concerns also the linking of a bottom up model (CExM
or PCM) with a more specialised model (market model
14
==PAGE:18==
Model
Class
Spatial granularity
Temporal Granularity
Horizon
Uncertainty Integration
Technical resolution
Study Type
OPF
Bottom-Up
Real time
Hours
N-1
Voltage limits, Operational
Constraints (Ramping, Min/Max . . .)
Short Term Operations
PCM
Bottom-Up
Regional
Hourly
Target Year
Probabilistic methods
(Monte-Carlo . .. ), Reserves
NTC, Operational
Constraints (Ramping, Min/Max . . .)
Mid Term Operations
CExM
Bottom-Up
Regional/National
Aggregates (Time Slices)
2050
Reserves
/
Long Term Expansion Trajectory
IAM
Top-Down
Global
Yearly
2100
Reserves
/
Very Long Term Macro Economic
TABLE I: General logic and resolution of the most use Energy System Model types [24, 25]
or hydro management model) and exchange information
on the electricity prices [59–61]. But above all, a certain
number of papers consider the linking from the prism of
system security. In that framework, the linkage is mostly
done between a CExM that send an energy mix and a
PCM model which assess the systems operations and
feedback among other data the LOLE [ [5, 6, 54] ],
curtailment [55, 62] or N-1 results [63, 64]. Furthermore,
the bidirectional linkage can be extended to more than
two models and capitalise on the strengths of each model
as in the paper of Gjorgiev et al. [64].that linked 5
models.
Fig. 12: Description of the different linking frameworks
Bi-Directional Soft-Linking clearly appears as the most in-
teresting solution to integrate a great representation of system
security and flexibility dynamics in an expansion model, espe-
cially as it allows to capitalize on the knowledge of established
and proven model [2, 5, 6, 13, 62]. An other interesting point is
that it allows a techno-economic iterative improvement of the
solution while having a clear control and transparency on the
soluion evolution which allow a better exploitation and analyze
of the results. In addition, Paviˇcevi´c et al. [54] and Helgesen
et al. [43] consider this linking framework as the best balance
between the computational burden and the proximity to the
absolute optimum. However it is important to keep in mind
that this framework doesn’t assure the convergence toward the
optimal solution, also the design and implementation of the
feedback framework and convergence criteria are an extensive
challenge while potentially being specific to each study context
[5, 13, 54]. To summarize, for the problem at hand, bi-
directional soft-linking represent the best balance between
implementation difficulty, computational burden, transparency
and proximity to the absolute optimum but it require a careful
fine tuning.
If we adopt the prism of a system planner in the context
of an interconnected system as the one of the European
electrical grid, it is extremely important to consider a wide
system in order to accurately represent/integrate the impact
of the neighbouring regions on the system dynamic. This
wide spatial consideration is translated in ESM by the use of
multi-nodal model. A direct consequence is that it significantly
increase the complexity of the feedback process for a coupled
model, indeed it adds up an extra variable dimension in the
problem considered by the models as VRES variability is
spatio-temporal [53]. Therefore, it is highly probable that the
gateway between a single node system and a multi node
system is not direct which is a problem because literature
only rarely assess their bi-directional soft-linked framework on
multi-nodal system. This assumption is for example supported
in Heggarty et al. [5] work where he observed significant
differences in the behaviour of the soft-linking despite having
an adaptable feedback design. Also Frysztacki et al. [65, 66]
found that a low spatial resolution linked to the copperplate
assumption produce important congestion effects on down
scaled assessment of the system, it led to significant load-
shedding and cost underestimation (up to 20 %). This question
of the feedback structure robustness to the system variability
seems to be a core one in bi-directional-soft-linked model,
especially as this variability grows with the share of renewable
which is systemically the case in mid to long term studies
(2030-2050). This claim is supported by several papers that
experienced stability issues and even absence of convergence
under highly renewable system [53, 54, 59]. Furthermore,
model-linking literature is quite evasive about the feedback
design choices and convergence of the coupled models at the
exception of Fortes et al. [56], Gong et al. [61], Helsegen et al.
[43] and Heggarty et al. [5] which is the only one to tackle a
problem with a similar complexity. In the end, if we consider
literature that tackle a techno-economic optimisation of an
energy system expansion with all the previously mentioned
core aspects : bi-directional linkage under the prism of system
flexibility and/or security with a multi-node system; we’re left
with only two papers [5, 6] and only one [5] of them discuss
the robustness of his linkage framework to spatial and temporal
variability.
As mentioned above, the consideration of flexibility is
essential in energy system planning expansion. An identified
important source of flexibility for the electrical system is the
interconnection to other energy vector such as Heat, Methane,
Hydrogen ... [9, 67–69]. This consideration of other energy
15
==PAGE:19==
vectors allows new cost effective behaviours, for example elec-
trolysers and batteries provide new synergies between short-
term and long-term storage [9]. Furthermore co-optimising
multi-energy systems altogether result in higher social welfare
[70] and improve the proximity to real systems behaviour [51].
Besides, an other reason to assess the interaction of electricity
systems with other energy systems can be the improvement of
the modelling of their associated important electrical demand
which impact the behaviour of the whole electrical grid [70].
An other clear literature gap found in this literature review
was that to the best of my knowledge, there is no paper
that assessed electrical system expansion studies with an
enhanced modelling of operational aspects through model-
linking with a consideration of sector coupling or multi energy
vector aspects. It appears as an important problem as we miss
considerable flexibility options as well as the impact of this
other energy vectors on the electrical system dynamics.
16
==PAGE:20==
Fig. 13: Decommissioning implementation in OSeMOSYS
EXTRA MODELS DESCRIPTION
In this study, the Python implementation of OSeMOSYS
was utilized, employing Pyomo library. Additionally, the ver-
sion 8.2 of the Antares simulator was employed as the primary
tool. The Xpress solver served as the solver for both models,
and the soft linking was achieved by combining R and Python
through the utilization of Antares R API to leverage its capa-
bilities effectively. OSeMOSYS, being a Capacity Expansion
Model (CExM), operates on perfect foresight and employs
timeslices. However, it lacks real chronology and may be prone
to biases due to the need for a high number of timeslices
to achieve accuracy in its results. It is a flexible tools that
is built around a central intermediary variable called activity
that represent the rate of activity of any energy converter.
An upward and a downward efficiency is then applied to
that converter allowing that way a lot of flexibility for the
modeller, allowing it to model linearly any type of technology.
Two extensions of OSeMOSYS were used . One of them
is a power transmission module developed by Heggarty [5]
to ensure homogeneous investments opportunities between
interconnections, and generation or storage. The second one
is home-made and aims to allows OSeMOSYS to freely
decommissioned unused installed capacities. That extension
decommission in priority the oldest installed capacities, a
second priority is enforce to decommission residual capacities
over capacities in which the model invested if both have
the same age. Furthermore, considering operational life also
reacquired some extra intermediary constraints. The exact
implementation is detailed in Figure 14. The motivation of
such implement was firstly to reduce the over usage of fossil
generation in ANTARES by decommissioning the capacities
that are useless from OSeMOSYS point of view in order
to reduce the fixed costs. It appears to be insufficient to
tackle the problem but was kept after the addition of CO2
budget management in ANTARES to bring OSeMOSYS more
opportunities and to avoid underestimation of the flexibility
proxies through a penalty in capacity factor in equation (4)
that may be caused by ’residual’ capacities needed in the
previous years but unused in the latter ones. A CO2 budget
management methodology fr myopic PCM was also developed
in order to harmonize the problems consider by OSeMOSYS
and ANTARES. That methodology is detailed in the following
section. To the best of the author knowledge, such problems
were never tackled until know with PCM.
Fig. 14: ANTARES simulator interface
17
==PAGE:21==
IMPLEMENTING A CO2 BUDGET MANAGEMENT IN A
MYOPIC PCM
ANTARES optimise weekly-problems that are solved
chronologically without any vision on the future weekly prob-
lems. Therefore, it is impossible to implement an integrated
and optimal management policy for long term storage as their
is no explicit linkage between the weekly problems (except
some heuristics). Note that for ANTARES, long-term storages
are object that can be charged or discharged through several
weekly problems while short-term storages must discharged all
the energy that has been charged over each weekly problem.
Two methods are used in ANTARES to to handle these
long-term storages. The first one exact approach based on
usage values, which are a matrix representing the value or
future usages of a stock depending of its state of charge
and of proximity to the problem limit horizon. They are then
integrated in the optimisation problem through the market bids
of the storage. These values can be optimised using dynamic
programming, it’s however way more complex when several
storages are modelled and is rarely utilised in these cases.
The other approach consist of an heuristic that pre-allocates
the natural water inflows over the weekly problems, the stocks
are then managed as short term storages with a pre-allocated
free inflows that must be used over the weeks, even if it is not
needed and could have been keep for later.
The same issues goes for carbon budget that can be con-
sidered as a long term storage that can only be discharged,
making it less complex to manage. Even if it is possible to
implement basic direct constraint to enforce a CO2 budget, it
doesn’t allow to optimise that stock over the year and would
just result in a greedy approach consisting of using fossil based
units until the budget is empty. It would not be satisfying in the
sense that saving a part of the carbon budget for later weeks
usually lead to less loss of load. In the same time, the CO2
Budget is essential to prevent the CExM from over investing
in fossil thermal generation because of both their low CAPEX
and their high flexibility proxies due to their free usage in the
PCM. In the end it results in system emissions in the PCM
that totally jeopardize the CO2 trajectory implemented in the
CExM. Capitalizing on the similarities with long term storage
and of the problem structure consisting of succession of similar
PCM iteration, a new approach was therefore implemented
with CO2 usage values determined by an heuristic. Those
usage values can be understand as a variable extra emission
cost.
The calculation of the CO2 usage values can be decom-
posed in two functions as illustrated in Figure 15. The first
curve consist of weekly pre-allocation of the budget over the
year (in green on Figure 15) and of a curve representing the
risk aversion toward an overfitting of the pre-allocation, en-
abling to deviate from it (in red on Figure 15). As ANTARES
is model is not fully flexible, it requires to build the constraint
with existing objects. More specifically, the new constraint can
only use the variable of the flows between areas and of the
production of thermal clusters. Therefore, the regional nodes
Fig. 15: Overview of the Shape of the CO2 Usage Values
are duplicated in ”fictive” CO2 nodes linked to an infinite
CO2 sink node. Here the idea is to put the CO2 stocks
in these fictive nodes, both are parameterized such as the
model will naturally not bi incited to use these stocks, even
if the usage value is null due to the positive hurdle costs,
spillage costs as well as the null loss of load cost in the
CO2 sink. A weekly13 equality between the flows towards
the sink and the the emission associated to the production
of fossil thermal generation is enforced by the constraint
described in (8). Therefore, the weekly flows between the
virtual nodes correspond exactly to the weekly emissions of
its corresponding node. Finally, the production cost of a fossil
technology correspond to its opex plus the cost associated to
the usage value of its CO2 budget (9).
Flowt
AreaCO2→SinkCO2 =
X
tech
EmmissionFactort
tech.Prodt
tech
(8)
ProductionCostt
tech ≃Productiont
tech.(OpExtech+
EmissionFactort
tech.UsageV aluet
CO2BudgetLevel)
(9)
A. Pre Allocation of the carbon budget
The pre-allocation of the CO2 budget delimits the share of
the budget that can be freely used by ANTARES at a given
date. That free carbon budget correspond to a usage value of
0, therefore there is no incentive to emit more or less CO2 on
that area of the curve.
I tried several methods to calculate that pre-allocation, the
first one is based on the french historical data of daily peak
of demands. Note that a better approach would be to use the
mean or a quantile of the weather years load time series, still
French data were judged acceptable due to their current strong
load thermo-sensitivity and to the fact that the dataset was
constructed based on historical data (with strong importance
given to the french one). It was also a way to reduce the
time needed for implementing it. By analysing the results
of several soft-linked simulations, it appeared that thermal
13To minimise rounding issues linked to numeric limits in ANTARES and
the fast mode, those constraint should be weekly constraints
18
==PAGE:22==
Fig. 16: Schematic representation of carbon budget
management in ANTARES
fossil generation and loss of load was essentially concentrated
around high daily peak of demand which seems consistent
with the problem studied. On this basis, I clustered those
historical data into 3 groups and associated them to periodic
uniform weekly CO2 budget based on the carbon emissions
of an unconstrained simulations scale by an exponential factor
in a similar way used for the long-term storage heuristic. A
Fig. 17: Daily peak of demand clustering
second methodology was to use directly the emission of the
unconstrained ANTARES simulations for several years and
to aggregate them. They were also scaled by an exponential
factor, generally equal to 2. The resulting CO2 budget pre-
allocation curves are presented in Figure 18 with the respective
data used to build them in Figure 19.
Both pre-allocation
methodologies were in the end relatively close and the mean
aggregate of the second based on previous unconstrained
iterations was preferred. This choice was made overfitting
issues with the the potential evolutions of the system in the
following soft-linked model iterations.
Fig. 18: Overview of the CO2 budget pre-allocation curve
with an exponential factor of 2
Fig. 19: Overview of the carbon budget pre-allocation
splitting methodologies
B. Relaxation of the CO2 Budget Pre-Allocation
Taking into account the change of the mix across iterations
as well as the primary objective of reducing loss of load,
it would not have been satisfying to solely rely on the
preallocation. Therefore, a relaxation of the pre-allocation
was implemented by considering a translated inverted ex-
ponential growth of the usage values. The shape of the
relaxation is illustrated in Figure 20. Considering ANTARES
cost minimisation and the cost of unsupplied energy being
UnsuppliedEnergyCost = 104EUR/MWh, there is a cap
of CO2 usage values above which the fossil technologies
will no more be used. That price cap is different from on
technology to another and depend essentially of their emission
factor, of their operational costs and of the cost of unsupplied
energy. Non linearity may also included with the start-up
costs and other technical constraints. The CO2 usage values
price caps of this paper’s study are detailed in Table II. A
corollary of that aspect is that above a certain usage value
corresponding to the operational costs of the most expensive
non-fossil generation (modulo the non-linearity), ANTARES
will not be able to use fossil technologies to optimise the
operational costs and will be forced to use them only to
avoid loss of load. Therefore, an other simple method could
be to use an uniform (locally or globally) usage value of
UVuniform ≡O(103)EUR/tCO2, however it would also not
19
==PAGE:23==
be able to save some budget for later weeks.
Fig. 20: Overview of the CO2 Budget Pre-Allocation
Relaxation Shape
TECH
VU CAP (EUR/tCO2)
Emission Factor (tCO2/MWh)
CCGT
30252
0,327
OCGT
20174
0,488
OIL
15007
0,65
COAL
10285
0,75
TABLE II: CO2 Usage Value Cap per Fossil Technology
C. Results and Discussion
In the end, the choice the methodology and their setting-
up depend mostly of the role that should play the fossil
generation for the system. In that, my main objective was to
keep the maximum flexibility potential contribution of carbon
intensive technologies, in the same time, I wanted to include
OSeMOSYS emissions limit trajectories in ANTARES. The
motivation behind that aspect was that initially, VRES had
no flexibility contribution considered, therefore a big part of
the flexibility provision came from the unrestricted carbon
intensive production, leading to high proxy and more invest-
ment in these technologies due to the cost-effectiveness of
satisfying the flexibility constraint with them. It resulted in
the end in a retroactive phenomenon that totally jeopardized
OSeMOSYS emission trajectory through the proxy with 2050
emissions being equivalent to the one of 2020. Even with non
null VRES flexibility proxies, it remain essential to keep that
implementation to avoid facing the retroactive effect that may
appear depending of the parameters and of the initialization.
The impact of that carbon budget consideration is illustrated
in that represent the relation between the usage values, the
remaining budget level as well as the loss of load. We clearly
observe the relaxation of the constraint with locally increasing
usage values, also a part of the budget is locked in summer
for the end of the year.
It still remain a difficult problem to tackle due to the
variability between the weather years and the obligation of
having a unique policy for the emission management in a
simulation. That variability is illustrated by Figure 21 , in
which high uniform usage values were used, banning that way
the operational cost optimisation with fossil based generation.
In some years, the budget can be fully used in April while
in other, some budget may stay available at the end. Also,
the respective expected impact on the loss of load and on the
emissions is presented in Figure 22. There is still a lot of
questions about how to improve the consideration of extreme
years as well on the exact impact of that implementation but
they were not investigated due to time constraints.
Finally, it was non binding in most of the iterations once the
VRES flexibility proxies were added. Considering that aspect,
the usage values weren’t updated between iterations and were
kept uniform across both the soft-linked model iterations and
the years assessed in ANTARES, lightening that way the soft-
linked model computational load.
Fig. 21: Evolution of the remaining carbon budget on 11
weather years with high uniform usage value
Fig. 22: Overview of the CO2 budget pre-allocation methods
Fig. 23: Impact of the carbon constraint in an inadequate
system
20
==PAGE:24==
Fig. 24: Different sources of variability and uncertainty
generate a need for flexibility, which can be dealt with by a
set of flexibility solutions. These are shown over a range of
different timescales. [5]
A SHORT OVERVIEW OF THE MODULATION
As shown in Figure 24, energy system’s variability and
uncertainty occur on different timescales, therefore, power sys-
tem operators need tools able to handle both of them in order
to ensure the balancing of demand and supply. These tools are
called flexibilities. If the exact concepts carried by this notion
evolved over the years in parallel with the systems paradigm
shifts, its actualised definition by the literature could be ”The
power system multi-scale ability to cope with variability and
uncertainty”. Note that variability and uncertainty can also be
extended to the spatial dimension, hence resulting in a very
complex object.
On an other side, the inherent nature of CExM make it
difficult to consider variability and uncertainty, and especially
on a high number of scales due to its need of dimension
compression. For that reasons, we used a PCM to increase
the resolution at operations are considered, enabling that
way to consider such variability and uncertainty. However,
it was necessary to aggregate these informations to be able
to integrate them in the CExM. For that reason, Heggarty et
All [3] proposed to adopt a signal processing approach. By
applying a discrete Fourier transform on the PCM’s production
plans, we obtained the spectral density (see Figure 26 associ-
ated to each technologies, hence synthesizing their temporal
response to variability and uncertainty. Furthermore, it enables
the possibility to disaggregate their behaviour on some of
the afore mentioned timescales through the filtering of their
spectral densities. By applying the inverse Fourier transform,
their scale-specific flexibility contribution; i.e. their modula-
tion were obtained (see Figure 25). Finally the informations
carried by the scale-specific modulation were aggregated using
a quantile of their distributions.
Fig. 25: Who currently provides flexibility? Annual (top left),
weekly (top right) and daily (bottom left) flexibility solution
modulation stacks, on the French power system in 2018.[5]
Fig. 26: How different are the roles of flexibility solutions
over different timescales? Normalised power spectral
densities show the timescales over which behaviour is
modulated, for nuclear, coal, gas and pumped hydro storage
time series, on the German power system in 2018 (data from
[88]). Marked out frequencies correspond to periods of a
year, a week, a day and half a day. [5]
21
==PAGE:25==
Number of timeslices
Seasons
Day-types
Daily-time-brackets
Variations
24
Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring
1
Night, Morning, Midday, Afternoon, Peak, Evening
3
48
Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring
High wind, Mid wind, Low wind
Night, Morning, Afternoon, Evening
72
Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring
96
Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring
TABLE III: Description of the Time Slices considered in this study
DATA OVERVIEW
For this project, nearly all data came from the OSMOSE
WP1 [71]. Therefore, they were already proven in a number of
academic and industrial research projects. Small adjustments
were done on the maximum investment rate to gain in con-
sistency, this adjustments were done based on the one use in
RTE long term expansion planing study ”Energy Pathways
2050” [20]. Initially the maximum rhythm considered in all
scenarios were the maximum deployment rhythm ever saw in
Germany for any kind of technology over a 5 year window
which was 25 GW. That number was the weighted by the
regional annual demand and applied to all technologies at
the exception of Nuclear for which the nominal maximum
deployment number was considered to be the maximum one
historically observed in France (i.e. 10 GW/5 years), the
same scaling process was then applied. This choice was done
considering the different nature that are nuclear power plants
in term of industrialisation and supply chain constraint in order
to avoid unrealistic planning.
Concerning the load profiles, ANTARES time series are
based on 35 years of reanalysis historical weather data, a
subset of 11 of these 35 years time-series is then picked
stochastically (under a uniform probability). The demand
curve are then derived from the weather time series. OS-
eMOSYS timeslices demand and load factors are built by
considering the mean value of their corresponding set of hours
over all weather years. The set of timeslices considered in
this study are the presented in Table III while load time-
series distribution curve are showed in Figure 28. Although the
normalised load distribution curves obtained for the 24 time
slices doesn’t represent correctly the peak of demand, marginal
differences were observed after trying several simulation using
between 24 to 96 timeslices, and this even if there LDC were
more representative of the peak of demand observed in the
PCM. Therefore, as the operational details are supposed to
be carried by the PCM, we chose to remain on the 24 time
slices CExM model to reduce to computational burden. Those
normalised load distribution curves were uniform over the
investment years but scaled according to the annual demand
level presented in Figure 29. The CO2 emission limit trajec-
tories were defined similarly and are presented in Figure 30
and are considered to represent 1.5 °C trajectories considering
a development of carbon capture and storages as well as
bio fuels and e-fuels that is not modelled explicitly. Also,
each of those parameters are of course specific to the region
considered.
In order to reduce the complexity of CExM, a temporal
compression is applied to their temporal dimension. The object
used to represent that temporal dimension are called timeslices,
Fig. 27: Hierarchical structure of OSeMOSYS timeslices. Lh
specifies the number and order of the fractions of ld, ld those
of the fractions of ls, and ls those of the fractions of lh.
Fig. 28: Normalised Load Duration Curves for the 3-Node
System
they aim to represent aggregated and/or typical set of the year.
The philosophy behind that process is presented in Figure 27
The process applied to derive timeslice values from hourly
values is shown here below in equation (10).
∀r,t,y,l
CapacityFactorr,t,y,l =
(10)
meanh∈Hl(CapacityFactorTimeSeriesr,t,wy,hl)
Where wy is one of the 35 weather years, H is the set of the
8760 hours of a weather year, the hourly time steps correspond
to t and hl the set of hours corresponding to the intersection
of a season, a day-type and a daily-time-bracket matching the
22
==PAGE:26==
definition of timeslice l. Other methods based on clustering
or optimisation exists to design the timeslices, however these
alternatives weren’t explored due to time constraint. Although,
we didn’t expect those improved methods to have a significant
effect outside of accelerating the soft linked model in the
sense that considering several weather years on a spatially
wide system is still expected to require an important number
of timeslices raising once again the question of tractability.
The technical parameters used to model technologies are
presented in Figure 31, they essentially consist of mini-
mum up-time, down-time, stable-power. Some technologies
are modeled as on uniform group per region while other are
modeled by several distinct units, for these technologies, a
reference nominal power was used. As OSeMOSYS worked
with continuous investment, an heuristic was used to adapt
the nominal power per group with the objective of having a
representative number of units in term of proximity to their
reference nominal power.
The economic parameters used in these study are globally
divided in two categories, the CExM investment costs pre-
sented in Figure 33 while Figure 32 shows the CPM market
bids representing the operational cost and the emission cost.
All those parameters are defined per investment year.
23
==PAGE:27==
Fig. 29: Annual Electricity Demand Trajectory per Region (TWh)
Fig. 30: Annual Emission Limit Trajectory per Region (Gt eqCO2))
24
==PAGE:28==
Fig. 31: ANTARES technical parameters per technology
Fig. 32: ANTARES Market Bids per technology and year
Fig. 33: OSeMOSYS CAPEX per technology and year
25
==PAGE:29==
EXTRA RESULTS FIGURES
Fig. 34: Pareto front resulting of a 100 iterations simulation of the 17-Nodes model)
26
==PAGE:30==
Fig. 35: Evolution of the installed capacities of generation and storages in the French node thorough a 100 iterations
simulation of the 17-Nodes model)
27
==PAGE:31==
Fig. 36: Evolution of the installed capacities of generation and storages in the Germany node thorough a 100 iterations
simulation of the 17-Nodes model)
28
==PAGE:32==
Fig. 37: Evolution of the installed capacities of generation and storages in the Italy node thorough a 100 iterations simulation
of the 17-Nodes model)
29
==PAGE:33==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
1.
Engeland, K. et al. Space-time variability of climate
variables and intermittent renewable electricity pro-
duction – A review. en. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 79, 600–617. ISSN: 1364-0321. https:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1364032117306822 (2023) (Nov. 2017).
2.
Planning for the renewable future Long-term mod-
elling and tools to expand variable renewable power
in emerging economies AVRIL findings en. Tech. rep.
(IRENA, Jan. 2017). https : / / www . irena . org /
publications/2017/Jan/Planning-for-the-renewable-
future-Long-term-modelling-and-tools-to-expand-
variable-renewable-power (2023).
3.
Heggarty, T., Bourmaud, J.-Y., Girard, R. & Karinio-
takis, G. Multi-temporal assessment of power system
flexibility requirement. Applied Energy 238, 1327–
1336 (Mar. 2019).
4.
Plazas-Ni˜no, F. A., Ortiz-Pimiento, N. R. & Montes-
P´aez, E. G. National energy system optimization
modelling for decarbonization pathways analysis: A
systematic literature review. en. Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews 162, 112406. ISSN: 1364-
0321. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1364032122003148 (2023) (July 2022).
5.
Heggarty, T. Techno-economic optimisation of the mix
of power system flexibility solutions en. PhD thesis
(Universit´e Paris sciences et lettres, Sept. 2021).
https : / / pastel . archives - ouvertes . fr / tel - 03461279
(2023).
6.
Alimou, Y., Ma¨ızi, N., Bourmaud, J.-Y. & Li, M.
Assessing the security of electricity supply through
multi-scale modeling: The TIMES-ANTARES link-
ing approach. en. Applied Energy 279, 115717. ISSN:
03062619. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0306261920312101 (2023) (Dec. 2020).
7.
Nahmmacher, P., Schmid, E., Hirth, L. & Knopf, B.
Carpe Diem: A Novel Approach to Select Repre-
sentative Days for Long-Term Power System Models
with High Shares of Renewable Energy Sources. en.
SSRN Journal. ISSN: 1556-5068. http://www.ssrn.
com/abstract=2537072 (2023) (2014).
8.
Hoffmann, M., Kotzur, L., Stolten, D. & Robinius,
M. A Review on Time Series Aggregation Meth-
ods for Energy System Models. Energies 13. Pub-
lisher: MDPI, 1–61. https : / / econpapers . repec .
org/article/gamjeners/v 3a13 3ay 3a2020 3ai 3a3
3ap 3a641- 3ad 3a315871.htm (2023) (2020).
9.
Lhuillier Nicolas (RTE) Orlic Dragana, K. M. ( Opti-
mal System-Mix Of flexibility Solutions for European
electricity, OSMOSE Project Fact Sheet tech. rep. ().
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/773406 (2023).
10.
Rocco, M., Rady, Y. & Colombo, E. Soft-linking
bottom-up energy models with top-down input-output
models to assess the environmental impact of future
energy scenarios. Modelling, Measurement and Con-
trol C 79 (Nov. 2018).
11.
Oree, V., Sayed Hassen, S. Z. & Fleming, P. J.
Generation expansion planning optimisation with re-
newable energy integration: A review. en. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 69, 790–803. ISSN:
1364-0321. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364032116308711 (2023) (Mar. 2017).
12.
Despr´es, J., Hadjsaid, N., Criqui, P. & Noirot, I.
Modelling the impacts of variable renewable sources
on the power sector: Reconsidering the typology of
energy modelling tools. en. Energy 80, 486–495.
ISSN: 0360-5442. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0360544214013620 (2023) (Feb.
2015).
13.
Fattahi, A., Sijm, J. & Faaij, A. A systemic approach
to analyze integrated energy system modeling tools:
A review of national models. en. Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews 133, 110195. ISSN: 1364-
0321. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1364032120304858 (2023) (Nov. 2020).
14.
Gaur, A. S., Das, P., Jain, A., Bhakar, R. & Mathur,
J. Long-term energy system planning considering
short-term operational constraints. en. Energy Strat-
egy Reviews 26, 100383. ISSN: 2211-467X. https :
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2211467X19300768 (2023) (Nov. 2019).
15.
Doquet, M., Gonzalez, R., Lepy, S., Momot, E.
& Verrier, F. A new tool for adequacy reporting
of electric systems: ANTARES. 42nd International
Conference on Large High Voltage Electric Systems
2008, CIGRE 2008 (Jan. 2008).
16.
Babatunde, O., Munda, J. & Hamam, Y. A Compre-
hensive State-of-the-Art Survey on Hybrid Renew-
able Energy System Operations and Planning. IEEE
Access PP, 1–1 (Apr. 2020).
17.
Collins, S. et al. Integrating short term variations
of the power system into integrated energy system
models: A methodological review. en. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 76, 839–856. ISSN:
1364-0321. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364032117304264 (2023) (Sept. 2017).
18.
Heggarty, T., Bourmaud, J.-Y., Girard, R. & Karin-
iotakis, G. Quantifying power system flexibility pro-
vision. en. Applied Energy 279, 115852. ISSN: 0306-
2619. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S030626192031326X (2023) (Dec. 2020).
19.
Howells, M. et al. OSeMOSYS: The Open Source
Energy Modeling System: An introduction to its
ethos, structure and development. en. Energy Policy.
Sustainability of biofuels 39, 5850–5870. ISSN: 0301-
4215. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0301421511004897 (2023) (Oct. 2011).
30
==PAGE:34==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
20.
Futurs ´energ´etiques 2050 : les sc´enarios de mix
de production `a l’´etude permettant d’atteindre la
neutralit´e carbone `a l’horizon 2050 fr. Tech. rep.
(June 2022). https://www.rte-france.com/analyses-
tendances-et-prospectives/bilan-previsionnel-2050-
futurs-energetiques (2023).
21.
ANTARES website https : / / antares - simulator. org /
pages/modele/2/ (2023).
22.
Jean-Yves, B. et al. OSMOSE WP1 dataset Mar.
2022. https://zenodo.org/record/6375020 (2023).
23.
Heggarty, T. Assessing the relative impacts of maxi-
mum investment rate and temporal detail in capacity
expansion models.
24.
Ringkjøb, H.-K., Haugan, P. M. & Solbrekke, I. M. A
review of modelling tools for energy and electricity
systems with large shares of variable renewables. en.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 96, 440–
459. ISSN: 1364-0321. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1364032118305690 (2023)
(Nov. 2018).
25.
Gomes, P. V. & Saraiva, J. T. State-of-the-art of
transmission expansion planning: A survey from
restructuring to renewable and distributed electric-
ity markets. en. International Journal of Electrical
Power & Energy Systems 111, 411–424. ISSN: 0142-
0615. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S014206151831888X (2023) (Oct. 2019).
26.
Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Ba-
sis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (eds Masson-Delmotte, V. et
al.) (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 2021).
27.
Paris Agreement 2015. https://unfccc.int/fr/a-propos-
des-ndcs/l-accord-de-paris (2023).
28.
Shukla, P. R., Skea, J., Reisinger, A. & Slade, R.
Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth As-
sessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change en. Tech. rep. (IPCC, 2022).
29.
Net Zero by 2050 - A Roadmap for the Global Energy
Sector en. Tech. rep. (IEA, Paris, 2021). https://www.
iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050.
30.
TYNDP 2022 - Opportunities for a more efficient
European power system in 2030 and 2040 tech. rep.
(ENTSO-E). https : / / tyndp . entsoe . eu / documents/
(2023).
31.
Deane, J. P., Gracceva, F., Chiodi, A., Gargiulo,
M. & Gallach´oir, B. P. ´O. Assessing power system
security. A framework and a multi model approach.
en. International Journal of Electrical Power & En-
ergy Systems 73, 283–297. ISSN: 0142-0615. https:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0142061515002021 (2023) (Dec. 2015).
32.
Subramanian, A., Gundersen, T. & Adams, T. Mod-
eling and Simulation of Energy Systems: A Review.
Processes 6, 238 (Nov. 2018).
33.
Poncelet, K., Hoschle, H., Delarue, E., Virag, A. &
Drhaeseleer, W. Selecting Representative Days for
Capturing the Implications of Integrating Intermittent
Renewables in Generation Expansion Planning Prob-
lems. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 32, 1936–1948. ISSN:
0885-8950, 1558-0679. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/7527691/ (2023) (May 2017).
34.
Poncelet, K., Delarue, E., Six, D., Duerinck, J. &
D’haeseleer, W. Impact of the level of temporal and
operational detail in energy-system planning models.
en. Applied Energy 162, 631–643. ISSN: 0306-2619.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261915013276 (2023) (Jan. 2016).
35.
Clerjon, A. & Perdu, F. Matching intermittent elec-
tricity supply and demand with electricity storage
- An optimization based on a time scale anal-
ysis. en. Energy 241, 122799.
ISSN: 03605442.
https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii /
S0360544221030486 (2023) (Feb. 2022).
36.
Burandt, T., Xiong, B., L¨offler, K. & Oei, P.-Y.
Decarbonizing China’s energy system – Modeling
the transformation of the electricity, transportation,
heat, and industrial sectors. eng. Applied Energy 255.
Publisher: Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1–17. ISSN: 0306-
2619. https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/214646
(2023) (2019).
37.
Welsch, M. et al. Modelling elements of Smart Grids
– Enhancing the OSeMOSYS (Open Source Energy
Modelling System) code. en. Energy. Energy and Ex-
ergy Modelling of Advance Energy Systems 46, 337–
350. ISSN: 0360-5442. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0360544212006299 (2023)
(Oct. 2012).
38.
Welsch, M. et al. Incorporating flexibility require-
ments into long-term energy system models – A
case study on high levels of renewable electricity
penetration in Ireland. Applied Energy 135, 600–615
(Dec. 2014).
39.
Welsch,
M.
et
al.
Supporting
security
and
adequacy
in
future
energy
systems:
The
need
to
enhance
long-term
energy
system
models
to better treat issues related to variability. en.
International Journal of Energy Research 39. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/er.3250,
377–396. ISSN: 1099-114X. https : / / onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/er.3250 (2023) (2015).
40.
Van Wijk, A. J. M., Halberg, N. & Turkenburg, W. C.
Capacity credit of wind power in the Netherlands. en.
Electric Power Systems Research 23, 189–200. ISSN:
0378-7796. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/037877969290087H (2023) (May 1992).
41.
Keane, A. et al. Capacity Value of Wind Power.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 26. Conference
31
==PAGE:35==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Name: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 564–
572. ISSN: 1558-0679 (May 2011).
42.
Andersen, K. S. Integrated Energy and Macroeco-
nomic Modelling en. PhD thesis (DTU).
43.
Helgesen, P. I. & Tomasgard, A. From linking to inte-
gration of energy system models and computational
general equilibrium models – Effects on equilibria
and convergence. en. Energy 159, 1218–1233. ISSN:
0360-5442. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360544218312118 (2023) (Sept. 2018).
44.
Raycheva, E., Garrison, J., Schaffner, C. & Hug,
G. High Resolution Generation Expansion Planning
Considering Flexibility Needs: The Case of Switzer-
land in 2030 in The 12th Mediterranean Confer-
ence on Power Generation, Transmission, Distribu-
tion and Energy Conversion (MEDPOWER 2020)
arXiv:2101.01486 [math] (2021), 416–421. http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/2101.01486 (2023).
45.
Sue Wing, I. The synthesis of bottom-up and top-
down approaches to climate policy modeling: Electric
power technology detail in a social accounting frame-
work. en. Energy Economics 30. Number: 2, 547–
573. ISSN: 0140-9883. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S014098830600079X (2023)
(Mar. 2008).
46.
Helgesen, P. I., Lind, A., Ivanova, O. & Tomas-
gard, A. Using a hybrid hard-linked model to ana-
lyze reduced climate gas emissions from transport.
en. Energy 156, 196–212. ISSN: 0360-5442. https:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0360544218308247 (2023) (Aug. 2018).
47.
Chang, M., Lund, H., Thellufsen, J. Z. & Østergaard,
P. A. Perspectives on purpose-driven coupling of
energy system models. en. Energy 265, 126335. ISSN:
0360-5442. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360544222032212 (2023) (Feb. 2023).
48.
Dominkovi´c, D. F., Junker, R. G., Lindberg, K. B.
& Madsen, H. Implementing flexibility into energy
planning models: Soft-linking of a high-level energy
planning model and a short-term operational model.
en. Applied Energy 260, 114292. ISSN: 0306-2619.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261919319798 (2023) (Feb. 2020).
49.
Diakov, V., Cole, W., Sullivan, P., Brinkman, G. &
Margolis, R. Improving Power System Modeling. A
Tool to Link Capacity Expansion and Production
Cost Models English. Tech. rep. NREL/TP-6A20-
64905 (National Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL),
Golden, CO (United States), Nov. 2015). https : / /
www.osti.gov/biblio/1233204 (2023).
50.
Loisel, R., Lemiale, L., Mima, S. & Bidaud, A.
Strategies for short-term intermittency in long-term
prospective scenarios in the French power system.
en. Energy Policy 169, 113182. ISSN: 0301-4215.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0301421522004037 (2023) (Oct. 2022).
51.
Felten, B. An integrated model of coupled heat and
power sectors for large-scale energy system analyses.
en. Applied Energy 266, 114521. ISSN: 0306-2619.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261920300337 (2023) (May 2020).
52.
Siala, K., de la R´ua, C., Lech´on, Y. & Hamacher,
T. Towards a sustainable European energy sys-
tem:
Linking
optimization
models
with
multi-
regional input-output analysis. en. Energy Strategy
Reviews 26, 100391.
ISSN: 2211-467X. https : / /
www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2211467X19300847 (2023) (Nov. 2019).
53.
Pina, A., Silva, C. A. & Ferr˜ao, P. High-resolution
modeling framework for planning electricity sys-
tems with high penetration of renewables. en. Ap-
plied Energy 112, 215–223. ISSN: 0306-2619. https:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S030626191300487X (2023) (Dec. 2013).
54.
Paviˇcevi´c, M. et al. Bi-directional soft-linking be-
tween a whole energy system model and a power
systems model in 2022 IEEE PES/IAS PowerAfrica
(Aug. 2022), 1–5.
55.
Brinkerink, M. et al. Assessing global climate change
mitigation scenarios from a power system perspective
using a novel multi-model framework. en. Environ-
mental Modelling & Software 150, 105336. ISSN:
1364-8152. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364815222000421 (2023) (Apr. 2022).
56.
Fortes, P., Pereira, R., Pereira, A. & Seixas, J.
Integrated technological-economic modeling plat-
form for energy and climate policy analysis. en.
Energy 73, 716–730.
ISSN: 0360-5442. https : / /
www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0360544214007749 (2023) (Aug. 2014).
57.
Riekkolaa, A. K., Berg, C., Ahlgren, E. O. &
S¨oderholm, P. Challenges in Soft-Linking: The Case
of EMEC and TIMES-Sweden. en.
58.
Krook-Riekkola, A., Berg, C., Ahlgren, E. O. &
S¨oderholm, P. Challenges in top-down and bottom-
up soft-linking: Lessons from linking a Swedish
energy system model with a CGE model. en. En-
ergy 141, 803–817.
ISSN: 0360-5442. https : / /
www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0360544217316274 (2023) (Dec. 2017).
59.
Seljom, P., Rosenberg, E., Sch¨affer, L. E. & Fod-
stad, M. Bidirectional linkage between a long-term
energy system and a short-term power market model.
en. Energy 198, 117311. ISSN: 0360-5442. https :
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0360544220304187 (2023) (May 2020).
60.
Deane, J. P., Gracceva, F., Chiodi, A., Gargiulo, M. &
´O Gallach´oir, B. en. in Informing Energy and Climate
Policies Using Energy Systems Models: Insights from
Scenario Analysis Increasing the Evidence Base (eds
Giannakidis, G., Labriet, M., ´O Gallach´oir, B. &
Tosato, G.) 315–331 (Springer International Publish-
32
==PAGE:36==
ing, Cham, 2015). ISBN: 978-3-319-16540-0. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16540-0 18 (2023).
61.
Gong, C. C. et al. Bidirectional coupling of a long-
term integrated assessment model REMIND v3.0.0
with an hourly power sector model DIETER v1.0.2
arXiv:2209.02340 [econ, q-fin]. Oct. 2022. http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/2209.02340 (2023).
62.
Miri, M., Saffari, M., Arjmand, R. & McPherson, M.
Integrated models in action: Analyzing flexibility in
the Canadian power system toward a zero-emission
future. en. Energy 261, 125181. ISSN: 0360-5442.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360544222020722 (2023) (Dec. 2022).
63.
Crespo del Granado, P., van Nieuwkoop, R. H., Kar-
dakos, E. G. & Schaffner, C. Modelling the energy
transition: A nexus of energy system and economic
models. en. Energy Strategy Reviews 20, 229–235.
ISSN: 2211-467X. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2211467X18300130 (2023) (Apr.
2018).
64.
Gjorgiev, B. et al. Nexus-e: A platform of inter-
faced high-resolution models for energy-economic
assessments of future electricity systems. en. Ap-
plied Energy 307, 118193. ISSN: 0306-2619. https:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S030626192101463X (2023) (Feb. 2022).
65.
Frysztacki, M. M., H¨orsch, J., Hagenmeyer, V. &
Brown, T. The strong effect of network resolution on
electricity system models with high shares of wind
and solar. en. Applied Energy 291, 116726. ISSN:
0306-2619. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0306261921002439 (2023) (June 2021).
66.
Frysztacki, M. M., Hagenmeyer, V. & Brown, T.
Inverse methods: How feasible are spatially low-
resolved capacity expansion modeling results when
dis-aggregated at high resolution? arXiv:2209.02364
[cs]. Sept. 2022. http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.02364
(2023).
67.
M¨uller, C. et al. Modeling framework for planning
and operation of multi-modal energy systems in the
case of Germany. en. Applied Energy 250, 1132–
1146. ISSN: 0306-2619. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0306261919309559 (2023)
(Sept. 2019).
68.
S´anchez, A. Marie-Alix Dupr´e La Tour – CIRED fr-
FR. Nov. 2020. https://www.centre-cired.fr/marie-
alix-dupre-la-tour/ (2023).
69.
Paviˇcevi´c, M. et al. The potential of sector coupling
in future European energy systems: Soft linking be-
tween the Dispa-SET and JRC-EU-TIMES models.
en. Applied Energy 267, 115100. ISSN: 0306-2619.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261920306127 (2023) (June 2020).
70.
Gea-Berm´udez, J. et al. The role of sector coupling
in the green transition: A least-cost energy system de-
velopment in Northern-central Europe towards 2050.
en. Applied Energy 289, 116685. ISSN: 0306-2619.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261921002130 (2023) (May 2021).
71.
Jean-Yves, B. et al. OSMOSE WP1 dataset version 1
(Zenodo, Mar. 2022). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
6375020.
33
