==PAGE:1==
Real­Time Characterization of Protein
Precipitation and Crystallization
Master’s Thesis
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
North Carolina State University
Biomanufacturing Training and Education Center
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
Master’s Thesis
July 28, 2023
By
Victoria Sara Saad
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Victoria Saad, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Søltofts
Plads 228A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.kt.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Biomanufacturing Training and
Education Center at NC State University, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, M.Sc. Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of downstream operations.
I hereby declare that the work presented in this document is based on research carried
out by the author.
Victoria Sara Saad ­ s212694
Signature
Date
ii
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With the increasing upstream titer in biopharmaceutical production, downstream opera­
tions have not been able to keep up.
Both crystallization and precipitation are alternatives, which need extensive development
time, but are cheaper and more flexible in production. To increase the use of precipitation
as a standard unit operation in downstream processing, also for molecules with higher
molecular weight such as monoclonal antibodies, the experimental design, and upscaling
of processes need to be made easier.
For an industrial course at BTEC about crystallization and precipitation, the precipitation
of the model protein lysozyme and green fluorescent protein was characterized using
Hofmeister salts as precipitants. In addition to the basic screening of required protein and
salt concentrations, agitation as a factor was considered. To remove impurities as a factor
and instead focus on the abilities of EasyViewer and ParticleTrack technology, lysozyme
was used in a pure solution with salts from the Hofmeister series. The exemplary impact
of different salt types, stirring, agitation types, salt concentration, protein concentrations,
and seeding was examined in this model system.
Especially, how the particle size distribution changes over time in a batch process was of
interest, as this showed the value of online process analytical technology usage. The use
of seeding crystals aimed at combining two parts of the lab course, by using the lysozyme
crystals from the stationary crystallization lab to change the kinetic process monitored in
the EasyMax 102 workstation. Using lysozyme and common salts at 20 °C, at pH 4 in
sodium acetate buffer, provides a good model system to exemplify the impact of different
factors on induction time, particle count, and chord length distribution (CLD), as the nec­
essary material is easy to source. While a PVM probe was mostly beneficial for processes
including crystals, the FBRM probe was a great in­situ tool for observing changes in CLD.
In the future, this equipment could be employed in the pharmaceutical industry to gener­
ate the data for machine learning in process development, as well as monitor industrial
processes in real­time.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
B22
Second Viral Coefficient
(NH4)2SO4
Ammonium sulfate
API
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
ATR­FTIR
Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
BTEC
Biomanufacturing Training and Education Center
CLD
Chord Length Distribution
DI
DeIonized
DLS
Dynamic Light Scattering
DNA
DeoxyriboNucleic Acid
DoE
Design of Experiments
DSP
Downstream Processing
EasyViewer
PVM probe
EMA
European Medicines Agency
ex­situ
examination of phenomenon outside of the place where it occurs
FBRM
Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement
FDA
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
GMP
Good Manufacturing Practice
HEWL
Hen Egg White Lysozyme
HILIC
Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography
HTP
High­Throughput
IEX
Ion EXchange chromatography
in­situ
examination of phenomenon in the place where it occurs
kD
dissociation constant
kDa
kiloDalton
mAb
monoclononal Antibody
N/A
not applicable
Na2SO4
Sodium sulfate
NaCl
Sodium chloride
NaOAc
Sodium acetate
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology, an US agency
ParticleTrack
FBRM probe
iv
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:7==
PAT
Process Analytical Technology
PEG
Polyethylene Glycol
pI
Isoelectric Point
PSD
Particle Size Distribution
PVM
Process Video and Measurement
QbD
Quality by Design
rpm
revolutions per minute
SDS Page
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SEM
Scanning Electron Microsopy
SLS
Static Light Scattering
STR
Stirred Tank Reactor
USP
Upstream Processing
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Thesis Structure
1
2
Introduction
3
3
Literature Review
5
3.1
Biopharmaceutical Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Proteins in Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.5
Parameters Impacting Precipitation and Crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.6
Alternative Unit Operations Used in Purification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.7
Process Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.8
Process Analytical Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.9
Biologics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Problem Statement
21
5
Thesis Goals
22
6
Materials and Methods
23
6.1
Considerations for Design of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Feedstocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.3
Buffer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.4
Salt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.5
Media Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.6
Process Analytical Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.7
Initial Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.8
Precipitation Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.9
Crystallization Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.10 GFP Q­Eluate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7
Results
31
7.1
Initial Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
Lysozyme Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7.3
GFP Q­Eluate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.4
Short Course Condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.5
Data collection for Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
8
SOP Protein Precipitation Characterization in Synthesis Workstation
45
8.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
8.2
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
8.3
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
8.4
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8.5
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8.6
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
vii
==PAGE:10==
8.7
Starting an Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8.8
Precipitation solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
8.9
Data export . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
8.10 Turning off equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.11 Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
9
Discussion
51
10 Conclusions and Outlook
54
List of Figures
54
List of Tables
57
References
58
Acknowledgements
65
A Appendix
66
A.1 MicroSphere Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.2 Impact of Salt Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.3 Jacket and Reactor Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.4 GFP Q­Eluate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.5 Short Course Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.6 README Template for Data Organization in Drive
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
viii
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:11==
1
Thesis Structure
Part 1: Introduction
Chapter 2 of this thesis comprises a comprehensive introduction to the current status of
the biopharmaceutical industry and its challenges.
Part 2: Literature Review
Chapter 3 provides a more in­depth analysis of the status quo of biopharmaceutical pro­
duction, as well as the application and underlying principles used for precipitation and
crystallization. Factors that impact precipitation and crystallization are introduced in de­
tail, as is the Quality by Design concept and process analytical technologies. The status
of process models is explained, as are the characteristics of the utilized model proteins.
Part 3: Problem Statement and Goals of this Thesis
Chapter 4 sums up the important takeaways from Part 2 and Chapter 5 specifies the
self­set goals for the performed research.
Part 4: Materials and Methods
Chapter 6 aims at giving a better understanding of the design of experiments and the used
precipitating agents, proteins, and analyses.
Part 5: Results
Chapter 7 shows the outcomes of the experiments described in Part 4, including many
figures obtained with Mettler Toledo software.
Part 6: SOP
Chapter 8 displays the standard operation procedure for the use of the EasyMax 102
workstation with the ParticleTrack G400 and the EasyViewer 100. The necessary func­
tions in the related Mettler Toledo in­house software iControl, iC Vision, and iC FBRM are
explained as well, to enable future students and scientists to use the equipment without
requiring on­site training from Mettler Toledo staff.
Part 7: Analysis and Discussion
Chapter 9 compares the obtained results with data and observations described in litera­
ture.
Part 8: Conclusion
Lastly, in Chapter 10, conclusions are drawn, summed up, and put into context, while
looking into the future.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:13==
2
Introduction
Even 100 years after Nordisk Insulinlaboratorium commercialized the production of in­
sulin in Europe, the investments in biopharmaceutical manufacturing are larger than ever.
Biopharmaceutical manufacturing relates to the production of biologics: pharmaceutical
drugs produced in bacterial, fungal, or mammalian cells such as Escherichia coli, Pichia
pastoris, or Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells. Currently, the global bioprocessing ca­
pacity is around 17.5 million liters spread over more than 1600 active facilities. The global
biologics market is expected to more than double by 2030, reaching a value of about a
trillion USD (Statista 2022). Depending on the process, purification steps can constitute
up to 80 % of the total manufacturing costs (Hunt et al. 2001, Costioli et al. 2010).
The rising demand for biopharmaceuticals, as well as the increasing titers in upstream
processing (USP), cause bottlenecks in downstream processing (DSP), especially purifi­
cation (Santos, Carvalho, and Roque 2017). After harvesting the fermentation broth, the
protein of interest should be isolated from critical contaminants such as proteases and
glycosidases. In this first purification step, the capture step, the focus is on capacity and
speed instead of resolution.
Currently, chromatography is the most­widespread unit operation for purification and pol­
ishing. That said, this prolific operation has substantial drawbacks in terms of its associ­
ated resin purchase cost, the missing compatibility with single­use technology, and prob­
lematic upscaling due to an increase in pressure drop with an increase in column size
(Martinez et al. 2019, Shukla and Gottschalk 2013). Despite these disadvantages, chro­
matography enables an easy and reliable process design and is therefore still the method
of choice and gold standard in the biopharmaceutical industry (A. S. Rathore, Kumar, and
Kateja 2018).
Meeting the increasing demands for protein­based medicines poses a significant industrial
challenge in terms of cost­effectiveness and reliability during biopharmaceutical manufac­
turing (Yang et al. 2019). Crystallization of proteins as a one­step process offers higher
efficiency compared to conventional purification techniques like chromatography, result­
ing in proteins with higher purity.
To improve productivity and decrease cost, protein crystallization and precipitation can
be used for both the initial and intermediate purification, as well as formulation steps in
biopharmaceutical production processes. Additionally or alternatively, is a simple unit op­
eration, which can be used both for volume and impurity reduction (Lohmann and Strube
2020).
Protein crystals exhibit greater stability and provide advantages in storage, formulation,
and drug delivery.
Placement of the precipitation or crystallization step further down­
stream provides a more pure and controlled feed solution and a more predictable out­
come. Nevertheless, placement earlier in the downstream process provides the most ad­
vantages, because crystallization and precipitation both concentrate and purify the feed
solution (Shukla, Etzel, and Gadam 2006). Precipitation is already used to remove impuri­
ties such as nucleic acids, lipids, and salts from the protein solution to isolate, concentrate
and stabilize the protein of interest (Buddha et al. 2016). However, it is important to note
that protein precipitation can also cause protein denaturation and aggregation, which can
affect the stability and activity of the protein product. Therefore, it is crucial to optimize
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
3
==PAGE:14==
the conditions of the precipitation process to minimize protein degradation and ensure the
production of high­quality biologics with full biological activity.
Currently, precipitation is mostly used for proteins with a comparatively low molecular
weight. Examples include the Cohn process, where subsequent precipitation steps are
used to purify albumin in blood plasma (Cohn et al. 1946). Other examples of precipitated
biologics include the hepatitis B vaccine (Hilleman et al. 1983) and the 5.6 kDa hormone
insulin (Siew and W. Zhang 2021).
To increase the use of precipitation as a standard unit operation in downstream process­
ing, also for molecules with higher molecular weight, such as monoclonal antibodies, the
experimental design, and upscaling of processes need to be made easier. Currently, the
downscaling of the process conditions is problematic. As of now, stationary dynamic light
scattering (DLS) is used to scan for successful conditions (Pantuso et al. 2020). However,
this does not accurately depict the effect of stirring and its influence on the precipitation
process. For better process understanding, turbidimeters or focused beam reflectance
measurements (FBRM) that obtain online kinetic data can be used as process analytical
technology (PAT) for small­scale runs.
4
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:15==
3
Literature Review
3.1
Biopharmaceutical Production
Biopharmaceutical production can be differentiated into four different stages. One stage
makes up upstream production, and three stages are associated with downstream pro­
duction: Recovery, Purification, and Formulation and Fill.
Purification of a biopharmaceutical molecule usually includes a capture chromatography
step, and two chromatographic polishing steps, followed by ultrafiltration/diafiltration. In
the case of a mammalian host cell, a viral inactivation and filtration step are included
as well. Often, the capture chromatography step is performed on a Protein A column,
whereas the polishing steps use anionic and cationic columns.
To overcome the limitations associated with chromatography, such as high costs of resins,
diffusion issues, and capacity constraints, there is a growing interest in exploring alter­
native approaches known as Anything but Chromatography methodologies. Currently,
non­chromatographic techniques for DSP are experiencing renewed interest, including
precipitation and crystallization methods (Santos, Carvalho, and Roque 2017).
Figure 3.1: The four stages of biopharmaceutical production, adapted from Gilleskie, Rut­
ter, and McCuen 2021.
3.2
Proteins in Solution
When proteins are dissolved in water, water forms a solvation layer around the hydrophilic
surface residues, forming a rigid matrix of counterions on the protein’s surface. The pres­
ence of these solvation layers reduces the amount of ionic interactions with other pro­
teins and decreases the likelihood of aggregation. These repulsive electrostatic forces
decrease protein­protein attractive forces. As fermentation broths are aqueous and con­
tain ions, purification through precipitation or crystallization requires a reduction of the
hydration layer.
3.3
Precipitation
Protein precipitation is a technique that separates and purifies proteins from a solution
by exploiting differences in solubility between proteins and the other components of the
solution (Burgess 2009, Oelmeier, Ladd­Effio, and Hubbuch 2013).
There are two separation strategies available for purifying biologics. The first strategy
involves precipitating side components, such as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and host cell
proteins (HCP), while keeping the target protein in solution to avoid subsequent protein
dissolution and degradation issues. However, it can be difficult to precipitate numerous
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
5
==PAGE:16==
impurities with unknown and diverse properties using this approach. The second strategy
involves using precipitation to isolate the target protein itself, which is more convenient
because optimal parameters can be selected for one specific target component.
Both strategies involve adding a precipitating agent to the protein­containing solution. The
first strategy causes the impurities to aggregate and become insoluble, whereas the sec­
ond strategy causes the protein of interest to precipitate, while other components remain
in the soluble phase. The resulting protein aggregates can be easily separated from the
solution by centrifugation or filtration. Removing proteases early in the procedure is crucial
to prevent protein degradation, which requires a quick, gentle, scalable, and reasonably
priced unit method such as precipitation. In addition to the fractionation, this method can
significantly enhance the concentration of the enriched protein (Burgess 2009).
Precipitation does not require a complex equipment setup, a continuous stirred tank re­
actor (STR) or a tubular reactor with a filter for solid­liquid separation works well. It can
deal with high process volumes and rising titers and can have shorter process times than
chromatography. Furthermore, once it is on a large scale, the volume of the STR is eas­
ily scalable, and continuous operation is feasible (Hammerschmidt, Tscheliessnig, et al.
2014; Hammerschmidt, Hobiger, and Jungbauer 2016, Li et al. 2019, Burgstaller, Jung­
bauer, and Satzer 2019). Currently, precipitation is mostly used for the production of
low­value products, but due to its advantages, research has been conducted on high­
value products, such as therapeutic proteins in the biopharmaceutical industry (Santos,
Carvalho, and Roque 2017).
3.4
Crystallization
Protein crystallization is a form of precipitation in which the precipitate is formed in an or­
dered manner (Santos, Carvalho, and Roque 2017). Typically, proteins are amorphous as
solids and prone to denaturation, but the crystalline lattices possess greater stability and
can resist denaturation (Santos, Carvalho, and Roque 2017, Peters, Minuth, and Schröder
2005). In polishing steps, crystallization is an effective means to ensure product quality
by influencing particle size, purity, and product yield. In the pharmaceutical industry, the
crystallization of an active pharmaceutical (API) connected to the crystal size distribution
has one of the greatest impacts on the quality and effectiveness of the API, as well as
its mode of delivery (Liang et al. 2013). Changes in crystal size and shape will also influ­
ence the processability, exemplified by filtration and drying performance, and change the
bioavailability and efficacy (Kempkes, Eggers, and Mazzotti 2008). A crystallized product
can be stored for years without significant product degeneration, and therefore the time
delay (for example due to transport) between the manufacture of the protein therapeutic
and fill and finish activities can be tolerated (Peters, Minuth, and Schröder 2005).
For many years, the central focus has been on crystallization for the production of diffraction­
quality single crystals for protein structure determination by crystallography. While the
demands on crystals are quite different for structure determination or purification, much
can be learned from crystallography and applied to bulk protein crystallization (Shukla,
Etzel, and Gadam 2006). However, many of the precipitants used in crystallography are
not practical for process­scale separation processes, as they would cause wastewater
treatment issues (Peters, Minuth, and Schröder 2005).
3.4.1
Crystallization Mechanism
To understand the underlying principles of crystallization, the concept of supersaturation
needs to be understood as the driving force for crystal nucleation and growth. Nucleation
is the creation of a new crystal nucleus, either undirected from solution (primary nucle­
6
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:17==
ation) or in the presence of existing crystals (secondary nucleation). During nucleation,
an adequate amount of molecules associates in three dimensions to form a thermody­
namically stable aggregate, which provides surfaces suitable for crystal growth. Crystal
growth is the increase in the characteristic length of existing crystals, it immediately fol­
lows nucleation and is governed by the diffusion of particles to the surface of the critical
nuclei and their ordered assembling onto the growing crystal (Krauss et al. 2013).
The relationship between supersaturation, nucleation, and growth can be simplified to
equations for the growth (Equation 3.1) and nucleation (Equation 3.2) rate.
G = kg∆Cg
(3.1)
where G stands for the growth rate, kg for the growth constant, g the growth order, and
∆C for supersaturation.
B = kb∆Cb
(3.2)
where B stands for the nucleation rate, kb for the nucleation constant, b the nucleation
order, and ∆C for supersaturation.
A visual relationship of the nucleation rate, growth rate, and crystal size can be seen in
Figure 3.3.
Changing the crystal­size distribution requires changing the relative nucleation and growth
rates. This may be accomplished by adjusting the supersaturation over time. Generally,
nucleation rates increase more rapidly than growth rates with increasing supersaturation
(b > g). The growth order for primary nucleation is typically much higher than for sec­
ondary nucleation or crystal growth. In addition, the degree of supersaturation required
for primary nucleation is typically much higher than for secondary nucleation, which in
turn is much higher than the threshold for the metastable region. Therefore, operation
at low supersaturation favors the formation of large crystals, whereas high degrees of
supersaturation, and operation close to the upper limit of the metastable region, favors
the formation of many nuclei, producing many small crystals (Shukla, Etzel, and Gadam
2006).
A two­dimensional phase diagram, illustrated in Figure 3.2, can be used to conveniently vi­
sualize the entire process of crystal growth. The diagram displays the stable states, which
include liquid, crystalline, and precipitate, as a function of two variables related to crys­
tallization. When the concentration of a protein solution surpasses its solubility limit, the
solution becomes supersaturated. This zone on the diagram can be divided into three re­
gions based on the degree of supersaturation: precipitation for very high supersaturation,
where molecules come together to form amorphous aggregates, labile for intermediate
supersaturation, where both nucleation and growth occur, and metastable for lower su­
persaturation, where only growth takes place. The boundaries between these regions
are not well­defined, as kinetic parameters influence them. Agitation and temperature
influence the width of the metastable zone, for example.
It is difficult to characterize the phase behavior of protein solutions completely due to
the complex kinetics that determine the equilibrium, the multicomponent character of the
solution, the number of solution parameters that can be adjusted, and the variety of dense
phases that can form (Callewaert and Michiels 2010).
The established and recommended approach to protein crystallization is the initiation of
nucleation at the lowest level of supersaturation within the labile region, followed by a
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: A simplified protein phase diagram, adapted from Krauss et al. 2013.
gradual decrease in protein concentration to enter the metastable zone, where growth
proceeds slowly. However, determining these optimal conditions can be challenging, and
it may be necessary to separate nucleation and growth stages in order to obtain high­
quality crystals.
This can be achieved, e.g., through the addition of so­called crystal
seeds. The chemical space of crystallization experiments is multidimensional, with dif­
ferent zones corresponding to nucleation and growth of various crystal forms. Predicting
the specific conditions needed to crystallize a protein from its chemical­physical properties
is currently not feasible. A modification of a single experimental parameter can affect mul­
tiple aspects of a crystallization experiment simultaneously, and therefore the process of
protein crystallization is not linear (Giegé 1999, Pusey and Aygün 2017, Rupp 2011, Liang
et al. 2013).
3.4.2
Seeding
Often, the high levels of saturation needed for nucleation are not reached (Figure 3.3). To
overcome this limitation, a so­called nucleant or seed can be added to the process. This
leads to a higher local concentration of macromolecules, lowers the energy barrier for
nucleation, and bypasses the high kinetic barrier of spontaneous nucleation (Alexander
McPherson 1999).
3.5
Parameters Impacting Precipitation and Crystallization
Many factors can affect protein crystallization and precipitation. In general, they can be
grouped into biochemical, chemical, and physical factors. Physical factors include tem­
perature, agitation, pressure, gravity magnetic fields, electric fields, dielectric properties,
viscosity, vibrations and sound, time, equilibration rate, nucleants, methodology, the sur­
face, and shape of the crystallization device, and sample handling. Chemical factors
involve the precipitant type and concentration, the pH value, the buffer type, the ionic
strength, as well as the sample concentration, presence, and use of metal ions, polyions,
8
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:19==
detergents, heavy metals, small molecule impurities, crosslinkers, reagent source, and
reagent formulation. Biochemical factors to be considered in crystallization processes
are the sample purity and homogeneity, the sequence, posttranslational and chemical
modifications, aggregation, proteolysis, sample pI and ligands, co­factors, and inhibitors
(Alexander McPherson 1999, Giegé 1999, Alexander McPherson 2004). Of all those
mentioned factors, generally, only the pH, salt, buffer, and temperature are changed in
optimization experiments.
3.5.1
Purity
As the conformational and chemical purity of the sample affects the ability to grow crys­
tals, it is important to use similar feedstock quality for similar results. Impurities can also
serve as additional nucleation points and thus change the kinetics of the process. Sodium
dodecyl sulfate­polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS Page) and mass spectrometry
can be used to assess purity, amongst others.
3.5.2
Temperature
The variation of the acid/base reaction constant of the protein side chains as a function of
temperature explains the dependence of protein solubility on temperature. Thus, some
proteins, exhibit a decreased solubility with decreasing temperature (Rosenberger et al.
1993, Chernov and Komatsu 1995). Crystallization can be achieved both by cooling and
evaporation, however, as proteins are heat­sensitive, evaporation is not commonly used
in industrial scale­purification. As the product of interest is usually in an aqueous solution,
and water has a high specific heat capacity, evaporation is not economically feasible,
and extraction of the protein precipitate through filtration for example can save energy
in the process and help reduce cost. However, vapor diffusion is used as a screening
tool with hanging drop crystallization (Alexander McPherson and Gavira 2014), with the
drawback that the data generated from sitting drop and microbatch experiments only gives
a qualitative insight into crystal growth kinetics and yield. Only the experiments in stirred
tanks scale allow quantitative analyses (Hebel et al. 2013).
The pKa values of ionizable groups in proteins are affected by the ionic strength of the
medium, with an increase in temperature leading to an increase in pKa values at low ionic
strength and a decrease at high ionic strength, though solubility variation is minimal at
high ionic strength. The temperature­solubility relationship is not a property of the protein
alone but depends on the protein­solution system. Temperature also affects nucleation
and growth rates and the equilibrium position of the trial during crystallization. While most
crystallization experiments are performed at 4 °C and 20 °C, new devices offer better
temperature control to optimize crystal growth and form (Krauss et al. 2013).
3.5.3
pH
Due to the presence of multiple ionizable groups with different pKa values, even a small
change of 0.5 pH units can significantly impact the solubility of proteins, and in some
cases, even a slight pH variation of 0.1 units can cause noticeable changes. This is
because pH affects the precise nature of protein­protein interactions, altering the ability
to form critical salt bridges and hydrogen bonds that are necessary for the formation of
specific crystal contacts (Dumetz et al. 2008). The protonation state of amino acid side
chains, which determines electrostatic interactions, plays a vital role in binding specificity,
protein hydration, and interactions with small molecules and ions that may facilitate crystal­
packing contacts. At the isoelectric point (pI) of each protein, the positive, and negative
charges balance each other, making it seem like the ideal condition for crystal growth
since there would be no electrostatic repulsion between protein molecules. However, an
analysis of nearly ten thousand unique protein crystal forms showed that this was not the
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
9
==PAGE:20==
case. Therefore, a broad pH range must be explored in crystallization experiments, but
only pH values that maintain the protein’s folded structure are acceptable conditions for
protein crystal growth (Kantardjieff and Rupp 2004).
Figure 3.3: Relationship between supersaturation, growth, and nucleation rate.
3.5.4
Precipitating agents
The choice of precipitating agent depends on the specific protein being purified and the
desired properties of the protein product. Common precipitating agents used in protein
precipitation include (NH4)2SO4, ethanol, and polyethylene glycol (PEG). These agents
work by reducing the solubility of the protein in the solution, leading to the formation of
protein aggregates.
They strengthen the attractions among biomacromolecules through various mechanisms,
such as altering the activity coefficient of water (in the case of salts) (Hofmeister 1888),
changing the dielectric constant of the solvating medium (in the case of organic solvents),
or increasing molecular crowding (by using high molecular weight polymers such as PEG)
(A. McPherson 1976). Precipitants that work via different mechanisms are not typically in­
terchangeable, and crystals that form with one type of precipitant are unlikely to form if the
precipitant is switched to a functionally different one without substantial process develop­
ment. However, it has been extensively demonstrated that combinations of precipitating
agents with distinct mechanisms can be synergistic and enhance the likelihood of crystal
growth (Majeed et al. 2003).
Metal ions can play a vital role in maintaining certain structural features of the protein
and are sometimes necessary for the protein’s biological activity. In some cases, metal
ions stabilize intermolecular contacts in the crystal. Studies have shown that the use of
biocompatible, water­soluble ionic liquids, organic salts, and salts with melting points at
or below room temperature as crystallization additives can yield promising results. Small
organic molecules are another useful additive class that enhances long­range electro­
static interactions by reducing the dielectric constant, impacts the solvent structure, and
may modify the hydrophobic effect. Crystallization of certain proteins often requires the
presence of natural ligands in the crystallizing solution, which ensures the conformational
10
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:21==
homogeneity of the sample. These ligands can be selected based on their binding affinity
to the enzyme. Some of these compounds can be directly added to the crystallization
drop (co­crystallization), while others need to be bound to the protein beforehand.
Salts
The solubility of macromolecules in concentrated salt solutions is a complex phenomenon,
but it can be simplified by considering it as a competition between salt ions, particularly
anions, and macromolecules for water molecules, which are crucial for maintaining solubil­
ity (Hofmeister. 1890). When the salt concentration is high enough, the macromolecules
lose an adequate amount of solvent, leading them to associate with each other to fulfill
their electrostatic requirements. This environment can result in the formation of ordered
crystals or disordered amorphous precipitates. Additionally, certain salt ions, primarily
cations, are necessary to ensure the solubility of macromolecules. At extremely low ionic
strengths, there is insufficient availability of cations to maintain macromolecule solubility,
and crystals may also form under these conditions (Alexander McPherson and Gavira
2014).
Hofmeister series
The Hofmeister series, also known as the lyotropic series, is a clas­
sification of ions based on their ability to influence the solubility and stability of proteins
and other macromolecules. It was first proposed by Franz Hofmeister in 1888 (Hofmeis­
ter 1888). Salts either stabilize proteins through a salting­in effect, occurring while ionic
strength is below 100 mM or accelerate precipitation based on the salting­out effect, which
eventuates at an ionic strength above 100 mM (Scopes 1987).
As explained earlier, the primary mechanism by which salts affect proteins is by displac­
ing water molecules through competition. The efficiency of this process is measured by
the ionic strength, which is calculated by summing the products of the molarity of each
ion in solution with the square of its charge. Consequently, multivalent ions, especially
anions, are the most effective agents for causing precipitation. Traditionally, salts such as
sulfates, phosphates, and citrates have been commonly used for this purpose (Alexander
McPherson and Gavira 2014).
The well­defined, empirical Hofmeister series arrange ions in order of their effectiveness
in promoting protein precipitation or stabilizing protein structure (Y. Zhang and Cremer
2006). The series is typically arranged in two lists: one for anions (negatively charged
ions, Equation 3.3 and one for cations (positively charged ions, Equation 3.4). For most
proteins, the degree of solubility depends weakly on the kind of cation, but strongly on the
kind of anion (Piazza and Pierno 2000).
CO2−
3
> SO2−
4
> H2PO−
4 > Cl−> NO−
3 ≈Br−> NO−
3 > I−> ClO−
4 > SCN−(3.3)
NH+
4 > K+ > Na+ > Li+ > Mg2+ > Ca2+
(3.4)
In general, the anions are listed in order of decreasing protein­stabilizing ability, while
the cations are listed in order of decreasing protein­precipitating ability. At the top of the
anion list are ions such as sulfate and phosphate, which are known to stabilize proteins,
while at the bottom are ions such as thiocyanate and iodide, which are known to promote
protein precipitation. The kosmotropic anions are located left of Cl−, and the chaotropic
anions right of Cl−. Kosmotrope species are strengthening bulk water hydrogen bonding
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
11
==PAGE:22==
networks, thereby stabilizing and creating a salting­out effect on the proteins. Chaotropic
species weaken the bulk water hydrogen bonding network, destabilize, and tend to unfold
proteins, thereby leading to a salting­in effect.
On the cation list, ions such as ammonium and potassium are known to precipitate pro­
teins, while ions such as sodium and calcium are less effective. The order of anions and
cations in the Hofmeister series can change, depending on whether it is ordered according
to weight or molarity. The lists in Equation 3.4 and Equation 3.3 are based on molarity.
The Hofmeister series is important in biochemistry and biophysics because it helps to ex­
plain the effects of salt concentration and composition on the behavior of macromolecules
in solution. It has been used to optimize protein crystallization, improve enzyme activity,
and understand the behavior of proteins in various biological processes. Without prior
knowledge of the behavior of a specific protein or nucleic acid, it is typically difficult to
predict the precise saturation level or molarity of a precipitating agent needed for pro­
tein crystallization. However, as a general rule, a concentration slightly lower than the
one that leads to the formation of an amorphous precipitate is often effective (Alexander
McPherson and Gavira 2014).
The ideal combination of temperature, pH value, and salt concentration for precipitation
is the one with the lowest addition of chemicals, as this decreases the risk of precipitating
too many impurities together with the product of interest. Subsequently, low salt addition
characterizes the ideal process.
Ammonium sulfate
One of the most widely used precipitation methods is ammonium
sulfate ((NH4)2SO4) precipitation. While several salts can be used as precipitants, am­
monium sulfate has several properties that make it the most useful. It is very stabilizing
to protein structure, with the sulfate anion on the far left of the Hofmeister series, very
soluble, relatively inexpensive, the pure material is readily available, and the density of a
saturated solution at 25 °C is not as high as other salting­out agents such as potassium
phosphate.
3.5.5
Polyethylene glycol
Polymers are frequently used in protein precipitation, the most commonly used being
PEG, usually 20 % (w/v) of PEG with molecular weights > 4000 Da due to the higher
efficacy compared to smaller PEG molecules. In solution, PEG not only attracts water
molecules from the protein surface but also has an effect in sterically excluding proteins
from its hydrodynamic volume, enhancing protein­protein interactions leading to protein
precipitation (A. McPherson 1976).
PEG has shown promising results for the isolation of large proteins like antibodies. While
the mechanism for PEG precipitation is not well enough understood yet, the phenomenon
is well described and models were built accordingly (Oelmeier, Ladd­Effio, and Hubbuch
2013, Hammerschmidt, Hobiger, and Jungbauer 2016).
3.5.6
Ethanol
The presence of organic solvents, such as ethanol, decreases the dielectric constant of
the medium. As the concentration of organic solvent increases, the attraction between
macromolecules becomes stronger, rendering the solvent less effective (reducing the kD)
and promoting the formation of a solid state. When using organic solvents, it is recom­
mended to work at a low temperature, preferably at or below 0 °C, and to add them slowly
while ensuring thorough mixing (Alexander McPherson 1999). In general, it is advisable
to keep the ionic strength low and employ any available means to prevent denaturation.
12
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:23==
3.5.7
Agitation
Crystal growth and morphology can be influenced by stirring the crystallization solution.
This technique helps to control crystal growth by minimizing the concentration gradient
across the crystal surface and preventing excess spontaneous nucleation. Stirring can
also accelerate the growth of protein crystals, which results in larger and higher­quality
crystals. Adachi, Takano, Niino, et al. 2005 proposed that stirring increases the interac­
tions between protein molecules, leading to the formation of large clusters that evolve
into stable nuclei. However, gentle stirring is recommended to avoid issues such as spon­
taneous nucleation, protein denaturation, and damaged crystals (Adachi, Takano, Mat­
sumura, et al. 2004). It is important to note that both the stirring technique and speed
affect crystal growth and morphology. Different agitation can be achieved through orbital
shakers, stir bars, and overhead stirrers.
Yaoi et al. 2004 observed increased lag times for crystal nucleation in stirred samples
compared to unstirred samples. While the time for crystal formation was longer, the quality
of the observed crystals was higher, as they had a complete shape and a size of up to 1
mm.
Influence of shear
The selection of experimental agitation methods with targeted types and intensities of
stresses can facilitate a better understanding of protein degradation mechanisms and
predictability for industrial applications. When comparing stresses induced by different
types of agitation, the vortex mixer causes the most intense stresses, while a stir bar
system presents locally intense shear close to the hydrophobic surface of the stir bar.
Orbital shakers provide intermediate­level stresses, with a stable platform for consistent
homogeneity (Bai et al. 2012).
The agitation and fluid shear have an influence on primary nucleation in solution – in gen­
eral, the induction time decreases with an increasing agitation rate (Liu and Rasmuson
2013). It is relevant to notice that the strain rates required to trigger structural alterations
decrease with increasing molecular weight and solvent viscosity, and thus, different pro­
teins experience shear differently (Bekard et al. 2011).
In fluid dynamics, the dimensionless Reynolds number is an important tool to estimate
the shear and model the flow behavior in a vessel. In Equation 3.5, the calculation for the
Reynolds number in a vessel is shown.
Re = ρ × Ni × D2
i
µ
(3.5)
Where Re is the Reynolds number, Ni is rotational stirrer speed (rps), ρ is the density of
the fluid (kg/m3), µ is the fluid viscosity (kg/m×s), Di is the diameter of impeller (m).
Most stirred tank systems have a laminar flow at Re ≤10 and a fully turbulent flow at Re
≥104. Consequently, there is a relatively large transition region of the flow regime of 10
≤Re ≤104.
3.6
Alternative Unit Operations Used in Purification
3.6.1
Protein A chromatography
Protein A affinity chromatography is a widely used method in the pharmaceutical industry
for purifying antibodies. It involves using a natural or synthetic base matrix coupled with a
native or recombinant proteic ligand derived from Staphylococcus aureus or Escherichia
coli, respectively. Protein A has five homologous domains that can specifically bind to
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
13
==PAGE:24==
the Fc portion of immunoglobulin G molecules. Apart from mAbs, Protein A also interacts
with polyclonal antibodies produced by various cell lines with different antigen­binding
properties.
The process of Protein A affinity chromatography starts by loading a clarified cell culture
containing the desired antibodies onto immobilized Protein A support at neutral pH, al­
lowing the interaction between the ligands. This step facilitates the isolation of the target
protein from impurities like HCP. The desorption of the purified protein is achieved by re­
ducing the pH of the mobile phase. Subsequently, the resin is regenerated and subjected
to a clean­in­place protocol.
Following the chromatographic process, additional purification steps, such as IEX are typ­
ically employed. Furthermore, virus removal is accomplished through membrane steps
such as ultrafiltration, diafiltration, and nanofiltration, as well as solvent/detergent treat­
ments and IEX.
Despite its effectiveness, Protein A affinity chromatography has certain drawbacks that
need to be addressed. These include the high costs associated with the support mate­
rial, potential leaching of the ligand, and instability under caustic conditions. Overcoming
these challenges remains a significant focus of research in this field (Ramos­de­la­Peña,
González­Valdez, and Aguilar 2019).
3.6.2
Ion Exchange Chromatography
Cation and anion exchange chromatography are often used as polishing steps in biomolecule
purification.
IEX utilizes the differences in the surface charge of proteins to achieve a highly precise
separation with a large capacity for sample loading. This separation process relies on
the reversible interaction between a charged protein and a chromatographic medium of
opposite charge. When loaded onto a column, proteins bind to it. Then, the conditions
are modified to selectively elute the bound substances. Elution is commonly achieved
by increasing the concentration of salt or adjusting the pH, either gradually or through
stepwise changes. In most cases, a gradient elution with salt (NaCl) is employed. During
binding, the target proteins are concentrated and subsequently collected in a purified and
concentrated form. The net surface charge of proteins varies depending on the pH of their
surroundings. Typically, if the pH is above the protein’s isoelectric point, it will bind to an
anion exchanger, while if the pH is below the pI, it will bind to a cation exchanger. However,
it’s important to note that binding is influenced by the charge, and surface charges alone
may be sufficient for binding even on the opposite side of the pI. IEX is typically used to
bind the desired molecule, but it can also bind impurities if necessary. By repeating IEX
at different pH values, multiple proteins with distinct charge properties can be separated.
3.7
Process Design
A successful process maximizes product recovery, scalability, robustness, and clarifica­
tion of the process stream while operating in a physical and chemical environment where
the protein of interest is stable (Shukla, Etzel, and Gadam 2006).
In biomanufacturing, this process needs to be scalable and most importantly repeatable
to ensure consistent product quality.
3.7.1
Continuous process
The decision to run a crystallization process as a batch or continuous process depends on
many factors such as PSD, total volume and yield requirements, as well as cost. A transi­
tion to continuous crystallization can offer significant benefits such as lower labor intensity,
14
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:25==
easier scalability, and a lack of batch­to­batch variation. At the same time, continuous pro­
cesses require more in­process monitoring to detect process disturbances early. The use
of PAT is therefore highly beneficial.
3.7.2
Quality by Design
Consistent product quality, as required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or
European Medicines Agency (EMA), can be achieved with the quality­by­design (QbD)
approach. This new standard procedure for process development is shown in Figure
3.4. QbD includes the definition of a quality target product profile (QTPP) and the critical
quality attributes (CQA). In the process model workflow, the risk assessment is performed,
and the design space is created after the design of experiments (DoE) and/or modeling.
Once the design space is set up, PAT can be used to implement a control strategy to
stay within predefined performance ranges. PAT also enables continuous improvement
through continuous data collection.
Typically, QbD is achieved through empirical methods such as high­throughput experi­
ments (Pathak, Dutta, and A. Rathore 2014, M. Zhang et al. 2014), but simulation can
also be employed to reduce experimental costs. Mechanistic modeling is an important
tool in this regard, as it can save time and resources when exploring new process pa­
rameter ranges. PAT is used to monitor and regulate the process (Sixt, Uhlenbrock, and
Strube 2018).
If the precipitation unit operation is subject to a QbD approach then the QTPP specifies
the structure of the target molecule and sets quality requirements necessary for retaining
biological functionality. Additionally, critical quality attributes are established for purity,
with respect to HCPs, and for product recovery.
Sixt, Uhlenbrock, and Strube 2018 adjusted ionic strength and pH value, as well as dis­
solution buffer ratio and dwell time in their experiments for monoclonal antibody (mAb)
recovery.
Figure 3.4: Quality by design approach for quality assurance (Sixt, Uhlenbrock, and
Strube 2018).
3.8
Process Analytical Technologies
Despite the inherent simplicity of the batch process, as of now, there is a lack of es­
tablished standard conditions for crystallization. This is due to the unique and complex
structures of individual proteins, which result in unique biochemical characteristics. Var­
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
15
==PAGE:26==
ious studies have shown that protein crystallization processes and their success are ex­
tremely sensitive. Furthermore, controlling the crystallization process is challenging, and
empirical optimization is often necessary. Nucleation, the initial step of crystal growth, is
a stochastic phenomenon influenced by factors such as supersaturation, agitation, impu­
rities, and mixing conditions. Consequently, reliable inline monitoring capabilities are re­
quired for crystallization optimization procedures and active process control in industrial
settings. Specifically, it is crucial to monitor the critical quality attributes of the crystal­
lization processes to identify optimal conditions, enhance process stability, and improve
product quality (Walla et al. 2023).
The use of in situ PAT aids in the mechanistic understanding of the crystallization process
along with the process design, and the detection of process changes (Sirota et al. 2021).
While laser diffraction or electrical sensing zones are not suited to determine the mea­
surement and characterization of the particle size and shape distribution, ex­situ or in­situ
microscopy coupled with image analysis is widespread (De Calderon Anda et al. 2005).
The delay in obtaining information as well as the added labor associated with ex­situ
particle analysis techniques make in­situ monitoring tools more attractive. Also, sample
preparation may cause changes in the conformation of the precipitate, as it can cause
dilution or change of ionic strength of the solution, and thereby create artifacts.
Nowadays, it is possible to analyze larger populations of particles using real­time particle
imaging. The images are typically obtained using a confocal microscope combined with
a high­speed camera and afterward processed using a segmentation algorithm that iden­
tifies each particle. Then finally, for each particle, a number of particle property features
are extracted (Patchigolla and Wilkinson 2010).
Often, focused beam reflectance measurements (FBRM) and in­situ microscopy through
a process video and measurement (PVM) microscope are the tools of choice. FBRM can
deliver the chord length distribution of a given particle population.
Since FBRM analyzes back scattering from a rotating monochromatic laser beam, it can
be operated even in concentrated slurries. Therefore, additional dilution steps or external
sampling, which are required in online and offline measurements, can be omitted. FBRM
is based on the reflection of scattered laser light which is encountered in the particle sys­
tem, so it is highly dependent on the optical properties of the particles’ surface. FBRM is
an alternative to offline particle size measurement methods, such as DLS or sieve analysis.
While FBRM is already established for monitoring the crystallization of small molecules,
only a few publications have applied it to biological macromolecules (Walla et al. 2023).
Microscopic photography
While being non­invasive and cost­effective, microscopic photography and the automated
image evaluation of protein crystallization techniques remain challenging (Walla et al.
2023). The results of optical microscopy imaging depend on the illumination of the sam­
ple and the system’s refractive index, as well as on sample composition with regard to
noise through aggregation, precipitation, and heterogeneous particles (Bischoff, Walla,
and Weuster­Botz 2022).
Infrared spectroscopy
Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR­FTIR) is a tech­
nique based on the coupling of electromagnetic radiation within the IR wavelength range
and the associated vibrational modes of molecules.
IR spectroscopy is an important
method for chemical analysis and research on functional materials, as well as biological
tests. It has been improved and developed to allow the study of molecular conformation,
biochemical reactions, protein function, and crystal structures (Walla et al. 2023). For
16
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:27==
seed crystallization, measuring the solution concentration with ATR­FTIR spectroscopy is
highly effective for detecting seed points, as it has the ability to distinguish between salt
and protein crystals due to the highly localized amide II absorbance (spectral region of
1585–1505 cm−1) on the image (Chan et al. 2009, Glassford et al. 2012).
Light scattering
Dynamic (DLS) or static (SLS) light scattering can be used to determine the impact of pre­
cipitating agents on proteins. Especially DLS is used to determine the kD, the dissociation
constant of a protein in a solution. The measure of scattered light intensity as a function of
angle is used to find the second viral coefficient (B22, mmol mL g2) amongst other param­
eters. A B22 value outside the range of ­0.1 x 10−4 molxmL/g2 to ­0.8 x 10−4 molxmL/g2
probably results in crystallization failure (George et al. 1997, Bonneté and Vivarès 2002,
Deszczynski, Harding, and Winzor 2006). Thus, B22 is used to predict crystal formation
or precipitation. Nevertheless, a straightforward prediction of crystallization conditions for
proteins (e.g., based on the second viral coefficient B22) is not yet feasible (Lewus et al.
2011). While DLS elucidates the hydrodynamic radius via analysis of the fluctuation of
the intensity of scattered light over time, SLS relates the intensity to molar mass.
3.8.1
Process control
Particle­based processes, such as processes used for isolating products, purifying mate­
rials, and refining substances, are difficult to manage due to their intricate dynamics and
physical­chemical characteristics. However, advancements in particle monitoring tools
have made it feasible to obtain immediate observations into some of these process dy­
namics (Nazemzadeh et al. 2021).
3.8.2
Process models
Up to this point, there is no process model available in literature that fully encompasses
the entire precipitation process. However, some model approaches have been proposed
for precipitation, including those derived from a mechanistic model approach for crystal­
lization, which are described in studies (Alexander McPherson and Gavira 2014, Zauner
and Jones 2000, Lucke et al. 2018). These models employ population balances and
provide detailed information about crystal or agglomerate nucleation, growth, birth, and
disruption. Such information is crucial in crystallization processes, where shape and size
distributions play a significant role in operation. In contrast, this information becomes
less essential for precipitation since the precipitates themselves are not the final product,
and population balances can compromise non­essential details. Additionally, Großhans,
Wang, and Hubbuch 2019 presented a mechanistic model approach for the precipitation
curve.
Machine learning
Particle­based techniques have a wide range of applications in various industries, includ­
ing the elimination of insoluble substances, product isolation, purification, and refinement.
However, due to the intricate dynamics and physical­chemical attributes of these pro­
cesses, they are often difficult to regulate. Fortunately, advancements in particle monitor­
ing technology enable the acquisition of instantaneous information about some of these
process dynamics.
The idea of combining mechanistic and machine learning models, known as hybrid mod­
eling, has been proven to be highly effective in diverse applications. Hybrid modeling
techniques have been previously utilized in several particle systems, such as crystalliza­
tion (Lauret, Boyer, and Gatina 2015, Meng et al. 2019) and milling/grinding processes
(Akkisetty et al. 2010).
Nazemzadeh et al. 2021 utilized on­line and at­line sensor data to train a machine learning­
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
17
==PAGE:28==
based soft­sensor that predicts particle phenomena kinetics by combining it with a mech­
anistic population balance model. Their approach allowed flexibility towards the use of
process sensors and ensured that the model predictions do not violate physical con­
straints. They demonstrated the application of the framework through laboratory­scale
lactose crystallization, laboratory­scale flocculation, and industrial­scale pharmaceutical
crystallization, using only limited prior process knowledge.
By utilizing online or at­line measurements of particle distribution, it is feasible to directly
fit hybrid models to particle properties, rather than relying on indirect process variables
like crystal mass (Nazemzadeh et al. 2021). The abundance of data also enables the re­
laxation of certain simplifying assumptions made in previous hybrid modeling approaches,
such as low­dimensional population balance models, which presents exciting opportuni­
ties for gaining new process insights and creating particle models with greater accuracy.
Additionally, advancements like automatic differentiation have significantly reduced the
computational expense of training machine learning models, as noted by Güneş Baydin
et al. 2018, making it possible to train hybrid models more quickly. This allows for real­time
training and the potential use of these models as on­line models.
As discussed in section 3.4.1, particle processes are simplified to consist of up to five
general physical particle phenomena: nucleation, growth, shrinkage, agglomeration, and
breakage. By combining a kinetic model with a mechanistic discretized population bal­
ance model, future particle attributes can be predicted, without the need for investigating
the underlying kinetics phenomena.
For successful data generation, the PAT sensors need to operate with a sampling fre­
quency higher than the critical sampling rate vcrit = 1/(tcrit), and need to be capable of
measuring a statistically sufficient number of particles for each sampling, to be able to
detect changes from sample to sample, as the sampling uncertainty is low enough.
3.9
Biologics
Biologics are a class of medicinal products made from living organisms or their compo­
nents, including proteins, nucleic acids, and cells. They are used to treat a wide range of
illnesses, such as cancer, autoimmune disorders, and infectious diseases.
Unlike traditional small molecule drugs, biologics are large and complex, often consisting
of thousands of proteins.
Proteins that are sensitive to variations in pH, temperature, precipitants, and agitation
pose a challenge for bulk crystallization. In addition, the process of bulk protein crystal­
lization is generally more time­consuming than that of small molecules such as sugars,
amino acids, and organic drugs. While small molecules can crystallize within minutes to
hours, proteins require hours to days. This extended time frame can increase the risk of
protease or microbial attack unless inhibitors are employed. It is also important to handle
protein crystals with care, as they are delicate and can be easily damaged by even mild
agitation.
3.9.1
Lysozyme
The glycosidic bond­breaking enzyme lysozyme (E.C. 3.2.1.17) plays an important role
in the antibacterial defense mechanism (Callewaert and Michiels 2010). While it can be
found in saliva, tears, and human milk, the main source of lysozyme is hen egg white,
where it makes up about 3.5 wt%. As an abundant enzyme with an isoelectric point of 11,
it is a model protein for precipitation studies (Howard et al. 1988, Callewaert and Michiels
2010, Callewaert, Van Herreweghe, et al. 2012, Ghosh and Cui 2000). Howard et al. 1988
18
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:29==
investigated the influence of pH, temperature, and NaCl concentration on the solubility of
HEWL. They found that the solubility of HEWL in sodium chloride (NaCl) decreases with
an increase in pH, increases with increases in temperature, and decreases with an in­
crease in NaCl concentration. When studied at pH 9.4 and low salt concentration (below
200 or 300 mM salt), lysozyme displays behavior inverse to the order of the Hofmeister se­
ries (compare to section 3.5.4), above this concentration, it reverts to the direct Hofmeister
series. Cheng et al. 2006 found that microcrystals developed following initial lysozyme
precipitation in (NH4)2SO4 solutions at pH 4 and 8 if the process time was long enough.
Figure 3.5: Phase diagram for the crystallization of lysozyme in NaOAc buffer at pH 4
based on qualitative data available in literature (white circle = crystal growth, black circle
= precipitate formation, grey circle = both precipitation and crystallization), adapted from
Walla et al. 2023.
3.9.2
Green fluorescent protein
The green fluorescent protein (GFP) is a model recombinant protein (Oddone et al. 2007).
More than 50 years ago, it was first found in the jellyfish Aequorea victoria, and has the
ability to emit green light when exposed to blue or UV radiation. Due to its stable struc­
ture, photophysical properties, and ability to be easily expressed in cells, GFP has been
extensively employed as a marker for gene expression and gene product localization in
the life sciences community over the years (Shimomura 2005). Torres­Acosta et al. 2021
reported a GFP titer of approximately 1.33 g/L as the GFP concentration that enters DSP.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:31==
4
Problem Statement
Purification is currently a bottleneck in the production of biologics. Well­designed protein
precipitation and crystallization can replace one to all chromatography steps, either only
for initial purification or for polishing steps as well.
While precipitation and crystallization are well­established unit operations in synthetic
chemistry, the process development structure cannot be fully transferred to the crystalliza­
tion of biomolecules such as proteins. This is because of the complex biological structure,
and heterogeneity of proteins, as well as the biological variation of the raw material.
As agitation and shear have a considerable impact on the hydrodynamic layer around
proteins, and thus impact the kinetics of precipitation and crystallization, they need to be
considered when establishing a new process for protein precipitation. Subsequently, the
experimental design and upscaling of processes need to be improved.
Currently, the scalability of the process is problematic, as it can be difficult to scale up
the process to industrial­scale production, e.g., the effect of shear is not included in initial
dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments. This can be alleviated with the use of pro­
cess analytical technology (PAT), for example, turbidimeters, or focused beam reflectance
measurements that obtain online kinetic data, as well as lab­scale stirred precipitation pro­
cesses in defined environments.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
21
==PAGE:32==
5
Thesis Goals
• Characterizing the impact of selected factors on the precipitation of lysozyme and
green fluorescent protein
• Providing data for machine learning to predict the development of the particle sizes
and counts during the precipitation process
• Finding process conditions that are feasible to show during the Short Course on
Precipitation and Crystallization at BTEC
5.0.1
Gantt chart
The Gantt chart below schematically illustrates the schedule of the Master’s thesis.
22
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:33==
6
Materials and Methods
6.1
Considerations for Design of Experiments
Initially, SAS JMP software was used to design experiments with a fractional factorial,
using precipitant concentration, salt concentration, buffer type, pH value as variables. This
choice of variables did not result in feasible conditions to test. Certain buffers only work in
certain pH zones, and there is a minimum protein concentration as well as an interest in
using as little salt as possible. There was an interest to keep sodium acetate as a buffer, to
keep the buffer identical to existing DLS and crystallization lab sessions of the Precipitation
and Crystallization short course at BTEC. Sodium acetate has buffering capacities in the
pH range, where lysozyme keeps its activity, and has been used extensively in literature
as well. According to Howard et al. 1988 the solubility of hen egg­white lysozyme at
pH 4 at 20 °C is at 4 mg/mL with 6 % NaCl (corresponding to 1 M), 2 mg/mL at 7.5
% NaCl (corresponding to 1.3 M) and 1 mg/mL at 10 % NaCl (corresponding to 1.7 M).
Thus, it was initially aimed to stay above these protein concentrations. Industrially relevant
concentrations were decided to be up to 10 g/L lysozyme. Sodium acetate works in the
range of pH 3.6 to 5.6, so pH 4 was chosen as a condition. Literature says that the pH
does not have a relevant effect on the precipitation of lysozyme, or an unpredictable one
(Forsythe, Russell A. Judge, and Pusey 1999), thus, it was not considered as a factor
in this thesis. To keep sample handling easy, and reduce power consumption, 20 °C
was chosen as the fixed temperature. The ideal stirring speed was determined as part of
the characterization experiments. For screening, experiments were performed once, and
interesting conditions were repeated up to three times.
6.2
Feedstocks
Lysozyme
The enzymatic function of hen egg white lysozyme (HEWL) lies in the catalyzation of the
hydrolysis of 1,4­β­linkages between N­acetylmuramic acid and N­acetyl­D­glucosamine
residues in peptidoglycans and between N­acetyl­D­glucosamine residues in chitodex­
trins. It maintains its activity in a large range of pH 6 to pH 9, and its isoelectric point
is at 11.35. The molecular weight of HEWL is around 14,388 kDa. Due to its catalytic
action, lysozyme has bacteriostatic and bactericidal properties, especially against Gram­
positive bacteria that have a large peptidoglycan wall around themselves. It is extensively
used in wound­healing creams, eye drops, and even anticancer drugs, as well as a food
preservative (Ghosh and Cui 2000). Lysozyme was purchased from Fisher Scientific.
6.3
Buffer
At pH 8, pre­made Tris­HCl buffer was utilized with a final molarity of 0.05 M. The buffering
capacity lies between pH 7.0 and 9.0.
Sodium Acetate works as a buffering agent in aqueous solution. The salt has a molecular
weight of 82.034 g/mol and a density of 1.5 g/cm3, which was utilized with a final molarity
of 0.1 to 0.02 M. Its buffering capacity lies between pH 3.6 and 5.6.
6.4
Salt
Ammonium sulfate (NH4SO4) is a salt with a molecular weight of 132.14 M, and a density
of 1.77 g/cm3. It is on the far left in the Hofmeister series.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
23
==PAGE:34==
Sodium chloride (NaCl) is a salt with a molecular weight of 58.443 M, a density of 2.17
g/cm3 and a solubility in 100 g water at 20 °C of around 36 g.
Sodium iodide (NaI) is a salt with a molecular weight of 149.894 g/mol and is on the far
right side of the Hofmeister series.
Anhydrous sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) is a salt with a molecular weight of 142.04 g/mol. it
is close to NH4SO4 in the Hofmeister series.
6.5
Media Preparation
All media components were dissolved in water purified through a Millipore milliQ system
and sterile filtered through a 25 mm syringe filter with a 0.2 µm nylon filter (Fisher Scien­
tific, USA) unless stated otherwise. The solutions were adjusted to the desired pH values
with glacial acetic acid or ammonium hydroxide, The pH was measured with a SevenEx­
cellence pH meter (Mettler­Toledo). All media was purchased at Thermo Scientific, USA,
if not indicated otherwise.
6.6
Process Analytical Technology
6.6.1
EasyMax 102
The EasyMax 102 advanced synthesis workstation (Mettler­Toledo, Switzerland) was used
for upscaled experiments in stirred 100 mL glass vessels. Stirring was performed with
spinplus®magnetic stir bars (VWR, United States), that create a deep vortex, or an over­
head stirrer with a Rushton turbine. The equipment is able to maintain a constant tem­
perature through water cooling and heating and collect the data of the reactor and jacket
temperature.
6.6.2
EasyViewer 100
Turbidity data as well as in­situ process pictures were acquired online by the EasyViewer
100 probe (Mettler­Toledo, USA) and analyzed using iC Vision software. The EasyViewer
100 was released by Mettler­Toledo in August 2019.
Figure 6.2: Schematic sketch of a focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) probe
in a crystal solution (Walla et al. 2023).
.
6.6.3
ParticleTrack G400
ParticleTrack (Mettler­Toledo, USA) is an instrument that employs a probe­based tech­
nique utilizing focused beam reflectance measurements (FBRM). The in­situ technique
24
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.1: Experimental setup of EasyMax 102 with ParticleTrack G400 (metallic, right
side) and EasyViewer 100 probe (white, left side) in BTEC laboratory.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
25
==PAGE:36==
was first introduced by Lasentec in 2012.
The instrument is directly inserted into the process stream at an angle, discarding the
need for sampling or sample preparation. A laser beam is emitted down the probe tube
and focused to form a concentrated spot of light at the sapphire window. The optics of the
instrument rotate at a constant speed of 2 m/s, causing the focused beam spot to rapidly
scan across particles as they pass by the window. When the concentrated beam interacts
with the particle system, individual particles or particle structures reflect the laser light back
to the detector. These distinct pulses of backscattered light are detected, counted, and
the duration of each pulse is multiplied by the scan speed to determine the chord length.
Typically, thousands of particles are counted and measured per second, enabling the real­
time reporting of a precise and highly sensitive distribution of chord lengths, thereby mon­
itoring the evolution of particle populations. Statistical information, such as the number
of particles in specific size classes, can be collected as well. This allows for the analysis
of changes in operating conditions and the tracking of particles and particle structures
as they naturally occur in the process. Ultimately, ParticleTrack helps in comprehend­
ing, optimizing, and controlling the particle system. The range for this real­time particle
size analyzer is between 1 µm to 1000 µm, and it can be used to characterize conditions
that affect aggregation, nucleation, polymorphism, and other system attributes. Data is
analyzed in the iC FBRM software.
26
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:37==
6.7
Initial Experiments
6.7.1
MicroSpheres
NIST­normed microspheres (Thermo Fisher, USA) with sizes ranging from 40 nm to 99.1
µm were used to determine the sensitivity of the FBRM and PVM probe.
6.7.2
Screening of Process Conditions
Potential salt­protein combinations were mixed in 1.5 mL reaction tubes and centrifuged
at 14,000xg for 10 min at room temperature. The absence or presence of a pellet as
well as cloud point visibility was observed and noted. Salt­protein combinations included
lysozyme with either sodium sulfate, sodium chloride, or sodium iodide, with salt concen­
tration from 0.5 M up to 7.5 M. The tested conditions are indicated in Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Conditions screened in 1.5 mL scale (green X = NH4SO4, blue circle = NaCl,
grey triangle = NaI.
6.7.3
Dynamic Light Scattering
The Wyatt DynaPro III plate reader (Waters Corporation, USA) was utilized to measure the
impact of 0 %, 2.5 %, and 5 % NaCl on the kD of lysozyme. Lysozyme in concentrations
from 5 to 25 g/L in 5 g/L steps was combined with the salt solution and 0.1 M sodium
acetate buffer, at a pH of 4.6. A 100 µL sample was added to 96­well black plates with an
optically clear bottom, and the diffusion coefficient was measured in the Wyatt DynaPro
III plate reader with a total acquisition time of 60 seconds. Additionally, to validate the
ParticleTrack G400 data offline, initial and final samples of an exemplary process, 5 g/L
lysozyme with 1.5 M NaCl and 0.05 M NaOAc, were measured in the DLS. Conditions
were static in the 100 mL EasyMax 102 vessel, stirred at 200 rpm in the 100 mL EasyMax
102 vessel, and shaken in an orbital shaker at 200 rpm and 20 °C.
6.7.4
Static Light Scattering
The Uncle (Unchained Labs, USA) was used to perform SLS experiments. In this biologics
stability screening platform, the impact of 0.6 M salts with sodium ions and anions from
the Hofmeister series on 2 g/L lysozyme was determined. 9 µL samples were pipetted
into the uni for sample analysis. The start temperature was set to 25 °C, the incubation
period was set to 180 seconds, the temperature ramp was set to 5 °C/minute, and the
end temperature was set to 95 °C.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
27
==PAGE:38==
6.8
Precipitation Experiments
On the basis of the solubility data for a lysozyme–NaCl system (Howard et al. 1988) and
using crystallization phase diagram in existing literature, (Bischoff, Walla, and Weuster­
Botz 2022) around 35 systems with variable salt concentration were selected for the study
(Table A.1). To tie the results to the Hofmeister series, some runs were performed with
(NH4)2SO4 and NaI as salts instead of NaCl. NaOAc was used as buffer, in concentrations
from 0.02 to 0.1 M. The pH value was maintained around pH 4, stirring in general kept at
200 rpm.
Figure 6.4: Overview of lysozyme [g/L] and salt [M] concentrations tested in the EasyMax
102 system.
The temperature of the reactor was maintained at 20 °C using a jacket.
The protein solution was stirred in the EasyMax synthesis workstation. Data measurement
was started, and the salt solution was added, as well as the acid or base for pH adjustment.
The impact of the process conditions on PSD, CLD, and turbidity was investigated for 24
to 128 hours. Initial samples were taken after pH adjustment, as well as final samples.
The solution was centrifuged at 1000xg for 5 to 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant, as
well as the pellet, were stored separately at 4 °C. Protein concentration in the supernatant
was measured in triplicate in a 96­well plate with a sample volume of 200 µL using UV­Vis
spectrometry (Synergy H1 microplate reader, BioTek, USA) and Gen5 3.1 software. This
also enabled the quantification of subvisible precipitation.
6.8.1
Stirring Speed Determination
To find a stirring speed with a low power input, but short induction time, lysozyme solutions
with a concentration of 5 g/L and 10 g/L were stirred at stirring rates ranging from 50 to
600 rpm, in 50 rpm increments, with a duration of minimum of 2 hours and up to 8 hours
at each stirring speed.
28
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:39==
6.8.2
Impact of Shear
To estimate whether the stir bars are the nucleation points, or the stirring itself, is the
reason for precipitation, the experiments with seeding (2 g/L lysozyme and 5 g/L lysozyme,
with 1.5 M NaCl, 0.02 M or 0.05 M NaOAc, at pH = 4) were repeated with overhead stirring
with a Rushton turbine at the same stirring speed.
6.8.3
Impact of Agitation
To compare the influence of orbital shaking to a stir bar, 50 mL of a solution containing
5 g/L lysozyme with 1.5 M NaCl was shaken at 200 rpm, and 20 °C in an orbital shaker
(Infors HT, Switzerland), with 3 mL samples taken to compare the precipitation efficiency
in the 100 mL vessel compared to the shake flask.
6.9
Crystallization Experiments
Lysozyme crystals were grown at pH 4.6 according to literature conditions (Russell A
Judge et al. 1999). 15 g/L lysozyme was dissolved in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer and
sterile filtered (0.1 µm, PVDF membrane). The same volume of sterile­filtered 10 g/L
sodium chloride with 0.1 M sodium acetate solution was added to the filtrate. This solution
was incubated at 2 °C. At least three 200 µL aliquots were pipetted into individual wells in
a round­bottom 96­well plate for later staining experiments. Crystals were observed with
a light microscope at 10x magnification, and under an electron microscope.
6.9.1
Crystal Staining
To differentiate salt from protein crystals, the mother liquor was stained with 0.1 g/L methy­
lene blue dye. Only protein crystals take up the methylene blue dye, while salt crystals
stay clear. Staining was performed overnight, and the supernatant was discarded, leaving
only the crystals at the bottom of the well. Each well was filled with 0.1 M sodium acetate
buffer, and observed under the light microscope at 10x magnification.
6.9.2
Scanning Electron Microscope
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is an electron optical imaging technique that yields
topographic images using a focused electron beam as an illumination source. As SEM
systems operate at a high vacuum, samples need to be dry and firmly mounted before
imaging. As protein crystal samples are not inherently conductive, they are coated with
gold. This technique is mostly qualitative but can be used to measure the crystal diameter
as well. A representative sample was pipetted onto a metal pin with a mounting tape,
and dried with a cellulose wipe and compressed air. The mounted sample was placed
in a sputter coater (Cressington, UK), and the current was set to 30 mA, with the target
pressure set to 0.08 mbar. Once the pressure reached 0.08 mbar, the sputter coating was
initiated and performed for 10 sec. The coated sample was placed in the Phenom Pure
SEM (thermo scientific, USA) and pictures were taken in a vacuum with the Phenom User
Interface software (thermo scientific, USA).
6.10
GFP Q­Eluate
The clarified cell lysate from recombinant Escherichia coli cells got purified using a Q
Sepharose Fast Flow column (Cytiva, USA), a strong anion exchanger. The eluate is
the analyte material that emerges from the chromatograph. It specifically includes both
the analytes and solutes passing through the column, in this case, the eluate contains
other proteins with a similar charge to GFP. While total protein concentration, measured
by UV/Vis­Spectroscopy at 280 nm is around 5.38 g/L (± 0.22), the GFP concentration is
around 4.54 g/L (± 0.22).
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
29
==PAGE:40==
6.10.1
Green Fluorescent Protein
In accordance with Sindarovska et al. 2008, 2.22 M (NH4)2SO4 was added to the GFP
Q­Eluate, without pH adjustment, at 20 °C and 200 rpm agitation. To increase throughput,
GFP Q­Eluate was also precipitated in 250 mL shake flasks, using (NH4)2SO4, NaCl, and
Na2SO4. The total process volume was 50 mL in all experiments.
30
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:41==
7
Results
7.1
Initial Experiments
7.1.1
Microsphere Experiments
Microspheres, normed in size in line with NIST guidelines, were used to test EasyViewer
100 and ParticleTrack G400 probe limitations and data generation from the EasyMax sys­
tem.
When diluting the microsphere particles in DI H2O, as recommended by the manufacturer,
0.2 % (v/v) solids is the lowest level of detection with the FBRM and EasyViewer, relating to
a 1:5 dilution. The minimal size to be detected with either the FBRM or EasyViewer probe
is 1 µm, thus any particles in the nanosize range cannot be accurately measured, as seen
in the very low particle count of below 1 in Figure 7.1a. While the measurements of the
chord length distributions did not change considerably over time (Figure A.1), the length
distributions obtained with the EasyViewer and ParticleTrack probe did not match the NIST
particle size for any microsphere size tested. The obtained median size with the FBRM
probe for 40 nm was 11.59 µm, for 4.6 µm it was 21.60 µm, for 21 µm it was 85.56 µm and
for 99.1 µm was 73.28 µm. Figure 7.1 shows the measured chord length distribution using
the ParticleTrack probe. Of particular interest are the two peaks observed in the CLD of
the 99.1 µm particles, that cannot be seen when looking at the same sample under the
microscope, as seen in Figure 7.2.
(a) 40 nm particles
(b) 4.6 µm particles
(c) 21 µm particles
(d) 99.1 µm particles
Figure 7.1: Chord Length Distribution of NIST particles as observed with the ParticleTrack
G400.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
31
==PAGE:42==
While the 40 nm particles only created a white­greyish background in the EasyViewer
pictures (Figure 7.2d), individual spheres can be distinguished for the particle sizes of
4.6 µm and above. Whereas the degree of dilution is identical, the larger particles are
present in lower numbers, as the solutions are made on a weight basis. In Figure 7.2
it can be seen that the particles reflect the laser light, which impacts the measurements.
Also, with the inbuilt ruler, the size of the particles can be somewhat accurately measured
(in the micrometer range), and it can be seen that all particles have a similar size, ruling
out falsified results from any handling errors and the addition of wrongly sized particles.
However, the inbuilt software was not able to measure the size of the NIST particles.
(a) 40 nm particles
(b) 4.6 µm particles
(c) 21 µm particles
(d) 99.1 µm particles
Figure 7.2: NIST particles as observed with the EasyViewer 100.
32
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:43==
7.1.2
Screening of Process Conditions
Once the limitations of the system had been identified following the microsphere experi­
ments, centrifugation tubes were used to screen for suitable salts and salt concentrations
to be tested in the EasyMax 102 system afterward. In Figure 7.3 the results of the screen­
ing of the impact of different salt and protein concentrations on protein precipitation can be
seen. NaCl was tested in concentrations from 0.5 M to 2 M, (NH4)2SO4 in concentrations
from 1 M to 2 M, and NaI tested in concentrations from 1 M to 7.5 M. Lysozyme concentra­
tions ranged from 2.5 g/L to 10 g/L. While none of the conditions with NaCl or NaI caused
the occurrence of a cloud point or a change in supernatant concentration, (NH4)2SO4 at
a molarity of 1 M and 2 M caused precipitation with a lysozyme concentration of 10 g/L.
Figure 7.3: Conditions screened in 1.5 mL scale, with successful screening highlighted in
green (X = NH4SO4, circle = NaCl, triangle = NaI).
It is important to remember, that factors, such as temperature and agitation, can change
the solubility limit of a protein, but it is not possible to precipitate more protein than the
solubility limit.
Although the screening results did not indicate that NaCl could be used to precipitate
NaCl successfully, the plethora of literature available on the topic indicated otherwise.
The static precipitation and crystallization of NaCl are widely studied and published (Rus­
sell A Judge et al. 1999, Popova et al. 2008, Walla et al. 2023), and NaCl is a cheap
and easily obtainable salt. Additionally, as it is neither on the far right nor the far left of
the Hofmeister series (compare with Section 3.5.4), so is neither strongly chaotropic nor
strongly kosmotropic, the kinetics are slower than for (NH4)2SO4, but not too slow to be
observed in a timeframe of up to a day.
An additional benefit was that the use of NaCl enabled tying the experiments performed
in the EasyMax to the crystallization and DLS conditions of the Precipitation and Crystal­
lization short course. Thus, NaCl was chosen as the predominant salt to characterize the
precipitation and crystallization of lysozyme.
7.1.3
Average Melting Temperature
To characterize the impact of different salts from the Hofmeister series on the stability
of lysozyme, SLS was used. In this regard, the average melting temperature of 2 g/L
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
33
==PAGE:44==
lysozyme in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer at pH 4.6 was determined in dependence on the
sodium anion. The highest average melting temperature of 80.8 °C was obtained using
sodium sulfate, and the lowest average melting temperature of 68.2 °C was obtained
when adding sodium thiocyanate. Sodium chloride in a concentration of 0.6 M caused an
average melting temperature of 76.4 °C.
Table 7.1: Average melting temperature of 2 g/L lysozyme in different solutions of 0.6 M
sodium salts at pH 4.6 in 0.1 M NaOAc buffer (Short Course Data).
Lysozyme
Salt
Sodium
Average Melting
Concentration
Concentration
Anion
Temperature
[g/L]
[M]
[°C]
2
0.6
Fluoride
78.5
Chloride
76.4
Bromide
74.6
Nitrate
74.8
Iodide
71
Thiocyanate
68.2
Sulfate
80.8
7.2
Lysozyme Experiments
7.2.1
Precipitation
Based on the results obtained in Section 7.1, stirred precipitation experiments with lysozyme
and sodium salts were performed in the EasyMax 102 system employing the EasyViewer
100 and ParticleTrack G400.
Lysozyme was precipitated at pH 4 using NaOAc as a buffer at varying protein and salt
concentrations and using different salts. Precipitation was successful at lysozyme con­
centrations as low as 2 g/L and 1 M NaCl concentration. The maximal measured particle
size was around 30 µm. It was possible to see clear shifts in precipitant mean size at
specific time points (such as seen in Figure 7.4) for protein concentrations of 5 g/L and
above, but not for protein concentrations below.
In Figure 7.4, the turbidity increases almost vertically after one hour to 0.35, to then stay
approximately constant for 13 hours until another, smaller increase in turbidity measure­
ment occurred to 0.60. After an hour, also the particle counts started rising from about 0
to up to 90000 for the total cont, and about 30000 for counts lower than 5, 5­10, and 10­20
µm. The count of particles from 20 to 100 µm in size increased to about 10000. After five
hours, the number of particles smaller than 5 µm to 5­10 µm reduced itself, and an hour
later the particle count increases once more to a maximum of 140000 for the total particle
count, about 70000 for particle count below 5 µm, about 45000 for particle count between
5 to 10 µm. The particle count of particles 20 to 100 µm in size reduced itself over time.
However, after 15 hours, all curves straighten and flatten. The observed particle count
(20 to 100 µm) is approximately 15000, for 10 to 20 µm it is approximately 30000, for 5 to
10 µm it is about 25000, for 1 to 5 µm it is about 18000, and for total particle count 90000.
In all experiments, the centrifugation of the initial sample, taken at t = 0 h, did not yield a
pellet, only a supernatant. Sometimes, even the final sample did not yield a pellet. In case
there was a pellet, the pellet was able to get fully resolubilized in milliQ water, proving that
the occurring precipitation was a reversible process,
34
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:45==
Using an external particle counter (FlowCam) required dilution of the solution, which
caused the dissolution of aggregates and subsequently resulted in non­representative
results.
While the reactor jacket temperature changed during experiments to keep the reactor
temperature at 20 °C, the changes are not large enough to signify the occurrence of an
endo­ or exothermic reaction. An exemplary depiction of this can be seen in Figure A.6.
Particle counts below 300 are considered insignificant, as the count of 300 is the cut­off
during FBRM­probe cleaning to determine whether a probe is clean.
Figure 7.4: FBRM trends from an experiment with 10 g/L lysozyme, 1.6 M NaCl, 0.1 M
NaOAc at pH 4 with 50 rpm stirring (blue = particle counts (<5 µm), dark blue = particle
counts (5­10 µm), dark green = particle counts (10­20 µm), light green = particle counts
(20­100 µm), red = total particle counts, purple = mean particle size [µm], yellow = median
particle size [µm], light blue = mean particle size, square weight [µm]), orange = turbidity).
7.2.2
Dynamic Light Scattering
Different concentrations of NaCl were used to determine the corresponding kD in the DLS.
Comparing the impact of 0, 0.5, and 2.5 % NaCl on the kD showed that the slope for 0
% NaCl is positive, slightly flattens with 0.5 % and shows a clear change in slope sign
above 2.5 % salt concentration, indicating that NaCl should be used in a concentration of
at least 2.5 %. For 0 % NaCl kD was 4.7 x 10−9, for 0.5 % NaCl kD it was 1.92 x 10−9,
and for 2.5 % NaCl kD it was ­6.86 x 10−10.
In an attempt to validate the ParticleTrack G400 data offline, initial and final samples of an
exemplary process were measured in the DLS. The initial samples of 5 g/L lysozyme with
1.5 M NaCl and 0.05 M NaOAc at t=0 h indicated no scattering with a diffusion coefficient
of about 1x10−6 cm2/s, a diameter of about 5 nm and a polydispersity of about 0.3 nm.
Most of the final samples were so turbid (identical content after agitation for 24 h), that
a measurement of the interaction was not possible. the final samples show multimodal
scattering, which indicates aggregation.
7.2.3
ParticleTrack G400
The FBRM probe can be used to measure the mean particle count, the chord length
distribution, and the number of particles in customizable bins. The bin sizes chosen for
the precipitation of lysozyme were ”smaller than 5 µm”, ”5­10 µm”, ”10­20 µm”, and ”20­
100 µm”. In Figure 7.4, an exemplary set of results, as portrayed in the software, can be
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
35
==PAGE:46==
seen. Additionally, the turbidity data, obtained with the EasyViewer probe, is overlaid in
yellow.
7.2.4
EasyViewer 100
The strengths of the EasyViewer 100 probe are, that it can provide in­situ process pictures
as well as online turbidity data.
in­situ process pictures
The EasyViewer images of a process involving a lysozyme concentration of 5 g/L, 1.8 M
NaCl, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH 4 and 200 rpm are shown in Figure 7.5. It can be seen, that
at the time points of 0 and 180 min, there are very few particle aggregates large enough
to be visible in the probe as white dots. 60 min later, more precipitate becomes visible,
which becomes even more predominant at 360 min. Shortly thereafter, little background
blackness remains in the picture, and the precipitates fill the whole picture, making the
distinction of individual particles difficult.
Figure 7.5: EasyViewer 100 Images from t = 0 min to t = 6.5 h for 5 g/L lysozyme, 1.8 M
NaCl, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4.
Turbidity values
In general, the turbidity measurements of the EasyViewer 100 are a combination of par­
ticle size and particle count data, and thus usually do not accurately reflect changes in
mean particle size or CLD. Nevertheless, the presence of aggregates can be observed
and monitored with the turbidity data.
An exemplary turbidity graph of a aggregation process of 5 g/L lysozyme with 1.5 M NaCl
and 0.1 M NaOAc at pH 4 can be found in Figure 7.6. It can be seen that the turbidity
measurement increases exponentially from around 1 h after salt addition, with the slope
flattening after about 3 h, and only a very slow increase in turbidity after 8 h. The maximum
turbidity value measured within 43 hours was 0.4.
When comparing the obtained turbidity trend to the mean size as well as the particle count,
it becomes even more apparent, that the turbidity measurement is missing shifts in the
particle characteristics, as seen in Figure 7.7, as the turbidity measurement inherently
misses the resolution to display a change in particle count measurements and change of
CLD at the same time (as turbidity is only one value).
36
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:47==
Figure 7.6: EasyViewer 100 turbidity measurements of 5 g/L lysozyme, 1.5 M NaCl, 0.1
M NaOAc at pH = 4.
Figure 7.7: EasyViewer 100 turbidity measurements as well as ParticleTrack 400 mean
size and particle count measurements of run with 5 g/L lysozyme, 1.5 M NaCl, 0.1 M
NaOAc at pH = 4 (green = mean size [µm], blue = count, dark blue = turbidity).
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
37
==PAGE:48==
7.2.5
Impact of Salt type
The impact that different types of salts from the Hofmeister series have on the CLD has
been observed. While the exact kinetics are not identical, the CLD of lysozyme precipi­
tated with 2 M (NH4)2SO4 or 1.5 M NaCl was almost identical after 24 h of stirring with
200 rpm, at pH 4 and using 0.1 M NaOAc as a buffer, as shown in Figure 7.8. In Figure
7.8 it can also be seen, that the initial lysozyme in solution is not picked up by the system
(indicated by the green flat line). NaI showed the same low particle count after 128 h
of stirring ­ the count is below 300 and thus insignificant. This also makes sense when
comparing the in­situ microscopy pictures of the EasyViewer probe: in the process with
NaI, no particles reflect light, whereas many particles reflect light in the processes with
NaCl and (NH4)2SO4.
Figure 7.8: Comparison of the impact of 2 M (NH4)2SO4 (dark blue line), 1.5 M NaCl
(green line), and 7.5 M NaI (yellow line) on chord length distribution at t=24 h to the chord
length distribution measured at t=0 h (light green line).
Additionally, 7.5 M NaI did not cause lysozyme to precipitate. The iodide ion is on the
right, chaotropic side of the Hofmeister series (compare to 3.3), and no lysozyme was
precipitated or crystallized within 128 h, as indicated by the results shown in Figure 7.8
and Figure 7.9c. The kinetic data is shown in the Appendix in Figure A.5.
(a) 1.5 M NaCl
(b) 2 M (NH4)2SO4
(c) 7.5 M NaI
Figure 7.9: EasyViewer picture of 5 g/L lysozyme with different salt concentration at pH =
4 in 0.1 M NaOAc buffer after 24 h. The cross shape in the background of (a) and (b) is
the stir bar.
38
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:49==
7.2.6
Impact of Stirring
As stirring requires a high energy input on a larger scale, and too high agitation will cause
shear and dissolution of protein aggregates, finding the optimal stirring speed and type is
important.
When increasing the stirring speed of the stir bar every two hours, and also in the following
experiments, where the stirring speed was kept for four to eight hours, it can be seen that
the stirring speed has an impact on precipitation kinetics. When the stirring was below 50
rpm, no precipitation was observed during the observed timeframe, when the lysozyme
concentration was at 10 g/L. With a lysozyme concentration of 5 g/L, the stirring needed
to be increased to 200 rpm to observe protein precipitation.
Figure 7.10: Change of mean particle size of a solution with 10 g/L lysozyme in 1.5 M
NaCl and 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4 and variable stir bar speed (purple line = stir bar speed,
green line = mean chord length size, blue line = particle count).
In Figure 7.10, a part of the stirring speed determination is shown. While the agitation
was between 100 and 300 rpm, the mean particle size decreased, and the particle count
increased. With a protein concentration of 10 g/L, above 400 rpm, the particles were
broken up, and above 500 rpm, the formation of bubbles distorted the measurements of
the mean particle size.
In experiments with fixed stirring speed, the lag phase for a process with 10 g/L lysozyme,
1.5 M NaCl and 0.1 M NaOAc differed between 10 min and almost 16 h, with only the
stirring speed differing between 50 (for 16 h) and 200 (for 10 min) rpm.
Impact of Agitation
When comparing the impact of different agitation modes by running an identical process
both in the EasyMax 102 with a stir bar, and in a shake flask, the stir bar caused 90.3 %
of the lysozyme to precipitate within 24 h, compared to 94.4 %. While pellets could be
observed with all stirred conditions, no pellet formed in the static condition.
7.2.7
Impact of Salt Concentration
Lysozyme was precipitated with NaCl in different molarities to observe the impact of salt
concentration. As can be seen in Figure 7.11, the obtained CLD with 0.2 M, 1 M, and 1.7
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
39
==PAGE:50==
M NaCl respectively does not follow in a linear order. While the highest particle count and
smallest chord length was obtained with 0.2 M NaCl, the second­highest particle count,
and second­smallest chord length were observed with 1.7 M and not 1 M NaCl. This
indicates that other factors are more relevant for the CLD than NaCl concentration.
Figure 7.11: CLD of lysozyme precipitates yielded by addition of 0.2, 1, and 1.7 M NaCl,
stir bar stirring at 200 rpm, pH = 4, and 0.1 NaOAc.
7.2.8
Impact of Protein Concentration
As solutions in industrial processes may have different protein concentrations, the pre­
cipitation kinetics of lysozyme at different protein concentrations was observed. Higher
protein concentrations had a shorter induction time before precipitation than lower protein
concentrations. As can be seen in representative runs in Figure 7.12, 10 g/L lysozyme
starts to precipitate within 20 min, whereas 5 g/L lysozyme starts to precipitate after about
40 min, and 2 g/L lysozyme starts to precipitate after 80 min.
Figure 7.12: Difference in induction time for lysozyme concentrations of 10 g/L (purple
line), 5 g/L (blue line) and 2 g/L (green line), with 1.5 M NaCl, stir bar stirring at 200 rpm,
pH = 4, and 0.1 NaOAc.
7.2.9
Impact of Seeding
In the chemical synthesis industry, it is a known practice to add seeding crystals to in­
crease the kinetics of the stirred crystallization process. Thus, protein­salt solutions with
40
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:51==
known kinetics, that had lag times of multiple hours, were seeded with crystal solutions.
The EasyViewer 100 was an ideal observational tool to follow the kinetics of the protein
crystals in the solution.
In addition to being able to verifiably determine the exact crystal seed addition time point,
it can also be seen, that the background scatter from small nuclei increases from the pic­
ture obtained at 5 min compared to the picture obtained at 5 h (Figure 7.13). The small
precipitates increase in number as time goes on. While the crystals seem to keep their
size in the first four pictures, they lost their shape in the last figure, obtained after 14 h.
Comparable results are obtained when stirring with an overhead stirrer instead of a stir bar.
Subsequently, the stirring speed, and protein concentration, are probably more relevant
for crystal growth than the type of stirrer used.
Figure 7.13: EasyViewer 100 Images from t = 5 min to t = 14 h for 2 g/L lysozyme, 1.5 M
NaCl, 0.02 M NaOAc at pH = 4.
Off­line lysozyme crystal pictures
An aliquot of the seeding crystal was observed under the SEM. In Figure 7.14 the mor­
phology of the crystals used for the seeding experiments can be seen, as obtained with a
SEM. As a comparison, in Figure 7.15a, the light microscope picture of lysozyme crystals
grown in a 96 well­plate can be seen.
Figure 7.14: Lysozyme crystals grown in 15 mL tube under a SEM (15 g/L lysozyme, 0.1
M NaOAc, pH = 4.6 in DI H2O).
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
41
==PAGE:52==
Distinction of salt and protein crystals
Protein crystals either obtained in 96 well plates, 15 mL centrifugation tubes, or from the
EasyMax were observed for staining after the addition and removal of methylene blue to
the crystal solution, e.g., initially observed as in Figure 7.15a. Crystal identity as protein,
and not salt, could be confirmed by the retention of the stain by the crystal, as seen in
Figure 7.15b.
(a) unstained
(b) stained with 0.1 % methylene blue dye
Figure 7.15: Lysozyme crystals grown in 96­well plate at 4 °C (15 g/L lysozyme, 10 %
NaCl, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4.6) observed under 10x magnification under light microscope.
7.3
GFP Q­Eluate
As a solution closer to industrial composition, GFP Q­Eluate was precipitated using am­
monium sulfate concentrations obtained in literature. Using the stir bar, the precipitation
process took multiple days, and the maximum particle count obtained was 2851, as seen
in Figure 7.2. This relates to a change of GFP concentration from 2.7 g/L to 1.46 g/L.
After screening of the shake flasks showed that using 3 M (NH4)2SO4 could result in
faster precipitation, the condition was tested using overhead stirring in the EasyMax 102.
Throughout the process duration, no precipitation occurred, as seen in A.4.
7.4
Short Course Condition
For 3 hours (30 min plus 150 min) of lab on the second (and final) day of the short course,
two different conditions were chosen. The EasyMax 102 workstation has two individually
programmable 100 mL vessels, but there are only two probes (one ParticleTrack G400,
one EasyViewer 100) available in total.
To have a significant particle aggregate concentration in the vessel, the precipitation pro­
cess monitored by the FBRM probe got started four hours before the lab started. The
parameters of 5 g/L lysozyme at 1.5 M NaCl, 0.1 M NaOAc, 200 rpm stir bar, at pH 4
solution can be changed by the students if wanted, options include change of stirring rate,
change of temperature, addition of seeding crystals as well as addition of ethanol as a
different precipitant. The participants chose to increase stirring to 400 rpm and the tem­
perature to 40 °C. This caused a decrease in total count from about 70000 to about 0, in
42
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:53==
Table 7.2: Overview of particle counts as well as the mean and median particle size over
time. The proteins in Q­Eluate were precipitated with 2 M (NH4)2SO4 at 20 °C and 200
rpm stirring.
time [h]
0
24
48
72
96
120
144
190
pH
7.9
8.16
8.12
8.05
8
NaN
NaN
NaN
counts <5
22.85
58.27
141.71
260.03
306.93
525.85
768.87
1,329.32
counts 5­10
10.46
13.29
53.35
139.14
198.07
349.11
531.01
1,027.64
counts 10­20
5.41
3.89
12.2
49.64
78.34
102.57
154.73
407.39
counts 20­100
3.18
1.45
2.55
13.67
37.99
30.3
28.12
87.28
counts, total
42.02
79.34
212.65
464.08
621.94
1,008.44
1,482.91
2,851.82
Mean
9.14
10.98
7.37
6.85
7.58
6.51
6.17
6.86
Median
4.68
3.84
3.97
4.61
5.05
4.86
4.88
5.24
less than 5 min. To create precipitate again, the stirring was reduced to 100 rpm and the
temperature set to 4 °C. Within 60 min, precipitate counts rose again.
To best showcase the benefits of the PVM probe, it is used for an experiment including
crystals. As no precipitation or crystallization will occur within the short time frame of the
lab, a seeding condition was chosen, with an initial protein and salt concentration chosen
by the students. As a basis, they had their DLS plate reading results, the microplate
crystallization results, as well as the FBRM run. If additional input was required, there is
also access to historic data. The students chose 30 g/L lysozyme with 1.5 M NaCl, and 3
mL seeding crystal solution, prepared as described in 6.9, were added.
The course material has been added to the Appendix (A.5) and a picture from the course
has been added as well (A.10).
7.5
Data collection for Machine learning
A Google sheet for easy data collection and analysis both by human and machine users
was created, compiling the information about the final precipitant concentration [g/L], the
start day of the experiment, the crystal seed volume [µL], the precipitant name, the pre­
cipitant concentration [g/L], the buffer name, the buffer concentration [M], the salt name,
the salt concentration [M], the process volume [mL], the stirring speed [rpm], the type of
stirrer used, the pH, as well as the total process duration [h]. Links to the folders and
files containing the FBRM and PVM data were included as well. From the FBRM data,
the CLD was exported every 30 min, as well as the Trends and Statistics. All pictures
obtained with the PVM probe were uploaded as well, as was the distribution data.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:55==
8
SOP Protein Precipitation
Characterization in Synthesis
Workstation
8.1
Purpose
Set up EasyMax 102, EasyViewer 100, and ParticleTrack G400 for precipitation and crys­
tallization purposes.
8.2
Equipment
• Deionized H2O for pH probe cleaning
• Mettler­Toledo pH calibration buffers for two­point calibration (pH 4.0, pH 7.01, pH
10.0)
• Deionized or milliQ H2O or 70
• 70 % isopropanol for cleaning
• milliQ H2O for rinsing
• KimTech Wipes
• 1.5 mL reaction tubes
• Serological pipettes
5 mL for sample taking
25 mL for the addition of substances
Note: Pipettes for volumes above 10 mL do not fit through lid holes
• Motorized pipette controller (pipette gun)
8.3
Hardware
• EasyMax 102 with100 mL glass reactor and 100 mL PTFE cover
• EasyViewer 100
• Magnetic stir bar or overhead stirrer
• ParticleTrack G400 Probe
• SevenExcellence pH probe
• Water chiller
• 100 mL glass reactor (Mettler Toledo No: 51161620)
• Clamp chain for 100 mL reactor (Mettler­Toledo No: 51161670)
• O­Ring for 100 mL reactor (Mettler Toledo: 51191913)
• Laptop (BTEC­4255C3 has the software packages installed)
• USB drive for data transfer
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
45
==PAGE:56==
8.4
Software
• iControl 6.1
• iC Vision 8.1
• iC FBRM 4.4
8.5
Setup
Turning on equipment:
• Turn on the EasyMax 102 workstation by pressing the power button.
• Turn on the SevenExcellence by pressing the power button.
• Turn on the water chiller by pressing the power button.
Make sure that the flow meter on the right side of the EasyMax is fully open.
The equipment should set the flow rate itself.
• Turn on the EasyViewer 100 by inserting the cable into one of the USB slots of the
computer.
The laser should turn on, and blue light should be visible.
Note: Connecting it to the 4­slot reader does not work.
• Turn on the ParticleTrack G400 probe by pressing the power button on the external
box.
A green light next to “Power” and “Communication” should begin to light up.
8.6
Calibration
• Calibration of the EasyViewer 100 and the ParticleTrack G400 is not needed.
• The pH probe needs to be calibrated through the EasyMax interface.
– Clicking on the relevant reactor side and then the pH and selecting “Adjust
sensor” opens a menu to perform a two­point calibration.
Note: While the calibration is performed, no other menu can be opened in the Easy­
Max interface. However, parameters can be adjusted in the iControl software.
– Mettler­Toledo calibration buffers are provided in bags, that fit well in 2 × 15 mL
reaction tubes. Usually, these tubes stand in racks next to the EasyMax.
Note: Make sure to properly clean and dry the probe before inserting it into the buffers.
8.7
Starting an Experiment
• Ensure that the external hard drive is connected to the laptop for data storage.
• Experiments can be designed and created in the iControl application.
• In the menu on the top left under “File” click “Design Experiment…” and select
“Based on an experiment template” to use a prior experiment as a template. Name
the experiment according to the following scheme:
YYYYMMDD ­ XX gL PROTEIN ­ XX M SALT ­ 0.X M BUFFER
• Experimental set­up in iControl involves a lot of drag­and­drop.
46
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:57==
All conditions can be manually controlled on the EasyMax interface as well, but
iControl enables data storage and is the connection to also include the collected
data, e.g., in the FBRM data file.
Note: It makes sense to manually start stirring around 50 rpm before starting the experi­
ment in iControl to audiovisually check for any contact of the probes with the stirrer
and to avoid particle aggregation at the top of the probes.
• If an experiment with the EasyMax and ParticleTrack has been selected, clicking the
blue play button will open a menu to create experiments in iC Vision and iC FBRM.
The name of the iControl file gets automatically transferred.
• iC Vision needs to be open in order for iControl to be able to start the set­up.
For iC Vision, a normal experiment duration is 1 day, with data being stored every
30 seconds.
– Insert the EasyViewer into the fitting hole in the lid and tighten.
– Optimal insertion length is obtained when the numbers on the tube are between
145 and 150 (when using a stir bar) and around 130 (when using an overhead
stirrer).
For iC FBRM, a normal duration is around 1 day, with data being stored every 10
seconds.
– To properly set the experiment up, the probe needs to be immersed in pure
water or isopropanol (best in a 15 mL tube in a black tube holder in a white
glass vessel stand) to test the probe for cleanness.
• Once the iC Vision and iC FBRM experiments have been created, the experiment
and data collection can begin by pressing “start”.
If you want to prolong the experiment after starting it, make sure to increase the hold
time in the iControl experiment before the automatic shut down of the iC Vision and iC
FBRM experiments. Add phases to the iC Vision and IC FBRM experiments while they’re
running, to prolong data collection. If the experiment has already ended, new data can
be added by closing a file and then selecting “New experiments” and “Append to existing
file”. Bear in mind that the latter will slow down the software, and can cause data storage
errors in the future. There’s a maximum of data points that can be collected, and longer
experiments or a lot of data points decrease the speed of data management.
8.8
Precipitation solution
To make experiments comparable, add the protein solution and potential water/buffer so­
lutions to the glass vessel before data collection starts using the serological pipettes.
Pipettes up to 10 mL volume fit into the free opening of the lid. After the start of the
experiment, add the salt solution, and adjust the pH with acid or base addition. Before the
addition of the salt solution, the pH probe likely is not submerged enough for reliable mea­
surements. Suitable volumes are 50 mL for stir bar experiments, and 75 mL for overhead
stirrer experiments. Take an initial sample (e.g., 2x 1.5 mL in 1.5 mL tubes, and centrifuge
for 10 min at 14,000 rpm at room temperature) Protein concentration in the supernatant
should be checked at 280 nm in the plate reader in lab 218. Make sure to use UV­Vis
96­well plates.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
47
==PAGE:58==
8.9
Data export
Export data only to the external hard drive (and do not store it on the laptop), to avoid data
loss or stop of data acquisition in the middle of a run.
8.9.1
iC Vision data export
1. Use the “smart pin” functionality to pin images every hour to get the size distribution
at these time points.
2. In the menu under “Export” select the respective folder on the external drive and
export all pictures as .png.
• Change the start of the picture name (“File Prefix”) to the date of the experiment
(“YYYYMMMDD_”) from “IMG_”.
Note: It is not possible to change the name or ending of the picture files.
• Picture export will likely take at least 20 minutes.
Note: Only one data set/picture set can be exported in iC Vision at a given time.
• Another interesting data set to export is the “Distributions” data set.
– Make sure it gets exported to the correct folder on the hard drive.
8.9.2
iC FBRM data export
1. Import the “MettlerToledo” statistics definition on the right side of the menu below
the “Statistics” heading.
• More precise pins can be dropped by zooming in after clicking the + icon on
top of the trends graphic. Information on particle size distribution can only be
obtained for pinned time points.
2. Drop a pin every 30 mins.
Note: There is no smart pin functionality..
3. Add trends (also known as information from the other software programs) by clicking
the bell curve icon with a plus.
Interesting information to have is the stirring speed R, the reactor temperature
(Tr) from the iControl file, and the Turbidity IA from the iC Vision file. For
information to be added, the file needs to be open in the other software, but it
can be closed after being added.
4. Copy and paste all the data (click “As Text (data only)”) and the “bitmaps” to an
Excel file. Especially for the “Trends” export, it may take a while until the data is in
the working storage and can be copied and pasted into the Excel sheet.
Note: The iC FBRM file can not be saved while the turbidity data is added as a trend,
therefore remove that data as a trend before saving the experiment file.
Upload the data to a Google Drive folder as additional storage to the hard drive. Move
it first to the USB drive labeled “265”, and then upload it either using a personal laptop
or use the laptop connected to the microscope next to the clean bench. The attached
“README Template for Data Organization” can be used to keep track of the data and
experiment conditions, especially for human use. For machine learning use, the same
information should be parsed into an Excel sheet.
48
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:59==
8.10
Turning off equipment
• Remove the EasyViewer USB connection to turn off the EasyViewer and increase
the lifetime of the laser.
• Turn off the external box for the ParticleTrack probe.
• Turn off the SevenExcellence.
• Turn off the water chiller below the EasyMax workstation.
• Equipment does not need to be sparged with N2 in this configuration.
8.11
Cleaning
• Clean the EasyViewer, ParticleTrack, and temperature probe with isopropanol spray
and wipe dry with KimTech wipes.
• Clean the pH probe with DI H2O and insert the tip into a pouch with KCl to avoid
desiccation of the probe.
• Take the lid apart and rinse the lid, glass vessel, stirrer, and O­ring first with tap
water. If needed, use a brush to remove any stains.
• Rinse the vessel with milliQ water 2 to 3 times.
• Soak the lid parts in a container in milliQ water to make sure that all residues are
solubilized, and the equipment is clean.
• Spray everything with isopropanol, and either air­dry or use pressurized air to dry
the equipment.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:61==
9
Discussion
The precipitation and crystallization of proteins are dependent on many factors, and real­
time characterization of these phenomena can aid process understanding and design.
The ParticleTrack G400 is good at providing online data about the CLD and giving a con­
tinuous overview. The EasyMax 102 workstation enables continuous monitoring of the
temperature of the reactor as well as the jacket temperature, and the pH. However, the
pH drift of the SevenExcellence probe makes it difficult to monitor and set the pH value
accordingly. For precipitation processes, the ability of the EasyViewer to take pictures is
less relevant, as the particles are too small to be more than small white dots. Additionally,
the CLD and mean particle size data obtained with the ParticleTrack G400 is more mean­
ingful, and relevant for following filtration steps, than the turbidity data obtained with the
EasyViewer.
The reflective nature of the NIST microspheres interferes with the measurements of the
ParticleTrack and EasyViewer probe (Figure 7.2), and thus it is not a suitable option to
test the accuracy of their measurements. Walla et al. 2023 mentions that the aggregation
and/or precipitation in protein crystallization processes is a major challenge, as these pro­
cesses may interfere with the focused laser beam and affect the duration of the backscat­
tered light as well as the pulse intensity. These problems have not been observed with
biological systems, but only with non­aggregating NIST particles.
Depending on the purpose of the crystallization or precipitation process, it can be benefi­
cial to have a longer or shorter induction phase. Using PAT to monitor this process can
enable decision­making in regard to the addition of additional protein or salt to speed up
the process.
Vortexing a solution in a reaction tube, followed by centrifugation at 14000xg for 10 min can
serve as a confirmation that a condition will lead to precipitation in a stirred system (shown
by changed absorption at 280 nm or cloud point formation). However, an unsuccessful
screening does not necessarily show that a condition will not lead to precipitation in a
stirred system. Therefore, the screening setup needs to be improved, to be able to find
the condition that is the most resource­efficient, reducing costs both for the production
company and the environment. While the exact reasons for this are unclear, it shows that
the vortex created by the vortexer has a different impact on the protein­salt solution than
the stir bars. According to Bai et al. 2012, vortexing exhibits a stronger force on the fluid
than stirring. This means, that the vortexing timeframe in the screening is either too harsh
or too short to increase protein­protein interactions.
The shear increased with velocity and accelerated the nucleation rate of lysozyme and
thus shortened the induction time, which is consistent with the crystallization kinetics of
other proteins (Yang et al. 2019, Liu and Rasmuson 2013).
Xiaopeng et al. 2006 observed a shorter timeframe for their purification of eGFP using
(NH4)2SO4 than shown in Table 7.2 and Figure A.4. Furthermore, they were able to re­
move impurities at a low saturation of (NH4)2SO4, which does not match with the results
of this thesis, where the contaminants of the Q­Eluate got precipitated as well. This can
be either due to the use of Tris­HCl and the pH of 8, or the difference in protein solution
composition.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
51
==PAGE:62==
While the addition of NaCl to lysozyme in NaOAc buffer at 20 °C did not yield any precipi­
tation or crystallization without stirring or decrease of process temperature (Section 7.2.6),
Yaoi et al. 2004 reports that stirring, even only at 100 rpm resulted in an increased time for
crystal nucleation to occur, and thus an increased lag phase.They observed that stirring
at 25 rpm or 50 rpm reduced the induction time, indicating that 100 rpm causes shear and
breakage of particles. Thus, stirring can stimulate nucleation of lysozyme proteins, and is
a relevant parameter to study and determine in a precipitation and crystallization process.
Additionally, through stirring, fewer, but larger, lysozyme crystals were created compared
to unstirred experiments. Opposite to this, other authors observed that higher shaking
rates or higher concentrations resulted in smaller crystals, which indicated the number of
crystals would be higher, and the edge of crystals became irregular. The largest crystal
obtained by Yaoi et al. 2004 was about 1 mm in length, and obtained at a stirring speed of
100 rpm and NaCl concentrations from 6 % up to 12.5 %. Their findings, that the flow of
the protein solution caused by stirring causes the production of large, high­quality crystals,
cannot be confirmed by the data obtained for this project, as no big crystals were obtained
through stirring of the protein and salt solution. This may be explained by different protein
concentrations, or different modes of agitation, at different temperatures. Furthermore,
Hebel et al. 2013 found no correlation between stirrer speed and crystal growth kinetics,
at least in their tested range of 100 to 300 rpm. As different stirrers have different power
inputs and cause different fluid dynamics, the comparison of stir rates alone is likely not
helpful.
The obtained data does show that the nucleation rate is increased with an increase in
lysozyme solution or stirring rate, as observed by Yang et al. 2019. However, a higher
initial concentration does not cause a different (smaller) size of lysozyme crystals, the
PSD of 2 g/L lysozyme and 5 g/L are almost overlapping.
There are different lysozyme crystal shapes, and Hebel et al. 2013 observed mostly com­
pact irregular tetragonal­like crystals, which is in line with microscopy data from the crys­
tallization experiments (compare to Figure 7.14 and Figure 7.15). In the SEM, crystal
clusters in the approximate size of 70 µm to 120 µm were observed, which is the size
range that Hebel observed as well (Figure 7.14). While Hebel et al. 2013 did not observe
any needlelike crystals, those occurred occasionally in the 15 mL centrifugation tubes
used for the creation of seeding crystals.
Since in situ microscopy probes are commonly available today from a diversity of compa­
nies, the image­based monitoring tool is proving to be a promising concept for industrial
protein crystallization in combination with deep learning image analysis for challenging
protein crystallization process conditions such as those involving aggregates, precipitated
proteins, heterogeneous particles, and low­resolution imaging devices (Bischoff, Walla,
and Weuster­Botz 2022). Combining different monitoring modalities shows great poten­
tial. Other authors have combined image analysis with Raman spectroscopy, to obtain
information both from the solid and the liquid phase. This joint information helped to es­
timate the nucleation kinetics as well as crystal growth kinetics. Based on the results
obtained in an aqueous taurine solution saturated at 30 °C and 40 °C, their approach
proved to be more sensitive and provided more reproducible nucleation detection com­
pared to FBRM (Bischoff, Walla, and Weuster­Botz 2022). Indeed, the need for offline
analysis for concentration measurements is a drawback in the current BTEC lab setup,
and the purchase or use of the probes in combination with others, e.g., the Raman probes
used in bioreactors, could aid further process understanding. In addition to improved hu­
man process understanding, machine learning resources benefit from the use of optical
probes in protein crystallization monitoring, enabling real­time analysis of protein crystal
52
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:63==
growth. As recent advances in protein crystallization research primarily focus on the real­
time detection of CQA of crystals and employ advanced crystallization process control
algorithms to adjust the final product according to specific requirements, spectroscopic
methods, particularly UV/Vis spectroscopy, are commonly utilized in conjunction with con­
trol strategies like supersaturation or concentration feedback control. The combination of
UV/Vis spectroscopy and chemometrics shows great potential in monitoring specific pro­
tein concentrations within complex matrices, offering a promising application in this field,
according to Walla et al. 2023.
Crystallization solutions with 50 mg/mL lysozyme solution nucleated at about 100 min with
the shaking rate of 100 rpm, while at about 30 min with shaking rate at 200 rpm. The faster
the shaking rate, the faster the decrease in concentration of crystallization solution, and
smaller crystals were obtained for lysozyme solutions of the same concentration (Yang
et al. 2019). Different stirring speed cause different lag phases for lysozyme precipitation
in the observed system of lysozyme as well (described in Section 7.2.6).
According to Jollès and Berthou 1972, at 25 °C, there is a shift in lysozyme crystal shape
from tetragonal to tetragonal/orthorhombic crystals (Jolles and Berthou, 1972). In these
experiments, different crystal shapes were observed even below 25 °C.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
53
==PAGE:64==
10
Conclusions and Outlook
To overcome the limitations associated with chromatography, such as high costs of resins,
diffusion issues, and capacity constraints, there is a growing interest in exploring alterna­
tive approaches to meet the rising titers and rising demands in biopharmaceutical produc­
tion. There are many parameters that need to be optimized to ensure that crystallization
and or precipitation are feasible replacements, requiring many process development and
optimization steps. The use of PAT and machine learning can speed up these processes
and enable their successful establishment in FDA­controlled environments, such as the
biopharmaceutical industry. As there is a plethora of literature available on the precipi­
tation and crystallization of lysozyme as a model protein, there is a solid basic process
understanding. The use of PAT, specifically an FBRM and PVM probe in a controlled,
stirred environment, is ideal to characterize the kinetics of the precipitation of lysozyme
and GFP. Different to SEM or light microscopy, the PVM probe can show the size and
shape of protein crystals in solution, thus making process monitoring easier. By produc­
ing rich data sets for future use, future experiments can be predicted and planned using
machine learning, on the basis of the experiments conducted for this thesis.
Lysozyme with salts from the Hofmeister series is a good teaching example for the in­
fluence of different parameters and possible effects, as all required materials are com­
paratively cheap and easy to obtain. By adding a laboratory module on the precipitation
of lysozyme in the EasyMax 102 and tracking the development of CLD in a precipitation
process with the ParticleTrack G400 and the development of turbidity and crystal seeds
with the EasyViewer 100, the short course “Protein Precipitation and Crystallization” got
improved.
The crystallization of lysozyme in a stirred system requires more process development.
While the GFP purification from Q­Eluate was unsuccessful using only Hofmeister salts,
it was possible to precipitate all proteins and thereby increase the concentration of the
solution.
The EasyMax system, while not sterile, is great for scaling up, as the geometry of the 100
mL vessel is similar to larger reactors, and there is a wide variety of stirrers to choose
from, to mimic large­scale conditions.
In the future, crystallization and precipitation will play a larger role in biopharmaceutical
production, and thus it is important to teach the industrial workforce the underlying princi­
ples and show how PAT, in interplay with machine learning and robot­assisted screening
for process conditions, will enable the widespread implementation, finally decreasing de­
pendence on expensive resins while maintaining work in an authority­approved design
space.
54
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:65==
List of Figures
3.1
The four stages of biopharmaceutical production, adapted from Gilleskie,
Rutter, and McCuen 2021. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
A simplified protein phase diagram, adapted from Krauss et al. 2013. . . . .
8
3.3
Relationship between supersaturation, growth, and nucleation rate. . . . . . 10
3.4
Quality by design approach for quality assurance (Sixt, Uhlenbrock, and
Strube 2018). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Phase diagram for the crystallization of lysozyme in NaOAc buffer at pH 4
based on qualitative data available in literature (white circle = crystal growth,
black circle = precipitate formation, grey circle = both precipitation and crys­
tallization), adapted from Walla et al. 2023.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.2
Schematic sketch of a focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM)
probe in a crystal solution (Walla et al. 2023). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.1
Experimental setup of EasyMax 102 with ParticleTrack G400 (metallic, right
side) and EasyViewer 100 probe (white, left side) in BTEC laboratory.
. . . 25
6.3
Conditions screened in 1.5 mL scale (green X = NH4SO4, blue circle = NaCl,
grey triangle = NaI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.4
Overview of lysozyme [g/L] and salt [M] concentrations tested in the Easy­
Max 102 system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.1
Chord Length Distribution of NIST particles as observed with the Particle­
Track G400. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
NIST particles as observed with the EasyViewer 100.
. . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7.3
Conditions screened in 1.5 mL scale, with successful screening highlighted
in green (X = NH4SO4, circle = NaCl, triangle = NaI). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7.4
FBRM trends from an experiment with 10 g/L lysozyme, 1.6 M NaCl, 0.1 M
NaOAc at pH 4 with 50 rpm stirring (blue = particle counts (<5 µm), dark
blue = particle counts (5­10 µm), dark green = particle counts (10­20 µm),
light green = particle counts (20­100 µm), red = total particle counts, purple
= mean particle size [µm], yellow = median particle size [µm], light blue =
mean particle size, square weight [µm]), orange = turbidity). . . . . . . . . . 35
7.5
EasyViewer 100 Images from t = 0 min to t = 6.5 h for 5 g/L lysozyme, 1.8
M NaCl, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7.6
EasyViewer 100 turbidity measurements of 5 g/L lysozyme, 1.5 M NaCl,
0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.7
EasyViewer 100 turbidity measurements as well as ParticleTrack 400 mean
size and particle count measurements of run with 5 g/L lysozyme, 1.5 M
NaCl, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4 (green = mean size [µm], blue = count, dark
blue = turbidity).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.8
Comparison of the impact of 2 M (NH4)2SO4 (dark blue line), 1.5 M NaCl
(green line), and 7.5 M NaI (yellow line) on chord length distribution at t=24
h to the chord length distribution measured at t=0 h (light green line). . . . . 38
7.9
EasyViewer picture of 5 g/L lysozyme with different salt concentration at pH
= 4 in 0.1 M NaOAc buffer after 24 h. The cross shape in the background
of (a) and (b) is the stir bar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
55
==PAGE:66==
7.10 Change of mean particle size of a solution with 10 g/L lysozyme in 1.5 M
NaCl and 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4 and variable stir bar speed (purple line
= stir bar speed, green line = mean chord length size, blue line = particle
count). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.11 CLD of lysozyme precipitates yielded by addition of 0.2, 1, and 1.7 M NaCl,
stir bar stirring at 200 rpm, pH = 4, and 0.1 NaOAc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7.12 Difference in induction time for lysozyme concentrations of 10 g/L (purple
line), 5 g/L (blue line) and 2 g/L (green line), with 1.5 M NaCl, stir bar stirring
at 200 rpm, pH = 4, and 0.1 NaOAc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7.13 EasyViewer 100 Images from t = 5 min to t = 14 h for 2 g/L lysozyme, 1.5
M NaCl, 0.02 M NaOAc at pH = 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.14 Lysozyme crystals grown in 15 mL tube under a SEM (15 g/L lysozyme, 0.1
M NaOAc, pH = 4.6 in DI H2O). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.15 Lysozyme crystals grown in 96­well plate at 4 °C (15 g/L lysozyme, 10 %
NaCl, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4.6) observed under 10x magnification under
light microscope. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
A.1 FBRM data for 40 nm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O. . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.2 FBRM data for 4.6 µm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O.
. . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.3 FBRM data for 21 µm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O. . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.4 FBRM data for 99 µm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O. . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.5 FBRM data for 7.5 M NaI with 5 g/L lysozyme, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4. The
straight lines occurred due to an intermittent stop in data collection. . . . . . 67
A.6 Reactor as well as jacket temperature with mean particle size [µm] and
particle count for a process with 2 g/L lysozyme, 1.7 M NaCl, and 0.1 M
NaOAc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.7 Kinetic data obtained with the ParticleTrack G400 probe for 3 M (NH4)2SO4
with GFP Q­Eluate at pH = 8, stirred at 200 rpm with an overhead stirrer.
. 68
A.8 CLD data obtained with the ParticleTrack G400 for 3 M (NH4)2SO4 with
GFP Q­Eluate at pH = 8, stirred at 200 rpm with an overhead stirrer. . . . . 69
A.9 ParticleTrack G400 data for GFP Q­Eluate with 2 M (NH4)2SO4 at 200 rpm
agitation with a stir bar at 20 °C, at pH = 8.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.10 Picture from BTEC short course ”Protein Precipitation and Crystallization”
on July 19, 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
56
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:67==
List of Tables
7.1
Average melting temperature of 2 g/L lysozyme in different solutions of 0.6
M sodium salts at pH 4.6 in 0.1 M NaOAc buffer (Short Course Data). . . . 34
7.2
Overview of particle counts as well as the mean and median particle size
over time. The proteins in Q­Eluate were precipitated with 2 M (NH4)2SO4
at 20 °C and 200 rpm stirring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.1 Experimental conditions tested in EasyMax 102 system. . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
57
==PAGE:68==
References
Adachi, Hiroaki, Kazufumi Takano, Hiroyoshi Matsumura, et al. (Jan. 2004). “Protein crys­
tal growth with a two­liquid system and stirring solution”. In: Journal of Synchrotron
Radiation 11.1, pp. 121–124. ISSN: 1600­5775. DOI: 10.1107/S0909049503026980.
Adachi, Hiroaki, Kazufumi Takano, Ai Niino, et al. (June 2005). “Solution stirring initiates
nucleation and improves the quality of adenosine deaminase crystals”. In: Acta Crystal­
lographica Section D: Biological Crystallography 61.6, pp. 759–762. ISSN: 09074449.
DOI: 10.1107/S0907444905013466.
Akkisetty, Pavan Kumar et al. (Dec. 2010). “Population balance model­based hybrid neu­
ral network for a pharmaceutical milling process”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Innova­
tion 5.4, pp. 161–168. ISSN: 18725120. DOI: 10.1007/S12247-010-9090-2/FIGURES/14.
Bai, Ge et al. (Feb. 2012). “Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) insights into agitation
stress methods in biopharmaceutical development”. In: International Journal of Pharma­
ceutics 423.2, pp. 264–280. ISSN: 0378­5173. DOI: 10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2011.11.044.
Bekard, Innocent B. et al. (Nov. 2011). “The effects of shear flow on protein structure and
function”. In: Biopolymers 95.11, pp. 733–745. ISSN: 1097­0282. DOI: 10.1002/BIP.
21646.
Bischoff, Daniel, Brigitte Walla, and Dirk Weuster­Botz (Sept. 2022). “Machine learning­
based protein crystal detection for monitoring of crystallization processes enabled with
large­scale synthetic data sets of photorealistic images”. In: Analytical and bioanalytical
chemistry 414.21, pp. 6379–6391. ISSN: 1618­2650. DOI: 10.1007/S00216-022-04101-
8.
Bonneté, F. and D. Vivarès (Oct. 2002). “Interest of the normalized second virial coefficient
and interaction potentials for crystallizing large macromolecules”. In: Acta Crystallo­
graphica Section D: Biological Crystallography 58.10 II, pp. 1571–1575. ISSN: 09074449.
DOI: 10.1107/S090744490201418X.
Buddha, Madhavan et al. (2016). “Precipitation as an alternative to chromatography in the
insulin manufacturing process”. In: Biopharm International 29.1, pp. 30–35.
Burgess, Richard R. (2009). “Chapter 20 Protein Precipitation Techniques”. In: Methods in
Enzymology 463.C, pp. 331–342. ISSN: 00766879. DOI: 10.1016/S0076-6879(09)63020-
2.
Burgstaller, Daniel, Alois Jungbauer, and Peter Satzer (May 2019). “Continuous inte­
grated antibody precipitation with two­stage tangential flow microfiltration enables con­
stant mass flow”. In: Biotechnology and Bioengineering 116.5, pp. 1053–1065. ISSN:
10970290. DOI: 10.1002/BIT.26922.
Callewaert, Lien and Chris W. Michiels (Mar. 2010). Lysozymes in the animal kingdom.
DOI: 10.1007/s12038-010-0015-5.
Callewaert, Lien, Joris M. Van Herreweghe, et al. (Oct. 2012). “Guards of the great wall:
bacterial lysozyme inhibitors”. In: Trends in Microbiology 20.10, pp. 501–510. ISSN:
0966­842X. DOI: 10.1016/J.TIM.2012.06.005.
Chan, K. L.Andrew et al. (May 2009). “Attenuated total reflection­FT­IR spectroscopic
imaging of protein crystallization”. In: Analytical Chemistry 81.10, pp. 3769–3775. ISSN:
00032700. DOI: 10.1021/AC900455Y.
Cheng, Yu Chia et al. (May 2006). “Kinetics and equilibria of lysozyme precipitation and
crystallization in concentrated ammonium sulfate solutions”. In: Biotechnology and Bio­
engineering 94.1, pp. 177–188. ISSN: 00063592. DOI: 10.1002/BIT.20839.
58
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:69==
Chernov, A. A. and H. Komatsu (1995). “Principles of Crystal Growth in Protein Crystalliza­
tion”. In: Science and Technology of Crystal Growth, pp. 329–353. DOI: 10.1007/978-
94-011-0137-0{\_}24.
Cohn, E. J. et al. (Mar. 1946). “Preparation and Properties of Serum and Plasma Proteins.
IV. A System for the Separation into Fractions of the Protein and Lipoprotein Compo­
nents of Biological Tissues and Fluids”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society
68.3, pp. 459–475. ISSN: 15205126. DOI: 10.1021/JA01207A034.
Costioli, Matteo D. et al. (2010). “Cost of goods modeling and quality by design for de­
veloping cost­effective processes”. In: Biopharm International 23.6, pp. 26–35. ISSN:
1542166x.
De Calderon Anda, J. et al. (May 2005). “Real­time product morphology monitoring in
crystallization using imaging technique”. In: AIChE Journal 51.5, pp. 1406–1414. ISSN:
00011541. DOI: 10.1002/AIC.10410.
Deszczynski, Marcin, Stephen E. Harding, and Donald J. Winzor (Mar. 2006). “Negative
second virial coefficients as predictors of protein crystal growth: Evidence from sedi­
mentation equilibrium studies that refutes the designation of those light scattering pa­
rameters as osmotic virial coefficients”. In: Biophysical Chemistry 120.2, pp. 106–113.
ISSN: 0301­4622. DOI: 10.1016/J.BPC.2005.10.003.
Dumetz, André C. et al. (Apr. 2008). “Effects of pH on protein­protein interactions and
implications for protein phase behavior”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ­ Proteins
and Proteomics 1784.4, pp. 600–610. ISSN: 15709639. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2007.12.
016.
Forsythe, Elizabeth L., Russell A. Judge, and Marc L. Pusey (May 1999). “Tetragonal
Chicken Egg White Lysozyme Solubility in Sodium Chloride Solutions”. In: Journal of
Chemical and Engineering Data 44.3, pp. 637–640. ISSN: 00219568. DOI: 10.1021/
JE980316A.
George, A. et al. (1997). “Second virial coefficient as predictor in protein crystal growth”.
In: Methods in Enzymology 276, pp. 100–110. ISSN: 00766879. DOI: 10.1016/S0076-
6879(97)76052-X.
Ghosh, R and Z F Cui (Mar. 2000). “Purification of Lysozyme Using Ultrafiltration”. In:
Biotechnology and Bioengineering 68.2, pp. 191–203. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0290(20000420)
68:2.
Giegé, Richard (1999). Crystallization of nucleic acids and proteins : a practical approachl
approach : A Practical Approach ­ DTU Findit. Ed. by Arnaud Ducruix. 2nd edition. Ox­
ford University Press. ISBN: 9780191918148.
Gilleskie, Gary, Charles Rutter, and Becky McCuen (Feb. 2021). “Biopharmaceutical Man­
ufacturing: Principles, Processes, and Practices”. In: Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing:
Principles, Processes, and Practices, pp. 1–335. DOI: 10.1515/9783110616880/EPUB.
Glassford, Stefanie et al. (Feb. 2012). “Chemical imaging of protein adsorption and crys­
tallization on a wettability gradient surface”. In: Langmuir 28.6, pp. 3174–3179. ISSN:
07437463. DOI: 10.1021/LA204524W.
Großhans, Steffen, Gang Wang, and Jürgen Hubbuch (Apr. 2019). “Water on hydrophobic
surfaces: mechanistic modeling of polyethylene glycol­induced protein precipitation”.
In: Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 42.4, pp. 513–520. ISSN: 16157605. DOI:
10.1007/S00449-018-2054-5.
Güneş Baydin, Atılım et al. (2018). “Automatic differentiation in machine learning: A sur­
vey”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 18, pp. 1–43.
Hammerschmidt, Nikolaus, Stefanie Hobiger, and Alois Jungbauer (Feb. 2016). “Contin­
uous polyethylene glycol precipitation of recombinant antibodies: Sequential precipita­
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
59
==PAGE:70==
tion and resolubilization”. In: Process Biochemistry 51.2, pp. 325–332. ISSN: 13595113.
DOI: 10.1016/j.procbio.2015.11.032.
Hammerschmidt, Nikolaus, Anne Tscheliessnig, et al. (2014). “Economics of recombinant
antibody production processes at various scales: Industry­standard compared to contin­
uous precipitation”. In: Biotechnology Journal 9.6, pp. 766–775. ISSN: 18607314. DOI:
10.1002/BIOT.201300480.
Hebel, Dirk et al. (2013). “Development and Scale up of High­Yield Crystallization Pro­
cesses of Lysozyme and Lipase Using Additives”. In: DOI: 10.1021/cg400212p.
Hilleman, M. R. et al. (July 1983). “The preparation and safety of hepatitis B vaccine”.
In: Journal of Infection 7.SUPPL. 1, pp. 3–8. ISSN: 0163­4453. DOI: 10.1016/S0163-
4453(83)96465-4.
Hofmeister, Franz (1888). “Zur Lehre von der Wirkung der Salze ­ Zweite Mittheilung”. In:
Archiv für Experimentelle Pathologie und Pharmakologie 24.4­5, pp. 247–260. ISSN:
14321912. DOI: 10.1007/BF01918191.
– (Jan. 1890). “Ueber die Darstellung von krystallisirtem Eieralbumin und die Krystallisir­
barkeit colloider Stoffe.” In: bchm 14.2, pp. 165–172. ISSN: 1437­4315. DOI: 10.1515/
BCHM1.1890.14.2.165.
Howard, Sandra B. et al. (July 1988). “The solubility of hen egg­white lysozyme”. In:
Journal of Crystal Growth 90.1­3, pp. 94–104. ISSN: 0022­0248. DOI: 10.1016/0022-
0248(88)90303-X.
Hunt, Ben et al. (Dec. 2001). “Economic analysis of immunoadsorption systems”. In: Bio­
chemical Engineering Journal 9.2, pp. 135–145. ISSN: 1369­703X. DOI: 10.1016/S1369-
703X(01)00136-X.
Jollès, Pierre and Jean Berthou (June 1972). “High temperature crystallization of lysozyme:
An example of phase transition”. In: FEBS Letters 23.1, pp. 21–23. ISSN: 0014­5793.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(72)80273-4.
Judge, Russell A et al. (1999). “The Effect of Temperature and Solution pH on the Nucle­
ation of Tetragonal Lysozyme Crystals”. In: DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(99)77006-2.
Kantardjieff, Katherine A. and Bernhard Rupp (Sept. 2004). “Protein isoelectric point as
a predictor for increased crystallization screening efficiency”. In: Bioinformatics 20.14,
pp. 2162–2168. ISSN: 13674811. DOI: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTH066.
Kempkes, Michel, Jan Eggers, and Marco Mazzotti (Oct. 2008). “Measurement of particle
size and shape by FBRM and in situ microscopy”. In: Chemical Engineering Science
63.19, pp. 4656–4675. ISSN: 0009­2509. DOI: 10.1016/J.CES.2007.10.030.
Krauss, Irene Russo et al. (May 2013). “An Overview of Biological Macromolecule Crys­
tallization”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2013, Vol. 14, Pages 11643­
11691 14.6, pp. 11643–11691. ISSN: 1422­0067. DOI: 10.3390/IJMS140611643.
Lauret, P., H. Boyer, and J. C. Gatina (2015). “Hybrid Modelling of the Sucrose Crystal
Growth Rate”. In: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02286203.2001.11442183 21.1, pp. 23–29.
ISSN: 02286203. DOI: 10.1080/02286203.2001.11442183.
Lewus, Rachael A. et al. (Jan. 2011). “Interactions and phase behavior of a monoclonal
antibody”. In: Biotechnology Progress 27.1, pp. 280–289. ISSN: 1520­6033. DOI: 10.
1002/BTPR.536.
Li, Zhao et al. (Nov. 2019). “Continuous precipitation for monoclonal antibody capture
using countercurrent washing by microfiltration”. In: Biotechnology Progress 35.6. ISSN:
15206033. DOI: 10.1002/BTPR.2886.
Liang, Miao et al. (Jan. 2013). “Shape evolution and thermal stability of lysozyme crystals:
Effect of pH and temperature”. In: Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 36.1, pp. 91–
99. ISSN: 16157591. DOI: 10.1007/S00449-012-0764-7.
60
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:71==
Liu, Jin and Åke C. Rasmuson (Oct. 2013). “Influence of agitation and fluid shear on
primary nucleation in solution”. In: Crystal Growth and Design 13.10, pp. 4385–4394.
ISSN: 15287483. DOI: 10.1021/CG4007636.
Lohmann, Lara Julia and Jochen Strube (Jan. 2020). “Accelerating Biologics Manufac­
turing by Modeling: Process Integration of Precipitation in mAb Downstream Process­
ing”. In: Processes 2020, Vol. 8, Page 58 8.1, p. 58. ISSN: 2227­9717. DOI: 10.3390/
PR8010058.
Lucke, Martin et al. (May 2018). “Integrating crystallization with experimental model pa­
rameter determination and modeling into conceptual process design for the purifica­
tion of complex feed mixtures”. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 133,
pp. 264–280. ISSN: 02638762. DOI: 10.1016/j.cherd.2018.03.029.
Majeed, Shahzad et al. (Sept. 2003). “Enhancing protein crystallization through precipitant
synergy”. In: Structure 11.9, pp. 1061–1070. ISSN: 09692126. DOI: 10.1016/S0969-
2126(03)00185-0.
Martinez, Michael et al. (Mar. 2019). “Precipitation as an Enabling Technology for the
Intensification of Biopharmaceutical Manufacture”. In: Trends in Biotechnology 37.3,
pp. 237–241. ISSN: 18793096. DOI: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2018.09.001.
McPherson, A. (1976). “Crystallization of proteins from polyethylene glycol”. In: Journal
of Biological Chemistry 251.20, pp. 6300–6303. ISSN: 00219258. DOI: 10.1016/s0021-
9258(20)81858-4.
McPherson, Alexander (1999). Crystallization of Biological Macromolecules. Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, pp. 1–586.
– (2004). “Introduction to protein crystallization”. In: Methods 34.3, pp. 254–265. ISSN:
10462023. DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2004.03.019.
McPherson, Alexander and Jose A. Gavira (2014). “Introduction to protein crystallization”.
In: Acta Crystallographica Section F:Structural Biology Communications 70.1, pp. 2–20.
ISSN: 2053230X. DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X13033141.
Meng, Yanmei et al. (Sept. 2019). “Hybrid modeling based on mechanistic and data­driven
approaches for cane sugar crystallization”. In: Journal of Food Engineering 257, pp. 44–
55. ISSN: 0260­8774. DOI: 10.1016/J.JFOODENG.2019.03.026.
Nazemzadeh, Nima et al. (Dec. 2021). “Integration of first­principle models and machine
learning in a modeling framework: An application to flocculation”. In: Chemical Engi­
neering Science 245, p. 116864. ISSN: 0009­2509. DOI: 10.1016/J.CES.2021.116864.
Oddone, Gian M. et al. (Apr. 2007). “Optimization of fed­batch production of the model
recombinant protein GFP in Lactococcus lactis”. In: Biotechnology and Bioengineering
96.6, pp. 1127–1138. ISSN: 00063592. DOI: 10.1002/BIT.21192.
Oelmeier, Stefan A., Christopher Ladd­Effio, and Jürgen Hubbuch (Dec. 2013). “Alterna­
tive separation steps for monoclonal antibody purification: Combination of centrifugal
partitioning chromatography and precipitation”. In: Journal of Chromatography A 1319,
pp. 118–126. ISSN: 00219673. DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2013.10.043.
Pantuso, Elvira et al. (June 2020). “On the Aggregation and Nucleation Mechanism of
the Monoclonal Antibody Anti­CD20 Near Liquid­Liquid Phase Separation (LLPS)”. In:
Scientific Reports 2020 10:1 10.1, pp. 1–14. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-
020-65776-6.
Patchigolla, Kumar and Derek Wilkinson (Jan. 2010). “Crystal shape characterisation of
dry samples using microscopic and dynamic image analysis”. In: Particle and Particle
Systems Characterization 26.4, pp. 171–178. ISSN: 15214117. DOI: 10.1002/PPSC.
200700030.
Pathak, Mili, Debayon Dutta, and Anurag Rathore (Aug. 2014). “Analytical QbD: Devel­
opment of a native gel electrophoresis method for measurement of monoclonal anti­
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
61
==PAGE:72==
body aggregates”. In: Electrophoresis 35.15, pp. 2163–2171. ISSN: 1522­2683. DOI:
10.1002/ELPS.201400055.
Peters, Jörg, Torsten Minuth, and Werner Schröder (Jan. 2005). “Implementation of a
crystallization step into the purification process of a recombinant protein”. In: Protein
Expression and Purification 39.1, pp. 43–53. ISSN: 10465928. DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2004.
09.011.
Piazza, Roberto and Matteo Pierno (2000). “Protein interactions near crystallization: A mi­
croscopic approach to the Hofmeister series”. In: Journal of Physics Condensed Matter
12.8A. ISSN: 09538984. DOI: 10.1088/0953-8984/12/8A/361.
Popova, E. et al. (June 2008). “Phase equilibria for salt­induced lysozyme precipitation:
Effect of salt concentration and pH”. In: Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process
Intensification 47.6, pp. 1026–1033. ISSN: 02552701. DOI: 10.1016/J.CEP.2007.02.005.
Pusey, Marc L. and Ramazan Savaş Aygün (Nov. 2017). “Introduction to Protein Crystal­
lization”. In: Springer, pp. 1–20. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-58937-4.
Ramos­de­la­Peña, Ana Mayela, José González­Valdez, and Oscar Aguilar (May 2019).
“Protein A chromatography: Challenges and progress in the purification of monoclonal
antibodies”. In: Journal of Separation Science 42.9, pp. 1816–1827. ISSN: 1615­9314.
DOI: 10.1002/JSSC.201800963.
Rathore, Anurag S., Devashish Kumar, and Nikhil Kateja (June 2018). “Recent develop­
ments in chromatographic purification of biopharmaceuticals”. In: Biotechnology Letters
40.6, pp. 895–905. ISSN: 15736776. DOI: 10.1007/S10529-018-2552-1/TABLES/2.
Rosenberger, F. et al. (Mar. 1993). “Temperature dependence of protein solubility ­ de­
termination and application to crystallization in X­ray capillaries”. In: Journal of Crystal
Growth 129.1­2, pp. 1–12. ISSN: 00220248. DOI: 10.1016/0022-0248(93)90427-X.
Rupp, Bernhard (Jan. 2011). “Biomolecular Crystallography: Principles, Practice, and Ap­
plication to Structural Biology, by Bernard Rupp”. In: Crystallography Reviews 17.1,
pp. 65–67. ISSN: 0889­311X. DOI: 10.1080/08893111003621289.
Santos, Raquel dos, Ana Luísa Carvalho, and A. Cecília A. Roque (Jan. 2017). “Renais­
sance of protein crystallization and precipitation in biopharmaceuticals purification”. In:
Biotechnology advances 35.1, pp. 41–50. ISSN: 1873­1899. DOI: 10.1016/J.BIOTECHADV.
2016.11.005.
Scopes, Robert K. (1987). Protein Purification. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Springer New York,
pp. XV–329. ISBN: 978­1­4757­1959­8. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4757-1957-4.
Shimomura, Osamu (Oct. 2005). “Discovery of Green Fluorescent Protein”. In: Methods
of Biochemical Analysis 47, pp. 1–13. ISSN: 00766941. DOI: 10.1002/0471739499.CH1.
Shukla, Abhinav A., Mark R. Etzel, and Shishir Gadam (2006). Process scale biosepara­
tions for the biopharmaceutical industry. CRC Press, pp. 1–575. ISBN: 9780429188985.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420016024.
Shukla, Abhinav A. and Uwe Gottschalk (Mar. 2013). “Single­use disposable technologies
for biopharmaceutical manufacturing”. In: Trends in Biotechnology 31.3, pp. 147–154.
ISSN: 01677799. DOI: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2012.10.004.
Siew, Yin Yin and Wei Zhang (Dec. 2021). “Downstream processing of recombinant hu­
man insulin and its analogues production from E. coli inclusion bodies”. In: Bioresources
and Bioprocessing 8.1, pp. 1–27. ISSN: 21974365. DOI: 10.1186/S40643-021-00419-W.
Sindarovska, Y. R. et al. (2008). “Purification of recombinant GFP produced by Agrobacterum­
mediated transient expression in Nicotiana excelsior”. In: Cytology and Genetics 42.2,
pp. 16–20. ISSN: 05643783. DOI: 10.3103/S0095452708020035.
Sirota, Eric et al. (Feb. 2021). “Crystallization Process Development for the Final Step of
the Biocatalytic Synthesis of Islatravir: Comprehensive Crystal Engineering for a Low­
62
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:73==
Dose Drug”. In: Organic Process Research and Development 25.2, pp. 308–317. ISSN:
1520586X. DOI: 10.1021/ACS.OPRD.0C00520.
Sixt, Maximilian, Lukas Uhlenbrock, and Jochen Strube (June 2018). “Toward a distinct
and quantitative validation method for predictive process modelling­on the example of
solid­liquid extraction processes of complex plant extracts”. In: Processes 6.6. ISSN:
22279717. DOI: 10.3390/PR6060066.
Statista (Feb. 2022). Projected size of the biopharmaceuticals market worldwide from
2020 to 2030. Tech. rep. URL: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1293077/global-
biopharmaceuticals-market-size/.
Torres­Acosta, Mario A. et al. (Jan. 2021). “Economic analysis of the production and recov­
ery of green fluorescent protein using ATPS­based bioprocesses”. In: Separation and
Purification Technology 254, p. 117595. ISSN: 1383­5866. DOI: 10.1016/J.SEPPUR.
2020.117595.
Walla, Brigitte et al. (May 2023). “Recent Advances in the Monitoring of Protein Crystal­
lization Processes in Downstream Processing”. In: Crystals 2023, Vol. 13, Page 773
13.5, p. 773. ISSN: 2073­4352. DOI: 10.3390/CRYST13050773.
Xiaopeng, H et al. (2006). “Rapid Purification of Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein
from Escherichia coli”. In: Chinese J. Chem. Eng 14.2, pp. 229–234.
Yang, Huaiyu et al. (2019). “Development and Workflow of a Continuous Protein Crystal­
lization Process: A Case of Lysozyme”. In: Crystal Growth & Design 19.2, pp. 983–991.
DOI: 10.1021/acs.cgd.8b01534.
Yaoi, Mari et al. (May 2004). “Effects of solution stirring on protein crystal growth”. In:
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, Part 2: Letters 43.5 B, p. L686. ISSN: 00214922.
DOI: 10.1143/JJAP.43.L686.
Zauner, R. and A. G. Jones (2000). “Mixing effects on product particle characteristics from
semi­batch crystal precipitation”. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 78.6,
pp. 894–902. ISSN: 02638762. DOI: 10.1205/026387600527969.
Zhang, Min et al. (Jan. 2014). “Quality by design approach for viral clearance by protein a
chromatography”. In: Biotechnology and bioengineering 111.1, pp. 95–103. ISSN: 1097­
0290. DOI: 10.1002/BIT.24999.
Zhang, Yanjie and Paul S. Cremer (Dec. 2006). “Interactions between macromolecules
and ions: the Hofmeister series”. In: Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 10.6, pp. 658–
663. ISSN: 13675931. DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2006.09.020.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
63
==PAGE:74==
64
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:75==
Acknowledgements
This Master’s thesis has been submitted as part of the Biotechnology Master program at
Denmark Technical University (DTU). The project has been written at the Biomanufactur­
ing Training and Education Center (BTEC) from January 23, 2023, to July 28, 2023, under
the supervision of Assistant Professor Seyed Soheil Mansouri at Process and Systems
Engineering Centre (PROSYS), Associate Teaching Professor John van Zanten at BTEC
with Scientist M.Sc. Hunter Brown as advisor. This work is the result of a 32.5 ECTS
points master thesis.
I would like to express my gratitude and appreciation for my supervisor, Soheil, whose
kind guidance, support, useful comments, continuous motivation, and supervision in the
field of process system engineering have been invaluable throughout this study. I would
like to convey my sincerest thanks to my supervisor, Prof vZ, whose support and accu­
rate insights in the field of purification of biological molecules have made this project an
inspiring experience for me. Hunter’s encouraging words and regular check­ins helped
me immensely in keeping an overview of the work, I value highly that he was always there
when I needed someone to talk through my ideas and did not tire to explain concepts and
share background information.
My sincerest thanks go to Dr. Sara Siegel at BTEC, who introduced me to the world of
protein crystals, and always had an open ear and found the time to discuss my results
and recommend follow­up experiments.
As this thesis was connected with using new equipment at BTEC from Mettler­Toledo, I
want to extend my gratitude to the Mettler­Toledo support team, especially Dr. Michael
Houghton, who helped with data understanding and told me how to best utilize the equip­
ment. During the second half of the spring semester, I had the opportunity to attend the
Cell Line Development Course, thanks to the generosity of Dr. Driss Elhanafi.
This thesis was connected with living in a new country, apart from family, and my work­
life­balance certainly would have been much worse without the company of Daniel, my
office partner, and the other friends I made in the lab: Will, Arianna, Mason, Michele, and
Silvia.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
65
==PAGE:76==
A
Appendix
A.1
MicroSphere Data
Figure A.1: FBRM data for 40 nm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O.
Figure A.2: FBRM data for 4.6 µm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O.
66
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.3: FBRM data for 21 µm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O.
Figure A.4: FBRM data for 99 µm microspheres diluted in DI­H2O.
A.2
Impact of Salt Type
Figure A.5: FBRM data for 7.5 M NaI with 5 g/L lysozyme, 0.1 M NaOAc at pH = 4. The
straight lines occurred due to an intermittent stop in data collection.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
67
==PAGE:78==
A.3
Jacket and Reactor Temperature
Figure A.6: Reactor as well as jacket temperature with mean particle size [µm] and particle
count for a process with 2 g/L lysozyme, 1.7 M NaCl, and 0.1 M NaOAc.
A.4
GFP Q­Eluate
Figure A.7: Kinetic data obtained with the ParticleTrack G400 probe for 3 M (NH4)2SO4
with GFP Q­Eluate at pH = 8, stirred at 200 rpm with an overhead stirrer.
68
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.8: CLD data obtained with the ParticleTrack G400 for 3 M (NH4)2SO4 with GFP
Q­Eluate at pH = 8, stirred at 200 rpm with an overhead stirrer.
Figure A.9: ParticleTrack G400 data for GFP Q­Eluate with 2 M (NH4)2SO4 at 200 rpm
agitation with a stir bar at 20 °C, at pH = 8.
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
69
==PAGE:80==
A.5
Short Course Material
Figure A.10: Picture from BTEC short course ”Protein Precipitation and Crystallization”
on July 19, 2023.
70
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:81==
 
 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 
ON-SITE ACTIVITY 
 
COURSE:  
Protein Precipitation & Crystallization  
DAY:  2 
LOCATION: 
Room 265 
ACTIVITY # & 
TITLE: 
LAB 5 & 6 – REAL-TIME PROCESS MONITORING INTRO 
 
INSTRUCTOR(S): 
Hunter Brown 
Victoria Saad 
Sara Siegel 
John van Zanten 
 
 
 
 
 
OVERVIEW/ 
SUMMARY: 
We utilized dynamic light scattering (DLS) to screen for conditions conducive to 
precipitation and/or crystallization. However, static plate-based methods do not account 
for the effect of stirring, the influence of shear, and the shortened length scale on a typical 
stirred tank batch precipitation process. We will deploy an inline process video monitoring 
probe, a turbidimeter, and a focused beam reflectance measurements (FBRM) probe to 
gather real-time kinetic data for improved process characterization and discuss 
applications in process development, modeling, and control. 
 
 
OBJECTIVE(S) 
FOR THIS 
ACTIVITY: 
● Explain the value-add and capabilities of inline monitoring for our batch 
precipitation process.  
● Explain the effect of shear in a stirred tank. 
● Identify conditions for monitoring and examine the real-time kinetics of protein 
precipitation.  
● Discuss potential use cases of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) in precipitation 
and crystallization processes. 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
INFORMATION: 
Agitation increases the frequency of protein-protein interactions through improved mixing 
and shortening of the length scale. Mechanically induced protein conformational changes 
are also possible in high-shear fluid flow. While full denaturation requires more extreme 
flow velocities, minor protein stretching can alter molecular surface charges and thus the 
propensity to aggregate. Stirred tank batch conditions are not easily replicated in a static 
environment. Inline process monitoring takes place continuously within the process itself, 
offering a window into the real process state while removing sources of sample 
manipulation involved in periodic at-line sampling. Turbidity data is acquired inline by the 
EasyViewer 100 probe. The ParticleTrack G400 probe utilizes focused beam reflectance 
measurement (FBRM) technology. FBRM is an in-situ method used to monitor the 
evolution of particle populations and is able to provide a highly precise chord length 
distribution. As an optical, probe-based instrument, it is inserted directly into the vessel to 
track changing particle size and count. The range for this real-time particle size analyzer is 
between 1 µm to 1000 µm, and it can be used to characterize conditions that affect 
aggregation, nucleation, polymorphism, and other system attributes. 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
 
MATERIALS & 
EQUIPMENT: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Serological pipettes 
100-1000 µL pipette 
EasyMax 102 with 100 mL glass reactors and 100 mL PTFE covers  
EasyViewer 100 probe 
ParticleTrack G400 probe 
Magnetic stir bar   
 
Protein solution 
50 g/L lysozyme with 0.1 M NaOAc in milliQ water 
Salt solution 
4.3 M NaCl (250 wt%/vol) with 0.1 M NaOAc in milliQ water 
Buffer solution 
0.1 M NaOAc in milliQ water 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
 
Activity 1: Equipment Overview 
1. Identify and discuss the EasyMax reactor station and vessels. 
 
2. Identify and discuss the EasyViewer probe and continuous turbidity data and picture 
capture. 
 
3. Identify and discuss the FBRM probe and continuous particle size data capture. 
 
4. Review iControl software for experimental design.  
 
 
Activity 2: Modeling Applications (MS Thesis Project – Victoria Saad, DTU) 
1. Discuss equipment utilization for process characterization.  
 
2. Discuss continuous data collection for modeling and PAT control. 
 
 
Activity 3: Prepare Experimental Conditions for Monitoring 
Reactor 1 in the EasyMax 102 station has been filled with 5 g/L lysozyme with 0.1 M NaOAc 
buffer and 1.5 M NaCl at pH 4. It has been stirred with a stir bar at 200 rpm, and kept at 
20 °C since this morning. The FBRM probe is used for monitoring. 
 
1. Using the DLS data set as well as the data from the ongoing process in Reactor 1 
identify conditions of interest to monitor using the EasyViewer probe over a few hours 
(until the end of lab 6). Account for agitation in our stirred tank system. 
 
Protein [mg/mL] 
Salt [% wt/vol] 
 
 
 
2. Batch reaction vessel 
a. Determine solution preparation volumes: 
 
Protein Solution  
[mL] 
Salt Solution  
[mL] 
Buffer Solution 
[mL] 
Total volume  
[mL] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
 
b. Using the provided serological pipettes, add ____ mL protein solution and 
____ mL buffer solution to the glass reaction vessel (Reactor 2).  
 
c. Manually, start stirring in Reactor 2 at around 50 rpm in the EasyMax interface 
to avoid aggregation of solids at the probe tip. 
 
d. Clean the PVM probe and insert it at an angle so that the tip is just above the 
moving stir bar. 
 
e. Start data collection in the iControl software - Stirring will increase to 200 rpm, 
temperature is set to 20 °C, and process duration is 4 h.  
 
f. Using a serological pipette, add ___ mL salt solution through a stoppered port. 
 
3. Return after lunch to view your batch progression. 
 
4. Decide to add either 1 or 2 mL of prepared seeding crystal solution (identical to lab 3) 
to the reactor.  
 
5. Cut off the top of a 1000 µL tip and use a pipette to transfer the volume of crystals 
from the 15 mL centrifuge tube to the reactor. 
 
6. Observe the change in crystal appearance in the iC Vision software throughout the lab.  
 
7. Decide whether you want to change one or multiple parameters in Reactor 1. Options 
include:  
a. increase/decrease in stirring speed 
b. increase/decrease in temperature 
c. addition of seeding crystals 
d. addition of ethanol 
 
8. At the end of lab 6, stop data collection and turn off the PAT equipment.  
 
9. Discuss the collected data. 
 
 
 
NOTES & 
QUESTIONS 
 
 
What are the benefits of inline monitoring? Why is this especially useful in monitoring 
precipitation? 
What are potential applications for PAT control in a precipitation or crystallization 
process? 
==PAGE:84==
A.6
README Template for Data Organization in Drive
README Template for Data Organization in Drive 
README: 202YMMDD - XX gL PROTEIN - X M SALT - 0.X M BUFFER 
Date [DD Month YYYY]:  
Duration [h]: 
Comments:  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Parameters 
Type of parameter 
Name of parameter 
Value/Range 
Name in data 
 
 
 
 
Fixed: 
pH 
 
Ref: pH 
temperature [°C] 
20 
Ref: Tr 
Protein concentration [g/L] 
 
 
Protein 
 
 
Salt concentration [M] 
 
 
Salt 
 
 
Buffer concentration [M] 
 
 
Buffer 
 
 
Stirring speed [rpm] 
 
Ref: R 
 
Events 
Events 
Time [hh:mm:ss] 
Addition of protein mixture 
00:00:00 
Start of stirring at XX rpm 
00:00:00 
Addition of salt mixture 
00:MM:SS 
Adjustment of pH 
00:MM:SS 
ADD OTHER EVENTS HERE 
 
End of experiment 
HH:00:00 
 
Links to files 
Probe 
Filename 
FBRM (ParticleTrack probe) 
 
PVM (EasyViewer probe) 
 
 
74
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:85==
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
75
==PAGE:86==
Precipitant
cprecipitant
Buffer
cbuffer
Salt
csalt
Volume
vcrystalseed
Stirring
Agitation
pH
Time
Name
[g/L]
Name
[M]
[M]
[mL]
µL
[rpm]
[h]
lysozyme
10
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
0.9
40
0
50
stir bar
4.12
24
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
100;200;300;400;500
stir bar
4.3
19
lysozyme
3
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
200
stir bar
3.99
48
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
100;200;300;400
stir bar
4.2
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
50;100;150;200;250;300;350
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
200
stir bar
4.31
24
lysozyme
10
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
50;100;200;300;400;500;600
stir bar
4.31
24
lysozyme
10
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
50
stir bar
4.31
24
lysozyme
10
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.1
40
0
50
stir bar
4.2
24
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.02
NaCl
1.5
50
200
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.02
NaCl
1.5
50
200
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.02
NaCl
1.5
75
300
200
OH stirrer
4
23
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.02
NaCl
1.5
75
300
200
OH stirrer
4
24
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.02
NaCl
1.5
75
300
200
OH stirrer
4
24
lysozyme
3
NaOAc
0.03
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
200
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
200
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
200
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
200
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
10
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
24
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.7
50
0
200
stir bar
4
48
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
(NH4)2SO4
2
50
0
200
stir bar
4
60
lysozyme
10
NaOAc
0.1
(NH4)2SO4
2
50
0
200
stir bar
4
70
GFP Eluate
tbd
N/A
N/A
(NH4)2SO4
2
50
0
200
stir bar
8
258
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
(NH4)2SO4
2
50
0
200
stir bar
4
24
GFP Eluate
tbd
N/A
N/A
(NH4)2SO4
3
50
0
200
stir bar
N/A
24
lysozyme
5
NaOAc
0.05
NaI
7.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
126
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
OH stirrer
4
40
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
OH stirrer
4
46
lysozyme
2
NaOAc
0.1
NaCl
1.5
50
0
200
stir bar
4
26.5
Table A.1: Experimental conditions tested in EasyMax 102 system.
76
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
==PAGE:87==
Real­Time Characterization of Protein Precipitation and Crystallization
77
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 2822
www.kt.dtu.dk/
