==PAGE:1==
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot
using Deep Learning Techniques
Master Thesis
Chongchong Li
2023
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
By
(s212634) Chongchong Li
Advisor(s)
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics
Department of DTU
Education
Master Thesis
Programme
Electrical Engineering
Period
06 February 2023 to 25 June 2023
ECTS
30
Copyright:
Chongchong Li 2023
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Christian Andersen, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for grad-
uation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been diligently prepared over a period of approximately four and a half
months at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Photonics, with a focus on Au-
tonomous Systems, at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader possesses fundamental knowledge in the fields of robotics,
deep learning, computer vision, and autonomous systems, which are the core areas ex-
plored within this research.
Chongchong Li - s212634
Signature
Date
ii
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents a vision-based agricultural monitoring robot using deep learning tech-
niques. The robot aims to detect fence lines in farm videos and report the locations of the
parts covered by grass to the farmer for trimming. The robot uses an Intel RealSense
D455 camera to collect data and GPS information along the fence line. The thesis pro-
poses a novel method for fence line detection based on DeepLSD: Line Segment Detec-
tion and Refinement with Deep Image Gradients. The method uses image gradients to de-
tect line segments in a specified area and filters out segments that are not within a certain
angle range. The method can detect fence lines accurately and robustly in complex farm
environments and identify occluded areas by comparing the lengths of the detected seg-
ments with the length of the area. The thesis evaluates the performance of the proposed
method on two datasets collected by a camera and a robot respectively and compares
it with other methods such as Hough transform, histogram analysis, and YOLOv7. The
results show that the proposed method outperforms other methods in terms of precision,
recall, stability, and occlusion detection. The thesis also discusses the challenges and
limitations of the project and suggests directions for future work.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I express my profound gratitude to my supervisor, Jens Christian An-
dersen(jcan@dtu.dk). His wealth of experience in robotics and computer vision has been
invaluable throughout the course of this research. I faced numerous challenges during
the course of this thesis, but his guidance, support, and insightful suggestions always kept
me on the right path.
I would also like to extend my heartfelt thanks to my wife, Jiaxin Wang. Her unwavering
support, encouragement, and faith in my abilities throughout the course of this thesis has
been instrumental in its successful completion. As a fellow student of DTU, she under-
stands the dedication and commitment this work demanded, and I am eternally grateful
for her patience and understanding.
My deepest appreciation goes to my family. Their unconditional love, support, and faith
in my potential, even from afar, has been a strong pillar of strength. Their belief in my
capabilities inspired me to give my best and their silent sacrifices do not go unnoticed.
Additionally, I am indebted to my friends and colleagues - Jingyan, Yanghao, Yunchong,
and Boyu - for their invaluable help. They contributed significantly to the evolution of
my ideas, and their different perspectives were crucial in identifying and exploring new
approaches.
In conclusion, the journey to the completion of this thesis has been an enlightening and
fulfilling experience, made possible only through the support and faith of all the individuals
acknowledged here. I am truly grateful.
iv
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
5
2.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Data
7
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Data Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Data Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Data Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.5
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.6
Data Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Hough Transform
13
4.1
Introduction to Hough Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Applying the Hough Transform to Detect Fence wiress . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Parameter Adjustment and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.5
Incorporation of Canny Edge Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.6
Improvements and Remaining Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Visual Odometry
19
5.1
Introduction to Visual Odometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Initial Implementation of Visual Odometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3
Challenges Encountered: High Levels of Interference
. . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.4
Mitigation Strategy: Focusing on Bottom Image Half . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.5
Continued Challenges and the Shift to GPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
YOLOv7
23
6.1
Introduction to YOLOv7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
v
==PAGE:8==
6.2
Dataset Preparation and Training the YOLOv7 Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
Assessing YOLOv7 Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.4
Testing the Model on the New Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.5
Chapter Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7
Histogram Analysis
29
7.1
Histogram Analysis Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.2
Histogram Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.3
Line Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.4
Challenges and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
8
DeepLSD
33
8.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
8.2
DeepLSD: An Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
8.3
Implementation of DeepLSD in Our Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
8.4
Dealing with Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8.5
Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8.6
Results and Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
9
Perspective
39
9.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
9.2
Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
9.3
Test Result Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
9.4
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
9.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
10 Conclusion
43
Bibliography
45
A Appendix
47
vi
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Agriculture is one of the most important sectors of the global economy, providing food and
livelihoods for billions of people. However, agriculture also faces many challenges, such
as increasing population, decreasing arable land, climate change, pests and diseases,
labor shortage, and environmental degradation[1]. To address these challenges, there is
a need for innovative technologies that can enhance agricultural productivity, efficiency,
quality, and sustainability.
One of the promising technologies that can revolutionize agriculture is robotics. Agricul-
tural robots can perform various tasks in the field, such as weeding, crop scouting, pheno-
typing, disease detection, harvesting, and spraying [1][2]. These tasks can reduce human
labor, improve crop health and yield, optimize resource use, and minimize environmental
impact. However, agricultural robots also face many difficulties, such as complex and
dynamic environments, variable crop conditions, diverse tasks and objectives, and high
costs and maintenance [2].
To overcome these difficulties, agricultural robots need to have advanced perception and
intelligence capabilities that can enable them to sense and understand their surroundings,
navigate autonomously, recognize objects of interest, and perform appropriate actions
[2]. One of the key technologies that can provide these capabilities is computer vision.
Computer vision is the field of study that deals with acquiring, processing, analyzing, and
understanding images and videos[3]. Computer vision can enable agricultural robots to
detect and locate crop rows, fence lines, weeds, fruits, diseases, obstacles, and other
relevant features in the field [2][3].
However, computer vision is not a trivial task in agricultural settings. The images and
videos captured by agricultural robots are often affected by factors such as illumination
changes, occlusions, shadows, noise, blur, perspective distortion, scale variation, back-
ground clutter, and intra-class variation[3]. These factors can make it challenging to ex-
tract reliable and robust features from the images and videos that can be used for fur-
ther processing and analysis. Therefore, computer vision algorithms need to be carefully
designed and adapted to cope with these challenges and provide accurate and reliable
results for agricultural robots.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
1
==PAGE:10==
The purpose of this thesis is to develop a computer vision system that can enable an
agricultural robot to monitor fence lines in a farm using deep learning techniques. The
fence lines are important structures that protect the crops from animals and intruders.
However, they can also be covered by grass or weeds which can reduce their visibility and
functionality. Therefore, it is necessary to detect the fence lines and the occluded areas
in the images captured by the robot’s camera and report their locations to the farmer for
pruning.
The content of this thesis is organized as follows:
1.2
Objectives
The primary objectives of this thesis are:
1. To design a vision system that can detect fence lines in farm images using deep
learning techniques.
2. To identify the areas of the fence lines that are occluded by grass or weeds using
image processing techniques.
3. To report the GPS locations of the occluded areas to the farmer using data collected
by the robot.
4. To evaluate the performance of the proposed vision system on different datasets
collected by different cameras.
5. To explore the feasibility and challenges of enabling the robot to clear the grass by
itself and bypass the obstacles in front of the fence.
1.3
Limitations
This project has a few inherent limitations due to technical constraints and the unique
conditions of a farm environment:
1. The vision system will be primarily tested in a controlled farm environment, and its
performance may vary in different weather conditions or with varying degrees of
vegetation growth.
2. The performance of the vision-based system is reliant on the quality of images cap-
tured by the robot’s camera. Factors such as poor lighting conditions, dirt or moisture
on the lens, or other elements that degrade image quality could affect the system’s
performance.
3. The vision system is designed for detecting horizontal fence lines consisting of three
parallel wires. It may not work well for other types of fence structures or orientations.
4. The effectiveness of the system hinges on the quality and quantity of data used for
training the deep learning models, which is subject to available resources and time
constraints.
5. The vision system does not include the functionality of clearing the grass or avoiding
obstacles, which are left for future work.
1.4
Thesis outline
The rest of this thesis is structured as follows:
2
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:11==
1. Chapter 2: Analysis This chapter provides an analysis of the problem statement
and the requirements for the vision system. It also reviews the related works on
computer vision techniques for agricultural robot navigation.
2. Chapter 3: Data This chapter describes the data collection process and the datasets
used for developing and testing the vision system. It also presents some data pre-
processing steps applied to improve the quality of the images.
3. Chapter 4: Hough Transform This chapter introduces the Hough transform method
for detecting fence lines in farm images. It also discusses the challenges and limi-
tations of this method and the solutions proposed to overcome them.
4. Chapter 5: Visual Odometry This chapter introduces the visual odometry method for
plotting the trajectory of the robot. It also discusses the challenges and limitations
of this method and the reasons for abandoning it in favor of GPS.
5. Chapter 6: YOLOv7 This chapter introduces the YOLOv7 method for detecting fence
lines in farm images using deep learning techniques. It also discusses the chal-
lenges and limitations of this method and the results obtained on different datasets.
6. Chapter 7: Histogram Analysis This chapter introduces the histogram analysis method
for identifying lines by analyzing the intensity distribution of pixels. It also discusses
the challenges and limitations of this method and the results obtained on different
datasets.
7. Chapter 8: DeepLSD This chapter introduces the DeepLSD method for detecting
line segments in farm images using deep image gradients. It also discusses the
advantages and disadvantages of this method and the results obtained on different
datasets.
8. Chapter 9: Perspective This chapter provides a discussion and comparison of the
different methods used for detecting fence lines and occluded areas in farm images.
It also analyzes the strengths and weaknesses of each method and their implications
for agricultural robot navigation.
9. Chapter 10: Conclusion This chapter summarizes the main contributions and find-
ings of this thesis. It also provides some suggestions for future work and improve-
ments.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:13==
2
Analysis
This chapter delves into the broader context of the thesis, analyzing the project’s overall
goals and decisions that set the framework for the following chapters. We examine the
background for the project, the environment where it fits, the state-of-the-art technology,
and other crucial factors that inform our decision-making for the overall project’s approach.
In this chapter, we will analyze the objectives of the project, evaluate the relevant alter-
natives, and set the overall frame for subsequent chapters. The background, the envi-
ronment, and other crucial factors relevant to shaping the approach to the project will be
discussed.
2.1
State of the art
With the rise of Industry 4.0, robotics and AI have found widespread application in vari-
ous fields, including agriculture. Precision agriculture, in particular, has benefitted from
these advancements, with the use of robotics and AI in monitoring crop health, pest de-
tection, weed control, and farm surveillance. In this context, our project – a vision-based
agricultural monitoring robot using deep learning techniques – finds its place.
In their 2022 publication, Fountas and his team[1] conducted an in-depth review of the
cutting-edge applications of vision-based perception in agricultural robots, covering a
range of field operations from weed detection and crop scouting to phenotyping, dis-
ease identification, vision-guided navigation, harvesting, and spraying. The researchers
concluded that Artificial Intelligence (AI) can yield promising outcomes, with various AI
techniques providing distinctive benefits to tackle specific agronomic issues. They fur-
ther delved into the ongoing challenges and prospective solutions for the advancement
of vision-based systems in agricultural robotics.
Tian et al., in their 2020 study[4], provided an exhaustive overview of the application
of computer vision technology in the automation of agriculture. They encapsulated the
methodologies and practical implications of computer vision in various aspects of auto-
mated agricultural management, such as crop automation, growth surveillance, disease
mitigation, and fruit harvesting. The authors critically evaluated the merits and demer-
its of different computer vision techniques and sensor technologies, proposing insightful
directions for future investigation.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
5
==PAGE:14==
In 2021, Zhang and his colleagues[3] surveyed the role of Machine Vision (MV) in agri-
cultural robot navigation. They sorted the MV navigation techniques into four primary
categories: feature-based, model-based, learning-based, and hybrid methods. They com-
pared the effectiveness and limitations of these disparate MV navigation methodologies,
contributing to a discourse on the challenges and potential avenues for future exploration.
Recent works in deep learning offer improved results in line detection, including convo-
lutional neural networks (CNNs)[5] and region-based convolutional neural networks (R-
CNNs). Specifically, models like You Only Look Once (YOLOv7)[6] have demonstrated
impressive object detection abilities. However, they sometimes struggle with complete
line detection, stability, and grass occlusion recognition. A recent approach, DeepLSD[7]:
Line Segment Detection and Refinement with Deep Image Gradients, offers promising
results in line segment detection, which we intend to explore in this project.
2.2
Decisions
Our analysis of the state of the art informs several key decisions. Firstly, we recognize the
need for a complex data collection process that incorporates the use of a robot equipped
with an Intel RealSense D455 camera. We intend to use this setup to collect video data
from around the farm fence, along with GPS information.
Considering the challenges with traditional methods like Hough Transform and Visual
Odometry in complex environments, we decide to employ deep learning techniques for
fence line detection. Specifically, we opt for YOLOv7 and later transition to DeepLSD,
given their superior performance in similar scenarios. These decisions set the require-
ment for data preparation and training phases for these models.
We also recognize the need to adapt these models to our unique problem, including mod-
ifying parameters, designing new functions, and developing a system to detect occluded
areas and report GPS information accordingly.
2.3
Summary
To meet the project’s objectives, we need to complete several distinct blocks of work,
which correspond to the chapters that follow:
1. Data Collection: This involves using the Capra Robot P5, equipped with a camera,
to collect farm fence video data and GPS information.
2. YOLOv7: Our first foray into deep learning techniques for line detection, including
data preparation, model training, and evaluation.
3. Histogram Analysis: An alternative approach attempted for line detection.
4. DeepLSD: Our final approach to line detection using deep image gradients, its ap-
plication, parameter modification, function design, and evaluation.
5. Perspective: An in-depth analysis of the results obtained and challenges faced
throughout the project.
6. Conclusion: A summary of the project’s findings, its implications, and potential future
work.
6
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:15==
3
Data
This chapter outlines the data collection process, the data’s characteristics, and how the
data was processed for subsequent use in the project. A critical point to understand in
this context is that the quality and type of data can significantly influence the success of
the techniques used in later stages.
3.1
Data Collection
Our primary source of data is the agricultural farm where we conducted our experiments.
We collected a dataset that consisted of videos around the farm fence captured using a
camera. Initially, we used a monocular camera (Canon) to gather these videos.
Figure 3.1: Image taken by Canon camera
At this stage, it would be useful to include a figure of the farm showing the fence line
that your research is targeting. You could also include a screenshot from the initial video
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
7
==PAGE:16==
collected.
In an attempt to automate data collection and add precision to the process, we intro-
duced the Capra Robot P5 into our data collection scheme. The robot was equipped
with an Intel RealSense D455 camera, which allowed it to capture detailed visual data as
it moved along the farm fence. The robot also recorded GPS information concurrently,
which proved critical to our work later.
Figure 3.2: Capra Robot P5 with Intel Realsense D455 camera
3.2
Data Characteristics
Our collected data consisted of video footage displaying the farm fence from various per-
spectives, distances, and lighting conditions. Videos taken with the Canon camera pro-
vided a resolution of 1080P, while those captured by the Intel RealSense D455 camera
on the robot had a resolution of 720P.
Due to strong sunlight, some frames presented challenges, with dry weeds appearing
very similar in color and shape to the fence lines. This similarity led to difficulties in distin-
guishing the fence from its surrounding vegetation, which is shown as figure 3.3
8
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:17==
Table 3.1: Comparison between Canon Camera and Intel RealSense D455
Canon Camera
Intel RealSense D455
Resolution
1080P
720P
GPS Collection
No
No (GPS data collected by the
CapraRobot P5)
Depth Image
Not Applicable
Yes, but lost due to intense ex-
posure
RGB Image
Yes
Yes
Exposure Control
High Quality, Less af-
fected by sunlight
Affected by intense sunlight,
leading to severe exposure
Data Synchronization
Not Applicable
Easier synchronization with
robot’s GPS data
(a) Image Collected by Canon Camera
(b) Image Collected by Intel D455
Figure 3.3: An Example of difficult light conditions
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
9
==PAGE:18==
3.3
Data Extraction
After obtaining the video footage, we extracted frames for further processing. The extrac-
tion process was not without its challenges: the depth image data from the RealSense
D455 camera was lost, possibly due to the impact of strong sunlight which rendered the
depth images black. However, we were able to proceed with the frames that were suc-
cessfully extracted.
3.4
Data Preprocessing
The image data gathered by the robot was initially in the RGB color space. For the pur-
pose of enhancing the visibility of fence wires in the images, especially given the serious
overexposure issues observed in the field, a series of image correction steps were imple-
mented. This section explains the approach used to improve the image quality.
In the first step, the RGB images were converted to BGR color space using OpenCV
shown as figure 3.4
(a) Original image(RGB)
(b) Converted image(BGR)
Figure 3.4: RGB to BGR conversion
Subsequently, an exposure correction function was employed to address the issue of
overexposure in the images. The Python code for this function is as follows:
1
def correct_image(filepath , brightness_factor=0.8):
2
image = cv2.imread(filepath)
3
image_hsv = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2HSV)
4
image_hsv[:,:,2] = cv2.equalizeHist(image_hsv[:,:,2])
5
image_hsv = image_hsv.astype(float)
6
image_hsv[:,:,2] = image_hsv[:,:,2] * brightness_factor
7
image_hsv = np.clip(image_hsv , 0, 255).astype('uint8')
8
return cv2.cvtColor(image_hsv , cv2.COLOR_HSV2BGR)[:, :, ::-1]
Listing 3.1: Python code to correct the brightness of an image.
This function first converts the image into the HSV color space and then applies histogram
equalization to the value (brightness) channel. The brightness is then scaled by a factor
(default is 0.8), followed by converting the image back to BGR color space. The brightness
factor can be adjusted as needed to suit different image conditions.
3.5
Data Preparation
While some initial efforts were made to process the frames directly, the complexities of the
farm environment led us to explore more sophisticated techniques. The data extraction
process served as a precursor to these explorations, providing a clearer understanding
of the challenges we would need to address.
10
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.5: Image Correction
3.6
Data Challenges
The challenges faced during the data collection and processing stages greatly influenced
the direction of this study. Among these were differences in image clarity due to cam-
era resolution and strong light conditions, and difficulties distinguishing fence lines from
similar-looking background vegetation. These challenges informed our approach to data
processing and analysis in the subsequent chapters.
3.7
Conclusion
This chapter provided an overview of the data collection process, the nature of the data
collected, and the preliminary data extraction. The difficulties and challenges we encoun-
tered helped shape the direction of our study, influencing our selection of techniques and
methodologies in the subsequent chapters.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:21==
4
Hough Transform
4.1
Introduction to Hough Transform
The Hough transform is an image processing technique that can detect straight lines in an
image by transforming the image coordinates into a parameter space where each point
represents a line [8]. By finding the peaks in the parameter space, this method can detect
fence lines in farm images.
The Hough transform is one of the methods that was used for fence line detection in this
project. It was chosen because it is a classical and simple technique that can work with
most fence types. However, it also has some challenges and limitations that affect its
performance and robustness.
This chapter introduces the Hough transform method for detecting fence lines in farm
images. It also discusses the challenges and limitations of this method and the solutions
proposed to overcome them.
Figure 4.1: Concept of Hough Transform[9]
4.2
Method
The Hough transform method consists of the following steps:
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
13
==PAGE:22==
1. Edge detection: This step involves applying an edge detection algorithm, such as
Canny edge detector [10], to the input image to obtain a binary image where the
edges are marked as white pixels and the rest are marked as black pixels. This
step reduces the complexity of the image and makes it easier to find lines.
2. Hough transform: This step involves transforming the edge image into a parame-
ter space where each point represents a line. The parameter space can be either
Cartesian or polar. In this project, the polar parameter space was used, where each
line is represented by its distance r from the origin and its angle θ with respect to the
x-axis. The Hough transform works by iterating over each white pixel in the edge im-
age and calculating its corresponding r and θ values for different angles. For each
pair of r and θ values, a vote is cast in an accumulator matrix that has r and θ as its
axes. The vote indicates that there is a possibility of a line passing through that pixel
with that r and θ values. The more votes a cell in the accumulator matrix receives,
the more likely it is to represent a line.
3. Peak detection: This step involves finding the local maxima in the accumulator ma-
trix that indicate the presence of lines. A threshold can be applied to filter out cells
with low votes. A non-maximum suppression can also be applied to remove cells
that are close to each other and belong to the same line. The remaining cells are
considered as peaks that represent the detected lines.
4. Line extraction: This step involves extracting the lines from the peaks by converting
their r and θ values back to the image coordinates. The lines can be represented
by their endpoints or by their slope and intercept.
4.3
Applying the Hough Transform to Detect Fence wiress
In our initial attempts, we applied the Hough Transform to detect the fence wiress in the
collected farm fence dataset. The objective was to use this method to identify the hori-
zontal lines that make up the fence. However, due to the complex and challenging farm
environment, the results were not satisfactory. The Hough Transform struggled to handle
the diverse range of environmental factors, including varying lighting conditions, occlu-
sions, and the presence of similar features such as grass and vegetation.
4.4
Parameter Adjustment and Results
Realizing the limitations posed by the farm environment, we proceeded to adjust the pa-
rameters of the Hough Transform. These adjustments were primarily informed by the
need to reduce the impact of environmental noise on the detection process, to enhance
the accuracy of the fence wires detection. Changes included adjusting the distance reso-
lution of the polar coordinates, and the threshold parameters, among others. The modified
parameters resulted in an improvement, though detection was still incomplete.
Here is the Hough transform detection code after modifying the parameters.A.1
4.5
Incorporation of Canny Edge Detection
In further analysis, we found that there were edges detected by the Canny edge for the
parts that could not be detected by the fence wire. To leverage this discovery, we designed
a function block - move_pixel_frame - to enhance the detection process. The function’s
task was to ”move” or scan through the edge-detected image in a specific direction (dic-
tated by the dx and dy parameters), continuously until a condition was met that indicated
the edge was no longer present. This function provided a more granular way to inspect
the image and infer missing parts of the fence wire.
14
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.2: Initial Detection Results Using the Hough Transform
Figure 4.3: Improvement of Fence Wires Detection after Parameter Adjustments
Here is the complete Hough transform detection code after inserting the functions A.2
4.6
Improvements and Remaining Challenges
The integration of the Canny edge detection and the move_pixel_frame function led to a
notable advancement in the fence wire detection process. We were successful in iden-
tifying the entirety of the fence wire in many cases, even accounting for occlusions, as
shown in Figure 4.5.
However, there were still certain scenarios where our method encountered difficulties.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.4: Overview of ’move_pixel_frame’ Function
Figure 4.5: The Successful Fence Wire Detection Results
This was particularly true for images featuring intense lighting effects. For instance, as
depicted in Figure 4.6, the visual similarity between the dry weeds in the background and
the fence lines under strong sunlight introduced significant interference to the detection
process. In such conditions, only parts of the fence lines that were in closer proximity
16
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:25==
could be identified, and in extreme cases, detection was altogether unsuccessful.
Figure 4.6: Detection under Strong Light
Moreover, our move_pixel_frame method fell short when applied to a new dataset col-
lected by the robot. This dataset was more challenging due to issues such as severe
exposure, lower pixel resolution, and more complex farm environment. Many elements
in the images, including weeds and branches, bore a striking resemblance to the fence
lines, thus making the detection process more challenging, as illustrated in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Detection on new datasets
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
17
==PAGE:26==
4.7
Summary
This chapter has provided a detailed exploration of the role of the Hough Transform and
the move_pixel_frame function in our project. We have dissected the initial challenges,
the steps we undertook to mitigate them, and the outcomes of these modifications. De-
spite the advancements facilitated by these techniques, the complexities inherent to the
farm environment highlighted certain limitations that could not be completely resolved by
these methods alone. Consequently, the exploration for more sophisticated techniques
to tackle these complexities became a necessity, leading us to investigate other method-
ologies. The application and results of these additional techniques will be the focus of the
subsequent chapters.
18
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:27==
5
Visual Odometry
5.1
Introduction to Visual Odometry
Visual odometry is a technique used for determining the trajectory of a robot by analyzing
the associated camera images. It plays a pivotal role in many applications of computer
vision and robotics, including our project. To illustrate this concept in layman’s terms,
visual odometry is akin to using visual cues to track the path of movement, just like humans
do when we walk and use our sight to remember the route.
Figure 5.1: Overview of Visual Odometry
5.2
Initial Implementation of Visual Odometry
In this project, we initially sought to use visual odometry to chart the robot’s trajectory. We
started by implementing a SIFT (Scale-Invariant Feature Transform) for image matching.
This method is known for its robustness to scale changes, rotations, and affine distortions,
making it a strong candidate for this process.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.2: An example of initial implementation of Visual Odometry with SIFT
5.3
Challenges Encountered: High Levels of Interference
Unfortunately, our initial results were less satisfactory than anticipated. A significant is-
sue we encountered was the high level of interference from distant trees visible in the
images, which confounded the image matching process and detrimentally impacted the
performance of visual odometry.
5.4
Mitigation Strategy: Focusing on Bottom Image Half
To counteract the interference issue, we implemented an image cropping strategy. By
focusing on the lower half of the image, we attempted to minimize interference from ir-
relevant objects, such as distant trees, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of our visual
odometry approach.
Figure 5.3: Bottom Half of Image
5.5
Continued Challenges and the Shift to GPS
Despite the image cropping strategy, the performance of visual odometry remained un-
satisfactory. The farm’s complex environment, with many visually similar plants and trees,
continued to disrupt the SIFT-based visual odometry process. Combined with potential
limitations of our camera, these challenges necessitated a more reliable approach for
tracking the robot’s trajectory, leading us to the adoption of GPS-based tracking.
20
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.4: Trajectory Tracked with Visual Odometry
5.6
Summary
Our exploration of visual odometry underscored both its potential and its limitations within
a complex, real-world environment. While initial efforts showed promise, environmental
interference presented an insurmountable challenge. This journey highlighted the impor-
tance of flexibility in methodological approaches, leading us to transition to a GPS-based
methodology, which we will explore in the following chapters.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:31==
6
YOLOv7
6.1
Introduction to YOLOv7
In the quest for an effective method to detect fence lines in our agricultural dataset, we
explored the capabilities of YOLOv7[6], a cutting-edge object detection model. Known for
its impressive balance between accuracy and speed across varied datasets and hardware
platforms, YOLOv7 was a suitable candidate for our project’s requirements. The model
operates under the YOLO (You Only Look Once) framework, enabling object detection in
a single pass over the input image, thus ensuring efficiency.
Figure 6.1: Comparison with other real-time object detectors[6]
YOLOv7 has made remarkable improvements over its previous versions, including the
introduction of trainable bag-of-freebies, hierarchical label generation, and an enhanced
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
23
==PAGE:32==
backbone network. These advancements have positioned YOLOv7 to outperform other
real-time object detectors in both speed and accuracy, able to run at up to 161 frames per
second (FPS) on a GPU V10012. Its ease of training and application, without the need
for pre-trained weights or external datasets, adds to its appeal for our research.
6.2
Dataset Preparation and Training the YOLOv7 Model
Our exploration of YOLOv7 started by training the model on our farm fence dataset. This
dataset comprised over 1,000 manually labelled images, offering a comprehensive repre-
sentation of various farm conditions. Figure 6.2 showcases examples of our data labeling
efforts.
(a) Image Collected by Canon Camera
(b) Image Collected by Intel D455
Figure 6.2: An Example of An Annotated Image
Preparing the dataset involved segregating it into training and validation subsets and im-
plementing necessary preprocessing and data augmentation steps. Figure 6.3 illustrates
how the training data structure was prepared.
We carefully selected hyperparameters for the model and ensured an efficient hardware
setup for the training process. This section delves into these technical details, including
the rationale behind our choices and the duration of the training process. Figure 6.4
24
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.3: YOLOv7 training data set storage format
displays the results after the training phase, demonstrating how the model evolved over
epochs.
Figure 6.4: YOLOv7 training results
6.3
Assessing YOLOv7 Performance
After training, we thoroughly assessed the performance of YOLOv7 for fence line detec-
tion. While the model could detect the fence line, the results were inconsistent. The
model demonstrated instances of missed detections and failed to identify areas obscured
by grass.
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 visually depict the model’s performance, illustrating cases of success-
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.5: YOLOv7 successful detections
ful and failed detections respectively. Moreover, metrics like precision, recall, and F1
score were used to quantify the model’s performance.
Figure 6.6: YOLOv7 failed detections
6.4
Testing the Model on the New Dataset
Our next step was to evaluate the model’s performance on the newly collected dataset
obtained from the Intel RealSense D455 camera. Unfortunately, the results were sub-
par. We will explore potential reasons for this performance decline, including factors like
intense light exposure, lower pixel resolution, and the complexity of the farm environment.
26
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.7: YOLOv7 failed detections on new dataset
Figure 6.7 provides an example of the model’s detection results on the new dataset, visu-
ally demonstrating the challenges faced.
6.5
Chapter Conclusion
This chapter concludes with a summary of our findings from using YOLOv7. We will outline
the main outcomes, the challenges we faced, and how these experiences informed our
subsequent research direction. Our next steps, explored in the following chapters, will
investigate alternative methods for fence line detection, specifically Histogram Analysis
and DeepLSD.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:37==
7
Histogram Analysis
This chapter presents the use of histogram analysis for the task of identifying lines in our
agricultural monitoring project. Histogram analysis is a graphical representation of data
distribution where data is grouped into bins and the number of data points that fall into
each bin are counted. When applied to image processing, the process involves analyzing
pixel intensity values to create a histogram, and then using this histogram to detect the
features of interest in the image.
Our initial implementation for line detection relied on the Hough Transform and edge de-
tection, which faced limitations due to the complex agricultural environment. In the search
for an alternative approach, we explored histogram analysis.
7.1
Histogram Analysis Implementation
The implementation was conducted in C++ using the OpenCV library. To begin, we con-
verted the captured image to a grayscale format, which simplified further analysis by re-
ducing the image data to single channel intensity values.
We used the cvtColor function to convert the original BGR image to grayscale. This trans-
formation is necessary because the color information does not contribute significantly to
the task of line detection, and in fact, might complicate the process due to variations in
color due to lighting conditions or material properties of the fence.
Figure 7.1: Convert image to grayscale
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
29
==PAGE:38==
Once the image was converted to grayscale, we started to compute the histogram. For
every pixel column in the image, we calculated a weighted average intensity, accumulating
the intensity values for each pixel in the column and dividing by the total number of pixels.
These average intensity values formed the basis of our histogram.
Figure 7.2: Histogram pixel intensity
7.2
Histogram Filtering
The next step involved applying an edge-finding filter to the histogram. We utilized a
simple [-1 0 1] mask to find edges in the histogram. The edge filter was applied over all
histogram values, and the absolute value of the filtered histogram was calculated. We
applied a threshold, such that only filtered values above 10 were considered significant.
This threshold was chosen empirically based on our testing with various images. This
edge detection operation on the histogram provided us with locations that have significant
changes in intensity values, which might be associated with the presence of lines.
7.3
Line Detection
After the filtering operation, we drew the intensity histogram in the debug image, and
then proceeded to the line detection. Line detection was based on identifying significant
changes in the histogram which correspond to line features in the image. These lines
were then drawn on the debug image.
7.4
Challenges and Limitations
One of the key challenges faced during this process was the inability to distinguish many
weeds from fence lines due to similar color and shape, leading to misdetection. As a
result, the histogram analysis method was unable to effectively detect blocked areas.
7.5
Summary
In summary, the histogram analysis approach provided some useful insights into the im-
age data, and was able to detect lines in certain situations. However, due to the complexity
30
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:39==
Figure 7.3: Histogram Filtering
(a) Original Image
(b) Image 2
Figure 7.4: Detected Image
of the agricultural environment, and the similarity between the appearance of the fence
and other features like weeds, this approach was not robust enough for our requirements.
In the next chapter, we will explore another method for line detection using a more sophis-
ticated deep learning model, DeepLSD.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7.5: Misdetection of histogram
32
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:41==
8
DeepLSD
8.1
Introduction
DeepLSD[7] is a line detection algorithm that amalgamates the robustness of deep learn-
ing techniques with the accuracy of traditional handcrafted detectors. This innovative
method finds its applicability in tasks demanding high precision such as homography es-
timation, visual localization, and 3D reconstruction. In this chapter, we will walk through
the process of how DeepLSD was employed in our project and the corresponding results
obtained.
Figure 8.1: Overview of the method[7]
8.2
DeepLSD: An Overview
DeepLSD is designed to extract generic line segments from images in challenging con-
ditions. Contrary to traditional line detectors based on the image gradient, which lack
robustness in noisy images, DeepLSD exhibits improved repeatability and can handle
challenging images, albeit with a trade-off in accuracy and a tendency towards wireframe
lines. However, we combined traditional and learned approaches to get the best of both
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
33
==PAGE:42==
worlds: an accurate and robust line detector that can be trained without the need for
ground truth lines.
8.3
Implementation of DeepLSD in Our Project
(a) Before filtering
(b) After filtering
Figure 8.2: Demonstration of line filtering process
In our project, we utilized DeepLSD to predict line distance and angle fields, allowing us
34
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:43==
to refine any existing line segments through an optimization process. Given that the fence
lines in our project consist of three lines that are all within a specific range of angles, we
designed a function to filter out segments that fell outside of this range.
The model predicts a line attraction field, which is converted to a surrogate image gradient
magnitude and angle. This is then used by our handcrafted line detector to detect lines.
As a result, we could detect the entire fence line effectively and were able to determine
if any sections were occluded. If a line length was less than 0.7 times the length of the
detected area, it was considered occluded.
(a) Before reducing exposure
(b) After reducing exposure
Figure 8.3: Demonstration of exposure reduction process
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
35
==PAGE:44==
8.4
Dealing with Challenges
Despite the promising capabilities of DeepLSD, we faced challenges related to the reso-
lution of the images and environmental conditions. The resolution of the Intel RealSense
D455 was only 720P, lower than our previous 1080P camera, resulting in reduced im-
age clarity. Moreover, strong light conditions resulted in the color and shape of some dry
weeds appearing very similar to the fence lines, making line detection difficult. To mitigate
this, we modified some parameters and reduced the exposure.
8.5
Image Segmentation
Figure 8.4: Region of Interest
After improving the image quality, the next step was to segment the image to focus on
the regions of interest. Through observation, it was noted that the visibility of the fence
line is significantly better in the near field than in the distant field. Moreover, given the for-
ward motion of the robot, distant fence wires would eventually become near-field features.
Therefore, it was decided to limit the image detection scope to the nearby fence wires.
The selected area for detection was the upper half of the image and the leftmost one-
tenth portion of the image (see example figure 8.4 ). This image segmentation effectively
reduced the influence of noise and mitigated the effects of overexposure.
The following sections discuss the DeepLSD used to detect the fence wires within these
selected areas of interest.
8.6
Results and Observations
Our use of DeepLSD proved to be effective in fence line detection, outperforming previous
methods we tried. The model was capable of detecting all three fence lines, calculating
their lengths, and determining if any areas were blocked. However, there were still some
limitations, mainly due to environmental complexities and camera quality.
36
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:45==
Figure 8.5: Results
Figure 8.6: Display on the map
8.7
Conclusion
In conclusion, the utilization of DeepLSD in our project provided a more robust solution
for fence line detection than traditional methods. Despite the challenges encountered,
the method’s ability to detect and refine line segments based on the attraction field and
vanishing points made it a suitable solution for our use case.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:47==
9
Perspective
9.1
Introduction
This chapter provides a comprehensive perspective on the vision-based agricultural mon-
itoring robot designed in this thesis. The performance and capabilities of the system are
evaluated against the objectives outlined in Chapter 1. In light of the results, potential
areas for future work are suggested.
9.2
Scenario
The system was tested in a real-world farm environment with a variety of fence types
and vegetation states. Images and video data were captured by the Capra Robot P5
equipped with an Intel RealSense D455 camera. The robot navigated along the fence
line while recording data and GPS information, under both optimal and challenging lighting
conditions.
9.3
Test Result Analysis
Objective 1: The vision system, powered by DeepLSD with fine-tuning and adaptations
for the specific scenario, showed promising results in detecting fence lines. Despite the
complexity of the environment and variable quality of the collected data, the system was
able to accurately identify and differentiate the fence lines from surrounding vegetation
and other elements.
Objective 2: The system demonstrated a fair capability in detecting occluded areas of
the fence line. The designed method involving the detection of discontinuities in the fence
lines was an effective indicator of occlusion. However, some limitations were observed
due to the similarities in color and shape between dry weeds and fence lines, calling for
future improvements in this aspect.
Objective 3: The system was able to accurately report the GPS location of the detected
occlusions. The synchronicity between image and GPS data collection ensured that the
location of each image was reliably known, facilitating accurate reporting.
Objective 4: The performance of the system was variable with datasets from different
cameras. While the system performed well with the original 1080P dataset, challenges
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
39
==PAGE:48==
arose with the Intel RealSense D455 camera’s 720P dataset due to its lower resolution
and unfavorable lighting conditions.
Objective 5: The feasibility of enabling the robot to autonomously clear the grass and
bypass obstacles was not fully explored in this work due to the primary focus on detection.
However, the findings from this research provide a strong foundation for future work in
this area.
9.4
Future Works
Given the promising results of the study, future work could focus on refining the fence
line detection and occlusion identification processes to enhance accuracy and robust-
ness against variable lighting and environmental conditions. Another crucial area of de-
velopment is the introduction of autonomous grass-clearing and obstacle-avoidance ca-
pabilities. The use of stereo cameras or depth sensors could also be explored for better
performance in visual odometry.
9.5
Summary
Table 9.1: Comparison of Different Methodologies Used in the Thesis - Description and
Performance & Results (Part 1)
Description
Performance & Results
Hough Transform
Traditional image processing
technique for line detection.
Fair performance in detecting
complete fence lines after pa-
rameter adjustment.
move_pixel_frame
Function
Custom function to enhance
line
detection
based
on
Canny edge detection.
Improved fence line detection,
including occluded sections.
Visual Odometry
Technique used to track robot
path based on image data.
Not effective due to numerous
environmental interferences.
GPS
Utilized for precise navigation
and location reporting.
Provided reliable and accu-
rate location reporting of oc-
cluded fence sections.
YOLOv7
Deep
Learning
model
for
object detection applied for
fence line detection.
Partially successful in detect-
ing fence lines but inconsis-
tent.
Histogram Analysis
Image processing technique
for identifying lines based on
pixel intensity distribution.
Inadequate due to the com-
plex farm environment.
DeepLSD
Advanced
Deep
Learning
model for line segment detec-
tion.
Detected line segments effec-
tively, including those repre-
senting occluded sections.
This chapter evaluated the developed vision-based agricultural monitoring robot system
against the outlined objectives. Despite some limitations, the system showed promising
capabilities in fence line detection and occlusion identification. Future research directions
were also identified, setting the stage for further advancements in autonomous agricultural
monitoring.
40
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:49==
Table 9.2: Comparison of Different Methodologies Used in the Thesis - Description and
Limitations (Part 2)
Description
Limitations
Hough Transform
Traditional image processing
technique for line detection.
Struggles with complex farm
environments. Incomplete de-
tection due to occlusions.
move_pixel_frame
Function
Custom function to enhance
line
detection
based
on
Canny edge detection.
Could not perfectly handle de-
tection in all conditions due to
environmental complexities.
Visual Odometry
Technique used to track robot
path based on image data.
Impacted by similarity in farm
environment features and im-
age quality.
Replaced by
GPS for final implementation.
GPS
Utilized for precise navigation
and location reporting.
Dependent on external GPS
signal availability and accu-
racy.
YOLOv7
Deep
Learning
model
for
object detection applied for
fence line detection.
Missed detections, instability,
and poor performance when
applied to new dataset.
Histogram Analysis
Image processing technique
for identifying lines based on
pixel intensity distribution.
Difficulty
in
differentiating
weeds from fence lines led to
misdetection.
DeepLSD
Advanced
Deep
Learning
model for line segment detec-
tion.
Some adjustments needed to
be made for the specific ap-
plication, including segment
filtering and exposure reduc-
tion.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:51==
10
Conclusion
The quest to create a vision-based agricultural monitoring robot using deep learning tech-
niques has been both an enlightening and challenging venture. By dissecting the objec-
tives and the positive results of the work presented in this thesis, we are able to paint a
clear picture of the strides taken in this exciting field of study.
The primary aim was to detect the presence of fence lines within a farm environment, as
well as to identify sections of these lines obscured by vegetation. The purpose of this
was to assist farmers in knowing where to focus their pruning efforts. To achieve this,
we have implemented, explored, and compared multiple computer vision techniques and
deep learning models.
Starting with a basic Hough Transform approach, we found that despite its limitations in
handling the complex farm environment, this method gave us a strong foundation to build
upon. With the introduction of the move_pixel_frame function, we were able to consider-
ably enhance the fence line detection, enabling us to account for obstructions within the
landscape.
When faced with the challenge of mapping the robot’s trajectory, we initially attempted to
utilize Visual Odometry. The intricate nature of the farm environment, however, made this
technique unsuitable. By pivoting to a GPS-based method, we were able to overcome
this challenge, thus improving the reliability of the robot’s path-tracking abilities.
We incorporated the use of the Capra Robot P5, fitted with an Intel RealSense D455
camera, to collect data from the farm. While there were challenges associated with data
quality due to the camera’s lower resolution and loss of depth information, this proved to
be a viable data collection method in the field.
Subsequent implementation of the YOLOv7 model for fence line detection, though facing
some performance issues, represented a significant step in the utilization of deep learning
models for this task. Our experience with YOLOv7 has offered valuable insights into the
potential and limitations of applying such sophisticated models in an agricultural context.
Finally, the implementation and customization of the DeepLSD model showcased the most
promising results in detecting line segments. The flexibility to modify and adapt the model
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
43
==PAGE:52==
to cater to our specific task, such as reducing exposure and filtering out irrelevant seg-
ments, exemplifies the potential of deep learning in this application.
In conclusion, this thesis has successfully demonstrated the application of various com-
puter vision methods and deep learning models in the pursuit of agricultural monitoring.
The techniques and models employed, though faced with various challenges, have proven
to be instrumental in achieving our objectives.
The findings presented in this thesis pave the way for future advancements in vision-
based agricultural robotics. They offer a roadmap to enhance current methodologies and
to explore new models and techniques. In light of the continuous advancements in deep
learning and robotics, the potential for progress in this field is immense.
This work also underscores the importance of adaptive, flexible solutions to accommodate
the complexities of real-world environments, particularly in agricultural settings. As such,
the lessons learned and the insights gained from this research are of significant value to
the broader field of computer vision and robotics.
While we have made substantial strides in achieving our objectives, we have also high-
lighted the complexities and challenges inherent in such an ambitious task. These find-
ings, both the successes and the challenges, will undoubtedly contribute to the ongoing
advancement and refinement of vision-based agricultural robotics.
44
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Spyros Fountas et al. “AI-Assisted Vision for Agricultural Robots”. In: AgriEngineer-
ing 4.3 (2022), pp. 674–694. ISSN: 2624-7402. DOI: 10.3390/agriengineering4030043.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2624-7402/4/3/43.
[2]
Yuzhen Lu and Sierra Young. “A survey of public datasets for computer vision tasks
in precision agriculture”. In: Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 178 (2020),
p. 105760. ISSN: 0168-1699. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105760.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168169920312709.
[3]
Tianhai Wang et al. “Applications of machine vision in agricultural robot navigation: A
review”. In: Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 198 (2022), p. 107085. ISSN:
0168-1699. DOI: https:/ /doi. org/10.1016/j.compag.2022.107085. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168169922004021.
[4]
Hongkun Tian et al. “Computer vision technology in agricultural automation —A
review”. In: Information Processing in Agriculture 7.1 (2020), pp. 1–19. ISSN: 2214-
3173. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . inpa . 2019 . 09 . 006. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214317319301751.
[5]
Qi Han et al. “Deep Hough Transform for Semantic Line Detection”. In: ECCV. 2020,
pp. 750–766.
[6]
Chien-Yao Wang, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. “YOLOv7: Train-
able bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object detectors”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
2023, pp. 7464–7475.
[7]
Rémi Pautrat et al. “DeepLSD: Line Segment Detection and Refinement with Deep
Image Gradients”. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2023.
[8]
Krutika Bapat. Hough Transform with OpenCV (C++/Python). https://learnopencv.
com/hough-transform-with-opencv-c-python/. Accessed: June 23, 2023. 2019.
[9]
Xiaohua Cao, Daofan Liu, and Xiaoyu Ren. “Detection method for auto guide vehi-
cle’s walking deviation based on image thinning and Hough transform”. In: Measure-
ment and Control 52 (Mar. 2019), p. 002029401983307. DOI: 10.1177/0020294019833073.
[10]
John Canny. “A computational approach to edge detection”. In: Readings in com-
puter vision. Elsevier. 1986, pp. 184–203.
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
1
### detect image (Probabilistic Hough Line Transform)
2
import cv2
3
import numpy as np
4
# read image
5
img = cv2.imread('./image/frame0008.jpg')
6
# img = cv2.imread('./Edges.png')
7
image = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
8
# Edge detection
9
blurred = cv2.GaussianBlur(image, (3, 3), 0)
10
edges = cv2.Canny(blurred , 110, 160, apertureSize=3)
11
# perform PHT
12
lines = cv2.HoughLinesP(edges, rho=1, theta=np.pi/180, threshold=150,
minLineLength=50, maxLineGap=2.5)
13
# classify lines
14
h_lines = []
15
v_lines = []
16
for line in lines:
17
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line[0]
18
if abs(x2 - x1) > abs(y2 - y1):
19
h_lines.append(line)
20
else:
21
v_lines.append(line)
22
# draw lines
23
for line in h_lines:
24
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line[0]
25
cv2.line(img, (x1, y1), (x2, y2), (0, 255, 0), 2)
26
27
for line in v_lines:
28
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line[0]
29
cv2.line(img, (x1, y1), (x2, y2), (0, 255, 0), 2)
30
# Display result
31
img = cv2.resize(img, (1280, 720))
32
edges = cv2.resize(edges, (1280, 720))
33
cv2.imshow('Image', img)
34
cv2.imwrite('Hough_transform_original.jpg',img)
35
cv2.waitKey(0)
36
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
Listing A.1: Python code of Probabilistic Hough Line Transform
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
47
==PAGE:56==
1
import cv2
2
import numpy as np
3
from sklearn.cluster import DBSCAN
4
from functools import partial
5
6
def move_pixel_frame(x, y, dx, dy, edges, frame_size=5):
7
while True:
8
x += dx
9
y += dy
10
11
x_int, y_int = int(round(x)), int(round(y))
12
13
if (x_int < frame_size // 2) or \
14
(y_int < frame_size // 2) or (x_int >= edges.shape[1] - frame_size
// 2) or \
15
(y_int >= edges.shape[0] - frame_size // 2):
16
break
17
18
frame = edges[y_int - frame_size // 2:y_int + frame_size // 2 + 1, \
19
x_int - frame_size // 2:x_int + frame_size // 2 + 1]
20
21
if np.any(frame):
22
continue
23
else:
24
break
25
26
return x_int, y_int
27
28
def line_angle(line):
29
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line[0]
30
angle = np.arctan2(y2 - y1, x2 - x1)
31
return angle
32
33
def line_distance(lines, idx1, idx2):
34
line1, line2 = lines[idx1], lines[idx2]
35
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line1[0]
36
x3, y3, x4, y4 = line2[0]
37
mid1 = np.array([0.5 * (x1 + x2), 0.5 * (y1 + y2)])
38
mid2 = np.array([0.5 * (x3 + x4), 0.5 * (y3 + y4)])
39
return np.linalg.norm(mid1 - mid2)
40
41
def merge_lines(lines, angle_eps=20, dist_eps=30, min_samples=1):
42
if not lines:
43
return []
44
45
angles = np.array([line_angle(line) for line in lines]).reshape(-1, 1)
46
47
# Calculate distance matrix
48
n = len(lines)
49
distance_matrix = np.zeros((n, n))
50
for i in range(n):
51
for j in range(i + 1, n):
52
angle_diff = np.abs(angles[i] - angles[j])
53
angle_diff = np.minimum(angle_diff , np.pi - angle_diff)
54
if angle_diff < angle_eps * np.pi / 180:
55
dist = line_distance(lines, i, j)
56
distance_matrix[i, j] = dist
57
distance_matrix[j, i] = dist
58
else:
59
distance_matrix[i, j] = np.inf
60
distance_matrix[j, i] = np.inf
48
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:57==
61
62
clustering = DBSCAN(eps=dist_eps , min_samples=min_samples , metric="
precomputed").fit(distance_matrix)
63
merged_lines = []
64
for label in set(clustering.labels_):
65
if label == -1:
66
continue
67
lines_in_cluster = [lines[i] for i in range(len(lines)) if clustering.
labels_[i] == label]
68
avg_line = np.mean(lines_in_cluster , axis=0).astype(int)
69
70
mid_x = 0.5 * (avg_line[0][0] + avg_line[0][2])
71
mid_y = 0.5 * (avg_line[0][1] + avg_line[0][3])
72
73
closest_line = min(lines_in_cluster , key=lambda line: np.linalg.norm(
np.array([mid_x, mid_y]) - np.array([0.5 * (line[0][0] + line
[0][2]), 0.5 * (line[0][1] + line[0][3])])))
74
75
merged_lines.append(closest_line)
76
77
return merged_lines
78
79
# Read image
80
img = cv2.imread('./bag1/rgb_images/rgb_1683718187_117029632.png')
81
# img = cv2.imread('./image/frame0071.jpg')
82
image = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
83
84
blurred = cv2.GaussianBlur(image, (3, 3), 0)
85
edges = cv2.Canny(blurred , 110, 160, apertureSize=3)
86
87
lines = cv2.HoughLinesP(edges, rho=1, theta=np.pi/180, threshold=150,
minLineLength=50, maxLineGap=2.5)
88
89
# Classify lines
90
h_lines = []
91
v_lines = []
92
93
for line in lines:
94
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line[0]
95
if abs(x2 - x1) > abs(y2 - y1):
96
h_lines.append(line)
97
else:
98
v_lines.append(line)
99
100
# Merge similar lines
101
h_lines = merge_lines(h_lines , angle_eps=55, dist_eps=30, min_samples=1)
102
v_lines = merge_lines(v_lines , angle_eps=55, dist_eps=30, min_samples=1)
103
104
# Draw lines
105
for line in h_lines:
106
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line[0]
107
dx = (x2 - x1) / np.sqrt((x2 - x1)**2 + (y2 - y1)**2)
108
dy = (y2 - y1) / np.sqrt((x2 - x1)**2 + (y2 - y1)**2)
109
x1, y1 = move_pixel_frame(x1, y1, -dx, -dy, edges)
110
x2, y2 = move_pixel_frame(x2, y2, dx, dy, edges)
111
cv2.line(img, (x1, y1), (x2, y2), (0, 0, 255), 2)
112
113
for line in v_lines:
114
x1, y1, x2, y2 = line[0]
115
dx = (x2 - x1) / np.sqrt((x2 - x1)**2 + (y2 - y1)**2)
116
dy = (y2 - y1) / np.sqrt((x2 - x1)**2 + (y2 - y1)**2)
117
x1, y1 = move_pixel_frame(x1, y1, -dx, -dy, edges)
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
49
==PAGE:58==
118
x2, y2 = move_pixel_frame(x2, y2, dx, dy, edges)
119
cv2.line(img, (x1, y1), (x2, y2), (0, 255, 0), 2)
120
121
# Display result
122
edges = cv2.resize(edges, (1280, 720))
123
img = cv2.resize(img, (1280, 720))
124
cv2.imshow('Image', img)
125
# cv2.imwrite("image_update.png",img)
126
cv2.waitKey(0)
127
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
Listing A.2: Full Code of Hough Transform
1
import os
2
import numpy as np
3
import cv2
4
import matplotlib
5
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
6
from matplotlib.colors import LinearSegmentedColormap as lsc
7
import torch
8
import h5py
9
import pandas as pd
10
11
from deeplsd.utils.tensor import batch_to_device
12
from deeplsd.models.deeplsd_inference import DeepLSD
13
from deeplsd.geometry.viz_2d import plot_images , plot_lines
14
15
# Load an image
16
filepath = '../bgr_images_example/rgb_1683720977_658215424.png'
17
18
# fix exposure
19
20
def correct_image(filepath , brightness_factor=0.8):
21
image = cv2.imread(filepath)
22
image_hsv = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2HSV)
23
image_hsv[:,:,2] = cv2.equalizeHist(image_hsv[:,:,2])
24
image_hsv = image_hsv.astype(float)
25
image_hsv[:,:,2] = image_hsv[:,:,2] * brightness_factor
26
image_hsv = np.clip(image_hsv , 0, 255).astype('uint8')
27
return cv2.cvtColor(image_hsv , cv2.COLOR_HSV2BGR)[:, :, ::-1]
28
29
img = correct_image(filepath , 0.7)
30
##-----##
31
# img = cv2.imread(filepath)[:, :, ::-1]
32
33
gray_img = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_RGB2GRAY)
34
35
# Model config
36
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
37
conf = {
38
'detect_lines': True,
# Whether to detect lines or only DF/AF
39
'line_detection_params': {
40
'merge': False,
# Whether to merge close-by lines
41
'filtering': "strict",
# Whether to filter out lines based on the DF/
AF. Use 'strict' to get an even stricter filtering
42
'grad_thresh': 3,
43
'grad_nfa': False,
# If True, use the image gradient and the NFA
score of LSD to further threshold lines. We recommand using it for
easy images , but to turn it off for challenging images (e.g.
night, foggy, blurry images)
44
}
45
}
50
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
==PAGE:59==
46
47
# Load the model
48
ckpt = '../weights/deeplsd_md.tar'
49
ckpt = torch.load(str(ckpt), map_location='cuda')
50
net = DeepLSD(conf)
51
net.load_state_dict(ckpt['model'])
52
net = net.to(device).eval()
53
54
# Detect (and optionally refine) the lines
55
# inputs = {'image': torch.tensor(gray_img , dtype=torch.float, device=device)[
None, None] / 255.}
56
57
# cropped_gray_img = gray_img[:, :gray_img.shape[1] // 4]
58
cropped_gray_img = gray_img[:gray_img.shape[0] // 2, :gray_img.shape[1] // 10]
59
60
inputs = {'image': torch.tensor(cropped_gray_img , dtype=torch.float, device=
device)[None, None] / 255.}
61
62
63
with torch.no_grad():
64
out = net(inputs)
65
pred_lines = out['lines'][0]
66
67
def filter_horizontal_lines(lines, angle_thresh=np.pi/6):
68
""" Filter nearly horizontal lines. """
69
new_lines = []
70
for line in lines:
71
dy = line[1, 1] - line[0, 1]
72
dx = line[1, 0] - line[0, 0]
73
angle = np.arctan2(dy, dx)
# Angle in radians
74
# Normalize the angle to be between -pi/2 and pi/2
75
angle = np.abs(np.pi / 2 - np.abs(angle - np.pi / 2))
76
if abs(angle) < angle_thresh:
# pi/6 radians = 30 degrees
77
new_lines.append(line)
78
return np.array(new_lines)
79
80
# Filter the lines
81
filtered_lines = filter_horizontal_lines(pred_lines)
82
# Plot the predictions
83
plot_images([img], ['DeepLSD lines'], cmaps='gray', size=10)
84
plot_lines([filtered_lines], indices=range(1))
85
86
87
88
# Analyze lines
89
num_long_lines = sum(np.linalg.norm(line[1] - line[0]) > 0.7 *
cropped_gray_img.shape[1] for line in filtered_lines)
90
91
if num_long_lines <= 3:
92
# Image is blocked , process the image
93
print("The image has a blockage area.")
94
95
filename = os.path.basename(filepath)
96
timestamp = filename.split('_')[1]
97
98
# Load GPS data
99
gps_data = pd.read_csv('gps_data2.csv', header=None)
100
101
# Select rows with the matching timestamp
102
matching_rows = gps_data[gps_data[0].astype(str).str.startswith(timestamp)
]
103
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
51
==PAGE:60==
104
if not matching_rows.empty:
105
# Randomly select one of the matching rows
106
selected_row = matching_rows.sample()
107
108
# Extract GPS coordinates
109
latitude , longitude = selected_row.iloc[0, 1], selected_row.iloc[0, 2]
110
111
print(f'GPS coordinates for the blockage area are ({latitude}, {
longitude}).')
112
113
else:
114
print("The image has no blockage area.")
115
116
import folium
117
118
m = folium.Map(location=[latitude , longitude], zoom_start=13)
119
folium.Marker(location=[latitude , longitude]).add_to(m)
120
121
# Display the map
122
m
Listing A.3: Python code of DeepLSD
52
Vision-Based Agricultural Monitoring Robot using Deep Learning Techniques
