==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Master Thesis
THE CARBON FOOTPRINT OF SEDATION IN
DENTISTRY
A case study for Scotland
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Approval
The thesis has been undertaken from February 2023 to June 2023 at the Department of Tech-
nology, Management, and Economics, and marks the conclusion of the master’s education in
Industrial Engineering and Management at the Technical University of Denmark.
June 23, 2023
Elisabeth Galster Pedersen - s164236
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The healthcare sector has an important role to play in the worldwide movement to reduce an-
thropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Human health and environmental health are inextricably
linked, and as the effects of climate change worsen, so do the prospects of living healthy lives,
which puts more strain on healthcare services. There is thus a growing expectation for health-
care systems to take responsibility for their contribution to climate change, and make a dual
commitment to upholding clinical safety for current patients and environmental safety for future
patients.
Together with NHS Highland, this thesis seeks to fill the current knowledge and documentation
gap of the carbon footprint of anesthetics, focusing on nitrous oxide and the intravenous drug
Midazolam within the area of dentistry. Applying a cradle-to-grave Life Cycle Assessment
methodology, central to the study is a comparative analysis of the carbon footprint and damage
to human health of inhalational and intravenous sedation in oral surgery practice. Results from
the study indicate that using intravenous anesthesia has a significantly smaller impact on climate
change, with reduced emission of 99.7% compared with nitrous oxide use.
In addition, through a comparative analysis with an emerging substitute agent, methoxyflurane,
the study is also meant to provide decision support for environmentally conscious procurement
of inhalational sedation agents. The results indicate that emission reductions of up to 99.5% are
possible from replacing nitrous oxide with methoxyflurane.
The LCA study was carried out in accordance with the frameworks provided by the ISO
standards 14040 and 14044, as presented in the International Life Cycle Data system handbook.
The impact assessment method used was IMPACTworld+ within the LCA software SimaPro.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Gratitude is extended toward the project commissioner from NHS Higland, who has provided the
foundation for the project, and presented a unique opportunity to investigate a largely unexplored
field.
Thank you to my supervisor, Professor Karyn Morrissey, for excellent guidance during the
project period. The support has been profoundly valuable with the feedback and constructive
criticism given, and encouragement along the way. A warm thank you to my co-supervisor,
Xiaocheng Hu, for providing input to the LCI model.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AOP
Area of protection
API
Active pharmaceutical ingredient
CFC
Chloroflurocarbon
CO2e CO2 equivalent
DALY Disability-adjusted life years
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
FU
Functional unit
GB
Great Britain
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GLO
Global
GTP
Global temperature potential
GWP Global warming potential
HDPE High density polyethylene
IHS
Inhalational sedation
ILCD International Reference Life Cycle Data System
IPCC International Panel for Climate Change
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
IV
Intravenous
v
==PAGE:6==
LCA
Life cycle assessment
LCI
Life cycle inventory
LCIA Life cycle impact assessment
MAC Minimum alveolar content
MOF Methoxyflurane
NHS
National Health Service
PET
Polyethylene
PP
Polypropylene
PU
Polyurethane
RER
Rest of Europe
RoW Rest of the world
UK
United Kingdom
Symbols
𝑛
Moles
𝑝
Pressure
𝑅
Ideal gas constant
𝑇
Temperature
𝑉
Volume
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
The connection between climate change and human health [1] . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Documents published by year.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
The four phases of LCA methodological approach [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
System boundaries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1
A comparison of the three scenarios, internally normalized to the nitrous oxide
scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Internally normalized impact scores for climate change short-term (a) and long-
term (b) per life cycle stage for all three scenarios. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Contribution per life cycle stage for the N2O scenario to short-term and long-term
climate change. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Contribution per life cycle for the Midazolam scenario to short-term and long-
term climate change.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
Contribution per life cycle to the impact score of the methoxyflurane scenario. .
37
5.6
Damage results at the endpoint level for human health (DALY) presented on a
logarithmic scale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7
Endpoint results for all impact categories within the AOP human health. . . . .
38
6.1
Process contribution analysis for the N2O scenario.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Process contribution analysis for the Midazolam scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Process contribution analysis for the methoxyflurane scenario.
. . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Process contribution analysis of the production and disposal stages. . . . . . . .
42
6.5
The contribution of N2O and Midazolam use to the overall impact stemming
from anesthesia procedures at the hospital in 2022.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.6
Life cycle-wise contribution to the impact score of climate change short-term
and long-term after substituting CO2e emissions with N2O emissions in the
disposal stage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.7
Life cycle-wise comparison between the scenarios excluding the production and
transportation of aluminum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.8
Damage scores in the human health AOP without aluminum processes. . . . . .
48
A.1 Process tree of an anesthetic procedure using nitrous oxide. . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Process tree of an anesthetic procedure using Midazolam. . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
vii
==PAGE:8==
LIST OF FIGURES
A.3 Process tree of an anesthetic procedure using methoxflurane . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Technical University of Denmark
Page viii of 72
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Overview of the top emitters in order, and climate actions in healthcare by
country.[1] [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Overview of the most common anesthetic gases used in surgery.[4] . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Overview of the selected articles in the literature review.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
Classification of data specificity, adapted from Hauschild et al. (2018) [2]
. . .
16
4.1
Summary of recommendations for LCI modeling choices by ILCD, adapted
from Hauschild et al. (2018). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
The main and secondary functions of the three scenarios in the study. . . . . . .
20
4.3
The functional unit and reference flows for each system. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
The primary materials of mixed composition medical equipment. . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
The framework for establishing system boundaries.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Geographical scope of each scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1
Overview of the characterized impact scores at the midpoint level for all three
scenarios. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Impact scores per life cycle stage for each scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Damage scores for climate change in DALY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1
Table showing the most contributing processes per life cycle stage for each scenario. 43
6.2
The most contributing processes to damage to human health from climate change
within the nitrous oxide scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
The most contributing processes to damage to human health from climate change
within the Midazolam scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.4
The most contributing processes to damage to human health from climate change
within the Midazolam scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.1
Numbers for validating the calculation of nitrous oxide amount. . . . . . . . . .
50
B.1
Overview of data collection for the nitrous oxide scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.2
Life cycle inventory for the nitrous oxide scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
B.3
Overview of the data collection and specificity for the Midazolam scenario.
. .
67
B.4
Life cycle inventory for the Midazolam scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
ix
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF TABLES
B.5
Overview of the data collection and data specificity for the methoxyflurane
scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.6
Life cycle inventory for the methoxyflurane scenario.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.1
List of assumptions for production processes and geographies.
. . . . . . . . .
72
Technical University of Denmark
Page x of 72
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The incessant anthropogenic exploitation of natural resources and release of greenhouse gases
(GHGs) has accelerated the effects of climate change, which is now recognized as the greatest
threat to the planet and its inhabitants’ well-being [5]. In recent years, a worldwide movement
to instigate actions to implement strategies for reducing emissions [6] has emerged. The energy,
agriculture (including forestry), building, and transport sectors remain the most prominent
contributors to GHG emissions [7], but attention is increasingly being paid to the healthcare
sector’s role in climate change.
According to a report published by Arup and Health Care Without Harm, healthcare services
account for 4.4% of global GHG emissions [1]. Translated into damage to human health, these
emissions from the global healthcare sector cause a reduction of 3.060.000 DALYs (disability-
adjusted life years) per year [8] . Notwithstanding the environmental impacts, a moral responsi-
bility on account of the Hippocratic oath to "first, do no harm" is also imposed on the healthcare
sector to support decarbonization without compromising individual patient safety [1], as climate
change is recognized as the greatest threat to public human health [5]. In recognition of the link
between climate change and public health, the National Health Service (NHS) of the United
Kingdom has defined the goal of reaching net zero carbon emissions by 2040 [3].
One strategy for reducing carbon emissions is for reducing the use of inhalational anesthetic
gases (IAGs) and implementing low-carbon alternatives instead. In the surgical sector, using
anesthetic gases represented 42% of GHG emissions and thus largely dominated the emissions
[9]. To produce general anesthesia, volatile gases such as isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane,
are typically used in combination with the non-volatile nitrous oxide (N2O). As GHGs, these
gases contribute to the global warming effect by trapping energy (radiative forcing) inside the
atmosphere [10], when released after use. Using nitrous oxide as a carrier agent for volatile
gases significantly increases the carbon footprint of sedation [4]. In 2019-2020, nitrous oxide
was found to account for 80% of emissions related to anesthetic gases in the NHS acute sector
[11], and it is the most commonly used inhalational anesthetic within dentistry as a single agent
(in combination with oxygen) to produce conscious sedation in anxious patients [12].
Public dental care is provided under NHS services in all three territories: England, Scotland,
and Wales. Within Scotland, there are 14 territorial boards, NHS Highland being one of them
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1. CLINICAL PATHWAYS FOR SEDATION IN DENTISTRY
[13]. In 2021, around 230 General Dental Practitioners (GDPs) were contracted on the board,
providing routine and specialist dental treatments, including dental surgery [14].
All NHS
territories are required to undertake carbon accounting, which includes dental practices. The
exact gas consumption within dentistry does not exist [13], but a 2018 report from Public Health
England estimated that nitrous oxide use makes up approximately 0.9% of the total emissions
from NHS dental services. In connection, it was found that the use of nitrous oxide increased
the carbon footprint of individual dental treatments by 4-9 times compared to procedures where
nitrous oxide had not been used. When used in combination, the gas made up 80-90% of the
carbon footprint related to the procedures [15].
The use of IV anesthesia has been shown to generate far less GHG emissions than its inhala-
tional counterparts [16][4]. It is however not possible to replace all use of nitrous oxide with IV
anesthesia, as patients with counterindications then could not receive analgesia or simply would
opt out of dental appointments altogether.
1.1
Clinical pathways for sedation in dentistry
Inhalational sedation
Administering nitrous oxide as inhalational sedation is a reliable method to achieve the effects of
analgesia, for pain- and anxiety-free dental surgical procedures. The process to sedate a patient
with nitrous oxide always begins and ends with delivering 100% oxygen. After 1-2 minutes
of breathing, usually at a flow rate of 5-6 L/min, delivery of nitrous oxide happens in 10%
intervals, though routinely never reaching a concentration above 50%. The patient is conscious
throughout the procedure [12].
Nitrous oxide is typically used as a single agent in dental settings due to its high MAC-value
(minimum alveolar concentration), making it suitable for quick procedures that need a rapid
onset and offset of the analgesic effect.
As mentioned, nitrous oxide has been shown to increase the carbon footprint of dental
procedures when used as the primary agent [15] and when used in combination with other gases
[16][4]. Public Health England (2018) estimates the carbon footprint of nitrous oxide to be
119 kgCO2e on average (ranging from 11 to 342 kgCO2e), calculated with a GWP of 298. In
their assumptions, nitrous oxide was delivered in 1800 L cylinders, providing anesthesia to 11
patients.
Intravenous sedation
Intravenous (IV) anesthesia is administered through the patient’s veins and is less harmful to the
environment throughout its life cycle [16][4]. Specifically, the use of the IV drug Propofol had
a cradle-to-grave carbon footprint of approximately 1 kgCO2e [4].
A different IV drug, Midazolam, is commonly used in dentistry to produce conscious sedation.
Additionally, it has amnesic effects, making it a powerful management tool for anxious patients
[17]. However, IV sedation is associated with higher risks of respiratory side effects [17], thereby
Technical University of Denmark
Page 2 of 72
==PAGE:13==
1.2. STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVE
causing another string of human health implications. As well, Midazolam is not recommended
for use on children below the age of 12, thereby making up another patient group in need of safe
alternatives to both anesthetic agents.
To the best of the author’s knowledge, no previous studies on the carbon footprint of Midazolam
use exist, though a life cycle inventory (LCI) study by Parvatker et al. (2019) found that producing
1 kg of Midazolam generates 444 kgCO2e.
Experimental inhalational sedation
Safe and reliable low-carbon alternatives are needed if emissions from nitrous oxide use are to
be reduced. One such inhalational gas, methoxyflurane, available as the commercial single-use
inhaler Penthrox, is a candidate. Methoxyflurane has a GWP of 4, and the impact from two
inhalers has been estimated to be 0.8 kgCO2e [18] through unknown methods. It was widely
available from the 1960s to the 1970s until it was recalled due to concerns over side effects [19].
Since then, its effects within sedation have been shown to be capable of achieving analgesic
effects on par with nitrous oxide within anxious patients.
Direct comparisons between the carbon footprints of available alternatives, both inhalational
and intravenous sedation, are needed in order to build a larger knowledge repository that anes-
thesiologists, dentists, and hospital leaders can refer to in order to make informed choices within
sustainable procurement and clinical practice to reduce the impact of healthcare services on the
environment and on human health.
1.2
Statement of objective
The current study is rooted in an assessment of the relative environmental merits in terms of
carbon footprints, and the potential damage to human health, of three anesthetic alternatives by
applying a life cycle assessment (LCA) framework on data obtained from a dental unit within
the NHS Highland, located in Inverness, Scotland. The overarching research question is:
What is the carbon footprint and corresponding damage to human health of inhalational and
intravenous sedation used in current oral healthcare practices in Scotland, and can impacts be
reduced by introducing methoxyflurane as a substitute inhalational sedation method?
To support the investigation of the main research question, three sub-questions will be ex-
plored.
Sub-RQ1: What has been found from applying life cycle assessment to anesthetic pro-
cedures within healthcare?
This assessment will be performed through an extensive literature review. Structurally, the
review will be mainly synthesized chronologically and will investigate what strategies are being
set in motion around the world.
Sub-RQ2: What is the carbon footprint of inhalational and intravenous anesthesia in
Technical University of Denmark
Page 3 of 72
==PAGE:14==
1.3. OVERVIEW OF THESIS STRUCTURE
dentistry, and what is the extent of their damage to human health: A case study of an NHS
practice in Scotland
The question will be explored through a case study of two standard practices for sedation using
comparative life cycle assessment (LCA): A nitrous oxide scenario, Combining nitrous oxide
and oxygen within inhalational sedation; and a Midazolam scenario, for intravenous sedation
using Midazolam. The assessment will follow good LCA practice and build on the framework
and requirements provided in the ISO 14040 and ISO 14044 standards for life cycle assessment
[2], as well as the guidance provided in the International Reference of Life Cycle Data system
(ILCD) [20]. LCA can be useful as a tool for decision-making in healthcare, not only for
emission reduction purposes but for estimating the relative damage imposed on human health
through different healthcare services.
Sub-RQ3: Can an introduction of methoxyflurane as a substitute sedation agent help
meet the emission reduction targets of the NHS?
An emerging substitute, methoxyflurane, will be explored as a substitute sedation agent. An
LCA will be performed, and compared with the aforementioned alternatives. This is to establish
proof for or against the hypothesis that methoxyflurane as a potent sedation agent is additionally
an environmentally responsible choice when it comes to anesthetic practices in oral surgery.
Key performance indicators (KPIs) are established:
1. The methoxyflurane scenario exhibits a reduced carbon footprint or is at least at the same
level as the nitrous oxide and Midazolam.
2. Potential damage to human health from methoxyflurane use is lower than in nitrous oxide
use.
1.3
Overview of thesis structure
Chapter 2 contains background information on climate change, its relation to health and health-
care, and a literature review of LCAs performed on healthcare services. Chapter 3 presents the
LCA framework and related terms and concepts. Chapter 4 contains the goal and scope, and
the life cycle inventory phases of the LCA. Chapter 5 contains the life cycle impact assessment,
and Chapter 6 discusses the results of the LCIA in the interpretation phase. Chapter 7 pro-
vides a discussion of the method and results, and Chapter 8 summarizes the conclusions and
recommendations.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 4 of 72
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
The following chapter provides an introduction to climate change and human health, and abate-
ment strategies within healthcare systems. Important concepts are introduced. The literature
review contains a review of relevant literature on LCA methodology within anesthesia practice
and provides a discussion of recommendations for emission reduction strategies from previous
studies.
2.1
Background
2.1.1
Climate change and human health
Rising temperatures are just one aspect of climate change. Rising sea levels, extreme weather
events, impacts on water quality, and more are the effects of climate change. Aggregated, they
have serious ramifications for human health. Some are depicted in Figure 2.1. Food and water
security become compromised, resulting in severe malnutrition and inadequate hygiene levels,
and housing situations become unsafe, leading to a rise in the number of so-called "climate
refugees" as more people are displaced from vulnerable regions. Furthermore, the IPCC has
declared a connection between climate change and the rise of cardiovascular, respiratory, and
infectious diseases, and a vast spread of vector-borne diseases (dengue, malaria, etc.). Climate
change is thus projected to drive an increase in incidences of various illnesses, and along
with growing populations, healthcare delivery is expected to intensify substantially. Healthcare
infrastructure is vulnerable to the effects of climate change as well, with the added risk of
supply chain disruptions and resource scarcity [21]. Human health is therefore dependent on
environmental health and vulnerable to climate change [22].
2.1.2
Climate change and healthcare systems
Even though healthcare systems across the world by default adhere to the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goal 3: "Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages", its activities
inadvertently oppose the principle of "meeting the need of the present generation without com-
promising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs". The past years have seen
5
==PAGE:16==
2.1. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.1: The connection between climate change and human health [1]
a rise in efforts to mitigate the harm from healthcare, but abatement actions across the world
vary in both ambition and existence. Table 2.1 provides an overview of the ten most polluting
healthcare systems and their mitigative actions.
A set of recommendations for reducing the carbon footprint from the healthcare sector is
provided by Healthcare Without Harm [1], of which the following two are highlighted:
1. Action 1: Reduce healthcare’s climate footprint now. Aligning with the Greenhouse Gas
Protocol, actions within all three scopes should be taken to 1) Incorporate low-carbon
technology, 2) Move to renewable energy sources, and 3) Decarbonize the supply chain.
2. Action 6: Deepen research on healthcare and climate change.
This action includes
generating knowledge on the carbon footprint of current practices and supply chains, as
well as identifying areas of improvement.
Climate change is projected to drive a rise in the incidence of various illnesses and requirements
for the healthcare sector are expected to intensify. According to Action 1, low-carbon alternatives
should be implemented when possible. However, healthcare systems are notoriously conserva-
tive and the uptake of new technologies can be slow-paced [23]. In an effort to catalyze the
uptake of new technologies and support clinical decision-making, the OECD (Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development) describes evidence-based methods for the appraisal
of health technologies, focusing on Health Technology Assessment (HTA) [24], providing an
evaluation of the economic costs against clinical benefits for patients.
It has been suggested that the use of HTAs can be complemented or integrated with science-
based assessment methods of carbon emissions, thereby ensuring that decisions are made with
economic and environmental sustainability in mind [8]. McAlister et al. (2022) suggest both
process-based life cycle assessment and environmentally extended input-output analysis (EIO) in
combination with HTAs. EIO is commonly used for assessing the carbon intensity of purchasing
a certain good, while process-based LCA assesses the environmental impact of transforming
resources (materials and energy) into a product. The impact can subsequently be translated to
damage caused within areas of particular interest for stakeholders, e.g., human health in the case
Technical University of Denmark
Page 6 of 72
==PAGE:17==
2.1. BACKGROUND
Country/region
Net
environmental
footprint (MtCO2e)
Applied climate action
United States
546.54
Kaizer Permanente health system targets
carbon net positivity by 2025.
University of California Health System
aims for carbon neutrality by 2025.
Cleveland Clinic aims for carbon neutrality
by 2027.
China
342.46
Improved energy management and
construction of green buildings in the
hospital sector at provincial and municipal
levels.
European Union
248.52
Scandinavian and Dutch efforts include zero-
emission hospital buildings, low-carbon
technology implementation, and strategies
for managing supply chain emissions.
Japan
103.55
None reported.
Russian Federation
76.46
None reported.
Germany
57.51
Joined the COP26 Health Programme in
2021.
Brazil
43.84
None reported.
United Kingdom
42.5
The English NHS aims to reach
net zero by 2040.
Joined the COP26 Health Programme in
2021.
Table 2.1: Overview of the top emitters in order, and climate actions in healthcare by country.[1]
[3]
Technical University of Denmark
Page 7 of 72
==PAGE:18==
2.2. LITERATURE REVIEW
of health practitioners.
Several pathways for executing Action 6 exist: The OECD suggests a portfolio approach
for wide distribution of dissemination to important stakeholders [24], McAlister et al. (2022)
suggest establishing a database of carbon emissions from healthcare services [8], and Petre et
al. (2019) found that knowledge-sharing on best practice through published carbon footprints
was perceived as an effective dissemination activity [23].
2.1.3
Anesthetic gases
A Canadian survey from 2019 found that anesthesiologists are generally positive towards the
concept of sustainable anesthetic practices [23] provided the efficacy of low-carbon alternatives
is equivalent to current practice. Similar results were obtained from surveys conducted in 2012
and 2016 in Australia, New Zealand, England [25], and the USA [26]. 52% of the respondents in
the Canadian survey identified a lack of education and information as a barrier to sustainability
efforts other than recycling, e.g., choosing anesthetics based on their carbon footprint.
Commonly used anesthetic gases are sevoflurane, desflurane, isoflurane, and nitrous oxide,
all well-known and potent greenhouse gases. The complications surrounding the use of these
gases are particularly associated with waste management: After use, a portion of the gas is
either collected by a so-called scavenging system and vented into the atmosphere, or exhaled by
the patient and becoming part of the indoor climate [16] and a serious occupational hazard for
health professionals.
An overview of the global warming potential (GWP), atmospheric lifetime, and potency
(MAC) of each gas can be found in table 2.2. MAC represents the minimum alveolar concen-
tration required to repress nerve responses to a surgical incision [4]. Nitrous oxide, which is
Gas
GWP
Atmospheric lifetime
MAC(%)
Sevoflurane
130
1.1
2.2
Isoflurane
510
3.2
1.2
Desflurane
2540
14
6.7
Nitrous oxide
265
121
104
Table 2.2: Overview of the most common anesthetic gases used in surgery.[4]
the most commonly used inhalational sedation within dentistry, has considerable environmental
impact considering its GWP and high atmospheric lifetime. As well, nitrous oxide is known to
have a high ozone depletion effect.
2.2
Literature review
The literature review was constructed with elements of a systematic review. Life cycle assessment
methods, herein including software, impact areas, method, and results were compared. The
search strategy consisted of combining terms referring to LCAs of anesthetic gases or drugs.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 8 of 72
==PAGE:19==
2.3. FINDINGS
The search engine used was the Scopus database, globally recognized as the largest database for
abstracts and paper citations, managed by Dutch publication company, Elsevier. The database
constitutes a temporal coverage of peer-reviewed articles ranging from 1788-present and the
geospatial coverage is global.
The search string was performed on the 2nd of April 2023: "life cycle assessment" or lca
and "carbon footprint" or "climate change" or "environmental impact" or "greenhouse gas"
or "greenhouse gas emissions" or sustainability and anesthe* or anaesthe* and healthcare or
hospital and (limit-to (doctype, "ar")).
Geographical coverage was global, and the publication time frame was unlimited. Inclusion
criteria considered that the preferred document type was scientific articles with original work,
peer-reviewed and published, with process-LCA as the chosen methodology, and the study
should include anesthetic gases or drugs. All languages were included to construct a picture of
the extent of research in the field. A separate search was conducted by adding the term "dentist*"
to the string, to identify any similar studies of anesthesia-related emissions in dentistry, but none
were found.
2.3
Findings
2.3.1
Identification of LCA approaches to environmental impact assess-
ment of anesthetic gases
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a tool for assessing the environmental performance of a product
or a service [2], widely used by businesses to optimize production methods, choose the most
sustainable materials, and reduce emissions from waste. LCA provides a method to identify
the major emitters and enable informed decision-making for reducing the carbon footprint
of operations.
It is useful for performing benchmarking of current practices and available
alternatives, and for monitoring emission reduction progress. This makes LCA increasingly
relevant in the healthcare sector, where it can contribute to strengthening knowledge on current
operations, and aid in increasing the adaptive capacity of health professionals [22]. This literature
review will explore the rising trend of using life cycle assessment for the analysis of anesthetic
procedures.
Few LCA studies have been performed on anesthetic practice. The search string produced 20
document results, with a simple trend analysis showing an increasing amount of publications
since 2008 in Figure 2.2. Some results turned out to be reviews or comments despite the specified
limitation for document types, and these were not considered in the literature review. Studies
using other methods than LCA were not included, and any studies exempting the investigation of
anesthetic drugs were excluded as well. The articles presented below were considered relevant
based on the inclusion criteria and therefore included in the review.
These related to the
manufacturing of both inhalational anesthetics and anesthetic pharmaceutical drugs, and other
studies were performed as use cases, e.g., of knee replacement surgeries.
The earliest mention of LCA in relation to anesthetics with the constructed search string was
Technical University of Denmark
Page 9 of 72
==PAGE:20==
2.3. FINDINGS
Figure 2.2: Documents published by year.
in 2008 by Ek and Tjus [27], who investigated the reductions of nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions
in a delivery ward in Sweden. Two scenarios were constructed: 1) 1 kg N2O alone, and 2) 1
kg N2O with the introduction of a gas treatment unit, using an LCA software named KCL-ECO
(now obsolete). Environmental impacts were assessed across all the life cycle stages. The
greenhouse effect (GWP) was reduced from 310 kgCO2e in scenario 1 down to 18 kgCO2e
(using hydropower) and 48 kgCO2e (using coal power).
In 2012, Sherman et al.
[16] conducted an LCA of four inhalational anesthetic gases:
Desflurane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, nitrous oxide (as a carrier agent), and one intravenous drug:
Propofol. They applied a cradle-to-grave approach, including raw material extraction, drug
manufacture, transport to healthcare facilities, drug delivery, and disposal or the equivalent
emissions to the environment. The functional unit was 1 MAC-h or MAC-h equivalent. Drug
synthesis of the anesthetic agents was modeled from proxy processes, as no previous life cycle
inventory records existed. Energy use and other material inputs were modeled correspondingly
to the requirements for each drug. Waste was modeled as either being incinerated as an organic
compound or unspecified plastic, and the venting of gases into the atmosphere was modeled
as GHG emissions (gCO2e). In the following impact assessment, the LCA revealed a lower
environmental impact in the scenario with Propofol. An adjoining argument against the use of
the four gases was the inherent implications of the use of GHGs as anesthetic agents.
For the purpose of filling out the lack of catalogs with LCIs for pharmaceutical anesthetics,
Parvatker et al. (2019) generated cradle-to-gate LCI data for 20 injectable anesthetic drugs [28]
based on patents, manufacturer, and synthesis databases, and chemical engineering processes.
The purpose was to develop process designs for use in full process-based LCA studies on
individual drugs and further research on the environmental impact of e.g., anesthetic drug
use.
The models were constructed in SimaPro version 8.1.
Energy for heating, steaming,
cooling, and electricity for drug manufacturing was based on background processes from the
ecoinvent database. Proxy chemicals were only used when data was not available in ecoinvent,
through literature, or if the mass of the input materials was less than 5%, to avoid significant
underestimations of emissions. The cradle-to-gate emissions for producing 1 kg of Midazolam
were calculated to be 444 kgCO2e.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 10 of 72
==PAGE:21==
2.3. FINDINGS
Hu et al. (2021) suggest different manufacturing pathways for the three halogenated anes-
thetic gases, desflurane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane [4] to complement the method proposed by
Sherman et al. (2012). The functional unit was defined as 1 MAC-h or 1 MAC-h equivalent
for maintaining anesthesia in an adult of 70 kg. Using a cradle-to-grave LCI approach, different
scenarios are constructed using different synthesis principles for the halogenated gases, and sce-
narios with N2O included as a carrier gas, as well as scenarios where a vapor capture technology
has been added to the systems. Propofol is used for comparative analysis. Applied to data from
the NHS, the highest emissions were found in the scenarios where the carrier gas was an N2O
and oxygen (O) mixture, and the majority of emissions were accredited to N2O waste. Propofol
exhibited a low carbon footprint profile in comparison at 1.01 kgCO2e.
An LCA study by Chua et al. (2021) on procedures in interventional radiology used retro-
spective data on waste, disposable supplies, electricity used during equipment operation, and
estimated travel time and temperature control units [29]. Results showed that the largest GHG
emitter in the system was indoor climate control, while the use of anesthetic drugs was the least
contributing, at 0.08%. The reason behind the relatively small portion attributed to anesthetics
emissions was that very few of the patients underwent general anesthesia.
McGain et al. conducted an LCA study to quantify the carbon footprint of general, spinal
(regional), and combined anesthesia in knee replacement surgery [30].
General anesthesia
covered volatile gases or intravenous drugs, while spinal anesthesia was delivered as sedation.
Desflurane was unused in the study, and the only patient that received nitrous oxide was excluded,
to avoid skewed results. Data on anesthetic drug use was obtained from 30 patient anesthetic
start and stop times, and anesthetic gas and oxygen volumes were obtained from the anesthetic
machine. The functional unit was defined as "all anesthesia for a total knee replacement in
a hospital in Victoria, Australia". Previous LCA and LCI studies were used to model CO2e
emissions for reusable items, processes, and devices, and the 2019 study from Parvatker et al.
provided an average of 340 gCO2e emissions/g drug for general anesthesia. Reusable anesthetic
equipment was represented as energy costs, which had been estimated in previous LCA studies by
the team. CO2 emissions from heating, ventilation, air conditioning in the operating theatre, and
surgical equipment were excluded. Waste from the procedures was categorized mainly as general
waste, clinical waste, pharmaceutical waste to incineration, and only little recycling. The systems
were modeled in SimaPro v9 using the ecoinvent and Australian Life Cycle Inventory databases.
The results showed that a reduction in sevoflurane gas flow would reduce emissions, as would
replacing sevoflurane with intravenous anesthesia. Reducing the use of single-use items and
implementing reusable equipment when possible had both financial and environmental savings.
The authors highlighted the importance of carrying out cognizance of the carbon footprint of
individual areas in anesthesia practice, to identify areas for improvement.
Pearson et al. conducted a study to compare the carbon footprints of alternatives within labor
analgesia [18]. The alternatives were Entonox (nitrous oxide/oxygen mix), patient-controlled
anesthesia/PCA (pump), epidural (pump), and morphine (intramuscular injection). Life cycle
assessments were conducted across all life cycle stages, encompassing drug and oxygen man-
ufacture, emissions from unmetabolized gas, single-use components, packaging, disposal, and
electricity for powering the infusion pumps. The CO2e were estimated over a 4-hour time period.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 11 of 72
==PAGE:22==
2.3. FINDINGS
The method using inhalational anesthesia generated 273 kgCO2e. The epidural was associated
with 1.2 kgCO2e, and the PCA with 0.75 kgCO2e. Morphine had the lowest carbon footprint
at 0.08 kgCO2e. Finally, a multifaceted approach to reducing emissions is recommended, in-
cluding reducing nitrous oxide use, better waste management, educating patients on low-carbon
alternatives, and implementing vapor capture technologies.
An overview of the selected articles is provided in Table 2.3. Geographical representation is
centered around the US and UK, situating the current study well as part of a larger movement
within the UK to establish sound scientific proof on sustainable sedation options. LCA as a
methodology is concluded to be an appropriate tool for such assessments of the carbon footprint
of anesthetic procedures.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 12 of 72
==PAGE:23==
2.3. FINDINGS
Article
Author(s)
Year
Aim
LCA Approach
LCA software
Result
Source
Decreased emission of nitrous oxide from
delivery wards - Case
study in Sweden
Ek, M.,
Tjus, K.
2008
Nitrous oxide emissions
from a delivery ward
after the introduction
of an exhaust system
Life cycle
assessment and
life cycle costing
KCL-ECO v. 3.1
Greenhouse effect was reduced to
18 kg CO2e from 310 kg CO2e, but
the emissions of toxic compounds
from manufacture of the treatment
system could not be decided as being
acceptable relative to the reduced
greenhouse effect.
DOI: 10.1007/
s11027-008-9142-9
Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of
anesthetic drugs
Sherman, J.,
Le, C.,
Lamers, V.,
Eckelman, M.
2012
Emissions from the use
of desflurane, sevoflurane,
isoflurane, nitrous oxide
and propofol
Cradle-to-grave
LCA
SimaPro 7.3.2
(ecoinvent v2.2)
Intravenous anesthetics appear to be
less environmentally harmful than
inhalational anesthetics.
DOI: 10.1213/
ANE.0b013e31824f6940
Cradle-to-Gate Greenhouse
Gas Emissions for Twenty Anesthetic
Active Pharmaceutical
Ingredients Based on Process
Scale-Up and Process Design
Calculations
Parvatker, A.G.,
Tunceroglu, H.,
Sherman, J.D.,
Philip, C.,
Paul, A.,
Zimmerman, J.B.
2019
Cradle-to-gate emissions
from the synthesis of
20 anesthetic drugs
(including Midazolam)
Cradle-to-gate
LCA
SimaPro 8.1
Life cycle inventories for 20 pharmaceutical
drugs and corresponding cradle-to-gate
emissions. Production of 1 kg Midazolam
generated 444 kgCO2e.
DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.
8b05473
The carbon footprint of general
anaesthetics: A case study
in the UK
Hu, X.,
Pierce, J.T.,
Taylor, T.,
Morrissey, K.
2021
Carbon footprint of desflurane,
isoflurane, sevoflurane,
nitrous oxide, and propofol via
different manufacturing
pathways and with vapor
capture
Cradle-to-grave
LCA
Lcopt
(ecoinvent v3.3)
Using oxygen as the carrier gas for anesthetic
agents instead of nitrous oxide reduces carbon
footprint.
DOI: 10.1016/j.resconrec.
2021.105411
The Environmental Impact
of Interventional Radiology:
An Evaluation of Greenhouse Gas
Emissions from an Academic
Interventional Radiology Practice
Chua, A.L.B.,
Amin, R.,
Zhang, J.,
Thiel, C.L.,
Gross, J.S.
2021
Calculating total GHG emissions
from an interventional radiology
department at a hospital
Hotspot LCA
N/A
Major contributors to the impact were
energyfor climate control and emissions
from single-use surgical supplies.
DOI: 10.1016/j.
jvir.2021.03.531
Carbon Footprint of General, Regional,
and Combined Anesthesia for Total
Knee Replacements
McGain, F.,
Sheridan, N.,
Wickramarachchi, K.,
Yates, S.,
Chan, B.,
McAlister, S.
2021
CO2e emissions for general
anesthesia, spinal anesthesia,
and combined anesthesia
during a knee replacement
surgery (not N2O)
Prospective LCA
SimaPro 9
(ecoinvent and Australian
life cycle inventory
database)
Several choices impact the outcome,
e.g., using low-flow gas, intravenous
anesthesia,reducing single-use plastics,
reducing oxygen flow, and improving
energy efficiency.
DOI: 10.1097/ALN.
0000000000003967
Estimate of the total carbon footprint
and component carbon sources
of different modes of labour analgesia
Pearson, F.,
Sheridan, N.,
Pierce, J.
2022
Comparing the carbon
footprints of four different
labor analgesia techniques
using life cycle assessment
in the UK.
Comparative LCA
Unknown
Nitrous oxide use produced 273 kgCO2e,
mostly from release of unmetabolized gas.
Injectable analgesic methods produced less
than 1.5 kgCO2e.
DOI: 10.1111/anae15678
Table 2.3: Overview of the selected articles in the literature review.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 13 of 72
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3
Method
An overview of the methodology and LCA framework is presented.
3.1
Life cycle assessment
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a method for quantifying the environmental impact of a product
or service throughout its life cycle. The discipline emerged in the 1960s and was primarily used
to study packaging solutions. Up through the 1990s and 2000s, LCA application was extended
through a vast range of products in the private sector. In 2008, LCA was adopted to inform on the
European Commission’s Sustainable Consumption and Production and Sustainable Industrial
Policy, extending LCA use to policy development[2].
The life cycle of a product begins with the extraction of raw material and ends with its
disposal or recycling, and LCA is therefore termed as having a "cradle-to-grave" approach to
estimating environmental performance. The life cycle is made up of raw material extraction,
manufacturing, transportation, use, and disposal (end-of-life).
In this report, raw material
extraction and manufacturing are joined under "production".
One aim of LCA is to identify areas with high impact magnitudes and high improvement
potentials. By providing estimations on environmental impacts within different impact cate-
gories, LCA studies are often used to support decision-making within manufacturing processes.
Additionally, LCA can be used to compare different alternatives, allowing manufacturers to per-
form benchmarking and users to make informed decisions. As well, it can be useful to identify
environmental hotspots within the supply chain. These principles can be applied to large and
complex systems, for example, the delivery of a service, such as surgery in a hospital.[2]
Standardized frameworks for LCA methodology have been developed by the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO): ISO 14040, which provides a general outline of the
principles and frameworks behind LCA studies, and ISO 14044, providing a detailed guide of
the phases required for an LCA. The ILCD provides a handbook on best practices in adherence
to the ISO standards [20]:
1. Goal and scope definition. While there are distinct requirements for both phases, they
14
==PAGE:25==
3.1. LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT
Figure 3.1: The four phases of LCA methodological approach [2]
are often seen as one. Here, the LCA context and purpose of the study are specified.
The product(s) or system(s) to be assessed are described, decisions on impact categories
to evaluate are justified, and the functional unit is defined. The system boundaries, data
sources, assumptions, and study limitations are also detailed.
2. Life cycle inventory analysis. Data collection and descriptions are provided. Modeling of
the system is done according to the goal and scope.
3. Impact assessment. This phase is carried out by specialized software. The data obtained
from the previous phase is evaluated by translating the inputs to impact indicators within
the categories that were chosen in the previous phases. These impact scores can be related
to e.g., damage to human health.
4. Interpretation. The final phase consists of an analysis and interpretation of the results,
comparisons of multiple scenarios, and recommendations for improving the model.
Typically, an iterative rather than a sequential approach characterizes an LCA study as illustrated
in Figure 3.1. This means that it is often necessary to revisit each phase several times.
3.1.1
Goal and scope definition
The goal provides context and setting for the study. The ISO standard defines six aspects that
must be answered to provide the sufficient definition:
1. Intended application(s).
2. Methodological limitations.
3. Decision context
4. Target audience
5. Comparative assertions in case of public disclosure.
6. Commissioner of the study and other influential actors.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 15 of 72
==PAGE:26==
3.1. LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT
The following phase concerns the scoping of the study. The overarching aim is to ensure good
documentation and consistency with the chosen method and assumptions throughout the ensuing
phases. The following aspects are included in the scope definition:
1. Deliverables
2. The system to be studied and the functional unit
3. LCI modeling framework
4. System boundaries
5. LCI data representativeness:
6. Basis for impact assessment
7. Special requirements for system comparisons
8. Results reporting
3.1.2
Life cycle inventory analysis
The life cycle inventory (LCI) analysis comprises the collection of data and the system modeling.
As data is compiled from multiple sources, the data quality should be carefully assessed. The
LCI analysis contains the following aspects:
1. LCI model at the system level: A depiction, usually in the form of a diagram or process
tree, detailing the processes within the system.
2. Data collection: An overview of the data sources, detailing the data availability and
specificity (accuracy). Data specificity can be assessed with the help of Table 3.1.
3. System modeling per life cycle stage: A clear explanation of data treatment, assumptions,
and uncertainty for each life cycle stage within each scenario.
4. LCI results: A complete inventory of the included processes.
Data specificity
Explanation
Low
Generic LCI database processes, data from literature, judgment by LCA practitioner according to data availability and quality.
Medium
LCI database process or process-specific data from literature, e.g., best available
technology standard or country-wise average.
High
Measured directly or scaled from measurement at specific process site.
Table 3.1: Classification of data specificity, adapted from Hauschild et al. (2018) [2]
.
3.1.3
Life cycle impact assessment
In this phase (LCIA), which is largely automated by LCA software, the LCI results are translated
to impact scores and their potential effect on areas of protection (AOP). LCIA is composed of
mandatory and optional steps. The mandatory steps are as follows:
1. Selection of impact categories, such as climate change.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 16 of 72
==PAGE:27==
3.1. LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT
2. Classification: An automated process in which LCI results are assigned to an impact
category.
3. Characterization: Automatic calculation of the contribution of LCI results to specific
impact categories.
There are three optional steps that may follow: Normalization, weighting, and grouping. In this
study, only normalization will be added. Here, the results can be expressed relative to a chosen
system of reference value.
LCIA results are expressed either at the midpoint level, as impact scores in the individual
impact category, e.g., kg CO2e for the climate change category, or at the endpoint level as
damage scores within an AOP, expressed in disability-adjusted life years (DALY) for human
health, and potentially-disappeared fraction of species in an area over a certain period of time
(PDF*m2*yr) for effects on ecosystem quality.
3.1.4
Interpretation
The aim of the interpretation phase is twofold: Firstly, to evaluate the preceding phases, such as
the LCI in relation to the goal and scope, or unexpected results from the LCIA, and to consider
appropriate changes for improving the model. Significant issues and uncertainties regarding the
LCI data should be analyzed. Secondly, to provide conclusions and recommendations.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 17 of 72
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4
Operationalizing the framework
The following chapter contains the goal and scope definition, and the life cycle inventory (LCI).
4.1
Goal and scope definition
4.1.1
Intended application
The present study focuses on applying life cycle assessment to anesthetic practice in dental
surgery. The overarching aim is to provide recommendations on the most sustainable selection
of three sedation methods through a comparative assessment of the carbon footprint and potential
harm on human health from a cradle-to-grave approach. The present study will identify major
challenges and address the knowledge gap, seeking to contribute to the growing knowledge
repository of environmental assessments of healthcare services.
4.1.2
Methodological limitations
The main limitations are identified as follows:
• LCA provides comprehensive estimations of impact potentials for thousands of processes,
but the comprehensiveness of the systems being studied requires the practitioner to gener-
alize and simplify parameters within the modeling, thereby only providing estimations on
environmental impact rather than exact results. Particularly in this study, as will be seen,
a lack of specific data on the upstream processes demands a high level of generalization.
Hence, the simplification of complex systems leads to inaccuracy.
• Rather than dealing with sustainability in absolute terms, i.e., assessing whether a product
or service can be classified as sustainable based on a certain threshold, the scenarios are
evaluated relative to each other, which can lead to misinterpretations of the results since
not all impact categories are considered.
• The study, as is usual for LCAs, does not consider social or economic aspects in the
evaluation, e.g., workplace exposure to dangerous substances or cost-benefit analyses,
which should also be considered within decision-making.
18
==PAGE:29==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
4.1.3
Decision context
The decision context of the study is identified as being Situation A [2] since the LCA is intended to
aid in micro-level decision support at a single dental unit. ILCD has provided recommendations
for modeling choices within different decision contexts, which are summarised in Table 4.1.
The ILCD, therefore, recommends an attributional LCI modeling framework, which quantifies
Decision context
LCI modeling
framework
Handling of multifunctional
processes when subdivision
not possible
Background system
modeling
Situation A
Attributional
System expansion
Average processes
Situation B
Attributional and
consequential
System expansion
Mix of long-term marginal
processes structurally changed.
Average processes otherwise.
Situation C1
Attributional
System expansion
Average processes
Situation C2
Attributional
Allocation
Average processes
Table 4.1: Summary of recommendations for LCI modeling choices by ILCD, adapted from
Hauschild et al. (2018).
the environmental impacts that can be assigned to a product or a system. It is referred to as
"retrospective" or "descriptive". According to Hauschild et al. (2018), the overall aim is to
"represent a product system in isolation from the rest of the technosphere or economy". The
technosphere encompasses the anthropogenic environment, such as infrastructure, buildings,
machines, etc., which is disconnected from the natural environment and its ecosystems that
make up the ecosphere. Mass allocation principles will be applied throughout all life cycle
stages within each system.
4.1.4
Target audience and commissioner of the study
The project commissioner is a dentist at a dental unit in the NHS Highland, located in Inverness,
Scotland, and thus identified as the user of the system.
The primary target audience is the commissioner and the thesis supervisor and the co-
supervisor. Project results and recommendations can be relayed to healthcare professionals, in
particular dentists, anesthesiologists, hospital administrations, etc., in order to contribute to the
dissemination of knowledge on carbon emissions and damage to human health from anesthesia
and more sustainable alternatives.
4.1.5
Comparative assertions in case of public disclosure
Two very common approaches to LCA are the comparative LCA study and the hotspot analysis.
As indicated by the name, a comparative study compares the environmental impact of two or
more systems that perform the same function, in order to determine which system has the lowest
negative environmental impact and thereby provide guidance on the most sustainable option. It,
therefore, employs principles of relative sustainability.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 19 of 72
==PAGE:30==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
A hotspot analysis is focused on identifying dominating contributors to the environmental
impact of the product system. Related to the use case, high-impact areas can be determined,
e.g., upstream activities related to production or downstream activities related to the disposal of
medical equipment. Such studies enable a better understanding of where emissions occur within
the supply chain.
In alignment with the intended application of the study, the analysis is rooted in a comparison
between the three scenarios but employs elements of the hotspot analysis.
This study will
provide a holistic view of the three different scenarios and provide recommendations based on
overall performance.
An external critical review is not necessary, as the results are not intended for public disclosure
unless the thesis results are to be published in a journal article.
4.1.6
Deliverables
The research encompasses a full life cycle assessment of the three scenarios, thereby the deliv-
erables consist of the life cycle inventory, life cycle impact assessment, and interpretation.
4.1.7
Function
The main function of all three systems is to deliver sedation safely to the patient through different
administration pathways. An overview of this and the secondary functions are given in Table
4.2. The secondary functions allow for the identification of reference flows within each system.
Sedation system
Primary function
Secondary function
Nitrous oxide
Deliver sedation
Inhalational through gas supply
system
Midazolam
Intravenous injection
Methoxyflurane
Inhalational through inhaler
Table 4.2: The main and secondary functions of the three scenarios in the study.
Nitrous oxide delivery system
Here follows a description of the system which delivers nitrous oxide to the patients [31]:
• Flowmeter: Combined with a portable stand.
A device that indicates the amount of
gas delivered to the patient. This is considered routine equipment with a high lifetime
(approximately 20 years) and is therefore not included in the model.
• Reservoir bag: This supplies additional gas if the patient inhales more than the supplied
amount, and monitors the patient’s respiration. It has a lifetime of 3 years with an estimated
1683 uses (calculated from the number of patients multiplied by its lifetime).
• Pipe connectors, nasal hood, and mask: Gas is delivered from the pipes, which can be
reused, to the mask, consisting of the outer nasal hood (reusable) and the inner mask
Technical University of Denmark
Page 20 of 72
==PAGE:31==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
(single-use). The nasal hood is designed to provide fresh gas for sedation and is also
capable of evacuating gas (scavenging) that is being exhaled by the patient. The pipe
connectors have a 5-year lifetime and an estimated 2805 uses, and the nasal hood has a
lifetime of 3 years (1683 uses).
• Scavenger system: A venting system with a lifetime of more than 10 years. The production
and disposal are excluded, while energy use for one functional unit is included.
Midazolam delivery system
This system consists of pharmaceuticals (Midazolam and a sodium chloride solution for dilution),
single-use equipment, and reusable equipment (a pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor).
The pharmaceuticals and single-use equipment are replaced for each patient, while the reusable
equipment has an approximate lifetime of 10 years. For that reason, the reference flow for
the reusable equipment (electrical machines) amounts to the energy use required to fulfill the
functional unit.
The single-use equipment is listed below:
• Disposable tourniquet
• Antimicrobial skin preparation, ChloraPrep.
• 22 guage cannula and a safety venflon.
• 21x40mm needle to draw up Midazolam.
• 5mL syringe
• Waterproof plaster.
• Adhesive tape, the impact of which is deemed negligible.
Methoxyflurane delivery system
Methoxyflurane is available under the commercial name Penthrox. Sedation is delivered to
the patient by self-administration through a single-use inhaler containing a 3 mL vial of the
sedation agent. As with the Midazolam scenario, a pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor
are necessary for the procedure and will be accounted for through energy use.
4.1.8
Functional unit and reference flows
The functional unit is the basis for comparison of the environmental performances of the dif-
ferent alternatives. The functional unit is defined as 1 MAC-hour (MAC-h) (for the anesthetic
gases) or 1 MAC-h equivalent (MAC-h eq.) (for the sedation drug) during dental surgery in
Inverness, Scotland. Based on the identification of primary and secondary functions, and the
system descriptions, the reference flows and key environmental parameters can be established.
Reference flows describe what must be purchased to fulfill the functional unit, and key environ-
mental parameters link the reference flows to the functional unit. These can be found in Table
Technical University of Denmark
Page 21 of 72
==PAGE:32==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
4.3. The fractions portray how much of the mass of a reusable component can be attributed to
Sedation system
Functional unit
Reference flows
Key environmental parameters
Nitrous oxide
1 MAC-h or 1 MAC-h equivalent
for maintaining anesthesia during dental
surgery at a hospital in Inverness, Scotland
Gas supply for 1 patient
1 gas piping
1 inner mask
1/1683 Outer nasal hood
1/1683 Reservoir bag
1/2805 HDPE pipe connectors
1/7 Gas cylinder (N2O)
1/6 Gas cylinder (O)
75 watts * duration of sedation = 0.0375kWh
(electricity for Scavenger system)
0.145 kgCO2e for decontamination of gas piping
and pipe connectors
Amount and type of
materials per scenario
Energy use
Midazolam
1 Midazolam solution for injection
1 Sodium chloride solution
1 Disposable tourniquet
1 Antimicrobial skin preparation
1 22guage cannula
1 21x40mm safety needle
1 5mL syringe
216 watts * use time = 0.0125 kWh (energy for
pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor)
Methoxyflurane
1 Penthrox inhaler
216 watts * use time = 0.0125 kWh (energy for
pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor)
Table 4.3: The functional unit and reference flows for each system.
the functional unit. In the instance of the outer nasal hood, the number of uses was estimated
by multiplying the number of patients within a year (561) by the lifetime of the component (3
years). With this simple calculation, 1/1683 of the total mass of the outer nasal hood has been
allocated to the functional unit. For the gas cylinders, the total content (680 L) was divided by
the median of gas used for all patients (98 L nitrous oxide and 119 L oxygen), to estimate how
many procedures can be performed with one gas cylinder.
4.1.9
LCI modeling framework
The life cycle inventory is modeled in SimaPro version 9.4.0.2, a widely used tool for conducting
LCAs. LCI data is collected from the ecoinvent "Allocation, cut-off by classification - system"
library, which is updated regularly to ensure temporal relevancy of technology and manufacturing
methods, and includes a wide range of processes within multiple sectors with global coverage.
A sector-specific document on proper GHG accounting of pharmaceutical products and med-
ical devices, published by Environmental Resources Management Ltd., is used as guidance for
assessing the primary material of mixed-composition consumables where data is not provided
by the commissioner. As per the instructions of the guidance document, medical supplies with
a mixed composition of materials can be assumed to comprise a primary material, which is
determined through a screening of said medical supply [32]. A cannula, for example, is com-
posed of both stainless steel and plastic components, and the primary material is thus assumed
to be stainless steel because it is vital for the function of the device. All screenings of mixed
composition consumables can be found in Table 4.4.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 22 of 72
==PAGE:33==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
Mixed composition item
Primary material
Source
22guage cannula
Stainless steel
Abena
Safety needle
Stainless steel
FDA
Syringe
Polypropylene
Perkin Elmer
Waterproof spot
plaster
Polyurethane
Amazon
Vacuum pouch
Polyethylene
Tehran Times
Table 4.4: The primary materials of mixed composition medical equipment.
4.1.10
System boundaries
The system boundaries are important for narrowing in on the specific system(s) to be investigated,
and defining which unit processes are included or excluded. Table 4.5 provides an overview
of the inclusions and exclusions provided by the commissioner, which have been used as a
guiding framework for deciding on the system boundaries as they make up the foundation of the
commissioner’s outreach in terms of interest and data supply. In addition to this, it was decided
System boundaries
Included
Excluded
Manufacture of active or other pharmaceutical agents
✓
Manufacture of equipment with a service life of 5+ years
✓
Packaging
✓
Transportation of active and other necessary
pharmaceutical agents plus consumables
✓
Energy requirements for electronic equipment
✓
Containers (glass and plastic vials/ampoules)
✓
Manufacture and disposal of items with a service lifetime of 5+ years
✓
Equipment for routine dentistry
procedures
✓
Decontamination of re-usable components
✓
Additional requirements to provide sedation
✓
Table 4.5: The framework for establishing system boundaries.
to include packaging which would be disposed of together with the corresponding consumable,
and manufacture of gas cylinders, as they are containers for the sedation agent. Furthermore,
the author decided to exclude any items for storage, since they are not used within the systems.
The inclusions and exclusions are determined so as to ensure the highest level of specificity for
the systems to be researched.
The system boundaries are illustrated in Figure 4.1. The foreground system is generally
characterized by a high level of detail and control, here indicated with white boxes in Figure
4.1. It consists of activities that are system-specific and under direct influence or control by the
commissioner.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 23 of 72
==PAGE:34==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
Figure 4.1: System boundaries.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 24 of 72
==PAGE:35==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
Activities that are not directly influenced by the commissioner, and that occur upstream of
user involvement, are part of the background system, indicated with grey in Figure 4.1. These
processes encompass production processes and transportation. The impact of these activities
will therefore be estimated through appropriate assumptions and average market-based data from
the ecoinvent database and other sources.
By including all life cycle stages from raw material extraction to disposal, the present study
is performed with a cradle-to-grave approach. It should be noted, that when using average data
from market activities, the environmental impacts from raw material extraction are indirectly
accounted for, and average transportation from supplier to consumer in a given market is also
accounted for.
4.1.11
LCI data representativeness
Geographical
The manufacturer locations of components have been specified by the commissioner. Manufac-
turing of components takes place in Europe, the USA, and Singapore. The specific manufacturers
were located via a Google search. Hence, the manufacturing stage is characterized by a global
representation. The transportation stage, from manufacturers to the hospital, reflects global
coverage as well. The geography of the use and disposal stages is in Scotland, and the LCI data
should therefore represent a European coverage to the closest possible range. Table 4.6 provides
an overview of the geographical scope within each scenario.
Stage
Nitrous oxide scenario
Midazolam scenario
Methoxyflurane scenario
Manufacturing
Global
Global
UK
Transportation
Global
Global
UK
Use
Inverness, Scotland
Inverness, Scotland
Inverness, Scotland
Disposal
Scotland
Scotland
Scotland
Table 4.6: Geographical scope of each scenario.
Temporal
Due to the single-use components being replaced at a nearly constant rate, at least once per
patient, it can be assumed that the manufacturing processes are up to date, and the LCI data used
should reflect this. This is ensured since the ecoinvent database is updated regularly.
Technological
The specific manufacturing technologies are not provided, but when possible and relevant to the
modeling, the newest LCI data available will be used.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 25 of 72
==PAGE:36==
4.1. GOAL AND SCOPE DEFINITION
4.1.12
Assessment method
The assessment is carried out using the IMPACTworld+ (2019) methodology, available through
SimaPro [33]. This methodology utilizes the updated characterization factors, thus securing
temporal relevancy of the results, and has global coverage.
The life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) can be performed at two different levels within the
IMPACTworld+ methodology: midpoint and endpoint [2]. At the midpoint level, resources
and emissions from the life cycle inventory are translated to produce an impact profile within
specific impact categories via science-based characterization factors. The formula to express
the midpoint score 𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑚
for a category is:
𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑚
=
∑︁
𝑖
𝐶𝐹𝑚𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖,𝑚
· 𝑢𝑖
(4.1)
where 𝑢𝑖in [𝑘𝑔/𝐹𝑈] is the emission of substance 𝑖per functional unit and 𝐶𝐹𝑚𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖,𝑚
in
[𝑘𝑔𝐶𝑂2𝑒] is the characterization factor of substance 𝑖in category 𝑚.
The impact category which will be assessed in this particular study is climate change, which
is expressed in the physical unit kgCO2e/FU. This was decided in order to fulfill the goal of pro-
viding a comparison of the carbon footprint of the three alternatives. Climate change at the mid-
point level is estimated based on the global warming potential (GWP100) for short-term impacts
and the global temperature potential (GTP100)𝑎𝑠𝑎𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑦𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔−𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑠.𝑇ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔−
𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑠𝑤𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑛𝑦𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑓𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑠.𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑐
The endpoint level conveys the effect of impact within areas of protection (AOP), namely
human health or ecosystem quality [2].
Endpoint indicators provide a holistic view of the
environmental impacts of a product by linking the midpoint indicators to damage scores. Stake-
holders have different priorities, and the choice of AOPs should reflect the goal and scope of the
study. Due to the specified decision context and the nature of the commissioner being part of the
health supplier community, just the AOP concerned with human health will be reported. These
are measured in disability-adjusted life years (DALY). The damage scores 𝑆𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒
𝑑
in category
𝑑are calculated as:
𝑆𝑑𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒
𝑑
=
∑︁
𝑚
𝑀𝐷𝐹𝑚,𝑑· 𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑚
(4.2)
in which Í
𝑚𝑀𝐷𝐹𝑚,𝑑is the midpoint-to-damage factor in 𝐷𝐴𝐿𝑌/𝑘𝑔𝑖and 𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑚
is the
midpoint score in category m, expressed in 𝑘𝑔𝑖/𝐹𝑈. For human health, the unit is DALY/FU,
indicating the potential for years of healthy life lost per functional unit.
The uncertainty of the model increases with the translation from the midpoint to the endpoint
level. On the other hand, the AOPs signify major environmental issues that have been determined
either for political reasons or from general trends in society and allow stakeholders to make
decisions that align with their interests, and thus the relevance of the interpretation increases
with the translation as well.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 26 of 72
==PAGE:37==
4.2. LIFE CYCLE INVENTORY
4.1.13
Requirements for comparative studies
The three systems should be modeled on the same basis, due to the comparative nature of the
study which has been established throughout the goal and scope definition. The functional unit
and system boundaries will remain the same for each scenario. The primary data which has
been provided by the commissioner is estimated to be of equal quality throughout the scenarios.
However, it should be noted that the scenarios with nitrous oxide and Midazolam sedation are
based on retrospective data while the experimental scenario (methoxyflurane) is not.
4.1.14
Critical review needs
The study will only be publicly disclosed if the thesis results in a journal article. Only in that
case will an external review be necessary.
4.1.15
Results reporting
The study goal and scope, LCI, LCIA, and interpretation results will follow guidance from
official frameworks, but there will be some adaptation to the structure for enhanced readability
and to comply with expectations for a Master’s thesis from the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
4.2
Life cycle inventory
The life cycle inventory (LCI) details the data collection and quality thereof, inputs and outputs
of the system, and provides an overview of all the processes used in the model of the systems.
Process trees for the procedures can be found in Appendix A, Figure A.1, Figure A.2, and Figure
A.3.
4.2.1
Data collection
The main sources of data for the LCI modeling were:
1. The commissioner had provided primary data on the weight and materials composition
of the components (except for electronic equipment), countries and names of most man-
ufacturers, and provided best guesses on some transportation modes. The weight of the
materials was measured on a Sartorius Secura 513 scale.
2. The "ecoinvent 3 database", specifically the "Allocation - cut-off by classification - system"
library has been used to obtain data where primary data was not available. Due to the
lack of process-specific data, e.g., manufacturing processes, the "system" type processes
are expected to provide the holistic perspective necessary for the comparative analysis.
3. If the above was not possible, data has been collected from relevant LCA studies and
scientific literature, for instance when deciding on appropriate proxies for materials that
are not available in the ecoinvent database, or from supplier websites.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 27 of 72
==PAGE:38==
4.2. LIFE CYCLE INVENTORY
The data that has been measured directly at the sedation site (the hospital) is evaluated as having
high specificity, while data items where estimations and average data from online research have
been applied, are assessed as being of low to medium specificity to justify the added layer of
uncertainty through assumptions. The LCIs, data sources, and specificity can be found for each
scenario in Appendix B.
The unit for input in the transportation stage is tonne-kilometers (t-km), which expresses the
transportation of 1 tonne of material over 1 kilometer [34].
4.2.2
System modeling of the Nitrous oxide scenario
The process tree for the nitrous oxide scenario can be found in Appendix A and seen in Figure
A.1. The assumptions for appropriate and available LCI data can be found in Appendix C and
Table C.1. The life cycle inventory and data specificity can be found in Appendix B, Table B.1.
Production stage
The commissioner had provided clinical data on the volumes used per patient over a one-year
time period. The mass of nitrous oxide and oxygen used was calculated by using the ideal gas
equation [35] and the median amount of liters of gas used per patient:
𝑝𝑉= 𝑛𝑅𝑇
(4.3)
in which 𝑝equals the atmospheric pressure (101325), 𝑉is the volume of nitrous oxide, 𝑛is the
number of moles, 𝑅is the ideal gas constant (8.314), and 𝑇is the (estimated) room temperature
in Kelvins (293.15). First, the 𝑛was isolated to find the number of moles per patient. Then,
the mass (in grams) was obtained by multiplying the number of moles with the molar mass of
nitrous oxide (44 g/mol) [4]. The median mass of nitrous oxide could then be calculated to be
0.17926 kg.
Data on materials and the corresponding quantities for each component were delivered by the
commissioner. The outer nasal hood and reservoir bag were modeled using market processes,
in which the transportation to consumers from suppliers is accounted for.
This is because
manufacturer data was only provided specifically for gases and gas containers, and single-use
equipment.
The material used to produce the gas cylinders was assumed to be aluminum. This material
assumption is rated as reliable as the item was found on the manufacturer’s (BOC) website.
The ecoinvent processes reflect the specified geography to the highest extent possible, e.g., the
location of the nitrous oxide manufacturer is assumed to be located in Inverness, Scotland, and
therefore the process has been modeled on a European basis (RER). If the nearest geographical
representation is not available for a specific process, e.g., in the case of silicone production for
the outer nasal hood and inner mask, which are produced in the USA, a rest-of-the-world (RoW)
process is chosen.
Since specific manufacturing processes are not known, many of the production activities are
modeled as market processes, in which the material has already been produced and is supplied to
Technical University of Denmark
Page 28 of 72
==PAGE:39==
4.2. LIFE CYCLE INVENTORY
the consumer. These processes include transport by default, so in the instances where a specific
manufacturer location has been provided (gases, gas cylinders, gas piping, and the inner mask),
assumptions of the production methods were made to avoid double-counting of emissions caused
by transportation to consumers. These assumptions are listed in Table C.1 in Appendix C.
Transportation stage
Data for the transportation stage consist of primary data (weights and location) and secondary
data from the ecoinvent database and internet sources. Transportation of single-use products is
modeled with primary data, and reusable equipment with LCI data.
Thelocation ofthemanufacturers wasgivenby theircountryand theirname. Themanufacturer
of the gases and cylinders (BOC) was assumed to be located in Inverness, Scotland. The single-
use pieces (gas piping and inner mask) were manufactured by Porter Brown, and the specific
facility was assumed to be located in Philadelphia, USA. The transportation modalities and
distances have been estimated by a combination of Google Maps and Routescanner, which is
a platform that optimizes route efficiency through AI and machine learning. Routescanner is
updated regularly through partnerships with 165 operators who share their schedules with the
platform [36]. All the assumed routes can be found in the LCI data, supplied as additional
information to the thesis. The truck specifications have been delivered by the commissioner.
The transportation by truck is modeled by European emissions standards level 6 (Euro6).
Use stage
The use stage consists of the energy consumed by the scavenger system during the dental
procedure and decontamination of reusable products. The power consumption was determined
at the commissioner’s site to 75 Watts, and the duration of use was determined as the median
duration of sedation (0.42 hours) plus 5 minutes (0.08 hours). The energy consumption was
therefore calculated as 0.0377 kWh. Decontamination by a washer and via steam disinfection
of the outer nasal hood and the pipe connectors was assumed to be 145.4 gCO2e [37], as stated
in Rizan et al. (2022) for individually wrapped items per cycle.
Disposal stage
The waste stream for single-use pieces was identified as clinical waste, and modeled as hazardous
waste for incineration, based on information from www.cntw.nhs.uk. The remaining pieces were,
according to the commissioner, disposed of through household waste, and modeled as municipal
solid waste for landfill. The venting of nitrous oxide is modeled as carbon dioxide equivalent
emissions, calculated from the patient data provided: The median mass of nitrous oxide used
was multiplied with its GWP100 of 265 [4], subtracted with the amount of gas (0.005%) which
has been assumed as metabolized in the patient [4].
Technical University of Denmark
Page 29 of 72
==PAGE:40==
4.2. LIFE CYCLE INVENTORY
4.2.3
System modeling of the Midazolam scenario
The process tree for the Midazolam system can be found in Appendix A. The life cycle inventory
and data specificity can be found in Appendix B, Table B.3. The assumptions can be found in
Appendix C and Table C.1.
Production stage
Based on the sedation dosage provided, the median dosage was found to be 8 mg. As the
Midazolam product is delivered in 5 mg/5mL solutions, it is estimated that 2 units are needed to
account for the median dosage. Therefore, the LCI data for the Midazolam drug production and
corresponding container will be multiplied by 2. The manufacturing of Midazolam is modeled
in CO2e emissions based on the LCI study conducted by Parvatker et al. (2019).
Following the guidance document on GHG reporting of medical devices [32], the cannula,
needle, and syringe used are classified as "single-use devices - multi-component". Therefore,
a screening approach can be used to determine which material contributes the most to the
emissions and can be attributed to the primary data (the weight). All three items were located at
suppliers, and the primary material for the cannula and safety needle was determined as stainless
steel, modeled as 18/8 chromium steel, and the primary material for the syringe was determined
to be polypropylene (PP).
When possible, average production processes have been used in the modeling of the single-
use pieces. Exceptions are the 22g cannula and the safety needle, as no appropriate production
process could be found. Therefore, the production of stainless steel has been modeled with
market-based processes. As well, the waterproof spot plaster has been modeled with a market-
based process for global polyurethane (PU) consumption, as no reliable data could be found on
the manufacturer’s location, and transportation had to be accounted for to maintain compliance
with the system boundaries.
Chlorhexidine, which is a component in the ChloraPrep piece, was not available in the
ecoinvent database, and iodine production was used as a proxy.
Transportation stage
The location of the manufacturers was derived from their country of origin and their name
via online searches. Midazolam was assumed to be produced in Gloucester, UK. The sodium
chloride solution was assumed to be produced in Melsungen, Germany; the disposable tourniquet
was assumed produced in Singapore; the Chloraprep device, the 22g cannula, and the 5mL
syringe were produced in San Diego, USA; and the safety needle in Belgium. Manufacturers
and their locations are seen in the overview of assumptions in Appendix C. A combination of
Google Maps and Routescanner was used to find appropriate travel routes and modalities. The
truck weight specifications were provided by the commissioner. The transportation by truck is
modeled by European emissions standards level 6 (Euro6).
Technical University of Denmark
Page 30 of 72
==PAGE:41==
4.2. LIFE CYCLE INVENTORY
Use stage
The use stage consists of the energy consumed by a pulse oximeter and a blood pressure monitor
during the dental procedure. The power consumption was determined at the commissioner’s
site to be 216 Watts, and the duration of use was determined to be 75 minutes (1.25 hours). The
energy consumption was therefore calculated to 0.27 kWh.
Disposal stage
The waste stream for the cannula, needle, and glass vial with the excess drug was identified as
the sharps bin by the commissioner, which was modeled as hazardous waste for incineration.
The excess drug was assumed to be negligible. The remaining pieces (the tourniquet, vacuum
pouches, and ChloraPrep packaging) are disposed of through a clinical waste stream, which is
modeled as municipal solid waste for landfill, based on information from www.nu-green.co.uk.
The waterproof spot plaster is not included in the disposal stage, since this is not part of the
hospital’s waste stream, but the patient’s.
4.2.4
System modelling Methoxyflurane scenario
The LCI and data specificity can be found in Appendix B, Table B.5. The assumptions can be
found in Appendix C and Table C.1. The process tree is shown in Appendix A.
Production stage
Since methoxyflurane is currently not in use as a sedation agent at the use site, the amount for
production is assumed to be equal to the content of the container (3 grams).
A proxy (trichloroethylene) with similar physical characteristics [38] was used to model the
production of methoxyflurane, with average production processes. Using a proxy chemical to
address missing LCI data is a common strategy, as the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API)
should not be omitted from the study. An acknowledgment of the implications this may have
due to the different production pathways of the two chemicals is necessary. The substitution is
justified based on descriptions of the two chemicals by Major et al. (1966).
Production of the inhaler and packaging is modeled with average production processes for the
materials.
Transportation stage
The transportation route from the manufacturer to the user site is estimated with Google Maps.
The truck specifications have been delivered by the commissioner. The transportation by truck
is modeled by European emissions standards level 6 (Euro6), as the largest share is made up
of Euro6-compliant trucks on the European market. Assumptions for the transportation can be
found in Appendix C, Table C.1.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 31 of 72
==PAGE:42==
4.2. LIFE CYCLE INVENTORY
Use stage
The use stage is identical to that of the Midazolam scenario: It consists of the energy consumed
by a pulse oximeter and a blood pressure monitor during the dental procedure. The power
consumption was determined at the commissioner’s site to 216 Watts, and the duration of use
was determined to be 75 minutes (1.25 hours). The energy consumption was therefore calculated
to be 0.27 kWh.
Disposal stage
The Penthrox inhaler is classified as a "hazardous substance, non-dangerous goods" [39], and
should therefore be disposed of as hazardous waste for incineration, according to stericycle.co.uk.
The packaging, which consists of plastic and cardboard, is assumed to be normal waste, and
modeled as municipal solid waste for landfill and incineration.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 32 of 72
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Results
The following section constitutes the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA). The comparative
LCIA is then carried out based on these results. The results were obtained from the SimaPro
software using the IMPACTworld+ method and were then processed in Excel to obtain graphic
representation.
Firstly, the characterized results at the midpoint level and subsequently the
damage results at the endpoint level are presented.
5.1
Midpoint level results
At the midpoint level, the inputs from the LCI phase are translated to impact scores in SimaPro
via Equation 4.1. Table 5.1 displays the impact scores for the climate change impact category,
both short-term and long-term. These represent aggregated results across all life cycle stages,
which amount to approximately 100 kgCO2e (short-term and long-term) in the N2O scenario,
near 0.25 kgCO2e in the Midazolam scenario, and 0.5 kgCO2e in the methoxyflurane scenario.
The magnitude of the overall impact from the N2O scenario is therefore approximately 385 times
larger than that of the Midazolam scenario, and 213 times larger than that of the methoxyflurane
scenario. At this point, no consideration has been taken to model uncertainties. An internal
Impact category
Unit
Nitrous oxide
Midazolam
Methoxyflurane
Climate change, short term
kgCO2e
100.19
0.25
0.46
Climate change, long term
kgCO2e
99.4
0.24
0.44
Table 5.1: Overview of the characterized impact scores at the midpoint level for all three
scenarios.
normalization of the midpoint impact scores has been carried out and can be seen in Figure
5.1. This means that within both impact categories, the impact scores are scaled to 100% of the
impact from the scenario with the highest impact, being the N2O scenario in both short-term and
long-term climate change. Within both impact categories, the difference between the Midazolam
and N2O scenarios is 99.7%, and the difference between the methoxyflurane and N2O scenarios
is 99.5%. This places the scenarios in a preliminary ranking of N2O > Midazolam, and N2O >
33
==PAGE:44==
5.1. MIDPOINT LEVEL RESULTS
methoxyflurane, and methoxyflurane > Midazolam, with regards to the size of the environmental
burden.
Figure 5.1: A comparison of the three scenarios, internally normalized to the nitrous oxide
scenario.
5.1.1
Midpoint results per life cycle stage
It could be seen that the overall impact from the N2O scenario was significantly larger than
that of the Midazolam scenario in Table 5.1. Further investigation of the characterized results
provides insight into how the contribution stemming from each scenario is distributed between
each life cycle stage of the model. This is illustrated in Table 5.2, where each life cycle stage is
assigned the corresponding impact score that has been calculated from the model. It can be seen
that the N2O scenario has higher impact scores in all four life cycle stages and that the short-term
and corresponding long-term impacts are approximately equal within both scenarios. It can be
seen that the Midazolam and methoxyflurane scenarios have a lower impact score than the N2O
scenario in all four life cycle stages. To better illustrate the difference between the scenarios, the
Scenario
Impact category
Production
(kgCO2e)
Transportation
(kgCO2e)
Use
(kgCO2e)
Disposal
(kgCO2e)
Nitrous oxide scenario
Climate change, short-term
51.9
5.3E-5
0.3
47.9
Climate change, long-term
51.2
5.2E-5
0.3
47.9
Midazolam scenario
Climate change, short-term
0.13
1.42E-5
0.08
0.043
Climate change, long-term
0.12
1.4E-5
0.08
0.04
Methoxyfurane scenario
Climate change, short-term
0.22
3.37E-5
0.08
0.15
Climate change, long-term
0.23
3.32E-5
0.08
0.15
Table 5.2: Impact scores per life cycle stage for each scenario.
impact scores have been internally normalized to the N2O scenario, and are compared in Figure
5.2. Here it can more clearly be seen that the N2O scenario has greater impact in all life cycle
stages. Between the N2O and Midazolam scenario, the reductions in the Midazolam scenario
per life cycle stage, displayed in 5.2, are: 99.7% (production), 73% (transportation), 73% (use),
and 99.9% (disposal).
Technical University of Denmark
Page 34 of 72
==PAGE:45==
5.1. MIDPOINT LEVEL RESULTS
Between the N2O and methoxyflurane scenarios, A comparison of the two in Figure 5.2,
shows that the methoxyflurane scenario has significantly lower impacts in all life cycles. In the
production stage, the methoxyflurane scenario has a 99% reduction in CO2 equivalent emissions,
in the transportation stage a 36% reduction, in the use stage a 72% reduction, and in the disposal
stage a 99% reduction in comparison with the N2O scenario. The reductions are applicable to
both short-term and long-term impacts.
The Midazolam and methoxyflurane scenarios perform relatively equally within most life
cycle stages, although there is a distinct difference within the transportation stage.
(a) Climate change short-term.
(b) Climate change long-term.
Figure 5.2: Internally normalized impact scores for climate change short-term (a) and long-term
(b) per life cycle stage for all three scenarios.
5.1.2
Life cycle-wise comparison
The magnitude of the three scenarios has been presented above, with the highest impact scores
found in the N2O scenario. Impacts are distributed among the life cycle stages: Production,
transportation, use, and disposal. It should be noted that some transportation is included in the
production stage, because of the market-based processes included in the SimaPro model. Due to
this, and the low proportion of mass being transported, the transportation stage will be relatively
insignificant despite the large distances covered (see Appendix C for assumptions regarding
Technical University of Denmark
Page 35 of 72
==PAGE:46==
5.2. ENDPOINT LEVEL RESULTS
locations of manufacturers).
For the purpose of maintaining consistency, transportation is
regarded as an upstream activity, since it is included in upstream processes within the ecoinvent
database.
Narrowing in on the contribution per life cycle stage will provide insight into the specific
life cycle stages and if the impact can be accredited to upstream or downstream activities. The
figures below display how the contribution to the impact score for each scenario is distributed
between the life cycle stages, for one procedure. The contribution to short-term and long-term
impacts remains approximately equal for all three scenarios within all the life cycle stages.
In Figure 5.3 it can be seen that the production and disposal stages dominate within the N2O
scenario, with the production stage accounting for just over half (51%) of the impact of one
procedure. The use and transportation stages have smaller contributions to the impact, at 0.3%
and 5.2E-05%, respectively. Upstream and downstream activities have approximately equal
responsibility for the impact of this scenario.
Figure 5.3: Contribution per life cycle stage for the N2O scenario to short-term and long-term
climate change.
The production stage is the most dominant stage in the Midazolam scenario at approximately
50%, as seen in Figure 5.4. This is followed by the use stage at approximately 33%, then the
disposal at 16%. The transportation stage has a rather insignificant contribution to the impact of
climate change at 0.005%. Once again, there is no distinct difference between the impact from
upstream and downstream activities.
In Figure 5.5, it can be seen that the production stage has the highest contribution, at approx-
imately 48%. Then follows the disposal stage, at 33%, then the use stage at 17%, and finally
the transportation stage at 0.007%. The downstream activities account for 50% of the impact in
this scenario, merely 2% more than the production stage.
5.2
Endpoint level results
At the endpoint level, the aim is to provide a holistic view of the final effect on human health
related to impacts from the system of a product or a service. This enables a better understanding
of the damage that each scenario can cause.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 36 of 72
==PAGE:47==
5.2. ENDPOINT LEVEL RESULTS
Figure 5.4: Contribution per life cycle for the Midazolam scenario to short-term and long-term
climate change.
Figure 5.5: Contribution per life cycle to the impact score of the methoxyflurane scenario.
5.2.1
Damage scores
Below, the damage scores for all three scenarios within the human health area of protection
(AOP) can be seen. Table 5.3 shows the estimated damage scores for each scenario in DALY.
Between all three scenarios, the highest damage scores are found under long-term climate
change.
Impact category
Unit
Nitrous oxide scenario
Midazolam scenario
Methoxyflurane
Climate change short term
DALY
8.2E-5
2.1E-7
3.8E-7
Climate change long term
DALY
2.8E-4
6.6E-7
1.2E-6
Table 5.3: Damage scores for climate change in DALY.
The DALYs generated have very low values, so the burden of disease (in DALY) resulting
from climate change per FU is very limited. To provide a comparison of the scenarios, the results
are presented on a logarithmic scale in Figure 5.6. It is seen that the nitrous oxide scenario has
the highest values within both impact categories.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 37 of 72
==PAGE:48==
5.2. ENDPOINT LEVEL RESULTS
Figure 5.6: Damage results at the endpoint level for human health (DALY) presented on a
logarithmic scale.
5.2.2
Normalized scores
Normalization factors are applied to all midpoint categories within SimaPro, to gain an under-
standing of the relative importance between impact categories to human health damage. Figure
5.7 represents the scores of each scenario within the 11 impact categories.
The damage within the impact category of water availability is highest, succeeded by climate
change (long-term and then short-term). Since the scores for climate change are among the
highest within this AOP, it remains feasible that this impact category should be a priority when
considering the damage to human health from the anesthetic procedures that have been studied.
[h]
Figure 5.7: Endpoint results for all impact categories within the AOP human health.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 38 of 72
==PAGE:49==
5.3. SUMMARY
5.3
Summary
The characterized impact scores for all three scenarios in [kg CO2e] within the category climate
change are displayed in Table 5.1. The nitrous oxide scenario has numerically higher impact
scores in both categories (short-term and long-term) than the scenario using intravenously
administered Midazolam and the experimental method using methoxyflurane. At this point,
no consideration has been given to parameter or model uncertainty. The largest difference is
observed between the scenarios using nitrous oxide and Midazolam. The Midazolam scenario
is nearly 2 times lower than the impact score for the methoxyflurane scenario, therefore in very
close range of magnitude of each other. Endpoint results showed no change in the scenario
ranking. The contribution to climate change was found to have a large impact on the human
health AOP, along with the damage scores for water availability, human toxicity (cancer), and
particulate matter formation. A preliminary ranking of the scenarios is determined as (from
highest to lowest impact score): Nitrous oxide > methoxyflurane > Midazolam.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 39 of 72
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 6
Model interpretation
The final phase, the interpretation, is an analysis of the results that were obtained in LCIA
phase. This entails identifying significant issues through a process contribution analysis, and
comparative analyses of the scenarios, a sensitivity analysis, and a completeness check. Unless
specified otherwise, only the impacts related to short-term climate change will be considered
throughout the interpretation, since there is no distinction in the ranking of the scenarios between
short-term and long-term climate change impacts.
6.1
Significant issues
6.1.1
Process contribution by scenario
In the nitrous oxide scenario, aluminum production is the most contributing process in the
corresponding stage, as seen in Figure 6.1. In the transportation stage, the lorry contributes the
most, and in the use stage, the emissions related to decontamination of the gas piping and pipe
connectors are the most contributing to the impact from that life cycle. The electricity in the use
stages stems from using the Scavenger venting system. In the disposal stage, the emissions are
generated from the venting of N2O after the anesthetic procedure, and dominate the contribution
to the impact of this life cycle stage.
In the Midazolam scenario, which is displayed in Figure 6.2, the impact score from the produc-
tion stage is dominated by the contribution from the production of stainless steel. Transportation
by lorry in Europe has the highest contribution in the transportation stage, and electricity from
using the pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor is the only contributor in this stage. As for
the disposal stage, it can be seen that the waste stream with hazardous waste for incineration is
the largest contributor.
In Figure 6.3, it can be seen that the impact of the production stage of the methoxyflurane
scenario is dominated by the production of polyethylene for the single-use inhaler. Impact
within the transportation stage is dominated by lorry transportation within Europe. As with the
Midazolam scenario, the use stage impact stems from the electricity necessary for operating the
pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor. Lastly, the contribution from hazardous waste for
40
==PAGE:51==
6.1. SIGNIFICANT ISSUES
Figure 6.1: Process contribution analysis for the N2O scenario.
Figure 6.2: Process contribution analysis for the Midazolam scenario.
incineration dominates the impact for the disposal stage.
Table 6.1 provides an overview of the process contribution analysis, showing the top contrib-
utors in descending order per category. Both the short-term and long-term impact categories
are shown, and it can be seen that the top contributing processes are identical for both short- and
long-term climate change.
Since the production and disposal stages dominate the impacts from each scenario, a thorough
investigation of the top contribution from intermediary processes is conducted.
This will
provide a better understanding as to which materials and processes contribute the most to the
environmental impacts. In Figure 6.4, the accumulated contribution from all processes related
to production and disposal in all three scenarios is presented. The production of aluminum
dominates the contribution to production-related impacts with a 97% contribution score. Within
the disposal stage, the process related to venting of N2O, modeled as kgCO2e, is dominant with
98% of the contribution to climate change. It is important to consider the large environmental
Technical University of Denmark
Page 41 of 72
==PAGE:52==
6.1. SIGNIFICANT ISSUES
Figure 6.3: Process contribution analysis for the methoxyflurane scenario.
burden of these two processes when interpreting the results.
Figure 6.4: Process contribution analysis of the production and disposal stages.
6.1.2
Human health damage of processes
The damage from the impact of climate change with the unit DALY generated from each scenario
can be found in Table 5.3. The processes with the highest contributions will be presented for
each scenario. A cut-off rule has been applied, so only processes contributing over 10% are
shown.
Table 6.2 shows an overview of the most contributing processes within the nitrous oxide
scenario. Aluminum production for the gas cylinders and venting of nitrous oxide are thus the
processes identified as having the highest contributions.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 42 of 72
==PAGE:53==
6.2. COMPARISON OF INHALATIONAL AND INTRAVENOUS SEDATION
Life cycle stage
Impact category
Nitrous oxide scenario
Midazolam scenario
Methoxyflurane scenario
Production
Climate change
short term
1. Aluminum production
2. Nitrous oxide production
3. Silicone production
1. Chromium steel, market
2. Polypropylene production
3. Silicone production
1. Polyethylene production
2. Glass fibre production
3. Corrugated board box production
Climate change
long term
1. Aluminum
2. Nitrous oxide production
3. Silicone production
1. Chromium steel, market
2. Polypropylene production
3. Silicone production
1. Polyethylene production
2. Glass fibre production
3. Corrugated board box
Transportation
Climate change
short term
1. Lorry (RER)
2. Shipping (GLO)
3. Lorry (RoW)
1. Lorry (RER)
2. Shipping (GLO)
3. Lorry (RoW)
1. Lorry (RER)
Climate change
long term
1. Lorry (RER)
2. Shipping (GLO)
3. Lorry (RoW)
1. Lorry (RER)
2. Shipping (GLO)
3. Lorry (RoW)
1. Lorry (RER)
Use
Climate change
short term
1. Emissions [kg CO2e]
2. Electricity, market (GB)
1. Electricity, market (GB)
1. Electricity, market (GB)
Climate change
long term
1. Emissions [kg CO2e]
2. Electricity, market (GB)
1. Electricity, market (GB)
1. Electricity, market (GB)
Disposal
Climate change
short term
1. Emissions (kg CO2e)
2. Hazardous waste (incineration)
3. Municipal solid waste
1. Hazardous waste (incineration)
2. Municipal solid waste
1. Hazardous waste (incineration)
2. Municipal solid waste
Climate change
long term
1. Emissions [kg CO2e]
2. Hazardous waste (incineration)
3. Municipal solid waste
1. Hazardous waste (incineration)
2. Municipal solid waste
1. Hazardous waste (incineration)
2. Municipal solid waste
Table 6.1: Table showing the most contributing processes per life cycle stage for each scenario.
Impact category
Material
DALY
Contribution (%)
Climate change short term
Aluminum
4.16E-5
50.8
Venting of nitrous oxide
3.89E-5
47.4
Climate change long-term
Aluminum
0.000142
50.2
Venting of nitrous oxide
0.000136
48.1
Table 6.2: The most contributing processes to damage to human health from climate change
within the nitrous oxide scenario.
The most contributing processes to human health damage within the Midazolam scenario are
found in Table 6.3. It is seen that electricity has the highest contribution at 32.2% (short-term)
and 34.3% (long-term). The electricity stems from the energy required for operating the pulse
oximeter and blood pressure monitor in the use stage of the Midazolam scenario. Waste for
incineration contributes 13% (short-term) and 14% (long-term), while stainless steel (the 22
guage cannula) contributes 12% to the damage from both impact categories.
Finally, the most contributing processes to negative effects on human health within short-term
and long-term climate change in the methoxyflurane scenario are the production of polyethylene
for the inhaler (36% and 39%), incineration of waste (29% and 32%), and elecitricity (17% and
18%).
6.2
Comparison of inhalational and intravenous sedation
A comparison of the inhalational and intravenous sedation scenarios is conducted. Firstly from
a per-patient perspective, and subsequently scaled to use over a year.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 43 of 72
==PAGE:54==
6.2. COMPARISON OF INHALATIONAL AND INTRAVENOUS SEDATION
Impact category
Material
DALY
Contribution (%)
Climate change short term
Electricity
6.81E-8
32.2
Waste for incineration
2.74E-8
13
Stainless steel
2.68E-8
12.7
Climate change long-term
Electricity
2.27E-7
34.3
Waste for incineration
3.88E-7
14.2
Stainless steel
8.5E-8
12.8
Table 6.3: The most contributing processes to damage to human health from climate change
within the Midazolam scenario.
Impact category
Material
DALY
Contribution (%)
Climate change short term
Polyethylene
1.5E-7
39
Waste for incineration
1.13E-7
29.4
Electricity
6.81E-8
17.7
Climate change long-term
Polyethylene
4.45E-7
36.9
Waste for incineration
3.88E-7
32.2
Electricity
2.27E-7
18.8
Table 6.4: The most contributing processes to damage to human health from climate change
within the Midazolam scenario.
A life cycle stage-wise comparison was carried out to determine which stage(s) contribute the
most to the environmental profile of each scenario. From figure 5.3 and 5.4 it was concluded
that the production stage is the largest contributor to climate change in both scenarios. This can
be attributed to the high consumption of resources and energy within the processes related to the
extraction and processing of raw materials. There is a certain risk that the estimations of impacts
within the production stages are underestimated, due to the lack of detailed manufacturing data
such as specific energy and water use, transforming, and assembly processes.
The production stage in the N2O scenario had a higher impact on climate change. The results
indicate that the production of aluminum for the gas cylinders causes this impact, generating
50.8 kgCO2e of the short-term impacts, which is 97% of the production impact score for that
scenario, as seen in Figure 6.1. The Midazolam scenario also contains metallic components
for the cannula and safety needle, and stainless steel comprises nearly 25% of the production
stage impact score in the Midazolam scenario. The production of nitrous oxide gas generates
0.5 kgCO2e per FU, corresponding to 1% of the total contribution to climate change in that
scenario. The production of the Midazolam drug, modeled as kgCO2e, is indicated to generate
0.005 kgCO2e per FU, corresponding to 3.5% of the impact on climate change for that scenario.
The production of the API is thus less environmentally taxing per FU in the Midazolam scenario.
The transportation stage within the Midazolam scenario caused lower environmental impacts
than the N2O scenario. This is due to the smaller weight of the components in the Midazolam
Technical University of Denmark
Page 44 of 72
==PAGE:55==
6.2. COMPARISON OF INHALATIONAL AND INTRAVENOUS SEDATION
Figure 6.5: The contribution of N2O and Midazolam use to the overall impact stemming from
anesthesia procedures at the hospital in 2022.
scenario.
The use stage impact is higher in the N2O scenario, which is attributed to the
decontamination process, modeled as 0.1454 kgCO2O per reusable item [37]. Decontamination
is absent from the Midazolam scenario. The impact related to energy consumption during use
is higher for the Midazolam scenario, due to the higher power rating and duration of use of the
pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor than the scavenging system.
In the disposal stage, the contribution from the venting of the anesthetic gas causes a signif-
icant difference between the scenarios. The impact stemming from the disposal of single-use
components and packaging is higher in the N2O scenario as well, even though some impact
within this stage is avoided due to the reusable outer nasal hood and pipe connectors made from
silicone and HDPE. Again, this is due to the components having a higher weight per FU in
the N2O scenario, although for both scenarios, the single-use medical equipment has a small
proportion of the total mass of the systems.
In Figure 6.5, the impact scores have been scaled to the number of patients who received
nitrous oxide and Midazolam (519 and 160, respectively) at the use case site in 2022. Viewing
the contribution to climate change from all anesthetic procedures at the hospital in one year,
the procedure using nitrous oxide contributes 99.9% to the total impact and thereby dominates
the impact stemming from anesthesia use. If fewer patients received nitrous oxide, the impact
would obviously be lower.
The damage potential to human health was smaller in the Midazolam scenario, indicating
reductions of 99.7%. DALY is not the only metric for human health, however, and before it
can be recommended to increase the usage of Midazolam, the healthcare practitioner should, of
course, be certain that the patient is not at risk from receiving intravenous sedation.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 45 of 72
==PAGE:56==
6.3. COMPARISON OF NITROUS OXIDE AND METHOXYFLURANE
6.3
Comparison of nitrous oxide and methoxyflurane
For the purpose of reporting on the objectively most sustainable inhalational sedation alternative,
the N2O and methoxyflurane scenarios are compared across all life cycle stages.
In Table 5.1 and Table 5.2, it can be seen that the N2O scenario has numerically higher overall
impact scores, and Figure 5.2 shows that it would be possible to reduce the impact on climate
change within all life cycle stages by switching from the nitrous oxide sedation method to the
methoxyflurane technique.
In the production stage, a massive reduction is obtained because the aluminum gas cylinders
are not present in the methoxyflurane scenario. The total impact from the production stage
is 0.23 kgCO2e, and the production of the API (using the proxy chemical trichloroethylene)
amounts to 3.8% of this impact.
The reduction in the transportation stage can be accredited to the reduced transportation
distance and mass of the transported goods in the methoxyflurane scenario, though in both sce-
narios the impact from transportation is negligible. The use stage is lower in the methoxyflurane
scenario because there are no emissions related to decontamination, but the impact related to
energy consumption for electrical machines is higher in the methoxyflurane scenario, for the
same reason as in the Midazolam scenario use stage. Lastly, the absence of waste anesthetic
gas (WAG) in the methoxyflurane scenario produces a significant reduction compared to the
nitrous oxide scenario as well. When excluding the emissions from the venting of the gas (appr.
47 kgCO2e), the impact related to the disposal of single-use items is reduced by 35% in the
methoxyflurane scenario.
The damage potential to human health was smaller in the Methoxyflurane scenario, indicating
reductions of 99.5%. As the safety profile of the two inhalational sedation gases is considered
the same physiologically [19], the results indicate that there are significant benefits to human
health on the basis of the functional unit from using methoxyflurane rather than nitrous oxide.
6.4
Sensitivity analysis
6.4.1
Substitution of carbon emission equivalents in the nitrous oxide dis-
posal stage
As was described in the LCI, the venting of N2O after use was modeled with the median value
for kgCO2e obtained from the sedation data provided by the commissioner. This has a very high
contribution to the impact of the disposal stage of the nitrous oxide scenario.
A sensitivity analysis is conducted in order to investigate whether the disposal stage impacts
have been overestimated due to this assumption, by replacing the self-calculated carbon dioxide
equivalent emissions with dinitrogen monoxide (N2O) emissions to air within the SimaPro
model, which will then be automatically calculated to kgCO2e. The reference flow is set to
the median weight of the N2O subtracted with 0.005% to account for the amount which is
Technical University of Denmark
Page 46 of 72
==PAGE:57==
6.5. COMPLETENESS AND CONSISTENCY CHECK
metabolized within the patient. In Figure 6.6, it can be seen that the contribution from the
disposal stage to the total impact from the N2O scenario has increased slightly and now accounts
for 50% of the impact within both categories. Since the results are relatively unchanged, the
original modeling can be considered valid.
Figure 6.6: Life cycle-wise contribution to the impact score of climate change short-term and
long-term after substituting CO2e emissions with N2O emissions in the disposal stage.
6.4.2
Omitting aluminum from the systems
Aluminum was identified as having a major environmental burden when compared with other
materials in the production stage, accounting for 97% of the accumulated impact from this stage.
There may therefore be other processes that have a significant impact but were overlooked due
to this leviathan, which could alter the ranking of the scenarios in the comparative analysis.
Calculated midpoint characterization scores for the life cycle stages in all three scenarios are
shown in Figure 6.7. The impact score of the production stage decreased to 1.09 kgCO2e with
the exclusion of aluminum from the scenario. The processes with the highest contributions
were now found to be silicone and nitrous oxide production. Due to chosen library (cut-off,
allocation), recycled materials are available burden-free. This means that to remain consistent
with modeling choices, replacing the production of aluminum with recycled aluminum is not
possible. An investigation of the damage scores to human health (Figure 6.8) shows that the
scenario ranking is unchanged, with scores for the nitrous oxide scenario being highest.
6.5
Completeness and consistency check
6.5.1
Completeness check
The modeling has been conducted in an attempt to reflect the real world as close as possible,
to the level allowed by the available data. While the specificity of the data given is considered
very high, being measured directly by the commissioner, each life cycle stage of the model is
characterized by some incompleteness due to a lack of available data, especially in the upstream
Technical University of Denmark
Page 47 of 72
==PAGE:58==
6.5. COMPLETENESS AND CONSISTENCY CHECK
Figure 6.7: Life cycle-wise comparison between the scenarios excluding the production and
transportation of aluminum.
Figure 6.8: Damage scores in the human health AOP without aluminum processes.
activities concerned with manufacturing. In the production stage, processes for transforming
materials into products are omitted due to a lack of reliable data. Instead, market-based processes
have been used in many cases, in which these emissions are assumed to be accounted for. The
level of detail of the model could be increased by adding specific manufacturing processes for
each component used, e.g., through collaboration with suppliers. The transportation stage is
modeled by assumptions, and therefore characterized by high uncertainty, yet covers the main
transportation impacts from single-use components. As for the downstream activities, energy
use and waste streams were identified by the commissioner, and modeled accordingly. The
completeness is considered slightly higher in the use and disposal stages, but by informing on
the specific electricity type used at the hospital, incorporating the transportation of waste to waste
management facilities, and including avoided impact due to energy production from incineration
processes, the level of detail in the model could be enhanced. Specifically for the nitrous oxide
Technical University of Denmark
Page 48 of 72
==PAGE:59==
6.5. COMPLETENESS AND CONSISTENCY CHECK
scenario, the detail concerned with decontamination could be enhanced by including detergents,
water use, energy use, etc.
The use of a proxy drug, trichloroethylene, instead of methoxyflurane, could potentially have
implications for the result of the carbon footprint. Detailed modeling of the synthesis pathway
of methoxyflurane could increase the completeness. As the production of nitrous oxide was
available in ecoinvent, and the modeling of Midazolam is based on the corresponding emissions
from an LCI study [28], these are considered as having a higher level of completeness owing to
the scenario-specific processes.
The study has fulfilled the objective of reporting on the relative environmental impacts of
the three alternatives. Rather than confining the comparative analysis to just carbon footprints,
it was decided to relate the impact of the alternatives to human health damage as well. This
aligns with stakeholder and commissioner interests, thus securing a high level of relevancy to
the commissioner as a healthcare professional, and meeting the goal of the study. Additionally,
the carbon footprint of sedation in dentistry has been estimated through a case study in Scotland.
6.5.2
Consistency check
Throughout the LCA, it has been attempted to follow the systematic approaches recommended
in the ISO standards and the ILCD. This has resulted in a full life cycle assessment in which all
phases have been completed.
Consistency has been applied throughout the modeling in SimaPro, by constructing the
upstream and downstream activities (production, transportation, use, and disposal) for all three
scenarios using the ecoinvent cut-off library. This ensures that only processes that are assumed
to contribute directly to the systems are included.
Concern should be raised regarding the consistency within the modeling of the gas cylinders in
the nitrous scenario. While the production of the containers of the sedation agents (gas cylinders
and glass vials) have been consistently modeled, inconsistency arises in the disposal stage, where
the proportion of aluminum allocated per FU is not included. This is due to the fact that gas
cylinders are not single-use items. Owing to this, more precise modeling of their recycling
should be considered to elevate the accuracy of the results. An option could be to model the gas
cylinders according to their lifetime, and not with the per-FU approach. Collaboration with the
manufacturer should be considered, to be informed on the potential recycling process.
Electrical equipment has consistently been excluded from production, transportation, and
disposal stages, as the contribution was deemed negligible owing to the product lifetimes.
Market-based processes from the ecoinvent database have been consistently used for modeling
reusable products, as transportation to users is accounted for within these. Single-use products
were modeled with average production processes and detailed transportation processes based on
assumptions, to ensure a higher level of detail of the impact per patient.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 49 of 72
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
7.1
Carbon footprints
The carbon footprint of nitrous oxide sedation on a patient from a life cycle perspective amounts
to approximately 100 kgCO2e. Similar results were seen in the book on carbon modeling within
dentistry by Public Health England (2018), which reported 91 kgCO2e per patient episode from
nitrous oxide use. This number was calculated solely by estimating the mass of the gas in a
1800L cylinder, and the estimated mass of gas per patient, multiplied by a GWP100 of 298.
Production of nitrous oxide and the gas cylinder were excluded.
In the current study, the amount of nitrous oxide per patient was calculated from the data and
using the ideal gas equation to be 0.17926 kg. Translated directly to its carbon equivalent, this
amounts to 47.5 kgCO2e (or 53 kgCO2e when using GWP=298). When the life cycle impacts
are excluded from the results of the current study, the carbon footprint of nitrous oxide is
approximately half of what Public Health England presents. The difference is likely attributable
to the higher amount of gas estimated per patient in the book (163 L) compared to the median
of 98 liters obtained from the data.
In an attempt to validate the calculation used in the current study, the method from the book,
based on gas cylinder content, are applied. The numbers used for the calculation can be seen
in Table 7.1. Data provided by the commissioner and information from Public Health England
is used. The new calculation yields 0.18 kgN2O per patient. This number is very close to the
amount of nitrous oxide used in the model, which was calculated by the ideal gas equation, and
the amount of gas used in the model can be considered reasonably accurate.
Gas cylinder size
Median volume
N2O
Number of patients
per cylinder
Amount of N2O per
cubic meter in nitrous
oxide gas[15]
Amount of N2O
per cylinder
Amount of N2O
per patient
680 L (size E)
98 L
7
1.875 kgN2O/m3
1.275 kgN2O
0.18 kgN2O
Table 7.1: Numbers for validating the calculation of nitrous oxide amount.
In the Midazolam scenario, the life cycle carbon footprint was found to be 0.25 kgCO2e.
This is lower than the carbon footprint of the intravenous sedation drug Propofol which was
50
==PAGE:61==
7.1. CARBON FOOTPRINTS
found to be 1.01 kgCO2e per 1 MAC-h in Hu et al. (2021) [4], where half of the impact was
accredited to electricity during the production of syringes. In the current study, energy use
within the production stage is only modeled within background processes using average data
from the included LCI processes. There is thus a risk that the impact has been underestimated.
The carbon footprint of 1 inhaler of Penthrox with methoxyflurane as the anesthetic agent was
indicated to be 0.45 kgCO2e throughout its life cycle in the dentistry setting. This is similar to
what was presented in Pearson et al. (2022) [18], at 0.834 kgCO2e for 2 inhalers. The carbon
footprint found in this study is only overestimated to a small degree, but at such small scales,
this could have implications for the indications from the process contribution. Unfortunately, it
was not possible to find the reference and compare modeling assumptions.
As has been shown, the magnitude of the carbon footprint of the nitrous oxide scenario is
significantly larger in comparison with the Midazolam and methoxyflurane scenarios. In a
previous study by Pearson et al. (2022), nitrous oxide use within labor analgesia corresponded
to 273 kgCO2e within a 4-hour time period. Nitrous oxide (in combination with oxygen) was
compared against the carbon footprints of an epidural, an IV, and an intramuscular injectable
sedation method, which were found to have significantly lower carbon footprints at 1.2 kgCO2e,
0.75 kgCO2e, and 0.08 kgCO2e. The difference between the carbon footprints of inhalational
and IV/injection anesthesia is of a comparable scale to the one found in this study. This indicates
some credibility to the results of the current carbon footprint study. However, as this is the only
other study, to the authors’ knowledge, providing cradle-to-grave life cycle assessment of nitrous
oxide (with oxygen) as the primary agent, further study is encouraged.
The ranking of the inhalational and intravenous sedation scenarios is in line with past studies,
i.e., Sherman et al. (2012), Hu et al. (2021), and Pearson et al. (2022), who generated evidence
of a favorable environmental profile for intravenous sedation options when compared with
inhalational sedation methods. No past study known by the author has done a direct comparison
of nitrous oxide use against the use of an intravenous drug in dentistry, as most LCA studies
with N2O have been conducted in surgical settings, and as a carrier gas rather than the primary
anesthetic gas.
7.1.1
Aluminum
Contribution to climate change was dominated by aluminum in the nitrous oxide scenario. The
disposal pathway for the gas cylinders is unknown. As mentioned, it is likely that they should be
considered as reusable items, rather than imposing environmental burdens from the production
with each patient. According to Hauschild et al. (2018), recyclable materials are available
burden-free, and impacts are only associated with recycling processes and transportation. Due
to modeling choices, the replacement of aluminum with recycled aluminum would be equal to
omitting aluminum from the model. While there is a risk that the impacts from the production
stage in the nitrous oxide scenario have been overestimated, it was seen that the ranking of the
scenarios did not change when omitting aluminum from the system. Hence, the recommenda-
tions from the comparative analysis are credible, though lacking in detail, however, the results
should not be interpreted as conclusive for carbon footprint accounting purposes.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 51 of 72
==PAGE:62==
7.2. IMPACT ON HUMAN HEALTH
7.2
Impact on human health
The results of the LCA show that the Midazolam scenario contributes the least damage to human
health. The methoxyflurane scenario has a similar profile within human health damages, only
slightly larger than Midazolam. The nitrous oxide scenario has the highest damage score of the
three scenarios. In the nitrous oxide scenario, the impacts from short-term climate change per
FU have the potential to cause a reduction of 8.3E-05 DALY in human health, and 2.8E-4 DALY
within long-term climate change. This indicates that damage to human health could be reduced
by substituting nitrous oxide with methoxyflurane as inhalational sedation.
7.3
Relation to key performance indicators
In Chapter 1, key performance indicators were established to facilitate the comparison between
the practical and experimental alternatives.
In KPI 1, it was specified that in order to determine whether methoxyflurane was a valid
replacement for nitrous oxide, the environmental impact (carbon footprint), should be reduced
or at similar levels. The results indicate that across all life cycle stages, methoxyflurane produces
emission reductions of more than 99%, compared with the nitrous oxide scenario.
KPI 2 specified that in order to recommend methoxyflurane as a substitute inhalational agent,
the potential damage to human health should be reduced in comparison with nitrous oxide. This
was established because it is important to consider different aspects of decision-making. As has
been mentioned, limiting the LCA to only report on carbon footprints generates a risk of shifting
impacts to other areas that may lie within to interest of the stakeholder to be aware of. From
the investigation of the damage to human health, it was seen that the ranking of the scenarios
remained unchanged throughout all impact categories, and the methoxyflurane scenario was not
indicated to have adverse effects in other categories. The damage results indicate that using
Midazolam and methoxyflurane reduces the damage to human health compared to nitrous oxide
use, with 99.7% and 99.5%, respectively.
7.4
Contribution to healthcare sustainability strategies
The study provides knowledge on the carbon footprints of three alternatives and the emission
reductions that can be achieved by substituting nitrous oxide with alternative techniques, albeit
some modifications to the model may increase the accuracy of the results. This relates to the
actions that were recommended by Health Care Without Harm [1] and has provided the dental
site with carbon accounting from its sedation activities, aligning with the requirements of the
NHS Net Zero initiative.
As well, the results of the carbon footprint study can according to McAlister et al. (2022) be
used in combination with HTAs. This would provide a more profound basis for decision-making,
as the estimations on carbon footprints do not encompass all aspects that health professionals
or other stakeholders must consider during the decision-making process [24]. As mentioned,
Technical University of Denmark
Page 52 of 72
==PAGE:63==
7.5. RECOMMENDATIONS
economic and clinical benefits must be evaluated as well, to capture all goals within the multi-
faceted discipline of healthcare decision-making. With estimations on the carbon footprint and
assessments of the damage to human health, LCA provides useful insight to complement HTAs
[8]. By incorporating health outcomes within the HTA and health outcomes from the LCA,
all clinical advantages and disadvantages to human health can be considered. Seeing as the
carbon footprint alone cannot account for the damage to human health, other impact categories
from LCA such as human toxicity and particulate matter formation could be of relevance to
include in HTAs. In light of existing policies for sustainable healthcare, it seems feasible to
target carbon emissions at the moment. As well, it remains to be seen if integrated LCA and
HTAs can accelerate the uptake of low-carbon health technologies, or if the conservative forces
within healthcare trust more in the clinical evidence behind current practices established over
multiple decades.
7.5
Recommendations
Based on the results and discussion, a set of recommendations is provided to the commissioner
to support clinical decision-making:
• Emissions from inhalational sedation in dentistry are indicated to be reduced by replacing
nitrous oxide with methoxyflurane. Large reductions were seen in both upstream and
downstream activities, mostly within the production and disposal stages. Methoxyflurane
can, according to the reported results, be seen as a low-carbon alternative to nitrous oxide
within inhalational anesthesia.
• Intravenous sedation in the form of the pharmaceutical drug Midazolam is indicated as
having a carbon footprint of 0.25 kgCO2e, and inhalational anesthesia using nitrous oxide
produced 100 kgCO2e. A larger number of patients received sedation with nitrous oxide
over the year, and this resulted in a larger contribution to emissions compared with the
IV technique. Reducing the number of patients that receive nitrous oxide can reduce
emissions from the dental clinic.
• From the process contribution analysis, aluminum from the gas cylinders was revealed
to dominate the contribution to climate change. It is recommended to investigate other
modeling choices and collaborate with the manufacturer to gain insight into the recycling
process or the possibility of using recycled aluminum in the production process.
• Collaboration with manufacturers and suppliers could enhance the level of detail within
the upstream activities of the model and contribute to reporting of Scope 3 emissions.
• The use of nitrous oxide within dentistry should be avoided or reduced in order to limit
the damage to human health from anesthesia.
• Due to model inconsistencies and data availability issues, the results of the study are
not to be perceived as conclusive but can provide a framework for progressing in the
investigation of low-carbon alternatives, and the LCI serves as a foundation that can be
extensively modified as more detailed data is collected.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 53 of 72
==PAGE:64==
7.6. LIMITATIONS
7.6
Limitations
LCA is a useful tool when it comes to estimating environmental impacts, but should be used
in conjunction with other tools or methodologies to ensure the right foundation for decision-
making. The limitations of LCA lie within the methodology: The framework allows practitioners
to interpret results in their own way. The data collection and modeling within the LCI are
laborious activities, and because some inventory processes are not available in the existing
databases, models are often built on secondary data from the literature, etc., making the LCA
results less accurate. Models and calculations for characterization factors are updated regularly,
which can make past LCA studies obsolete if they are calculated from old methods.
This study has specific limitations as well. Being a carbon footprint study (going slightly
off-brand with the human health damage perspective), caution should be demonstrated when
providing recommendations for the most environmentally conscious sedation alternative, as the
study is prevented from providing a truly holistic view of the relative sustainability of each
alternative across multiple impact categories. There is a risk of shifting the environmental
burden to another impact category by substituting nitrous oxide with one of the alternatives with
a lower carbon footprint, which would not be revealed unless a full LCA was conducted.
In the nitrous oxide scenario, some of the impacts may be undervalued because nitrous oxide
has ozone depleting-capabilities, that are typically reported in a separate impact category from
climate change, and thus excluded from the study. A broader impact profile could contribute to
understanding the actual damage caused by anesthesia use.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 54 of 72
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
A comparative LCA with a cradle-to-grave approach was conducted between three alternative
methods for providing anesthesia within dentistry. Retrospective process-based LCAs were
conducted on scenarios using inhalational sedation, in the form of nitrous oxide, and intravenous
sedation, in the form of the pharmaceutical drug Midazolam. An experimental process-based
LCA was carried out on the use of methoxyflurane, an emerging inhalational sedation agent.
The results indicated that emissions from anesthesia during dental procedures could be drasti-
cally reduced by substituting nitrous oxide with methoxyflurane and thus contribute to reducing
emissions from NHS services. Between nitrous oxide and Midazolam, an even larger difference
in carbon footprint was found. The indicated results were aligned with the literature.
Most of the impact of the nitrous oxide scenario was associated with the production and
disposal stages. Aluminum from the gas cylinders dominated the impact in the production stage
and venting of the nitrous oxide gas dominated the disposal stage.
Potential damage to the AOP concerned with human health was included in the report, ex-
pressed in disability-adjusted life years (DALY). This was done in order to increase the relevancy
of the results to the commissioner, being a healthcare professional. A relative comparison among
impact categories showed that the impact of climate change had a high damage potential within
all three scenarios and that nitrous oxide had the highest potential for damage to human health.
However, the results indicate limited damage to human health based on the functional unit.
In general, the model was not sensitive to the parameters that were tested on the basis of
the process contribution, but some of the chosen assumptions, that were not tested, could
influence the results of the study. Due to data availability concerns, and model inconsistencies
within the disposal of gas cylinders, the analysis cannot provide conclusive evidence on the
carbon footprints of the nitrous oxide scenario. However, the ranking of the scenarios has been
consistent throughout impact categories and sensitivity checks, both considering the estimated
carbon footprint and potential damage to human health: Nitrous oxide > Methoxyflurane >
Midazolam.
A set of recommendations was provided.
It is highlighted that the results indicate that
carbon emissions and corresponding damage to human health from anesthesia within dentistry
55
==PAGE:66==
can be reduced drastically by reducing or avoiding the use of nitrous oxide by substituting it
with methoxyflurane. It is recommended to exercise caution when interpreting the results, and
modifications to enhance the level of detail of the models are recommended as well, as this
would improve estimations on impact and damage scores.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 56 of 72
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] S. Karliner, S. Slotterback, R. Boyd, B. Ashby, and K. Steele. Health Care’s Climate
Footprint. Technical report, Health Care Without Harm, 2019.
[2] M. Z. Hauschild, R. K. Rosenbaum, and S. I. Olsen, editors. Life cycle assessment: Theory
and practice. Springer, 2018.
[3] NHS England. Delivering a ’Net Zero’ National Health Service. Technical report, NHS,
2020.
[4] X. Hu, J.M.T. Pierce, T. Taylor, and K. Morrissey.
The carbon footprint of general
anaesthetics: A case study in the UK. Resources, Conservation and Recycling Advances,
12(105411):8, 2021.
[5] M. Romanello, C. Di Napoli, P. Drummond, C. Green, H. Kennard, P. Lampard, and et
al. The Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: from 25 years of inaction to a
global transformation for public health. The Lancet, 400(10363), 2022.
[6] H. O. Portner, D. C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E. S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría,
M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, and B. Rama. IPCC, 2022:
Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Working Group II Con-
tribution to the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report. Technical report, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 2022.
[7] R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer. IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report.
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Technical report, IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland,
2015.
[8] S. McAlister, R. L. Morton, and A. Barratt. Incorporating carbon into health care: adding
carbon emissions to health technology assessments. Lancet Planet Health, 6(12):993–999,
2022.
[9] A. Whiting, I. Tennison, S. Roschnik, and M. Collins. Surgery and the NHS Carbon
Footprint. The Bulletin of Surgeons of the Royal College of England, 102(5), 2020.
[10] H. Gadani and A. Vyas. Anesthetic gases and global warming: Potentials, prevention and
future of anesthesia. Anesthesia: Essays and Researches, 2011.
[11] A. Chakera. The Nitrous Oxide Project: #nixthenitrous, 2021.
57
==PAGE:68==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] R. Mohan, V.D. Asir, Shanmugapriyan, V. Ebenezr, A. Dakir, Balakrishnan, and J. Ja-
cob. Nitrous oxide as a conscious sedative in minor oral surgical procedure. Journal of
Pharmacy and Bioallied Sciences, 7(1):248–250., 2015.
[13] B. Duane, J. Hyland, J.S. Rowan, and B. Archibald. Taking a bite out of Scotland’s dental
carbon emissions in the transition to a low carbon future. Public Health, 126(9):770–777,
2012.
[14] L. Taylor. NHS dentists increase across Scotland despite ‘perilous situation’ faced by
practices, 2022.
[15] I. Steinbach, R. Stancliffe, M. Berners-Lee, and B. Duane. Carbon modelling within
dentistry: Towards a sustainable future. Public Health England and Centre for Sustainable
Healthcare, 2018.
[16] J.D. Sherman, C. Le, V. Lamers, and M. Eckelman. Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions
of Anesthetic Drugs. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 114(5):1086–1090, 2012.
[17] F. Chasma, T. Chasma, and H. Irshad. Dental sedation—Airing a concept. Oral Surgery,
15(4):701–705, 2022.
[18] F. Pearson, N. Sheridan, and J. M. T. Pierce. Estimate of the total carbon footprint and
component carbon sources of different modes of labour analgesia. Anaesthesia, 77(4):486–
488, 2022.
[19] A. Kingon, T. Yap, C. Bonanno, P. Sambrook, and M. McCullough. Methoxyflurane: a
review with emphasis on its role in dental practice. Australian Dental Journal, 61(2):157–
162, 2015.
[20] International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook - General guide for Life
Cycle Assessment - Detailed guidance. Technical report, European Commission - Joint
Research Centre - Institute for Environment and Sustainability, 2010.
[21] J. Drew, S.D. Christie, P. Tyedmers, J. Smith-Forrester, and D. Rainham. Operating in a
Climate Crisis: A State-of-the-Science Review of Life Cycle Assessment within Surgical
and Anesthetic Care. Environmental Health Persepectives, 129(7), 2021.
[22] M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson. IPCC, 2007:
Summary for Policymakers. Technical report, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, 2007.
[23] M. Petre, L. Bahrey, M. Levine, A. Rensburg, M. Crawford, and C. Matava. A national
survey on attitudes and barriers on recycling and environmental sustainability efforts among
Canadian anesthesiologists: an opportunity for knowledge translation. Canadian Journal
of Anesthesia, 66:272–286, 2019.
[24] OECD. The OECD Health Project: Health Technologies and Decision Making. Technical
report, 2005.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 58 of 72
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[25] F. McGain, S. White, S. Mossenson, E. Kayak, and D. Story. A Survey of Anesthesiol-
ogists’ Views of Operating Room Recycling. International Anesthesia Research Society,
114(5):1049–1054, 2012.
[26] L.Jr. John, K. Tobin, T. Huncke, R. Kline, S. Ryan, and C. Bell. A Survey of the Amer-
ican Society of Anesthesiologists Regarding Environmental Attitudes, Knowledge, and
Organization. International Anesthesia Research Society, 6(7):208–2016, 2016.
[27] M. Ek and K. Tjus. Decreased emission of nitrous oxide from delivery wards—case study
in Sweden. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 13:809–818, 2008.
[28] A.G. Parvatker, H. Tunceroglu, J.D. Sherman, P. Coish, P. Anastas, J.B. Zimmerman, and
M. Eckelman. Cradle-to-Gate Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Twenty Anesthetic Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredients Based on Process Scale-Up and Process Design Calculations.
ACS Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering, 7(7):6580–6591, 2019.
[29] A. L. B. Chua, R. Amin, J. Zhang, and C. L. Thiel.
The Environmental Impact of
Interventional Radiology: An Evaluation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from an Academic
Interventional Radiology Practice.
Journal of vascular and interventional radiology,
32(6):907–915, 2021.
[30] F. McGain, N. Sheridan, K. Wickramarachchi, S. Yates, B. Chan, and S. McAlister. Carbon
Footprint of General, Regional, and Combined Anesthesia for Total Knee Replacements.
Anesthesiology, 135(6), 2021.
[31] M. S. Clark and A. L. Brunick. Handbook of Nitrous Oxide and Oxygen Sedation. Elsevier,
4th edition, 2015.
[32] T. Penny, K. Fisher, M. Collins, and C. Allison. Greenhouse Gas Accounting Sector
Guidance for Pharmaceutical Products and Medical Devices, 2012.
[33] C. Bulle, M. Margni, L. Patouillard, and Et Al. IMPACT World+: a globally regionalized
life cycle impact assessment method. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment,
24:1653–1674, 2019.
[34] H. S. Matthew, C. Hendrickson, and D. H. Matthews. Chapter 5 : Data Acquisition and
Management for Life Cycle Inventory Analysis. In Life Cycle Assessment: Quantitative
Approaches for Decisions That Matter, pages 98–156. 2014.
[35] J. Clark. IDEAL GASES AND THE IDEAL GAS LAW, 2010.
[36] Routescanner.
[37] C. Rizan, R. Lillywhite, M. Reed, and M. F. Bhutta. Minimising carbon and financial costs
of steam sterilisation and packaging of reusable surgical instruments. British Journal of
Surgery, 109(2):200–210, 2022.
[38] V. Major, M. Rosen, and W. W. Mushin. Methoxyflurane as an Obstetric Analgesic: a
Comparison with Trichloroethylene. British Medical Journal, 2(5529):1554–1561, 1966.
[39] MSDS - Penthrox: Material Safety Data Sheet, 2021.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 59 of 72
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX A
Process trees
60
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.1: Process tree of an anesthetic procedure using nitrous oxide.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 61 of 72
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.2: Process tree of an anesthetic procedure using Midazolam.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 62 of 72
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.3: Process tree of an anesthetic procedure using methoxflurane
Technical University of Denmark
Page 63 of 72
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX B
Data collection and life cycle inventories
64
==PAGE:75==
Life cycle stage
Type
Material/process
Amount [unit]
Data collection method
Specificity
Production
N2O (gas)
Nitrous
oxide
0.179 kg
Measured at site, median
obtained from data
High
Oxygen (gas)
Oxygen
0.077 kg
Measured at site, median
obtained from data
High
Gas piping
Silicone
0.146911 kg
Measured at site
High
Inner mask
Silicone
0.0164 kg
Measured at site
High
Outer nasal hood
Silicone
2.73E-05 kg
Measured at the site, distributed
on estimated uses (1683)
over lifetime (3 years)
Medium
Reservoir bag
Silicone
5.16E-05 kg
Measured at the site, distributed on
estimated uses (1683)
over lifetime (3 years)
Medium
Pipe connectors
HDPE components
1.05743E-05 kg
Measured at site, distributed on
estimated uses (2805) over
lifetime (5 years)
Medium
N2O (gas cylinder)
Aluminium
1.4 kg
Material found at manufacturer website.
Total weight measured at the site
High
Oxygen (gas
cylinder)
Aluminium
1.05 kg
Material found at manufacturer website.
Total weight measured at the site.
High
Transportation
N2O (gas + gas
cylinder)
Truck
5.68E-06 t-km
Manufacturer name provided by
commmissioner, location assumed to be
Inverness. Route planned by Google maps.
Low
Oxygen (gas + gas
cylinder)
Truck
4.05E-06 t-km
Manufacturer name provided by
commissioner, location assumed to be
Inverness. Route planned by Google Maps.
Low
Gas piping
Truck, ship and train
1.2E-03 t-km
Manufacturer name and location
provided by commissioner. Route planned
by Google Maps and Routescanner.
Low
Inner mask
Truck, train and ship
1.3E-04 t-km
Manufacturer name and location
provided by commissioner. Route planned
by Google Maps and Routescanner.
Low
Use
Energy
Electricity (Scavenger
system)
37.5 kWh
Power consumption provided by
the commissioner. Duration is the median
use time calculated from measured data + 5
minutes after sedation.
Medium
Cleaning of
reusable parts
(gas piping)
Emissions
145.4 gCO2e
Process (washer disinfection and steam
sterilization) described by commissioner.
Emissions estimated from \cite{Rizan2021}.
Low
Cleaning of
reusable parts
(pipe connectors)
Emissions
145.4 gCO2e
Process (washer disinfection and steam
sterilization) described by commissioner.
Emissions estimated from \cite{Rizan2021}.
Low
Disposal
Inner mask
Incineration
0.0164 kg
Assumed classified as
infectious waste (orange bag).
Low
Gas piping
Incineration
0.147 kg
Assumed classified as
infectious waste (orange bag).
Low
All other items (outer
nasal hood and reservoir bag)
Household waste
7.88E-05 kg
Disposed every 3 years.
Low
N2O (gas)
Emissions
47.49 kgCO2e
Venting through the Scavenger system. Calculated from
the sedation data provided by the commissioner.
The metabolised amount (0.005%) is subtracted.
Medium
Table B.1: Overview of data collection for the nitrous oxide scenario.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 65 of 72
==PAGE:76==
Production
Materials
Nitrous oxide {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,17926
kg
Production of nitrous oxide
Oxygen, liquid {RER}| air separation, cryogenic | Cut-off, S
0,07716
kg
Production of oxygen
Silicone product {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,146911
kg
Gas piping
Silicone product {RER}| market for silicone product | Cut-off, S
2,72591E-05
kg
Outer nasal hood
Polyethylene, high density, granulate {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, S
1,05743E-05
kg
Pipe connectors
Silicone product {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,016372
kg
Inner mask
Silicone product {RER}| market for silicone product | Cut-off, S
5,1555E-05
kg
Reservoir bag
Aluminium, primary, ingot {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
1,4
kg
Production of aluminium for gas cylinder (9.95 kg/7)
Aluminium, primary, ingot {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
1,05
kg
Production of aluminium for gas cylinder (6.35 kg/6)
Transportation
Materials/fuels
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
4,16261E-06
tkm
transportation of N2O from manufacturer to NHS highland (3,6 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
5,92333E-06
tkm
Transportation of oxygen from manufacturer to NHS highland (3.6 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RoW}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
9,38761E-06
tkm
Gas piping: Manufacturer to port in Philadelphia (63.9 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
0,00101442
tkm
Gas piping: Philadelphia to London world gateway port (6905 km)
Transport, freight train {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | Cut-off, S
0,000101369
tkm
Gas piping: London world gateway to Glasgow (690 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
1,04307E-05
tkm
Gas piping: Glasgow to Edinburgh (71 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
3,70216E-05
tkm
Gas piping: Edinburgh to Inverness site (252 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RoW}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
1,04617E-06
tkm
Inner mask: Manufacturer to port in Philadelphia (63.9 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
0,000113049
tkm
Inner mask: Philadelphia to London world Gateway port (6905 km)
Transport, freight train {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | Cut-off, S
1,12967E-05
tkm
Inner mask: London world Gateway port to Glasgow (690 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
1,16241E-06
tkm
Inner mask: Glasgow to Edinburgh (71 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
4,12574E-06
tkm
Inner mask: Edinburgh to Inverness (252 km)
Use
Electricity/heat
Electricity, high voltage {GB}| market for | Cut-off, S
0,037725
kWh
Energy use and duration provided by commissioner
Emissions to air
Carbon dioxide
0,1454
kg
From Rizan et al. (2022)
Carbon dioxide
0,1454
kg
From Rizan et al. (2022)
Disposal
Emissions to air
Carbon dioxide
47,497625
kg
Median of CO2e from data on N2O minus metabolised amount (0,005%)
Waste to treatment
Municipal solid waste {GB}| market for municipal solid waste | Cut-off, S
8,93884E-05
kg
Outer nasal hood, reservoir bag disposal (silicone)
and pipe connectors disposal
Hazardous waste, for incineration {Europe without Switzerland}| market for hazardous waste, for incineration | Cut-off, S
0,016372
kg
Inner mask disposal (silicone)
Hazardous waste, for incineration {Europe without Switzerland}| market for hazardous waste, for incineration | Cut-off, S
0,146911
kg
Gas piping (silicone)
Table B.2: Life cycle inventory for the nitrous oxide scenario.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 66 of 72
==PAGE:77==
Life cycle stage
Type
Material/process
Amount/unit
Data collection method
Specificity
Production
Pharmaceutical
Midazolam
(emissions)
0.005 kgCO2e
Calculated from Sherman2021
Medium
Glass vial
7,02E-3 kg
Median of three units measured
at site by commissioner.
High
Pharmaceutical
Sodium chloride
0.0104 kg
Median of three units measured
at site by commissioner.
High
Plastic vial
3.6E-03 kg
Calculated from data provided by commissioner.
Medium
Disposable tourniquet
Silicone
5.6E-03 kg
Median of three units measured by commissioner.
Medium
Antimicrobial skin
preparation
Chlorhexidine
6.44E-05 kg
Calculated as 2% of unit content.
Medium
Isopropyl alcohol
2.25E-03 kg
Calculated as 70% of unit content.
Medium
Purified water
9.01E-04 kg
Calculated from content of chlorhexidine, isopropyl alcohol,
and unit content measured by commissioner.
Medium
Plastic container
1.57E-03 kg
Total weight measured by the commissioner, subtracted with the
weight of substances.
Medium
22 guage cannula
Stainless steel
4.8E-03kg
Median of three units measured by
commissioner.
High
Polyethylene
(vacuum pouch)
2.7E-03 kg
Calculated by subtracting weight of
stainless steel component from total
weight.
Medium
21x40 mm safety needle
Stainless steel
2.23E-03 kg
Median of three units measured by
commissioner.
High
Polyethylene
(vacuum pouch)
6.76E-04 kg
Calculated by subtracting weight of stainless steel component
from the total weight.
Medium
5 ml syringe
Polypropylene
1.04E-02 kg
Measured by commissioner. 2 units.
High
Polyethylene
(vacuum pouch)
1.48E-03 kg
Calculated by subtracting weight of
polypropylene component from total weight.
Medium
Waterproof spot plaster
Polyurethane
(adhesive)
2.52E-04 kg
Measured by commissioner.
Very high
Transportation
Midazolam
Truck
5.59E-05 t-km
Manufacturer name specified by commissioner.
Route estimated through Google Maps (Gloucester-Inverness).
Low
Tourniquet
Truck and ship
9.26E-05 t-km
Manufacturer specified by commissioner.
Route estimated through Routescanner and
Google Maps (Singapore-Inverness).
Low
Chloraprep
Truck and ship
7.5E-05 t-km
Manufacturer specified by commissioner.
Route estimated through Routescanner and
Google Maps (San Diego-Inverness).
Low
22 guage cannula
Truck and ship
4.22E-5 t-km
Manufacturer specified by commissioner.
Route estimated through Routescanner and
Google Maps (San Diego-Inverness).
Low
21x40mm safety needle
Truck, train, and ship
1.55E-06 t-km
Manufacturer specified by commissioner.
Route estimated through Routescanner
and Google Maps (Warszaw-Inverness).
Low
5 ml syringe
Truck and ship
1.86E-04 t-km
Manufacturer specified by commissioner.
Route estimated through Routescanner
and Google Maps (San Diego-
Inverness).
Low
Sodium chloride solution
Truck, train and ship
2.75E-5 t-km
Manufacturer specified by commissioner.
Route estimated through Routescanner
and Google Maps (Melsungen-
Inverness).
Low
Use
Pulse oximeter and
blood pressure monitor
Electricity
0.27 kWh
Calculated. Power consumption
and hourly use provided by
the commissioner.
Medium
Disposal
22 guage cannula
Incineration
0.004377 kg
Waste stream (sharps bin) identified
by commissioner.
Medium
21x40mm needle
Incineration
0.002232 kg
Waste stream (sharps bin) identified
by commissioner.
Medium
Glass ampoule and
excess drugs
Incineration
8.93E-06 kg
Waste stream (sharps bin) identified
by commissioner.
Medium
Clinical waste
(tourniquet, ChloraPrep)
Landfill
8.82E-03 kg
Waste stream (clinical waste)
identified by commissioner.
Medium
Table B.3: Overview of the data collection and specificity for the Midazolam scenario.
==PAGE:78==
Production
Materials/fuels
Glass fibre {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,007022
kg
Packaging of Midazolam, 2 units
Sodium chloride, brine solution {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,010434
kg
Sodium chloride solution
Polypropylene, granulate {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,003645
kg
Plastic vial for sodium chloride solution
Silicone product {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,005613
kg
Single use tourniquet
Iodine {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,00006438
kg
Proxy chemical for chlorhexidine for Chloraprep (manufacturer in USA)
Water, ultrapure {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,00090132
kg
Purified water for Chloraprep (manufacturer in USA)
Isopropyl acetate {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,0022533
kg
Proxy for isopropyl alcohol (manufacturer in USA)
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, S
0,004377
kg
Stainless steel for 22guage cannula (manufacturer in USA)
Polyethylene terephthalate, granulate, amorphous {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,002699
kg
Vacuum pouch for 22 guage cannula (manufacturer in USA)
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, S
0,002232
kg
Stainless steel for 21x40 safety needle (manufacturer in EU)
Polyethylene terephthalate, granulate, amorphous {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,0006764
kg
Vacuum pouch for 21x40 safety needle (manufacturer in EU)
Polypropylene, granulate {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,010428
kg
5 ml syringe (2 units)
Polyethylene terephthalate, granulate, amorphous {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,001476
kg
Vacuum pouch for 5 ml syring
Polypropylene, granulate {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
0,001572
kg
Plastic containter for ChloraPrep. Assumption.
Polyurethane adhesive {GLO}| market for polyurethane adhesive | Cut-off, S
0,000252
kg
Water proof spot plaster
Emissions to air
Carbon dioxide
0,004695729
kg
Midazolam production, 2 units
Transportation
Materials/fuels
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
5,58885E-06
tkm
Manufacturer of Midazolam in Gloucester, UK to Inverness (795 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RoW}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
6,45495E-08
tkm
Tourniquet: Manufacturer of tourniquet in Singapore to port (11,5 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
8,70408E-05
tkm
Tourniquet: By ship to Netherlands (15507 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
4,1031E-06
tkm
Tourniuet: By ship to UK (731 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
1,41448E-06
tkm
Tourniquet: Truck from Grangemouth to Inverness
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RoW}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
9,1029E-07
tkm
Chloraprep: Manufacturer in San Diego to Yusen container port (190 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
6,94312E-05
tkm
Chloraprep: Yusen terminal to Netherlands (14492 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
3,47348E-06
tkm
Chloraprep: Netherlands to UK (725 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
1,20733E-06
tkm
Chloraprep: Grangemouth, UK to NHS highland (252 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RoW}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
0,000000513
tkm
22 guage cannula: San diego to Yusen (190 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
3,91284E-05
tkm
22 guage cannula: Yusen to Netherlands (14492 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
1,9575E-06
tkm
22 guage cannula: Netherlands to UK (725 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
6,804E-07
tkm
22 guage cannula: Grangemouth, UK to NHS highland (252 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
5,9488E-09
tkm
21x40 needle: manufacturer in Warszaw to rail station (8,8 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight train {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | Cut-off, S
2,18348E-07
tkm
21x40 needle: Train to baltic hub in Gdansk (323 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
9,971E-07
tkm
21x40 needle: Ship from baltic hub to Teesport terminal (1475 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
1,64268E-07
tkm
21x40 needle: From teesport to Edinburgh (243 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
1,70352E-07
tkm
21x40 needle: Edinburgh to NHS highland (252 km) (without stainless steel, transport accounted for in production)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RoW}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
2,26176E-06
tkm
5 ml syringe: San diego to Yusen terminal (190 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
0,000172513
tkm
5 ml syringe: Yusen terminal to Netherlands (14492 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
8,6304E-06
tkm
5 ml syringe: Netherlands to UK (725 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
2,99981E-06
tkm
5 ml syringe: Grangemouth, UK to NHS highland (252 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
9,01056E-08
tkm
Sodium chloride: Mesulgen, Germany to Train terminal (6,4 km)
Transport, freight train {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | Cut-off, S
6,88463E-06
tkm
Sodium chloride: Train terminal to MSCBH shipping port (489 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
6,85647E-06
tkm
Sodium chloride: MSCBH port to Hutchinson port (487 km)
Transport, freight, sea, container ship {GLO}| market for transport, freight, sea, container ship | Cut-off, S
1,02073E-05
tkm
Sodium chloride: Hutchinson port to Grangemouth terminal (725 km)
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
3,54791E-06
tkm
Sodium chloride: Grangemouth terminal to Inverness site (252 km)
Use
Electricity/heat
Electricity, high voltage {GB}| market for | Cut-off, S
0,27
kWh
Use of pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor (w/1000)*h = kWh
Disposal
Waste to treatment
Hazardous waste, for incineration {Europe without Switzerland}| market for hazardous waste, for incineration | Cut-off, S
0,004377
kg
22g cannula through sharps bin
Hazardous waste, for incineration {Europe without Switzerland}| market for hazardous waste, for incineration | Cut-off, S
0,002232
kg
21x40 needle through sharps bin
Hazardous waste, for incineration {Europe without Switzerland}| market for hazardous waste, for incineration | Cut-off, S
0,00702
kg
Glass ampoule and excess drug (subtract the median dosage from content of 2 units)
Municipal solid waste {GB}| market for municipal solid waste | Cut-off, S
0,0157
kg
Clinical waste (tourniquet, packaging (plastics and vacuum pouches)
Table B.4: Life cycle inventory for the Midazolam scenario.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 68 of 72
==PAGE:79==
Life cycle stage
Type
Material/process
Amount, unit
Data collection method
Specificity
Production
Pharmaceutical
Methoxyflurane
(MOF)
0.003 kg
Converted from mL (3 mL MOF)
to kilograms by hand calculation.
Medium
Inhaler
Polyethylene
0.046926 kg
Measured by commissioner.
High
Packaging
PET
0.014111 kg
Measured by commissioner.
High
Cardboard
0.017866 kg
Measured by commissioner.
High
Container
Glass vial
0.009 kg
Calculated from data provided by the commissioner.
Medium
Transportation
Methoxyflurane
Truck
6.63-05 t-km
Manufacturer name specified by commissioner.
Route estimated with Google Maps (Galen-Inverness).
Low
Use
Pulse oximeter and
blood pressure monitor
Electricity
0.27 kWh
Calculated. Power consumption
and hourly use provided by
the commissioner.
Medium
Disposal
Penthrox inhaler
Incineration
0.056 kg
Classified as hazardous and
non-dangerous substance.
Medium
Packaging
Municipal solid waste
0.032 kg
Normal waste
Medium
Table B.5: Overview of the data collection and data specificity for the methoxyflurane scenario.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 69 of 72
==PAGE:80==
Production
Materials/fuels
Trichloroethylene {RER}| trichloroethylene production | Cut-off, S
0,003
kg
Proxy for methoxyflurane
Polyethylene terephthalate, granulate, amorphous {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,046926
kg
Penthrox inhaler
Polyethylene terephthalate, granulate, amorphous {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,014111
kg
Packaging component
Glass fibre {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,009374
kg
Glass vial
Corrugated board box {RER}| production | Cut-off, S
0,017866
kg
Cardboard box
Transportation
Materials/fuels
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, euro6 {RER}| market for transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO6 | Cut-off, S
6,64E-05
tkm
Transportation by lorry from Galen Pharma to NHS Highland
Use
Electricity/heat
Electricity, high voltage {GB}| market for | Cut-off, S
0,27
kWh
Energy use for pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitor
Disposal
Waste to treatment
Hazardous waste, for incineration {Europe without Switzerland}| market for hazardous waste, for incineration | Cut-off, S
0,0563
kg
Penthrox inhaler without drug weight for incineration
Municipal solid waste {GB}| market for municipal solid waste | Cut-off, S
0,031977
kg
Packaging
Table B.6: Life cycle inventory for the methoxyflurane scenario.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 70 of 72
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Assumptions
71
==PAGE:82==
Life cycle
stage
Nitrous oxide scenario
Midazolam scenario
Methoxyflurane scenario
Manufac-
turing
Item
Assumption
Item
Assumption
Item
Assumption
N2O
Average nitrous oxide
production processes (RER)
Midazolam
Emissions
(kgCO2e)
Methoxyflurane
Average production
process of trichloro-
ethylene (RER)
Oxygen
Production using air
separation (RER)
Glass vial
Average glass
production
processes (RER)
Inhaler
Average production
process of PET
(RER)
Gas piping
Average silicone production
processes (RoW)
Sodium chloride
solution and plastic
vial
Average production
processes,
sodium chloride
and PP (RER)
Plastic
Average production
process of PET
(RER)
Inner mask
Average silicone production
processes (RoW)
Tourniquet
Average silicone
production
processes (RoW)
Cardboard
Average production
process of corrugated
board box (RER)
Gas cylinders
Average production process
of aluminum ingot (RoW)
Antimicrobial
skin preparation
Average production
processes, iodine,
pure water, isopropyl
acetate, and PP
(RoW)
Glass vial
Average production
process of glass
(RER)
22 guage cannula
Average production
processes, chromium
steel (GLO) and PET
(RoW)
21x40 safety needle
Average production
processes, chromium
steel (GLO) and PET
(RoW)
5 mL syringe
Average production
processes, PP (GLO)
and PET (RoW)
Transpor-
tation
N2O and oxygen
Manufacturer (BOC) located
in Inverness, Scotland
Midazolam
Manufacturer (Hamelm)
located in
Gloucester, UK
Penthrox inhaler
Manufacturer (Galen)
located in Loubourough,
UK
Gas piping and
inner mask
Manufacturer (Porter Brown)
located in Philadelphia
Tourniquet
Manufacturer (Beckton-
Dickinson) located in
Singapore
Chloraprep,
cannula and
syringe
Manufacturer (Beckton-
Dickinson) located in
San Diego, USA
21x40 safety needle
Manufacturer (Solcare)
located in Belgium
Use
Electricity
Great Britain consumption
mix
Electricity
Great Britain
consumption mix
Electricity
Great Britain consumption
mix
Decontamination
Emissions (kgCO2e) per
item decontaminated
Disposal
N2O
Venting (emissions)
22g cannula, 21x40
safety needle, glass
ampoule and excess
drug
Hazardous waste,
incineration (EU w/o
Switzerland)
Inhaler
Hazardous waste,
incineration (EU w/o
Switzerland)
Gas piping and
inner mask
Hazardous waste, incineration
(EU w/o Switzerland)
Tourniquet, Chloraprep
Municipal solid waste
(GB)
Outer nasal hood and
reservoir bag
Municipal solid waste
(GB)
Table C.1: List of assumptions for production processes and geographies.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 72 of 72
