==PAGE:1==
Design, optimization and experimental identi­
fication of a hydrodynamic pump
Design, optimering og eksperimentel identifika­
tion af hydrodynamisk pumpe
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
Design, optimering og eksperimentel identifikation af hydrodynamisk pumpe
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Markus Snælundur Skovhus
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Construct, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Markus Snælundur Skovhus ­ s174181
Signature
Date
ii
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis deals with outlet size and location optimization of a viscous pump. Addition­
ally, experimental investigation and validation of the finite element model used in the op­
timization routine is conducted. The numerical finite element model solves a thin film flow
problem using Reynolds equation. The aim of the thesis is to further develop the viscous
pump optimization and experimentally validate the FEM code developed by Petersen[1].
Using a regularized Heaviside step function projection, an outlet size and location based
optimization generates solutions maximizing the outlet flow of a viscous pump built on the
principles of a hydrodynamic thrust bearing.
The developed optimization is applied to a bearing pad geometry used to generate validat­
ing experimental data. Optimized solutions with different constraints of the experimental
viscous pump are presented. The work is regarded as academic with the intention of
bringing the development closer to designing an optimized constant flow viscous pump.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Casper Schousboe Andreasen, Associate Professor, Supervisor
Asger Bjerregaard Petersen, Ph.d.student, Supervisor
iv
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Earlier work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Lubrication theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
FEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Topology hole optimization of viscous pump . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Results
29
3.1
Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2
FE model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.3
Comparison between experimental and numerical results . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.4
Optimization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4
Discussion
55
5
Conclusion
58
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Bibliography
59
A Results for all solutions in the load constraint study
61
A.1 Outlet optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.2 Outlet and topography optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
A.3 Refined load fraction study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B Data sheet for experimental geometry
77
C Relevant MatLab implementations
79
C.1 Finite Element Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
C.2 Optimization routine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
C.3 Load fraction study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The aim of this thesis is to develop a systematic optimization procedure for a viscous
pump. This is done on the basis of the FEM code and the topography optimization rou­
tine developed by A. Petersen[1]. The FEM code is the foundation for an optimization
routine of a viscous pump. By modifying and further developing the FEM code and the
optimization routine, a parametric outlet location and sizing based optimization routine is
to be added to the topography routine. Additionally, the FEM code is to be validated by
experimental data and commercial software in order to verify that the optimization routine
is based on physically feasible solutions.
1.1
Motivation
In standard gear or impeller based pumps, the pressure output is oscillating due to the
nature of time dependent impeller or gear teeth positioning, as seen in figures 1.1. As the
gear teeth or impellers pass the outlet of the pump, a portion of fluid will be forced through
the outlet which leads to an outlet pressure varying with time.
(a) Simple impeller pump
(b) Oscillating outlet pressure
Figure 1.1: Simplified illustration of time varying outlet pressure of simple impeller pump
geometry
A time varying outlet pressure in a pump can be problematic for certain applications, for
example during filtering where the viscous media carries impurities in a flow through a
filtering system. Furthermore, for systems where a pump with an oscillating pressure out­
put is applied, a resulting vibration will occur throughout the machinery which can lead to
problems in regards to resonance. For such situations, a non­pulsating flow is desirable.
In an attempt to create a pump with a constant output in the form of pressure and volume
flow, hydrodynamic thrust bearings are taken as inspiration. Hydrodynamic thrust bear­
ings, such as a Rayleigh step bearing [2], work by decreasing the film height in the sliding
direction which can be done by introducing a shoe step.This generates a time invariant
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
1
==PAGE:10==
pressure, meaning the pressure does not change with time, as seen in the simplified ge­
ometry and pressure distribution in figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Simple step bearing illustration showing pressure distribution. Illustration in­
spired by Sato[3] and Petersen[1]
The Rayleigh step bearing creates a film height difference of ∆h = sh between the inlet
and the outlet, as seen in figure 1.2. With a constant velocity of the driving plate ub, the
theory predicts that the thrust bearing generates a constant pressure.
By introducing an outlet hole, the generated pressure can be taken advantage of to create
a pump, as illustrated in figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Viscous pump with outlet placed favourably in order to take advantage of
pressure distribution seen in step bearings. Illustration inspired by Sato[3] and Petersen[1]
2
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:11==
A portion of the fluid will be forced through the outlet hole, and the rest of the fluid will pass
through the bearing outlet, as illustrated in figure 1.3. If the plates are perfectly aligned and
flat with a perfectly constant velocity and the fluid flow is assumed to be incompressible,
laminar and perfectly uniform throughout the domain, the output pressure will be constant
resulting in a non­pulsating flow.
1.2
Earlier work
Optimization of viscous pumps has been performed in different ways before. Sato [3]
performed geometrical optimization on both spiral groove and shrouded Rayleigh step
viscous pumps. Petersen [1] performed film height optimization, also referred to as to­
pography optimization, on viscous pumps. Building upon this work, a parametric outlet
sizing and location based optimization is to be developed. A circular­hole based topology
optimization has been developed before for other applications, such as done by F. Wang
[4] on high­performance slow light photonic crystal waveguides.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
In the following chapter the theory behind the work that has been done for this thesis,
is presented. The general lubrication theory for thin film flow will be presented in the
form of the Reynolds equation. The experimental setup will be presented along with the
procedure for collecting experimental data. The numerical model for a viscous pump is
presented along with the numerical optimization routine for a viscous pump.
2.1
Lubrication theory
The viscous pump is built on the principles of a hydrodynamic thrust bearing which is gov­
erned by thin film lubrication. A thin film lubrication regime is classified as being governed
by pressure and viscosity in a slow viscous mass flow. Generally, for hydrodynamically
lubricated bearings, the viscous forces acting in the fluid film are significantly greater than
the inertia forces. Additionally, the fluid is assumed to be incompressible. No pressure
gradient is assumed in the z­direction as the film is significantly thinner compared to the
width and length dimensions. Full film lubrication is assumed in the entire domain. The so­
lution for the pressure distribution in a thin film lubrication regime is found by the Reynolds
equation. The Reynolds equation is derived from the full Navier­Stokes equations and the
continuity equation, as described by Petersen [1] and Hamrock et al. [5]. The full Reynolds
equation is shown in equation (2.1):
∂
∂x
(
−ρh3
12η
∂p
∂x
)
+ ∂
∂y
(
−ρh3
12η
∂p
∂y
)
+ ∂
∂x
(
ρh(ua + ub)
2
)
+ ∂
∂y
(
ρh(va + vb)
2
)
+ ρ (wa −wb) −ρua
∂h
∂x −ρva
∂h
∂y + h∂ρ
∂t = 0
(2.1)
The first two terms in equation (2.1) make up the Pouiseuille term which is the flow in­
duced by the pressure gradient in the thin film between two plates. The next two terms
in equation (2.1) make up the Couette term which is the flow induced in a thin film due to
surface velocities. The Couette term generates a flow when the two parallel surfaces in
the bearing have relative differences in velocities which induces a shearing of the viscous
fluid between the two plates, thereby generating a flow. The Couette term, presented in
equation (2.2), consists of three sub terms: the density wedge term, the stretch term and
the physical wedge term.
∂
∂x
(ρh (ua + ub)
2
)
+ ∂
∂y
(ρh (ua + ub)
2
)
= h(ua + ub)
2
∂ρ
∂x + h(ua + ub)
2
∂ρ
∂y
+ ρh
2
∂
∂x(ua + ub) + ρh
2
∂
∂y(ua + ub) + ρ(ua + ub)
2
∂h
∂x + ρ(ua + ub)
2
∂h
∂y
(2.2)
The density wedge term, h(ua+ub)
2
∂ρ
∂x+ h(ua+ub)
2
∂ρ
∂y from equation (2.2), is the flow generated
by a change in the fluid density along the sliding direction. This can be induced by an
increase in temperature in the fluid along the sliding direction. The density wedge term
does not contribute to this solution, as the fluid properties are assumed to be constant
throughout the thin film.
4
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:13==
The stretch term, ρh
2
∂
∂x(ua+ub)+ ρh
2
∂
∂y(ua+ub) from equation (2.2), is the flow generated by
a varying velocity in the sliding direction, meaning the plates will have different velocities
at different points along the sliding direction. This could be relevant for plates made of
highly elastic solids, but for most general application bearings this term does not induce
a pressure.
The physical wedge term, ρ(ua+ub)
2
∂h
∂x + ρ(ua+ub)
2
∂h
∂y from equation (2.2), is the pressure
generated by a change in the film height along the sliding direction. For most hydrody­
namic bearings, the main portion of the pressure will be generated by the physical wedge
term.
Figure 2.1: Superposition of velocity profiles
The next three terms in equation (2.1) make up the Squeeze term which is the flow in­
duced by a normal force pressing the two plates together, resulting in the film thickness
diminishing and the flow induced by a translation of an inclined surface. Since the film
thickness does not vary with time, this term can be neglected.
The last term in equation (2.1) is the local expansion term which is the flow induced by
a change in the density, most often caused by thermal expansion in the fluid. Assuming
constant fluid properties, this term can be neglected as well.
By this the full Reynolds equation can be reduced to include only the Poiseuille and the
Couette term as seen in equation (2.3) where h [m] is the film height, ˜u = (ua+ub)
2
and
˜v = (va+vb)
2
are the mean surface velocities of the two plates, η [Pa s] is the absolute
viscosity and p [Pa] is the pressure.
∂
∂x
(
−ρh3
12η
∂p
∂x
)
+ ∂
∂y
(
−ρh3
12η
∂p
∂y
)
+ ∂
∂x(ρh˜u) + ∂
∂y(ρh˜v) = 0
(2.3)
Arbitrary velocity profiles of the Couette and Pouiseuille terms can be seen in figure 2.1,
and the superposition principle is imposed in order to generate the full velocity profile of
the flow generated by both terms, as seen from figure 2.1.
2.2
Experimental setup
An experimental setup of the viscous pump is utilized to investigate flow, outlet pressure
and load capacity of the pump. The setup consists of a top part and a bottom part. The
bottom part is the bearing pad, as seen in picture 2.2.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Bearing pad showing the three pressure generating step pads with outlets and
milled sections creating a film height difference across the pad
The bearing pad is submerged in an oil bath as shown in image 2.3a. The top part of the
pump is the flat steel disc seen in image 2.3a which is attached to a DC motor. The DC
motor drives the top part of the pump inducing the flow.
(a) Closeup of the open viscous pump in the oil
bath. The blue insert is the distance probe and
the yellow tube is the outlet
(b) Pressure transducer measuring the outlet
pressure and the valve for opening for the outlet
flow
Figure 2.3: Experimental setup pictures
The experimental setup uses different sensors to measure the data during the experiment.
6
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:15==
The important data collected is:
• Load capacity
• Outlet pressure
• Outlet flow
• Film height
• Angular velocity
(a) Load cell underneath the viscous pump
and the oil bath
(b) Pressure transducer on the outlet
with valve controlling the flow
(c) Distance probe mounted in the viscous pump
fully submerged in the oil bath
(d) Laser sensor and 3D printed teeth allowing
for a ”tick” based RPM counter
Figure 2.4: Experimental measurement devices
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
7
==PAGE:16==
The load capacity is measured by a load cell placed underneath the pump, as seen in im­
age 2.4a. As the pump is in operation, the load generated by the flow will apply a force on
the load cell. The load cell is piezo­based where the resistance in the transducer changes
proportionally with the force applied. The change in resistance is the data measured by
the load cell which can then be converted to a load capacity. The measured load capacity
is sum of both the mass of the experimental setup and the pressure generated in the pump
during operation. In order to compare the experimental data with a numerical solution, the
static weight is measured and subtracted in order to only measure the load generated by
the viscous pump during operation. Furthermore, the measured load capacity is divided
by three as the numerical model only computes the load capacity for one single step shoe.
The outlet pressure is measured by a pressure transducer, seen in image 2.4b, which
works by the same principles as the load cell. The pressure transducer is mounted on the
outlet. When the black valve seen in image 2.4b is closed, allowing no flow through the
outlet, the pressure transducer is able to measure the near static pressure in the outlet
during operation.
In order to measure the outlet flow, the black valve seen in image 2.4b is opened, allowing
flow through the outlet. The oil from the outlet flow is collected in a cup over a set time
period. The oil mass is measured on a scale, and the volume is calculated by the mass
and the density of the oil. Dividing by the time gives a measurement of the outlet volume
flow.
The film height is measured using a distance probe, seen in image 2.4c. The distance
probe works as an inductive proximity sensor which measures distance by inductive elec­
tromagnetic fields. This means that the distance probe is only able to measure distances
in regards to magnetic objects, such as the steel disc on the top part of the pump. The
distance probe induces a current which generates an electromagnetic field. As the steel
disc approaches, the electromagnetic flux will change which changes the voltage in the
sensor. The change in voltage can then be converted to a proportional distance. As the
distance probe only reacts to magnetic material, it is unfazed by the oil in the pump which
makes it a highly suitable sensor for this application.
The angular velocity is measured by a laser, as seen in image 2.4d. A set of teeth are
mounted on the DC motor axle which pass by the laser. When the laser is uninterrupted,
the sensor counts 1, but as the motor rotates, a tooth will block the laser which will set the
sensor to 0. The value change is counted, and by knowing how many teeth are on the
axle, an angular velocity of the axle can be determined.
The pad rests on a concave rubber piece, enabling slight rotation for automatic alignment
during operation. A rotational locking mechanism, as seen in the pictures 2.3, ensures
that the bearing pad is static as the fluid creates a torque on the bearing pad.
2.2.1
Calibration
Before data collections can proceed, the relevant measurement tools and sensors need
to be calibrated in order to trust the output from the experimental data processing software
Labview.
The distance probe used to measure the film height h0, is calibrated using shims of varying
thicknesses. The distance probe is mounted on the bottom part of the pump and secured
by a nut, seen in picture 2.4c and illustration 2.5 as being the blue cylinder.
8
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:17==
(a) Zeroing of the distance probe during calibra­
tion
(b) Shim inserted used for determining the cali­
bration slope of the distance probe
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the calibration procedure for distance probe
Starting the calibration, a zeroing measurement is made. First, the pump is completely
clamped without any shims, as seen in figure 2.5a, and the distance is read and regarded
as the zeroing distance. Afterwards, shims of increasing thickness are inserted between
the top and bottom part of the pump, as seen in figure 2.5b, in order to create a controlled
distance, simulating the film height present during pump usage.
The pressure transducer, which is used to measure the pressure at the outlets in the
pump, is calibrated using a dead weight tester, illustrated in figure 2.6
Figure 2.6: Dead weight tester for pressure transducer calibration
The dead weight tester creates a controlled oil pressure where the pressure transducer
can be attached and calibrated by the controlled pressure values. Floating mass weights
are used to generate a controlled oil pressure, and the set friction and misalignment in the
piston is negated by applying rotation on the mass piston. An oil reservoir with a valve
ensures that the enclosed space is filled with oil. The volume of the enclosed space in the
dead weight tester can be varied using a threaded valve with a plastic seal. The controlled
pressure is calculated by the mass of the piston and the weights, the area of the end of
the piston, and the gravitational constant as such:
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
9
==PAGE:18==
p = mg
A
(2.4)
The outputs from the distance probe and the pressure transducer are read and plotted
against the controlled values, as seen in figures 2.7. A linear polyfit correlation is made
to find the slope and y­axis intersection for the LabView program for each of the sensors.
(a) Distance probe calibration plot showing the
shim thickness [mm] and the corresponding
electrical output [V]
(b) Pressure transducer calibration plot show­
ing the dead weight static pressure [bar] and the
corresponding electrical output [V]
Figure 2.7: Calibration graphs
2.2.2
Experimental procedure
When conducting experiments, it is important to maintain variable control. Variable control
means keeping every variable constant except for the variable being studied. Variable
control makes it possible to study the relationship between the variable and the outputs
of interest. For this experimental setup, the variables being controlled are the angular
velocity, ω, and the film height, h0. The angular velocity is controlled by the power supply,
and the film height is controlled by the hydraulic jack. Two types of experiments are run,
one where the angular velocity is kept constant and the film height is varied, and another
where the film height is kept constant and the angular velocity is varied. Each of the
experiments can be run with or without outlet flow by keeping the outlet valve open or
closed.
Before starting any experiment, the hydraulic jack is lowered completely in order to open
the viscous pump. The DC motor is turned on to induce rotation of the top part of the
pump. The hydraulic jack is engaged in order to close the viscous pump.
The procedure for the two types of experiments is as follows:
For the constant angular velocity experiment with a closed outlet valve:
1. DC motor voltage is regulated until the constant angular velocity is reached
2. Load is applied through the hydraulic jack until the first film height is reached, making
sure the rotational lock mechanism of the bearing pad is engaged in order to prevent
rotation of the bearing pad
3. Voltage is adjusted to keep a constant angular velocity as the friction has increased
10
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:19==
4. After letting the setup reach equilibrium, the data for bearing pressure, load capacity,
angular velocity and film height is collected through the LabView software
5. The load is increased through the hydraulic jack until the next film height is reached,
making sure the pump runs without friction between the plates
6. Steps 3 and 4 are repeated until the desired amount of data points are gathered
For the constant film height experiment with a close outlet valve:
1. DC motor voltage is regulated until the first data point angular velocity is reached
2. Load is applied through the hydraulic jack until the constant film height is reached,
making sure the rotational lock mechanism of the bearing pad is engaged in order
to prevent rotation of the bearing pad
3. After letting the setup reach equilibrium, the data for bearing pressure, load capacity,
angular velocity and film height is collected through the LabView software
4. The DC motor voltage is increased until the next angular velocity data point is
reached
5. The load on the hydraulic jack is adjusted to keep a constant film height as the load
capacity increases
6. Steps 3 and 4 are repeated until the desired amount of data points are gathered
For open valve experiments, a slightly different approach is taken as the data collection
is slightly more manual. As the desired film height and angular velocity is reached, the
flow rate is to be measured. An empty measuring cup is used to tare the scale. A timer is
set to one minute as the measuring cup is set to collect the outlet flow. When the time is
up, the collected oil from the outlet flow is weighted. The studied variable, film height or
angular velocity, is varied and the other parameters are adjusted to keep constant, and a
new data collection is made.
2.3
FEM
The FEM model, developed by Petersen [1] for viscous pump geometries inspired by
hydrodynamic thin film thrust bearings, is utilized to numerically approximate the exper­
imental setup. Using the FEM code, comparisons of the outlet pressure, the outlet flow
and the load capacity can be made between the experimental setup and the numerical
approximation.
The numerical solution is obtained in the FEM code from the reduced Reynolds equation
presented earlier in equation (2.3). The reduced Reynolds equation is formulated on
vector form, as seen in equation (2.5), where the velocity is formulated as a vector: ˜u =
[ ˜u
˜v
]
[m/s]
∇·
(
h˜u −h3
12η∇p
)
= 0
(2.5)
The Pouiseuille term has the film height, h, raised to the third power which makes the film
height a highly sensitive metric when calculating the pressure of a thin film.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3.1
Outlet modelling
In order to take advantage of the flow and pressure generated in a hydrodynamic bearing,
an outlet orifice is introduced, creating a pump. The outlet allows the fluid to flow freely
out of the viscous pump which can be approximated as a zero pressure zone. The outlet
is modelled as a region on the pad with zero pressure due to the fluid being able to pass
through the outlet assuming no significant pressure is generated. Figure 2.8a shows an
incline slider bearing where the film height is decreased linearly by the incline, generating
a constant pressure. By introducing the outlet as a region where the pressure drops to
zero, the pressure distribution will change with the new boundary conditions imposed as
seen in figure 2.8b.
(a) Incline slider pressure distribution
(b) Incline slider pressure distribution with the
outlet modelled
Figure 2.8: Simplified illustration showing an arbitrary pressure distribution in an incline
slider bearing with and without an outlet
The outlet boundary condition is applied by two different methods for two different appli­
cations.
For strict FE modelling, the zero pressure condition can be applied directly to the node in
or on the outlet orifice boundary as a classical boundary condition. To generate the outlet
boundary conditions, the ”inpolygon” MatLab function is utilized. This creates a logical
data array based on the outlet vertices which will be 1 for the nodes in or on the boundary
of the outlet circle. This way the nodes can easily be identified and prescribed the outlet
pressure condition. This creates a simple and effective zero pressure zone in the outlet
which defines the outlet hole well.
For optimizations the penalty method used instead of the classical boundary conditions.
The penalty method enforces a prescribed boundary condition value on a set of nodes
by introducing a penalty for any violations of the prescribed value. The penalty is ap­
plied through a diagonal penalty matrix A, in the global system of equations, derived by
Petersen [1]:
(M + A)p = f + b
(2.6)
Where M is the global symmetric Poiseuille matrix which is derived from the Poiseuille
term in equation (2.5). As mentioned, A is the diagonal penalty matrix which contains the
penalty value, α, in the diagonal positions matching the nodes prescribed the boundary
condition. p is the pressure vector which is the solution giving the pressure distribution
on the domain. f is the load vector which is derived from the Couette term from equation
(2.5). Added to the load vector is the prescribed pressures of the boundary conditions
which are given by the vector b.
12
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:21==
The higher the penalty value, α, in the diagonal penalty matrix A is, the more the pre­
scribed pressure in vector b is enforced. Ill conditioning can appear if the α value becomes
too large. The penalty value is calculated from an interpolation function, as described by
Petersen [1] and Stolpe and Svanberg[6]:
α(˜ξ) = αmin + (αmax −αmin)
˜ξ
1 + (1 −˜ξ)k
(2.7)
Where αmin and αmax are the upper and lower bounds of the penalty value, k is the
penalty factor dictating the curvature of the interpolation and ˜ξ is the interpreted outlet
hole design value which is ˜ξ = 1 if the prescribed pressure value is to be enforced. In
this manner, a vector of values between 0 and 1 can determine the nodes for which the
penalty shall be enforced, giving the prescribed pressure value for the outlet. The penalty
interpolation is plotted for different penalty factors illustrating the effect on the curvature
of the interpolation, seen in figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Penalty value interpolation for different penalty factors k as a function of the
outlet hole variable ˜ξ
2.3.2
Geometry definition and measurement
The mesh for the FEM model is made to approximate the viscous pump geometry. In order
to approximate the experimental setup, the viscous pump bearing pad geometry needs to
be measured. Using an optics based DeMeet 3D CNC coordinate measuring machine,
the geometry of the shoe steps are defined, as seen in figure 2.10b. For the milled section
of the shoe step, an Alicona optical measurement system is used to determine the step
height of the shrouded step on the bearing, as seen in figure 2.10a. Using the line tool,
a 2D representation of a small part of the step can be defined, as seen in figures 2.11.
Multiple line tool measurements are made in order to get an idea of the general shoe step
height.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) Viscous pump pad in
Alicona measurement ma­
chine
(b) Viscous pump pad in DeMeet measurement machine
Figure 2.10: Viscous pump pad measurement
The step height, sh, is an important value for the film height in the milled section of the
viscous pad. The film height in the milled section is determined as h = sh + h0. As seen
in equation (2.5) and discussed earlier, the film height is raised to the third power and
therefore has a significant effect on the solution.
(a) 2D graph of step height made by Alicona line tool
(b)
Video
feed
showing
close up of line tool across
the step height sh
Figure 2.11: Step height measurement using Alicona
Five measurements evenly spread across the boundary are made for each of the steps
in order to determine the step height sh. The measurements are listed in table 2.1 along
with the average step height of each step. The step height is approximated to be sh = 45
µm.
1st [µm]
2nd [µm]
3rd [µm]
4th [µm]
5th [µm]
Average [µm]
Step 1
45.6
46.6
48.4
51.6
45.5
47.54
Step 2
48.6
41.4
40.9
38.7
38.4
41.60
Step 3
40.7
44.5
44.0
40.9
43.8
42.78
Table 2.1: Step height measurements
The data sheet for the total geometry can be found in appendix B. With the geometry
being defined, it is then possible to start generating meshes for the finite element model.
14
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:23==
2.3.3
Mesh generation
A mesh of the geometry is to be generated for the FE model.
Many different approaches can be taken in order to create a mesh.
(a) APDL conformal mesh
(b) Mapped curved mesh
(c) Projected mapped mesh
Figure 2.12: Three different meshes
A conformal mesh can be generated by the use of ANSYS APDL, seen in figure 2.12a.
A conformal mesh ensures that nodes are located along geometry defining lines such as
the boundary in the milled step shoes or the outlet hole, seen as the red and blue lines
in figure 2.12a. Furthermore, it allows for more customization and local refining of the
mesh along areas of special interest. The downside is the cumbersome work in refining
or modifying the mesh as this is a highly customizable mesh.
An immersed mapped mesh can be generated across the curved step shoe as the total
geometry is approximately an arc segment which can be evenly divided. This generates
a polar mapped mesh where the elements at the inner radius cover a smaller area than
the elements at the outer radius, as seen in figure 2.12b. As the mapped mesh does not
take any geometries such as the outlet hole or the milled part into account, the nodes will
not be located along any specific inner boundaries. This mesh is easily refined and easily
generated, but does not represent the real geometry as well as the conformal mesh.
Finally, a uniform rectangular immersed mapped mesh can be generated by projecting the
geometry from the curved polar arc segment into a rectangular area. This results in an
easily meshed model with uniform elements across the entire domain, as seen in figure
2.12c. By being a projected immersed mesh the rectangular mesh represents the real
geometry the least out of the three meshes.
As the FE model is to be used for optimization where the outlet is to be move­able, a
conformal mesh is not beneficial. For the ease of use and ease of refinement, the mapped
meshes are used throughout this thesis.
2.3.4
Film height and boundary conditions
The film height and the boundary conditions are crucial bits of information that are to be
generated in the input file. The film height is a representation of the topography of the
bearing pad plate in the viscous pump. The boundary conditions are assumptions for the
pressure along the boundaries of the bearing pad plate.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Curved mesh with nodes of different film
heights superimposed. Red square nodes: h =
h0 + sh, blue circle nodes: h = h0
(b) 2D representation of the film height mesh
(blue) along with an arbitrary nodal solution
for the pressure distribution (red) showing the
boundary conditions
Figure 2.13: Illustrations of the film height mapping and the boundary conditions
The film height is defined as a logical column vector, γ=[nn x 1] with ”nn” being the number
of nodes where each value defines the film height of the corresponding node. The milled
part will have the film height of h0 + sh which is inside the red outlines in figures 2.12,
and the step will have a film height of h0. A 2D illustration of the film height on a mesh
is seen in figure 2.13b as the blue mesh. The logical vector determines the film height
where γ = 1 means the film height is h0 + sh and γ = 0 means the film height is h0. The
film height vector is generated using the ”inpolygon” MatLab function which takes a point
cloud data set and a set of vertices and outputs the logical array determining which points
from the data set are inside the polygon defined by the vertices. Applying the ”inpolygon”
MatLab function on the mesh seen in figure 2.13a with the red lines being the boundary
polygon, the nodes in the milled part will be given the logical value γ = 1, and all nodes
outside the red polygon will be given the logical value γ = 0.
From this logical vector, the FEM code creates a linear interpolation, as described by
Petersen [1] and by Andreasen [7], by equation (2.8).
hn(γn) = h0 + γn · sh
(2.8)
Where γ is the logical vector describing the film height of each node, h0 is the minimum
film height and sh is the shoe step height. The linear interpolation of the film height is
plotted for different film heights h0 and a constant step height sh = 45 microns, as seen
in figure 2.14.
16
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.14: Film height interpolation for various film heights h0 and constant step height
sh = 45 microns as a function of the film height variable γ
Since the mesh is immersed, the linear interpolation will be an approximation of the real
geometry. For a 50x50 mesh the interpolated topography is plotted:
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography -  []
(a) Topography of a 50x50 mesh showing the
approximated geometry
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography -  []
(b) Zoomed view of showing the topography in­
terpolation and the approximating nature of the
immersed non­conformal mesh
Figure 2.15: Topography interpolated across mesh with red outline showing the step ge­
ometry and the outlet
As the mesh is refined, the film height mapping will approach the real geometry. The
approximation will be a sort of pixelated geometry seen in figures 2.15 increasing in res­
olution as the nodes close in on the polygon defining the real geometry.
The boundary conditions are imposed in the model as nodes with pressure set to zero.
Two vectors dictate the boundary conditions. The first vector includes the node numbers
of all the nodes with a boundary condition and the second vector includes the prescribed
values, p = 0, of the boundary condition for each node. All nodes along the edge of the
design domain, meaning the four edges of the shoe in this case, are in this fashion listed
and prescribed a pressure of zero.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
17
==PAGE:26==
2.3.5
Velocity field
As the non­stationary top plate rotates, a velocity field is to be imposed. For the projected
regular mesh, this is easily done as a vector field with only the x component being nonzero.
For the curved mesh, an angular velocity field is imposed where the magnitude of the
velocity is dependent on the distance of the node from the center [0,0] and the direction
is always tangential to the center [0,0]. The angular velocity field is defined by a vector
with two components, u and v:
[ un
vn
]
=
[ cos (θn)
√
x2n + y2nω
sin (θn)
√
x2n + y2nω
]
(2.9)
Where θn is the angle from horizontal to the n’th node, xn and yn are the coordinates
of the n’th node, and ω is the angular velocity imposed by the top plate. The velocity
fields are illustrated in figures 2.16. For the curved mesh, the magnitude of the velocity
is seen to increase with the radius of the shoe and stays tangential to the center [0,0]. A
Cartesian coordinate system is used for flexibility between models. The projected mesh
with imposed velocity field is seen to be constant across the entire domain with only an x
component being nonzero.
(a) Curved mesh with imposed angular velocity
field
(b) Projected mesh with imposed velocity field
Figure 2.16: Two different velocity fields
2.4
Topology hole optimization of viscous pump
Optimization of shrouded step bearings modified to be used as viscous pumps has been
performed with respect to flow rate in the form of basic geometry and film shape optimiza­
tion by Sato[8] [3]. Topology optimization of a viscous pump was attempted by Petersen
[1] using a density based approach where each node could be formulated as being an
outlet hole when ˜ξ = 1 and the opposite, being a solid, when ˜ξ = 0. This resulted in a
topology optimization routine which generated outlet holes along the entire boundary of
the domain. This indicated that a more geometric approach should be taken in order to
avoid the formation of boundary orifices. A singular fixed shape outlet size and location
based optimization procedure is suggested as this prohibits the optimization routine from
generating outlets along the entire boundary of the domain.
The following will describe the development of a topology optimization code which sizes
and places an outlet on a design domain. The optimization routine has the aim of placing
18
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:27==
and sizing the outlet hole in order to maximize the flow through the outlet, meaning as
much fluid as possible is being pumped by the viscous pump. For simplicity the following
will use the Cartesian coordinate system. The optimization routine is developed initially
for rectangular meshes, but in order to represent the experimental geometry a curved
mesh is used with a coordinate transformation from Cartesian to Polar coordinates of the
outlet design variables ξ and the relevant sensitivities.
Figure 2.17: Simple overview of the design variables on the design domain
Figure 2.17 illustrates the parametrization method by a simplified design domain with the
outlet sized and located by the design variables ξ = [xc, yc, rc]. The design variables
are the center coordinates and the radius of the outlet. The topology optimization routine
can change these three variables in order to increase the outlet flow. Constraints can
be applied to the solution in the form of an area and load capacity constraint. The area
constraint will limit the size of the outlet which could be set to 10% of the entire design do­
main. The load capacity constraint enforces that the solution should generate a minimum
load capacity. The minimum load capacity, wmin, can be expressed in numerous ways.
During this thesis, the minimum load capacity is calculated as the product of a reference
load, wref, and a load fraction, ϵ.
wmin = ϵ · wref
(2.10)
The reference load is the load capacity of the initial design with no outlet modelled. In
this way, the load fraction determines how much of the initial load capacity the optimized
solution should sustain.
2.4.1
Material Mask Overlay Strategy using Heaviside projection
In order to create a parametric optimization of an outlet hole, the outlet hole is to be
modelled in the mesh parametrically. Parametrization of a circular outlet hole can be
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
19
==PAGE:28==
formulated using the Heaviside function, as done by Wang[4]. The Heaviside function is
a step function that projects a set of arguments into a one or zero value set.
A mesh with a set of node coordinates is fed into the Heaviside function mapping, and
the output will be a set of values where for each node there is an equivalent one or zero
value depending on whether the node is located in the outlet area or not. The piecewise
discontinuous function for an outlet circle can be defined as:
˜ξ = H (xn, yn, ξ) =



0
if (xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1 > 0
1
if (xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1 < 0
(2.11)
Where xn and yn are the coordinates of the nodes in the mesh, ξ contains the design
variables as described from figure 2.17, and ˜ξ is the projected design variables resulting
in the circular outlet mapping which for this application is 0 outside the outlet circle and 1
inside the outlet circle. For this to be useful in a topology optimization, the sensitivities for
the design variables are to be calculated in order to determine how the design variables
should be changed in order to increase the outlet flow. Since equation (2.11) is a discon­
tinuous step function, the sensitivities are not available. The Heaviside function needs to
be converted into a smooth approximation. This is done by regularization.
(a) Heaviside study with 11 node mesh
(b) Heaviside study with 21 node mesh
(c) Heaviside study with 101 node mesh
Figure 2.18: Regularized Heaviside studies of different refinements illustrating the effect
of the β parameter
The piecewise function in equation (2.11) can be regularized by introducing the parameter
20
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:29==
β as such:
˜ξ (xn, yn, ξ) =
1
1 + exp
(
−β
(
(xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1
))
(2.12)
The β parameter is a smoothness factor which controls the gradient when crossing the
step in the step function. As the β parameter increases, the step becomes ”sharper”,
meaning the derivatives become less defined, but the mapping represents reality better.
A simplified ”1D” Heaviside function is plotted for an outlet of radius=0.1 for three different
mesh refinements where the β parameter goes from 1 to 10, as seen in figures 2.18.
As seen from the figures 2.18, as the β parameter increases, the regularized Heaviside
function becomes steeper and approaches a discontinuous step function. Evidently it is
important to make sure the mesh is refined enough in order to get a properly defined outlet
hole, as seen in the difference between figure 2.18a and figure 2.18c.
The full Heaviside mapping function can be plotted as a surface plot and the effect of
the β parameter on the outlet mapping is illustrated as seen in figures 2.19. As the β
value increases, the mapping represents an outlet hole closer to reality, as seen from the
difference in figures 2.18a and 2.18c and the difference between figures 2.19a and 2.19d.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Outlet mapping with 101x101 mesh and β=2
(b) Outlet mapping with a 101x101 mesh and
β=10
(c) Outlet mapping with a 101x101 mesh and
β=20
(d) Outlet mapping with a 101x101 mesh and
β=100
Figure 2.19: Outlet Heaviside mapping for different β values
The derivatives of the Heaviside with respect to x, y and radius are used to formulate the
sensitivities of the objective function and the constraint functions.
The partial derivative of the Heaviside function with respect to the design variable x is
found as:
∂˜ξ
∂x =
−β · exp
(
−β
(
(xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1
))
(
1 + exp
(
−β
(
(xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1
)))2 ·
(
−2xn + 2xc
r2c
)
(2.13)
The partial derivative of the Heaviside function with respect to the design variable y is
found as:
∂˜ξ
∂y =
−β · exp
(
−β
(
(xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1
))
(
1 + exp
(
−β
(
(xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1
)))2 ·
(
−2yn + 2yc
r2c
)
(2.14)
The partial derivative of the Heaviside function with respect to the design variable r is
22
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:31==
found as:
∂˜ξ
∂r =
−β · exp
(
−β
(
(xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1
))
(
1 + exp
(
−β
(
(xn−xc)2+(yn−yc)2
r2c
−1
)))2 · −2 (xn −xc)2 −2 (yn −yc)2
r3c
(2.15)
The Heaviside mapping and its partial derivatives are plotted as surface plots, as seen in
figures 2.20.
(a) Outlet mapping with 101x101 mesh and β=2
(b) Partial derivative with regards to x, on a
101x101 mesh and β=2
(c) Partial derivative with regards to y, on a
101x101 mesh and β=2
(d) Partial derivative with regards to radius, on a
101x101 mesh and β=2
Figure 2.20: Full Heaviside mapping and partial derivatives
The partial derivatives are seen to be fairly smooth and continuous at the relatively low β
value of 2. The partial derivatives with respect to x and y are seen to be directional in the
x and y direction, respectively, as seen in figures 2.20b and 2.20c. The partial derivative
with respect to the radius is seen from figure 2.20d to be represented as a volcano shape
affected by the radius at the edge of the outlet as expected.
The effect of the β value on the partial derivatives is investigated. As seen from figures
2.19, when the β value increases, the mapping approaches a step function, meaning
the mapping becomes close to discontinuous. The partial derivative of the Heaviside
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
23
==PAGE:32==
projection with respect to the radius is plotted for different β values to illustrate how the
discontinuity affects the sensitivities, as seen in figures 2.21.
(a) ∂˜ξ
∂r at β=2
(b) ∂˜ξ
∂r at β=10
(c) ∂˜ξ
∂r at β=20
(d) ∂˜ξ
∂r at β=100
Figure 2.21: Deterioration of sensitivities as β parameter increases
As the β value increases, the continuity decreases, and the plot becomes more spiky and
less uniform with higher maximum values. From this it is evident that a more coherent sig­
nal from the partial derivatives is reached by a lower value of the regularisation parameter
β.
2.4.2
Topology optimization routine
The topology optimization procedure is an iterative process. Each iteration will change the
design slightly. The iteration scheme will continue to run until the solution has converged,
meaning the solution should change insignificantly between iterations. The convergence
is determined by a convergence criterion, σ. The lower the convergence criterion is set,
the longer the iteration scheme will run. A schematic of the main components of the
topology routine can be seen in figure 2.22, illustrating the order of computations in the
convergence conditioned while loop.
24
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.22: Schematic overview of the topology optimization algorithm
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
25
==PAGE:34==
The first step in the iteration scheme is the Heaviside projection of the design variables,
˜ξ = H(xn, yn, ξ). The design variables are fed into the Heaviside mapping function along
with the node coordinates of the mesh, creating a continuous field for the outlet mapping,
as described in section 2.4.1.
After the Heaviside mapping, a numerical solution to the problem is computed using the
FEM code based on the Reynolds equation (2.5). The FEM code computes the value
of the objective function ϕ, in this case the volume flow through the outlet, Q, and the
partial derivative of the objective function with respect to the filtered design variables, ∂ϕ
∂˜ξ .
Furthermore, the FEM code computes the load constraint value cw along with the partial
derivative of the load constraint function with respect to the filtered design variables, ∂cw
∂˜ξ .
The objective function, which in this case is the volume flow through the outlet, is com­
puted as a residual from the flow across the boundary of the design domain.
Figure 2.23: Illustration of arbitrary boundary flow. The outlet volume flow Q (black) is cal­
culated as the difference between the inlet flow Qi (red) and the outlet flows Qo1, Qo2, Qo3
(blue)
The outlet volume flow, Q, is calculated as:
Q = Qi −Qo1 −Qo2 −Qo3
(2.16)
With Qi being the inlet boundary volume flow and Qo1, Qo2, Qo3 being the volume flow
across the three remaining boundaries, as illustrated in figure 2.23.
The load constraint value is calculated from the minimum load capacity.
cw = wmin
w
−1
(2.17)
With wmin being the minimum load capacity calculated from equation (2.10) and w being
the load capacity computed from the numerical solution as the surface integral of the
pressure.
The area constraint value, ca, is calculated from the design domain area and the area of
the outlet circle:
ca = πr2
A · τ −1
(2.18)
26
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:35==
Where r is the outlet radius, A is the area of the entire design domain and τ is the area
fraction. The area constraint value ca, is a measure of how close the outlet area is to the
set area constraint. If the outlet is larger than the area constraint, the optimization should
decrease the radius of the outlet circle.
The final sensitivities for the objective function and the load constraint function are the
partial derivatives of the objective function with respect to the design variables, ∂ϕ
∂ξ , and
the load constraint function with respect to the design variables, ∂cw
∂ξ . As the objective
function and load constraint function are not analytically determined and therefore not
directly differentiable, the chain rule is used in order to calculate the sensitivities from the
projected design variables, ˜ξ:
∂ϕ
∂ξ = ∂˜ξ
∂ξ
∂ϕ
∂˜ξ
(2.19)
∂cw
∂ξ = ∂˜ξ
∂ξ
∂cw
∂˜ξ
(2.20)
The computations for the partial derivative of the objective function with respect to the
projected design variables, ∂ϕ
∂˜ξ , and the computations for the partial derivative of the load
constraint function with respect to the projected design variables ∂cw
∂˜ξ are described by
Petersen [1] in appendix D.
The partial derivatives of the projected design variables with respect to the design vari­
ables, ∂˜ξ
∂ξ, are calculated using equations (2.13), (2.14) and (2.15).
The sensitivity for the area constraint function can be analytically determined by differenti­
ating equation (2.18), and is given only by the partial derivative with respect to the radius,
as the area constraint is seen to be unaffected by the x and y coordinate:
∂ca
∂ξ = dca
dr = 2πrc
(2.21)
The sensitivities indicate how the design should be changed for the next iteration. For
example, if the partial derivative of the objective function with respect to the third design
variable, rc, is positive, then the outlet volume flow will increase if the outlet radius is
increased slightly. Another example could be, if the partial derivative of the objective
function with respect to the first design variable, xc, is negative, then the outlet volume
flow will increase if the outlet is translated a small increment in the negative x­direction.
After the final sensitivities are calculated, the move limits of the design variables are de­
fined to give the algorithm a maximum and minimum value for the current iteration design
variables. With the move limits defined, the MMA algorithm can be used to solve the
nonlinear problem of minimizing the objective function, ϕ, with respect to a set of con­
straint functions. The MMA algorithm is a gradient based solver of non­linear problems
developed by Svanberg [9]. The MMA algorithm computes a new set of design variables,
meaning a new location and size of the outlet, based on the objective function value,
constraint functions values and the sensitivities described in equations (2.19) and (2.20).
Furthermore, the MMA algorithm changes the design with a magnitude determined by a
set of move limits. With the MMA algorithm being gradient based, the solution will be a
local minimum of the objective function.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
27
==PAGE:36==
Finally, a change from the previous design variables is calculated to determine whether
the solution has converged:
∆y = max(|⃗ψi −⃗ψi−1|)
(2.22)
The topology iterations run in a while loop which breaks when ∆y is below a set threshold
which is the convergence criterion, σ.
Including topography optimization
The topology optimization described above is combined with the topography optimiza­
tion developed by Petersen[1]. The number of design variables increase to include both
the outlet coordinates and radius, ξ, and the film heights of each node, γ. Move limits
are defined separately for each of the sets of design variables. Furthermore, the conver­
gence criteria are split for each of the sets of design variables. In order for the solution
to converge, both sets of design variables should converge according the the respective
convergence criteria, σξ and σγ. The general procedure follows the schematic presented
in figure 2.22 closely.
28
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:37==
3
Results
In the following chapter the results from the experimental data, the numerical solutions
and the optimization routines are presented. The results from the FE model will be com­
pared with commercial software and with the experimental results. The results for the
optimized solutions are presented, both with and without topography optimization. A load
constraint study is conducted to investigate how the optimization handles an increasing
load enforced on the design.
3.1
Experimental Results
The experimental results are generated as parameter studies following the procedures
described in section 2.2.2. The parameters being studied are the film thickness, h0, and
the angular velocity, ω. The experimental results are presented across two sections.
The first section presents the data for the experiments conducted with the outlet valve
closed, meaning the setup works as a shrouded Rayleigh step bearing. The second sec­
tion presents the data for the experiments conducted with the outlet valve open, meaning
the setup works as a viscous pump. Finally, the motivation for the thesis of a constant
pressure pump is investigated by studying the outlet pressure.
3.1.1
Experimental data for studies with no outlet flow ­ closed valve
The first parameter studies are shown in figure 3.1. For the three data points with the
greatest outlet pressure in figure 3.1a, it is seen that the measured film height is close
to zero or even below zero. In reality the experimental setup would jam or at the least
generate significant noise indicating wear and friction if the film height was zero or below.
Since the pump ran without any friction, this indicates that there is an error in the film height
measurement as it is not physically possible to have a negative film height and generate
a relatively significant outlet pressure. Due to these negative film height measurements,
the distance probe is recalibrated at a higher clamping force. The zeroing procedure
described in section 2.2.1 is repeated, but the clamping force is set to just below the
maximum load cell capacity of 2000 N. The experimental data is therefore split in two
sets. The first set is data collected before the recalibration, indicated by red squares in
figures 3.1 and 3.2, and the second set is data collected after the recalibration, indicated
by blue diamonds in figures 3.1 and 3.2.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) Experimental data showing pressure as a
function of the film height at a constant angular
velocity of 245 RPM
(b) Experimental data showing load capacity as
a function of the film height at a constant angular
velocity of 245 RPM
Figure 3.1: Parameter study showing the influence of the film height on the outlet pressure
and the load capacity
The first parameter study is a study of the film thickness. With a constant angular veloc­
ity of 245 RPM, the film thickness is varied, and the corresponding outlet pressure and
load capacity are measured. The data for both outlet pressure and load capacity as a
function of the film thickness is plotted as seen in figures 3.1. As seen in figure 3.1a,
the pressure increases significantly as the film height decreases, as expected. With a
film height ranging from h0 ≈0 −100 µm, the outlet pressure is seen to vary between
p ≈9 −0.5 bar. The load capacity follows this trend, as seen in figure 3.1b. When the
film height decreases, the load capacity increases significantly. The load capacity for one
pad varies from wz ≈325 −10 N. Both the outlet pressure and the load capacity shows
an exponential decline as the film height increases.
(a) Experimental data showing pressure as a
function of the angular velocity at a constant film
height of 40 µm
(b) Experimental data showing load capacity as
a function of the angular velocity at a constant
film height of 40 µm
Figure 3.2: Parameter study showing the influence of the angular velocity on the outlet
pressure and the load capacity
30
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:39==
The second parameter study is a study of the angular velocity. With a constant film thick­
ness of h0=40 µm, the angular velocity is varied and the corresponding outlet pressure
and load capacity are measured. The data for both outlet pressure and load capacity as a
function of the angular velocity is plotted as seen in figures 3.2. As seen in figure 3.2a, the
outlet pressure increases as the angular velocity increases. The angular velocity ranges
from ω ≈100 −350 RPM with a corresponding outlet pressure in the range p ≈0.9 −2.3
bar. As with the film thickness parameter study, the load capacity follows the same trend
as the outlet pressure. With an increasing velocity, the load capacity increases, as seen
in figure 3.2b, in the range wz ≈22 −55 N.
3.1.2
Experimental data for studies with outlet flow ­ open valve
The valve is opened in order to allow flow through the outlet. Two parameter studies are
conducted on the viscous pump. The dependence of the outlet flow on the film thickness
and angular velocity are studied, with the experimental data being plotted in figures 3.3.
(a) Experimental data for volume flow as a func­
tion of the film thickness for constant velocity
245 RPM
(b) Experimental data for volume flow as a func­
tion of the angular velocity at a constant film
thickness of h0=40 µm
Figure 3.3: Experimental data for the volume flow
With a constant angular velocity of 245 RPM, the film thickness is varied in the range
of h0 ≈0 −140 µm. The outlet flow is measured in the range Q ≈120 −300 mm3/s.
From figure 3.3a, the general trend is seen to be that as the film thickness increases, the
outlet flow decreases. A break in the seemingly linear trend is observed around a film
thickness of approximately 40 µm where the outlet flow increases momentarily. After this
jump in the outlet flow, the trend is seen to be a linear decrease again, but at a less steep
slope. Figure 3.3b shows the experimental data for the constant film thickness study of
the outlet flow. With a constant film thickness of h0=40 µm, the angular velocity is varied
in the range ω ≈100 −300 RPM. Evidently, the outlet flow generally increases linearly
with the angular velocity, in the range Q ≈110 −300 mm3/s.
The outlet flow data is seen to be less predictable, as it is more scattered, compared to
the experimental data in figures 3.2 and especially figures 3.1.
3.1.3
Outlet pressure pulsations
When conducting the experiments and analysing the data from figures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3,
the parameter study relies on keeping either the film thickness or the angular velocity
constant. In reality this is impossible as there will always be slight inaccuracies in the
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
31
==PAGE:40==
experimental setup. An investigation into how accurate the two variables are kept across
different experiments is made. Three measurements are made for both constant film
thickness of h0=40 µm and angular velocity of 245 RPM. The data is plotted in figures 3.4.
A Savitzky­Golay filter is implemented on the data, using the MatLab function ”sgolayfilt”,
in order to better visualize the data.
(a) Film thickness data for three experiments at
different angular velocities
(b) Angular velocity data for three experiments
at different film thicknesses
Figure 3.4: Experimental data illustrating to which degree a variable can be kept constant
across experiments
As seen in figure 3.4a, the film height data has a significant range of around ∆h0=40 µm,
ranging from 20 µm up to 60 µm. The filtered data shows the discrepancies between
each of the measurements. The mean film thicknesses are computed and listed in table
3.1. For just these three measurements the film height varied with more than 6 µm. The
average of the three measurements was only 1.5 µm greater than the target film height
which is reasonably low. From figure 3.4b it is seen that the angular velocity has a rel­
atively lower span compared to the film thickness, but the data is less consistent across
time compared to the film thickness. The average angular velocity of each of the three
measurements are listed in table 3.1. The average angular velocity of the three measure­
ments vary approximately 7 RPM. The average across the three experiments is 2.9 RPM
below the target angular velocity.
1st
2nd
3rd
Average
Film thickness h0 [µm]
38.7
44.9
40.7
41.5
Angular velocity ω [RPM]
239.7
246.4
240.3
242.1
Table 3.1: Table showing the mean values of the constant variable data
When looking at figure 3.4a and identifying a significant range in the film height measure­
ment, the motivation of the thesis comes to mind, as the purpose of the viscous pump is to
create a non­pulsating constant output pressure. The raw outlet pressure output is plotted
for two different film thicknesses in order to determine if the outlet pressure is constant.
32
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:41==
(a) Pressure output with a measured film thick­
ness of h0 ≈45µm and angular velocity of ω ≈
245 RPM
(b) Zoomed view over 1 second of pressure out­
put with measured film thickness of h0 ≈45µm
and angular velocity of ω ≈245 RPM
(c) Pressure output with a measured film thick­
ness of h0 ≈2µm and angular velocity of ω ≈
245 RPM
(d) Zoomed view over 1 second of pressure out­
put with measured film thickness of h0 ≈2µm
and angular velocity of ω ≈245 RPM
Figure 3.5: Pressure output oscillations for different film thicknesses
Evidently, from figures 3.5, the pressure oscillates with a significant amplitude for both
the low and high pressure data. To investigate the oscillations in the outlet pressure,
a FFT (fast Fourier transformation) analysis is conducted using the pressure data. The
FFT analysis reveals frequencies with significant pressure amplitudes which shows how
constant the pressure of the viscous pump actually is.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) FFT of the low pressure output with vertical
lines at the angular velocity ω = 245 RPM and
the next two multiplicities
(b) FFT of the high pressure output with vertical
lines at the angular velocity ω = 245 RPM and
the next two multiplicities
Figure 3.6: FFT showing the pressure amplitude pulsations in the frequency domain
As seen from figures 3.6, the pressure output of the viscous pump oscillates at different
frequencies during operation. The largest pressure amplitude is seen at the frequency
matching the rotational speed of the viscous pump. From the figures 3.6, the signal be­
comes more noisy at higher pressures with oscillations at higher frequencies compared
to the lower pressure. As the film thickness decreases and the pressure increases, less
viscous damping is present in the pump which leads to more higher frequency vibrations
in the pump.
As the pressure oscillates with a significant amplitude at the frequency of the angular
velocity of the pump, this could indicate a film height variation as a function of the rotation
of the pump plate. Using a dial gauge, as seen in picture 3.7, the flatness of the top plate
in the pump is measured across a single rotation.
Figure 3.7: Flatness measurement of top plate in viscous pump
34
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:43==
The height is measured and seen to vary with approximately 70 µm. This misalignment
matches with the measurement variation from the distance probe of the unloaded top
plate. During operation, when the plate is loaded, this height variation is measured to
decrease all the way down to approximately 10 µm when the load through the hydraulic
jack is at its max. Misalignment is known to cause pressure variations in viscous pumps,
Etsion and Yaier [10], which is what is observed by the FFT analysis in figure 3.6 and the
raw outlet pressure observed in figure 3.5.
3.2
FE model validation
In order to build trust in the numerical model, some form of validation is sought.
3.2.1
Comsol validation
In order to validate the numerical FEM implementation, a commercially recognized numer­
ical finite element software is used for comparison. A thin film flow model is generated in
Comsol based on the same geometrical measurements of the bearing pad and material
properties of the oil.
A difference between the two models would be the mesh. Using Comsol, a free mesh
is generated by the software as seen in figures 3.8. The FE model in MatLab uses a
non­conforming mapped mesh. For details, such as the outlet, the Comsol mesh creates
local refinement in order to capture the details around such a geometry better. The non­
conforming mesh does not take any local geometry details into account, but simply has a
global resolution across the entire domain.
(a) The conformal mesh generated by Comsol
(b) Closeup of the Comsol conformal mesh
around the outlet
Figure 3.8: Comsol mesh
A comparison between the two models is made. An oil thickness of h0 = 100µm and an
angular velocity field of 245 RPM is imposed in both the FE model and the Comsol model.
The pressure distribution is plotted for both solutions and compared, as seen in figures
3.9. First the solution is computed without the outlet hole modelled which is the solution
for a Rayleigh shrouded step bearing. The MatLab FE model has a refinement of a 50x50
mesh.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) 2D pressure plot of the pump with no outlet
modelled which is the equivalent of a shrouded
Rayleigh step bearing pad, computed in Comsol
0
2
4
6
Pressure [Pa]
104
(b) 2D pressure plot of the pump with no outlet
modelled which is the equivalent of a shrouded
Rayleigh step bearing pad, computed using FE
MatLab code
Figure 3.9: Comparison of 2D pressure distribution for solutions without an outlet, be­
tween commercial software Comsol and the FE MatLab code
The pressure distribution is seen to be similar between the two models, as seen in figures
3.9. The maximum pressure is slightly lower for the MatLab solution compared to the
Comsol solution, as seen in table 3.2. With a 3.3% difference between the MatLab and
Comsol solutions, the margin of error is within a reasonable range for such a rough mesh.
Comsol [Pa]
MatLab [Pa]
∆[%]
6.372 · 104
6.160 · 104
­3.3
Table 3.2: Maximum pressure comparison of Rayleigh shrouded step bearing between
Comsol and Matlab
The outlet hole is now introduced, converting the Rayleigh shrouded step bearing into a
viscous pump. The outlet hole is modelled by directly imposing a zero pressure zone in
the FE model, meaning no penalty is imposed on the model as these results are not to
be optimized. The pressure distribution is plotted again and compared between the two
solutions. The same film height and angular velocity is imposed. The mesh refinement of
the MatLab solution is also identical with the non­conformal mapped mesh of 50x50.
36
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:45==
(a) 2D pressure plot of the viscous pump with
the outlet modelled, computed in Comsol
0
1
2
3
Pressure [Pa]
104
(b) 2D pressure plot of the viscous pump with
the outlet modelled, computed using FE MatLab
code
Figure 3.10: Comparison of 2D pressure distribution for solutions for the viscous pump
with the outlet modelled, between commercial software Comsol and the FE MatLab code
The trend in the pressure distribution is identical between the two solutions. The greater
pressure is located on the left side of the outlet with a slightly smaller local maximum
pressure on the right side of the outlet. The magnitude of the pressure is slightly greater
in the MatLab solution which is due to the small outlet not being defined well enough by the
relatively rough mesh of 50x50. As seen from table 3.3, the MatLab solution overestimates
the maximum pressure by around 13.2% compared to the Comsol solution. The zero
pressure boundary condition of the outlet hole decreases the pressure generated in the
pump, but when the mesh is rough, the outlet is not defined properly and therefore the
pressure is greater than a more refined solution.
Comsol [Pa]
MatLab [Pa]
∆[%]
3.169 · 104
3.588 · 104
13.2
Table 3.3: Maximum pressure comparison of viscous pump between Comsol and Matlab
A close up of the non­conformal mapped mesh of the MatLab solution around the outlet
shows that with a 50x50 mesh only two nodes are located in the outlet circle, meaning
only two nodes are imposed the zero pressure boundary conditions, as seen in figure
3.11. Evidently, a 50x50 mesh does not represent the outlet hole properly. This causes
the larger deviation from the Comsol model which has a local mesh refinement around
the outlet due to the conformal meshing, seen in figure 3.8b.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.11: Close up of the non­conformal mapped mesh around the outlet with a 50x50
refinement
In order to determine a reasonable mesh refinement for the viscous pump solution, a
convergence study is conducted, as seen in section 3.2.2.
A final Comsol validation is done by comparing the parameter study of the MatLab code
with a parametric sweep in Comsol. The mean pressure of the nodes inside the outlet
circle is compared between the two solutions. The film thickness is varied in the range 25
µm to 120 µm, with a constant angular velocity of 245 RPM. The two parameter studies
are plotted as seen in figure 3.12. The pressures are seen to be almost identical between
the two models across the entire film thickness range.
38
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.12: FEM parameter study validation using parametric sweep Comsol model
3.2.2
Convergence
With a mesh of 2500 elements the discrepancies between the FE model and the Comsol
solutions were ­3.3% for the model without the outlet modelled and 13.2% for the model
with the outlet modelled, as seen in tables 3.2 and 3.3. A convergence study of the FE
model with and without the outlet mapped is made in order to validate the FE model and
to determine how refined the mesh should be in order to get a solution within reasonable
margins of the Comsol model. The convergence studies are presented in figure 3.13.
Comsol solution
5% tolerance
(a) Convergence study on FE model with no out­
let modelled
Comsol solution
5% tolerance
(b) Convergence study on FE model with the
outlet modelled
Figure 3.13: Convergence study of MatLab FE model compared with Comsol solution
As seen from figures 3.13, both the models converge towards the respective Comsol
solutions. The model with no outlet mapped converges faster, as seen in figure 3.13a,
compared to the model with the outlet modelled, as seen in figure 3.13b. Furthermore,
the model with no outlet converges from the bottom and the model with the outlet con­
verges from the top. This is due to the nature of the way the outlet is modelled using a
non­conformal mesh, as discussed earlier. When the mesh is coarse at around 100­400
elements, the outlet is not represented which means that the solution is completely iden­
tical to the model without the outlet modelled, as seen from the identical initial pressure
values between figure 3.13a and figure 3.13b. A mesh of 10000 elements is chosen for
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
39
==PAGE:48==
the numerical studies performed in the following as this is within reasonable margins of
the Comsol solution without being excessive in regards to computation time.
3.3
Comparison between experimental and numerical results
As the FE model has been validated, numerical parameter studies simulating the experi­
mental parameter studies described in section 2.2.2 can be conducted. All the numerical
parameter studies are conducted with a step height of sh = 45 µm. As described in sec­
tion 2.3.2, the three bearing pads had slightly different milled step heights. To take this
into account, two additional solutions are computed for each of the parameter studies,
with a generous margin of sh ± 10µm.
Film thickness parameter study
A parameter study is conducted to investigate how the film thickness in the pump affects
the outlet pressure [Pa], the volume flow [m3/s] and the load capacity [N]. The film thick­
ness is varied between 25 µm to 120 µm. The angular velocity is kept constant at ω = 245
[RPM]. The numerical parameter study is plotted with the experimental data as seen in
figure 3.14.
From figures 3.14a and 3.14b it is seen that the pressure and the load capacity are closely
related. The pressure and the load capacity increase exponentially as the film thickness
decreases. This makes sense as the pressure is inversely proportional with the film height
raised to the third power, as seen in the Pouiseuille term from Reynolds equation (2.5), and
the load capacity, being a surface integral of the pressure, is proportional to the pressure.
The step height sh is seen to have a slight influence on the curvature of the pressure and
the load capacity. A smaller step height results in a steeper curve and a larger step height
results in a less steep curve. As seen from figure 3.14c, the outlet flow is seen to increase
exponentially as the film thickness decreases as well, but at a lower rate compared to the
pressure and load capacity. The step height sh is seen to have a greater influence on the
outlet flow compared to the pressure and load capacity. A change in the step height of
∆sh = ±10 µm is seen to induce a constant shift in the outlet flow across the entire film
thickness range which in this case is approximately ∆Q = ±75 mm 3/s.
40
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:49==
(a) Comparison between experimental data and
numerical solution for parameter study of film
thickness on the outlet pressure, meaning a
closed outlet valve, with a constant angular ve­
locity of 245 RPM
(b) Comparison between experimental data and
numerical solution for parameter study of film
thickness on the load capacity, meaning a
closed outlet valve, with a constant angular ve­
locity of 245 RPM
(c) Comparison between experimental data and
numerical solution for parameter study of film
thickness on outlet flow, meaning an opened
outlet valve, with a constant angular velocity of
245 RPM
Figure 3.14: Comparison between experimental data and numerical solution for the film
thickness parameter studies for both open and close valve experiments
When looking at the correlation between the experimental data and the numerical param­
eter studies in the figures 3.14, it is evident that there is a discrepancy between the two,
especially for the pressure and the load capacity. The numerical model predicts the pres­
sure and the load capacity at a higher film height, but with a similar exponential trend. By
translating the experimental data approximately ∆h = 30 µm, the experimental data fits
well with the numerical parameter study, especially for the load capacity seen in figure
3.14b. For the outlet flow, the experimental data is less coherent. The outlet flow does
not follow the numerical to the same degree when comparing with the pressure and the
load capacity data. The data is seen to be within the interval given by the step height
tolerance of sh ± 10 µm, indicating that the true step height is lower than sh = 45 µm
used in the numerical model. The general trend of increasing outlet flow with decreasing
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
41
==PAGE:50==
film thickness is evident, but the exponential correlation is difficult to determine from the
experimental data. By shifting the experimental data, as done for the pressure and the
load capacity data, the outlet flow is seen to match slightly better with the numerical model
using the step height sh = 45 µm.
Angular velocity parameter study
Another parameter study is conducted to investigate how the angular velocity [RPM] af­
fects the outlet pressure [Pa], the volume flow [m3/s] and the load capacity [N]. The an­
gular velocity is varied from 100 RPM to 350 RPM. The film thickness is kept constant at
h0 = 40 µm. The numerical parameter study is plotted with the experimental data as seen
in figures 3.15.
From figures 3.15a and 3.15b, it is seen that the pressure and the load capacity are linearly
proportional with the angular velocity as expected from the Couette term in the Reynolds
equation (2.5). As for the film thickness parameter study, the step height sh has slight
influence on the slope of the pressure and the load capacity. As seen from figure 3.15c,
the outlet flow is also linearly proportional with the angular velocity. The step height has
a greater influence on the outlet flow compared to the pressure and the load capacity,
just as for the film thickness parameter study seen in figure 3.14c. A change in the step
height is seen to induce a shift in the magnitude and slope of the outlet flow. A smaller
step height causes a smaller outlet flow and a less steep outlet flow function. A larger
step height causes a larger outlet flow and a steeper outlet flow function.
42
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:51==
(a) Comparison between experimental data and
numerical solution for parameter study of angu­
lar velocity on the outlet pressure
(b) Comparison between experimental data and
numerical solution for parameter study of angu­
lar velocity on the load capacity
(c) Comparison between experimental data and
numerical solution for outlet flow as a function
of the angular velocity with a constant film thick­
ness of h0=40 µm
Figure 3.15: Comparison between experimental data and numerical solution
From figures 3.15a and 3.15b, it is evident that the slope is different between the numerical
parameter study and the experimental data. The slope of the pressure and therefore also
the load capacity is dictated by the film height, as seen from the Couette term in Reynolds
equation (2.5). Again the numerical model predicts a higher pressure and load capacity at
the given film height, across the angular velocity spectrum. This indicates the same film
thickness discrepancy as seen in the film thickness parameter study, shown in figure 3.14.
As it is not possible to shift the experimental data h0 + 30 µm, another parameter study
is conducted with a greater film thickness instead, h0 + 30 µm. The numerical parameter
study with an increased film thickness is seen to match well with the experimental data.
The slope has decreased and shows correlation between the experimental data and the
numerical parameter study.
3.4
Optimization results
The viscous pump used in the experimental setup is to be optimized with respect to outlet
flow. The reference outlet flow used is the outlet flow computed in figure 3.14c. For a film
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
43
==PAGE:52==
thickness of h0 = 100µm and at an angular velocity ω = 245 RPM with a step height of
sh = 45µm the outlet flow of the experimental geometry before optimization is computed to
be Q ≈200 mm3/s. The outlet is now modelled not by directly imposing the zero pressure
zone, as done in the section 3.2, but by the penalty method described in section 2.3.1.
The outlet modelling is a balance between representing the true geometry and creating a
differentiable mapping. The penalty method and the Heaviside projection function each
has mapping parameters controlling the enforcement of the outlet hole. The parameters
β in the Heaviside mapping and αmax, αmin and k in the penalty interpolation are found
through trial and error by the author. The results should be a representation of the outlet
in the pressure distribution matching well with the outlet outline and smooth sensitivities.
The penalty values are set to αmax = 100 and αmin = 0. The penalty factor is set to
k = 107. The smoothness parameter in the Heaviside function is set to β = 5.
First, the optimization of location is studied, meaning the radius is constant and no load
constraint is enforced. The optimization algorithm can only change the location of the
outlet hole.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a) Pressure distribution of solution showing re­
located outlet (red outline)
(b) Normalized outlet volume flow rate showing
an increase of almost 2%
Figure 3.16: Outlet location based optimization solution
Plotting the normalized outlet flow rate as a function of the iterations shows an increase
in outlet flow rate of almost 2%, seen in figure 3.16b. The final outlet location is plotted
with the normalized pressure distribution, seen in figure 3.16a. The outlet location is seen
to have shifted slightly towards the inner radius curve when compared to the pressure
distribution for the experimental geometry seen in figures 3.10. The largest pressure has
shifted from being on the left hand side of the outlet to the right hand side in the optimized
solution.
The optimization routine is then allowed to change the radius of the outlet in the effort of
increase the outlet flow rate. An area constraint of 5% of the design domain is enforced
on the outlet area, meaning the outlet can only occupy 5% of the total domain area.
44
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:53==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a) Pressure distribution of solution showing re­
located and resized outlet (red outline)
(b) Normalized outlet volume flow rate showing
an increase of approximately 80%
Figure 3.17: Outlet location and size based optimization solution. Area constraint of 5%
applied
By both relocating the outlet and increasing the outlet radius, the outlet volume flow rate
increases significantly by approximately 80% as seen from figure 3.17b. The pressure is
seen from figure 3.17a to be zero on a large part of the design domain.
A load constraint is enforced on the optimization routine. A minimum load of 25% of the
geometry without an outlet is set as the load constraint for the optimization routine.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a) Pressure distribution of solution showing re­
located and resized outlet (red outline)
(b) Normalized outlet volume flow rate showing
an increase of approximately 80%
Figure 3.18: Outlet location and size based optimization solution with load constraint of
25% and area constraint of 5% applied
The optimization routine solves the enforced load constraint problem by reducing the out­
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
45
==PAGE:54==
let radius in order to generate a greater pressure, and thereby the solution generates the
minimum load demanded by the constraint. The location is seen to be largely unchanged,
as the pressure distribution is similar to the two figures 3.17a and 3.18a. The normalized
flow rate shows an increase of approximately 45% as seen in figure 3.18b.
The topography optimization is engaged for the optimization routine. The experimental
geometry is used again as the initial design. Again the outlet is only allowed to change
location, meaning the optimization is unable to change the radius of the outlet.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a) Pressure distribution of solution showing re­
located outlet (red outline)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b) Optimized topography with red outline show­
ing the outlet
(c) Normalized outlet volume flow rate with log
scaled x axis showing an increase slightly more
than 250%
Figure 3.19: Outlet location and plate topography based optimization solution
By only relocating and changing the topography of the plate, the optimization routine in­
creases the outlet flow by more than 250%. The topography is seen to change significantly
compared to the experimental geometry seen in figure 2.2. The optimization opens up
the right hand side of the geometry by creating a high film thickness along the entire right
hand boundary. The topography is seen to generate negative pressures zones at the
inlet. In theory this would create a suction effect at the inlet which would be beneficial in
46
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:55==
terms of getting a higher flow across the inlet boundary and thereby increase the amount
of fluid pumped. Furthermore, the topography optimization is seen to not take full advan­
tage of the film height which could indicate that there is an optimal relation between the
step height, sh, and the film height, h0.
The optimization is then additionally allowed to change the radius of the outlet, with an
area constraint of 5%.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a) Pressure distribution of solution showing re­
located and resized outlet (red outline)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b) Optimized topography with red outline show­
ing the outlet
(c) Normalized outlet volume flow rate with log
scaled x axis showing an increase of almost
350% compared to the experimental geometry
Figure 3.20: Outlet location, size and plate topography based optimization solution. Area
constraint of 5% applied
Again the optimization takes full advantage of the area constraint, making the outlet hole
as big as possible, creating a significant increase in outlet flow rate of almost 350%. Again
the boundary is at almost full film thickness. The same negative pressure zones appear
at the inlet, as seen in figure 3.19a, but additional negative pressure zones appear at the
right hand side boundary. This is caused by a vane created in the topography.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
47
==PAGE:56==
A load constraint of 25% is enforced on the outlet location, size and plate topography
optimization.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a) Pressure distribution of solution showing re­
located and resized outlet (red outline)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b) Optimized topography with red outline show­
ing the outlet
(c) Normalized outlet volume flow rate with log
scaled x axis showing an increase of approxi­
mately 300% compared to the experimental ge­
ometry
Figure 3.21: Outlet location, size and plate topography based optimization solution. Load
constraint of 25% and area constraint of 5% applied
Again, as seen in figures 3.21b and 3.21c, the optimization routine decreases the outlet
size in order to comply with the load constraint, as the decrease outlet size will allow a
greater pressure to be generated. Additionally, the plate topography optimization is seen
to have brought down the right hand side wall in order to decrease the side leakage, as
seen in figure 3.21b. By creating a small film thickness along the right hand side, as done
on the left hand side, the side leakage is obstructed. By decreasing the side leakage,
the pressure generated is increased and this increases the load capacity and therefore
the optimization is able to comply with the load constraint. The optimization is seen to
increase the outlet flow by approximately 300% compared to the experimental geometry,
48
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:57==
as seen in figure 3.21c.
3.4.1
Load fraction study
A study of the effect of the load constraint on the optimized solution is conducted. The
geometry used in the experimental setup is used as the initial geometry in the optimization.
The outlet area constraint is set to 1% of the total design domain. The reference load used
to calculate the load constraint function value, from equation (2.10), is the load capacity
of the experimental geometry with no outlet.
The parametric outlet sizing and location based topology optimization is investigated,
meaning the topography is constant for each of the optimized solutions. The load fraction
is varied, generating 21 different solutions, as seen by table 3.4 and 3.5.
Solution
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
ϵ
1−8
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
w [N]
0.0
75.8
151.6
227.4
303.1
378.9
454.7
530.5
606.3
682.1
757.9
Table 3.4: Load fraction and corresponding minimum load of the first 10 optimized solu­
tions
Solution
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
ϵ
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
w [N]
833.6
909.4
985.2
1061.0
1136.8
1212.6
1288.3
1364.1
1439.9
1515.7
Table 3.5: Load fraction and corresponding minimum load of the optimized solutions con­
tinued
The outlet volume flow is plotted as a function of the load fraction along with the area and
load constraint function values, as seen in figure 3.22.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
49
==PAGE:58==
4
7
9
16
Figure 3.22: Load fraction study on the outlet topology optimization routine showing the
outlet flow, the area constraint and the load constraint function values as a function of the
load fraction. Vertical lines illustrate the solutions chosen for further investigation in the
form of plotting
From figure 3.22, the outlet volume flow rate is constant until the load fraction reaches
a threshold of approximately 27%, at which point the outlet volume flow rate decreases
as the load fraction increases. Figure 3.22 also shows that the area constraint value
decreases as soon as the load constraint value starts reaching 0. As the load constraint
value increases and approaches 0, the optimization routine decreases the radius of the
outlet. The area constraint value decreases rapidly after the load constraint value has
reached 0, in an effort to generate a higher pressure.
The topography is plotted with the outlet outline for the four marked solutions, as seen in
figures 3.23. The solutions are chosen as different points of interest along load fraction
range, marked in figure 3.22 by solutions 4, 7, 9 and 16. The load fractions of each of the
solutions can be read in tables 3.4 and 3.5.
50
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:59==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(a) Topography plot showing the experimental
geometry and the optimized outlet (red outline)
sizing and location of the fourth solution showing
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(b) Topography plot showing the experimental
geometry and the optimized outlet (red outline)
sizing and location of the seventh solution show­
ing
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(c) Topography plot showing the experimental
geometry and the optimized outlet (red outline)
sizing and location of the ninth solution showing
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(d) Topography plot showing the experimen­
tal geometry and the optimized outlet (red out­
line) sizing and location of the sixteenth solution
showing
Figure 3.23: Plots of the four outlet topology solutions, marked in figure 3.22
Evidently from the figures 3.23, the outlet area is reduced and relocated slightly away
from the film height step boundary and away from the maximum pressure zone which will
increase the load capacity generated by the solution.
The same load fraction study is made, but with the plate topography optimization enabled.
The area constraint is set to 1% again, and the same reference load is used to calculate
the load constraint value. The outlet volume flow rate is plotted as a function of the load
fraction, along with the area and load constraint function values, as seen in figure 3.24.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
51
==PAGE:60==
4
7
9
16
Figure 3.24: Load fraction study on the outlet topology optimization routine showing the
outlet flow and the area and load constraint function values as a function of the load
fraction. Vertical lines illustrate the solutions chosen for further investigation in the form
of plotting
Generally, the same trend is seen as from figure 3.22. The outlet radius is kept at the
maximum as long as the load constraint value starts to reach 0, meaning the minimum
load starts to approach the load capacity of the generated solution. When comparing to
the load fraction study without topology optimization seen in figure 3.22, the outlet is kept
at the maximum area at slightly higher load fractions, 30% in figure 3.24 compared to the
27% in figure 3.22. With topography optimization enabled, the algorithm is able to make
up for the load capacity thereby allowing the outlet to be kept open for a slightly higher
load fraction constraint. As the outlet area decreases in order to generate a larger load
capacity, the outlet volume flow rate is seen to decrease. As the outlet area goes towards
zero at around the 0.8 load fraction mark, the outlet volume flow trend is seen to become
less linear. This is likely due to the outlet being significantly smaller than the capabilities
of the mesh to properly represent the outlet. This numerical instability is also evident in
the first load fraction study, seen in figure 3.22. A significant increase is seen in the flow
rate when the topography optimization is enabled. At the maximum load fraction with the
outlet being almost completely removed from the model, the normalized flow rate is seen
to be higher than the highest achieved flow rate in figure 3.22. This is unexpected, as the
outlet is practically closed and therefore no outlet flow should be calculated, as in figure
3.22. If the outlet is closed and an outlet flow is still observed, this means the fluid is
disappearing somewhere in the domain separate from the outlet.
The topography is plotted with the outlet outline for the four marked solutions, as seen in
figures 3.25. The solutions are chosen as different points of interest along load fraction
range, marked in figure 3.24 by solutions 4, 7, 9 and 16. The load fractions of each of the
solutions can be read in tables 3.4 and 3.5.
52
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:61==
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(a) Topography plot showing the optimized ge­
ometry and the optimized outlet (red outline) siz­
ing and location of the fourth solution showing
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b) Topography plot showing the optimized ge­
ometry and the optimized outlet (red outline) siz­
ing and location of the seventh solution showing
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(c) Topography plot showing the optimized ge­
ometry and the optimized outlet (red outline) siz­
ing and location of the ninth solution showing
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(d) Topography plot showing the optimized ge­
ometry and the optimized outlet (red outline) siz­
ing and location of the sixteenth solution show­
ing
Figure 3.25: Plots of the four marked outlet topology and topography solutions from figure
3.24
Figure 3.25 shows a trend of the topography optimization removing the right hand side
shroud at low load fraction constraint much like the optimizations in figure 3.19b and 3.20b.
This is unexpected as the shroud should decrease side leakage thereby directing more
flow towards the outlet. As the load fraction is increased the shroud reappears in order
to generate a larger load capacity. The outlet part of the optimization behaves much
like without topography optimization enabled. The outlet hole area is reduced, and the
outlet is relocated much like the solutions seen in figures 3.23. As observed earlier, the
topography does not take full advantage of the film height, as the biggest film height is
only 90% of the full film thickness. At solutions with a higher load fraction constraint, the
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
53
==PAGE:62==
optimization is seen to create small islands of thin fluid films in and around the outlet.
Evidently, the model does not take into account that the outlet hole negates any control
of the fluid film in the nodes inside the outlet outline.
54
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:63==
4
Discussion
In this chapter the results from chapter 3 are discussed. The discussion is split into three
sections. The first section covers the results from the numerical FE model validation. The
second section covers the results from comparisons between the experimental data and
the numerical parameter studies. The third section covers the optimization results.
4.0.1
FE model validation
The FE model of the experimental setup of the viscous pump was compared with the
commercial software for multiphysics Comsol. The solution for a simulation of the closed
valve experiment, meaning no outlet is modelled, was seen to converge relatively quickly
from the bottom. This was expected as the FE model employs an immersed mesh. As the
mesh is refined, the true geometry of the shroud is approached since the nodes are not
defined to any inner geometries. The solution for a simulation of the open valve experi­
ment, meaning the outlet is modelled, converged at a slower rate and from the top. This
is due to the way the outlet was modelled. The mesh is imposed an area with all nodes
inside where the zero pressure boundary condition is enforced. Using this method, the
area will always be under­represented, but will approach the true size as the mesh is re­
fined. As the model is refined, the outlet and its boundary conditions are represented in
greater detail, therefore reducing the pressure, meaning the solution converges from the
top. The closed valve solution will always underestimate the solution, and the open valve
solution will always overestimate the solution. A mesh refinement of 10000 elements was
chosen as a compromise between computational time and precision.
4.0.2
Comparison between the experimental data and the FE model
The experimental data and the numerical parameter studies indicated a difference of 30
µm between the two of them. The experimental data measures a lower load capacity and
outlet pressure which corresponds to approximately 30 µm of film thickness discrepancy
between the FE model and the experimental data. Several reasons for this discrepancy
were investigated. The FE model assumes constant fluid properties, meaning any change
of viscosity due to temperature is not taken into account. During operation, the tempera­
ture increases in the high pressure zones in the fluid film which decreases viscosity, and
therefore the pressure being generated will decrease slightly. Furthermore, the FE model
is not an elastic hydrodynamic model which means that the deformation caused by the
pressure during operation is not taken into account. This is mainly taken into account
when dealing with bearings where nonconformal surfaces generate significantly higher
pressures than what is generated in the viscous pump [5]. If the discrepancy was caused
by either a fluid property change as a function of the pressure or elastic deformation as a
function of the pressure, the discrepancy would also be a function of the pressure, mean­
ing the discrepancy between the experimental data and the FE model would increase as
the pressure increased. This is not observed in the pressure and load capacity compar­
isons seen in figures 3.14a, 3.14b, 3.15a and 3.15b, where a more or less constant 30
µm discrepancy is observed.
Another source for the discrepancy could be electromagnetic interference on the induction
based distance probe. When the DC motor is turned on, magnetic disturbances caused
by the motor is speculated to interfere with the distance probe. In order to determine if this
is the case, the pump is opened slightly and the oil between the two plates is removed,
meaning no viscous forces are acting in the pump. The distance probe output is monitored
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
55
==PAGE:64==
as the motor is turned on inducing a rotation of the top plate. No jump in the distance probe
output is observed and therefore this can be discounted as a measurement error causing
the 30 µm discrepancy.
When conducting the experiments, either the film thickness or the angular velocity is at­
tempted to be kept constant between measurements. Evidently, this is not possible as
there will always be slight differences between experiments, as seen from table 3.1. The
variation between the three chosen experimental data sets are within reasonable ranges
with the film thickness being on average 1.5 µm above the target value and the angular
velocity being 2.9 RPM below the target. Both a larger film thickness and a lower angular
velocity will contribute to a lower measured pressure and load capacity when comparing
with the FE model. This a small contribution to the discrepancy between the experimental
data and the numerical FE model, but is discounted as the main source.
The misalignment of the top plate, measured as a film height variation by the distance
probe and a flatness range by the dial gauge in section 3.1.3, is attested as the main
source of the discrepancy. The three outlets in the experimental bearing pad are con­
nected into one single outlet. The pressure measured is therefore an unknown combi­
nation of the pressures generated in each of the outlets. If assuming the misalignment
causes a film height difference between the three outlets, one of the three outlets will gen­
erate a minimum pressure which will be the outlet with the largest film height at any given
time. As all the outlets are connected, the fluid can pass relatively free between each
of the outlets. Although steps could be taken in order to bring down the misalignment, it
is impossible to create a perfect rotating flat plane which would eliminate any pressure
pulsations. An obvious but expensive solution is to manufacture a top plate assembly
with tight tolerances. This would create a smaller misalignment, but a low compliance
and expensive solution. Another solution is to make a high compliance solution, meaning
the top plate should be designed with a higher degree of x and y rotation, either using
some kind of spherical joint or compliant shims in the form of belleville springs. A high
compliance solution would allow the top and bottom plate to align better when the load
is applied which could reduce misalignment. A reduced misalignment would reduce the
pressure amplitude found in figures 3.6a and 3.6b.
In order to better investigate the effect of the misalignment on the output pressure, a
new bottom plate design, meaning the bearing plate, should be made. If the outlets were
separated, three pressure transducers measure each of the outlets separately eliminating
the unknown pressure combination. Additionally, each of the step shoes should have an
individual distance probe. This would allow for measurements of the local film thickness at
each of the step shoes. This would give a better indication of the exact film height of all the
pressure generating shoes, instead of only one. Separate outlets and multiple distance
probes would allow for a more precise measurement of the film height and corresponding
pressure in each of the outlets.
Another discrepancy source is the normal squeeze which is not taken into account in the
FE model as stated in section 2.1. As demonstrated by the experimental results, the
film thickness varies with time as the top plate is not perfectly aligned. A varying film
thickness causes a normal squeeze pressure that is not negligible. The normal squeeze
will also be a major factor in the outlet pressure pulsation as the film thickness increases
and decreases.
Lastly, the viscosity of the oil is determined from the oil temperature and the technical
specifications given by the supplier. As the oil has been sitting out for some time before
the work in this thesis was conducted, any degradation of the oil is unaccounted for. Ex­
56
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:65==
perimental measurements of the oil viscosity could show a degradation of the oil which
could lead to a poorer pressure generating ability in the pump.
4.0.3
Optimization results
The outlet topology results show a general trend of the optimization routine increasing
the outlet as much as possible in order to increase the outlet flow. As a load constraint is
enforced, the optimization balances the load capacity by reducing the outlet size, as seen
by comparison of the solutions in figures 3.17a and 3.18a and from the load fraction study
in figure 3.22. Furthermore, the outlet is relocated by the optimization routine, locating
the greatest pressure zone on the right hand side of the outlet.
The optimization routine with the topography optimization enabled is seen to remove the
outer radius shroud when no load constraint or a weak load constraint is enforced on
the optimization routine. As a harsher load constraint is enforced, the optimized solution
resembles a shrouded step, as seen from figure 3.25. Additionally, the optimization tries
to take advantage of the boundaries at the inlet and the right hand side, by creating areas
where the flow goes from the small film thickness to a large film thickness. This creates
theoretical negative pressure zones which creates suction and thereby decreasing the
flow out of the domain. The negative pressure zones increase the outlet flow due to
the manner of calculating the outlet flow as a residual from the boundary flow, as seen
in equation (2.16) and illustrated in figure 2.23. The outlet flow is seen to be increased
significantly from figure 3.24 with the topography optimization enabled. Even as the outlet
orifice is reduced in size to practically zero, the outlet flow is still higher than the optimized
solution without topography optimization enabled. An artificially high outlet flow is seen to
be generated when topography optimization is enabled.
The two load fraction studies show different real usability of the two solutions. The opti­
mization with topography disabled creates solutions where the outlet flow disappears as
the outlet orifice is closed which makes physical sense. The optimization with topography
enabled creates solutions where the outlet flow is still significant even as the outlet orifice
is closed which does not make physical sense.
The source for this artifical outlet flow is discussed.
This artificial flow causing the discrepancy was seen to be greater than the discrepancy
documented by Petersen[1] which was caused by different converging rates between the
pressure field and the flow rate. The refined load fraction study can be found in appendix
A.3.
The outlet flow was reduced to margins within numerical reason in the optimization without
topography enabled. This indicates that the isoparametric formulation works, meaning the
error is likely not caused by varying element sizes in the mesh.
The most discerning difference between the two solutions is the generation of negative
pressure zones when topography optimization is enabled. The outlet topology optimiza­
tion solutions only generated positive pressures, as seen from appendix A.1. The outlet
topology and topography optimization solutions generated zones with negative pressures,
as seen from appendix A.2. The negative pressure zones act as sinks which increase the
outlet flow dramatically.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
57
==PAGE:66==
5
Conclusion
From the experimental results, it was shown that a discrepancy was observed between the
outlet pressure and the load capacity corresponding to approximately 30 µm film thick­
ness. The main source of the discrepancy was accredited to the misalignment of the
top plate and the under­represented measurements of the outlet pressure and the film
thickness. The misalignment of the top plate caused film thickness varying with time
and the under­represented measurements caused the outlet pressure to be an unknown
combination of three different outlet pressures, along with the film thickness only being
representing of on single film thickness.
The outlet optimization showed improved outlet flows, mainly attributed to an increasing
outlet size, but also in terms of relocation of the outlet.
Including the topography optimization showed even greater improvements of the outlet
flow, but due generation to of artificial outlet flow the topography optimization generated
solutions which are not physically feasible. The artificial outlet flow was speculated to be
caused by the generation of suction zones where the pressure was negative.
5.1
Future work
An improved experimental setup allowing for more detailed measurements was suggested
in the form of separate outlets and multiple distance probes.
The topology outlet optimization was seen to work as intended, which prompts further
development in regards to optimization allowing multiple outlets or optimization based
on morphable shapes, as the circular outlet hole is not necessarily the best shape for
maximising the outlet flow.
The solutions with the topography optimization enabled showed high artificial outlet flow
along with negative pressure zones. Further examination of the exploitation of negative
pressures should be conducted in order to create a physically feasible topography opti­
mized solution for the viscous pump.
58
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
A. B. Petersen. Topology optimization of hydrodynamic bearings. 2022.
[2]
Lord Rayleigh. Notes on the theory of lubrication. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
14786440108635730.
[3]
J. D. Knight Y. Sato. Performance Characteristics of Shrouded Rayleigh­Step and
Spiral Groove Viscous Pumps. 1992. URL: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2920911.
[4]
O. Sigmund F. Wang J. S. Jensen. High­performance slow light photonic crystal
waveguides with topology optimized or circular­hole based material layouts. 2012.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.photonics.2012.04.004.
[5]
S. R. Schmid B. J. Hamrock and B. O. Jacobson. Fundamentals of Fluid Film Lu­
brication. Marcel Dekker, inc., 2004.
[6]
K. Svanberg M. Stolpe. An alternative interpolation scheme for minimum compli­
ance topology optimization. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s001580100129.
[7]
C. S. Andreasen. Optimized bearing shape and texture for isothermal hydrodynamic
bearings. 2015.
[8]
N. Moriguchi Y. Sato K. Ono. Analysis of Viscous Pumps With Shrouded Rayleigh­
Steps Using Compressible Fluid. 1988. URL: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3261699.
[9]
K. Svanberg. The Method of Moving Asymptotes A New Method for Structural Op­
timization. 1987. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.1620240207.
[10]
R. Yaier I. Etsion. Performance Analysis of a New Concept Viscous Pump. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3261582.
[11]
N. Brunetière and B. Tournerie. Finite Element Solution of Inertia Influenced Flow
in Thin Fluid Films. URL: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2768089.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:69==
A
Results for all solutions in the load
constraint study
A.1
Outlet optimization
Topography plots for all the solutions from the load fraction study using the outlet topology
optimization.
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
61
==PAGE:70==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(b)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(c)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(d)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(e)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(f)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Topography - 
(t)
Figure A.1: Topography of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of 100x100
Pressure distribution plots for all the solutions from the load fraction study using the outlet
topology optimization.
62
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:71==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(b)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(c)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(d)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(e)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(f)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(t)
Figure A.2: Pressure distribution of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of
100x100
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
63
==PAGE:72==
A.2
Outlet and topography optimization
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(a)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(c)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(d)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(e)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(f)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(g)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(h)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(i)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(j)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(k)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(l)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(m)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(n)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(o)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(p)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(q)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(r)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(s)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(t)
Figure A.3: Topography of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of 100x100
64
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:73==
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(b)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(c)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(d)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(e)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(f)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(t)
Figure A.4: Pressure distribution of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of
100x100
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
65
==PAGE:74==
A.3
Refined load fraction study
The artificial outlet flow is studied. Finer discretization load fraction studies are conducted
in order to determine if the outlet flow is caused by difference of convergence rates be­
tween the pressure field and the outlet flow as described by Petersen [1] and Brunetière
and Tournerie [11]. Six different refinements are applied to the optimization. The number
of elements of the six studies are as follows: [10000,12100,14400,16900,19600,22500].
The normalized outlet flow of the solutions at load fraction ϵ = 1 are plotted as a function
of the number of elements in figure A.5.
Figure A.5: Normalized outlet flow of the last solutions in the load fraction studies as a
function of the number of elements
Evidently, the artificial outlet flow generally increases as the refinement increases. This
suggests that the main portion of the artificial outlet flow is not caused by the different
convergence rates of the pressure field and the outlet flow.
The solutions for the refined load fraction studies are plotted as seen in the following:
66
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:75==
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(a)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(c)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(d)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(e)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(f)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(g)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(h)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(i)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(j)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(k)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(l)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(m)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(n)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(o)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(p)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(q)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(r)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(s)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(t)
Figure A.6: Topography of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of 110x110
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
67
==PAGE:76==
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(b)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(c)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(d)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(e)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(f)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(t)
Figure A.7: Pressure distribution of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of
110x110
68
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:77==
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(a)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(c)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(d)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(e)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(f)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(g)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(h)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(i)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(j)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(k)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(l)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(m)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(n)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(o)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(p)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(q)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(r)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(s)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(t)
Figure A.8: Topography of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of 120x120
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
69
==PAGE:78==
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(b)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(c)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(d)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(e)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(f)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(t)
Figure A.9: Pressure distribution of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of
120x120
70
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:79==
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(a)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(c)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(d)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(e)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(f)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(g)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(h)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(i)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(j)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(k)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(l)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(m)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(n)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(o)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(p)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(q)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(r)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(s)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(t)
Figure A.10: Topography of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of 130x130
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
71
==PAGE:80==
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(b)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(c)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(d)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(e)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(f)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(t)
Figure A.11: Pressure distribution of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of
130x130
72
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:81==
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(a)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(c)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(d)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(e)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(f)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(g)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(h)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(i)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(j)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(k)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(l)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(m)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(n)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(o)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(p)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(q)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(r)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(s)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(t)
Figure A.12: Topography of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of 140x140
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
73
==PAGE:82==
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(b)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(c)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(d)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(e)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(f)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(t)
Figure A.13: Pressure distribution of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of
140x140
74
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:83==
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(a)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(b)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(c)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(d)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(e)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(f)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(g)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(h)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(i)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(j)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(k)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(l)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(m)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(n)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(o)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(p)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(q)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(r)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(s)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Topography - 
(t)
Figure A.14: Topography of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of 150x150
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
75
==PAGE:84==
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(a)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(b)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(c)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(d)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(e)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(f)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(g)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(h)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(i)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(j)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(l)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(n)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(o)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(p)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(q)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(r)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized pressure 
P
(t)
Figure A.15: Pressure distribution of solutions for load fraction study with a mesh of
150x150
76
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:85==
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
77
==PAGE:86==
B
Data sheet for experimental geometry
Figure B.1: Geometric measurements of experimental bearing pad geometry
78
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:87==
C
Relevant MatLab implementations
This appendix presents relevant MatLab code which has been created or modified by the
author. The MatLab implementaitons are heavily inspired by the work done by Asger B.
Petersen in his thesis [1]. Additional code used, but not created or modified by the author
can be found in the appendix in Petersen’s thesis [1]. The implementations are not made
with efficiency as the first priority, meaning there is room for computational improvements.
The MatLab implementations are made using MatLab version R2021b.
C.1
Finite Element Model
The finite element model function is written by Asger B. Petersen and modified by the
author. The function solves the finite element problem in the form of a pressure distribu­
tion. Additionally, relevant objective functions and constraint values along with respective
sensitivities are returned.
1
% FEM Reynolds equation
2
% Extended to 2D - 29/3-22 ABP
3
function [sol,f0,df0,f,df]=film_2D(fem,design,designA)
4
% fem.X is node list
5
% fem.IX is connectivity matrix
6
% fem.bc.... is boundary conditions structure
7
%
.bc_pressure
is nodes with defined pressure
8
%
.bc_pressure_values
is corresponding pressure values
9
10
nel=size(fem.IX,1);
11
nn=length(fem.X);
12
ndof=nn;
13
14
edofMat=fem.IX; % Due to 1 dof per node
15
16
if size(fem.u,2)==2 % Check for non-changing velocity field
17
uConst=fem.u;
18
fem.u=zeros(2*nn,1);
19
fem.u(1:2:end)=uConst(:,1);
20
fem.u(2:2:end)=uConst(:,2);
21
end
22
23
24
[h,dh]=interpolate(fem,design);
25
if fem.outlet
26
[alpha,dalpha]=interpolateAlpha(fem,designA);
27
else
28
alpha=zeros(nn,1);
29
end
30
31
[G,N, Null]=boundary_conditions(fem);
32
33
[M,A,F]=formResidualJacobian(fem,edofMat ,h,alpha);
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
79
==PAGE:88==
34
35
F=F-M*(G);
36
M = Null'*M*Null - (Null-speye(ndof,ndof));
37
F(N~=1)=G(N==0);
38
if fem.outlet
39
M=M+A; % Test location
40
end
41
sol=M\F;
42
43
if nargout >1
44
if strcmp(fem.int,'G')
45
gp=[-1/sqrt(3), 1/sqrt(3)];
46
w=[1,1];
47
elseif strcmp(fem.int,'L')
48
gp=[-1, 1];
49
w=[1,1];
50
elseif strcmp(fem.int,'U')
51
gp=0;
52
w=2;
53
else
54
disp('Wrong selection of integration')
55
keyboard
56
end
57
switch fem.objective
58
case 'force' % FD check approved - 14/4
59
L=zeros(nn,1);
60
for elem=1:nel
61
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
62
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
63
for i=1:length(gp)
64
for j=1:length(gp)
65
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
66
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
67
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
68
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
69
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
70
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
71
L(edof)=L(edof)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
72
end
73
end
74
end
75
load=L'*sol;
76
rhs=-L;
77
78
% Enforce boundary conditions
80
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:89==
79
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
80
adj=M\rhs;
81
82
dload_1=zeros(nel,1);
83
dload_2=zeros(nel,1);
84
dload_3=zeros(nel,1);
85
dload_4=zeros(nel,1);
86
dload=zeros(nn,1);
87
for elem=1:nel
88
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
89
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
90
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)
*2,edof(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)
*2]; % Variable velocity field 23/5
91
for i=1:length(gp)
92
for j=1:length(gp)
93
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
94
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
95
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
96
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
97
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
98
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
99
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
100
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
101
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
102
B=invJ*dN;
103
Bu=invJ*[-1+xi(2),0,1-xi(2),0,1+xi(2)
,0,-1-xi(2),0;
104
0,-1+xi(1),0,-1-xi(1),0,1+xi(1),0,1-
xi(1)];
105
% New derivatives wrt. variable velocity
field 23/5
106
dload_1(elem)=dload_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
107
dload_2(elem)=dload_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
81
==PAGE:90==
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
108
dload_3(elem)=dload_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
109
dload_4(elem)=dload_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
110
end
111
end
112
dload(edofMat(elem ,:))=dload(edofMat(elem ,:))+[
dload_1(elem);dload_2(elem);dload_3(elem);
dload_4(elem)];
113
end
114
f0=-load;
115
df0=-dload;
116
f=1;
117
df=zeros(size(df0));
118
case 'friction' % FD check approved - Gauss and force
119
L=zeros(nn,3);
120
dragConst=[0 0];
121
for elem=1:nel
122
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
123
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
124
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)
*2,edof(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)
*2]; % Variable velocity field 24/5
125
for i=1:length(gp)
126
for j=1:length(gp)
127
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
128
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
129
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
130
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
131
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
132
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
82
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:91==
]/4;
133
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
134
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
135
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
136
B=invJ*dN;
137
%Bu=invJ*[-1+xi(2),0,1-xi(2) ,0,1+xi(2)
,0,-1-xi(2),0;
138
%
0,-1+xi(1),0,-1-xi(1) ,0,1+xi(1)
,0,1-xi(1)];
139
L(edof ,1)=L(edof ,1)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
140
L(edof ,2:3)=L(edof ,2:3)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ
*(-.5*Np*h(edof)*B)';
141
dragConst=dragConst+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*(Nu*
fem.u(uedof))'*fem.eta/(Np*h(edof));
142
end
143
end
144
end
145
146
load=L(:,1)'*sol;
147
drag_x=L(:,2)'*sol-dragConst(1);
148
drag_y=L(:,3)'*sol-dragConst(2);
149
rhs=-L;
150
151
% Enforce boundary conditions
152
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
153
adj=M\rhs;
154
155
dload_1=zeros(nel,1);
156
dload_2=zeros(nel,1);
157
dload_3=zeros(nel,1);
158
dload_4=zeros(nel,1);
159
ddrag_x_1=zeros(nel,1);
160
ddrag_x_2=zeros(nel,1);
161
ddrag_x_3=zeros(nel,1);
162
ddrag_x_4=zeros(nel,1);
163
ddrag_y_1=zeros(nel,1);
164
ddrag_y_2=zeros(nel,1);
165
ddrag_y_3=zeros(nel,1);
166
ddrag_y_4=zeros(nel,1);
167
dragConst=[0 0];
168
169
dload=zeros(nn,1);
170
ddrag_x=zeros(nn,1);
171
ddrag_y=zeros(nn,1);
172
for elem=1:nel
173
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
174
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
175
for i=1:length(gp)
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
83
==PAGE:92==
176
for j=1:length(gp)
177
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
178
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
179
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
180
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
181
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
182
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
183
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
184
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
185
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
186
B=invJ*dN;
187
Bu=invJ*[-1+xi(2),0,1-xi(2),0,1+xi(2)
,0,-1-xi(2),0;
188
0,-1+xi(1),0,-1-xi(1) ,0,1+xi(1),0,1-
xi(1)];
189
190
dload_1(elem)=dload_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
191
dload_2(elem)=dload_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
192
dload_3(elem)=dload_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
193
dload_4(elem)=dload_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
84
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:93==
194
195
dragConst=(1/2*Np'*(B*sol(edof))')'-Nu*
fem.u(uedof)*fem.eta/(Np*h(edof))^2*
Np;
196
ddrag_x_1(elem)=ddrag_x_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]')
...
197
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,1);
198
ddrag_x_2(elem)=ddrag_x_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]')
...
199
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,2);
200
ddrag_x_3(elem)=ddrag_x_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]')
...
201
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,3);
202
ddrag_x_4(elem)=ddrag_x_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]')
...
203
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,4);
204
205
ddrag_y_1(elem)=ddrag_y_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]')
...
206
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(2,1);
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
85
==PAGE:94==
207
ddrag_y_2(elem)=ddrag_y_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]')
...
208
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(2,2);
209
ddrag_y_3(elem)=ddrag_y_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]')
...
210
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(2,3);
211
ddrag_y_4(elem)=ddrag_y_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]')
...
212
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(2,4);
213
end
214
end
215
dload(edof)=dload(edof)+[dload_1(elem);dload_2(
elem);dload_3(elem);dload_4(elem)];
216
ddrag_x(edof)=ddrag_x(edof)+[ddrag_x_1(elem);
ddrag_x_2(elem);ddrag_x_3(elem);ddrag_x_4(
elem)];
217
ddrag_y(edof)=ddrag_y(edof)+[ddrag_y_1(elem);
ddrag_y_2(elem);ddrag_y_3(elem);ddrag_y_4(
elem)];
218
end
219
friction_x=-drag_x/load;
220
dfriction_x=(ddrag_x*load-drag_x*dload)/(load)^2;
221
friction_y=-drag_y/load;
222
dfriction_y=(ddrag_y*load-drag_y*dload)/(load)^2;
223
% Min friction and "maintain" load:
224
f0=friction_x;
225
df0=-dfriction_x;
226
f=1;
227
df=zeros(size(df0));
228
case 'drag' % FD check approved - Gauss and force
229
L=zeros(nn,3);
230
dragConst=[0 0];
86
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:95==
231
for elem=1:nel
232
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
233
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
234
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)
*2,edof(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)
*2]; % Variable velocity field 24/5
235
for i=1:length(gp)
236
for j=1:length(gp)
237
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
238
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
239
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
240
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
241
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
242
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
243
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
244
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
245
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
246
B=invJ*dN;
247
L(edof ,1)=L(edof ,1)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
248
L(edof ,2:3)=L(edof ,2:3)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ
*(-.5*Np*h(edof)*B)';
249
dragConst=dragConst+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*(Nu*
fem.u(uedof))'*fem.eta/(Np*h(edof));
250
end
251
end
252
end
253
254
load=L(:,1)'*sol;
255
drag_x=L(:,2)'*sol-dragConst(1);
256
drag_y=L(:,3)'*sol-dragConst(2);
257
rhs=-L;
258
259
% Enforce boundary conditions
260
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
261
adj=M\rhs;
262
263
dload_1=zeros(nel,1);
264
dload_2=zeros(nel,1);
265
dload_3=zeros(nel,1);
266
dload_4=zeros(nel,1);
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
87
==PAGE:96==
267
ddrag_x_1=zeros(nel,1);
268
ddrag_x_2=zeros(nel,1);
269
ddrag_x_3=zeros(nel,1);
270
ddrag_x_4=zeros(nel,1);
271
dragConst=[0 0];
272
273
dload=zeros(nn,1);
274
ddrag_x=zeros(nn,1);
275
for elem=1:nel
276
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
277
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
278
for i=1:length(gp)
279
for j=1:length(gp)
280
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
281
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
282
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
283
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
284
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
285
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
286
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
287
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
288
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
289
B=invJ*dN;
290
Bu=invJ*[-1+xi(2),0,1-xi(2),0,1+xi(2)
,0,-1-xi(2),0;
291
0,-1+xi(1),0,-1-xi(1) ,0,1+xi(1),0,1-
xi(1)];
292
293
dload_1(elem)=dload_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
294
dload_2(elem)=dload_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
88
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:97==
295
dload_3(elem)=dload_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
296
dload_4(elem)=dload_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
297
298
dragConst=(1/2*Np'*(B*sol(edof))')'-Nu*
fem.u(uedof)*fem.eta/(Np*h(edof))^2*
Np;
299
ddrag_x_1(elem)=ddrag_x_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]')
...
300
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,1);
301
ddrag_x_2(elem)=ddrag_x_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]')
...
302
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,2);
303
ddrag_x_3(elem)=ddrag_x_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]')
...
304
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,3);
305
ddrag_x_4(elem)=ddrag_x_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]')
...
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
89
==PAGE:98==
306
-w(i)*w(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*
dragConst(1,4);
307
end
308
end
309
dload(edof)=dload(edof)+[dload_1(elem);dload_2(
elem);dload_3(elem);dload_4(elem)];
310
ddrag_x(edof)=ddrag_x(edof)+[ddrag_x_1(elem);
ddrag_x_2(elem);ddrag_x_3(elem);ddrag_x_4(
elem)];
311
end
312
f0=-drag_x;
313
df0=-ddrag_x;
314
%
f=1;
315
%
df=zeros(size(df0));
316
f=fem.fGoal/load -1;
317
df=-fem.fGoal*dload/load^2;
318
case 'pressure'
319
disp('Not updated')
320
keyboard
321
f0=(sol-fem.fGoal)'*(sol-fem.fGoal);
322
rhs=-2*(sol-fem.fGoal);
323
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
324
adj=M\rhs;
325
dload_left=zeros(nel,1);
326
dload_right=zeros(nel,1);
327
for elem=1:nel
328
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
329
a=fem.X(edof(2))-fem.X(edof(1));
330
detJ=a/2;
331
const=6*fem.eta*fem.u;
332
for i=1:numel(gp)
333
xi=gp(i);
334
Np=[1-xi, 1+xi]/2;
335
B=[-1, 1]/2;
336
dload_right(elem) =
dload_right(elem) + w(i
)*detJ*dh(edof(2))* adj(edof ,1)'* (B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*Np*[0 1]'*B*sol(edof)/detJ
^2+const*Np'*B*[0 1]'/detJ);
337
dload_left(elem) =
dload_left(elem) + w(i)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,1)'* (B'*3*(Np*
h(edof))^2*Np*[1 0]'*B*sol(edof)/detJ^2+
const*Np'*B*[1 0]'/detJ);
338
end
339
end
340
dload=([dload_left; 0]+[0; dload_right]);
341
df0=dload;
342
f=1;
343
df=zeros(size(df0));
344
case 'outlet' % Passed FD check for Gauss 6/6
345
[Q,~,rhs,dQdh]=boundaryflow(fem,sol,h,dh,gp,w);
90
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:99==
346
rhs=-rhs;
347
348
L=zeros(nn,1);
349
for elem=1:nel
350
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
351
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
352
for i=1:length(gp)
353
for j=1:length(gp)
354
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
355
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
356
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
357
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
358
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
359
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
360
L(edof)=L(edof)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
361
end
362
end
363
end
364
load=L'*sol;
365
rhs(:,2)=-L;
366
367
% Pressure test 18/6
368
pres=sum(max(0,-sol));
369
rhs(:,3)=0;
370
rhs(sol<0,3)=1; % rhs er minus af gradienter , som er
minus => positiv
371
372
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
373
adj=M\rhs;
374
375
doutlet_1=zeros(nel,1);
376
doutlet_2=zeros(nel,1);
377
doutlet_3=zeros(nel,1);
378
doutlet_4=zeros(nel,1);
379
doutlet=zeros(nn,1);
380
381
dload_1=zeros(nel,1);
382
dload_2=zeros(nel,1);
383
dload_3=zeros(nel,1);
384
dload_4=zeros(nel,1);
385
dload=zeros(nn,1);
386
387
% Pressure test 18/6
388
dpres_1=zeros(nel,1);
389
dpres_2=zeros(nel,1);
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
91
==PAGE:100==
390
dpres_3=zeros(nel,1);
391
dpres_4=zeros(nel,1);
392
dpres=zeros(nn,1);
393
394
for elem=1:nel
395
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
396
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
397
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)
*2,edof(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)
*2]; % Variable velocity field 23/5
398
for i=1:length(gp)
399
for j=1:length(gp)
400
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
401
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
402
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
403
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
404
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
405
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
406
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
407
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
408
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
409
B=invJ*dN;
410
Bu=invJ*[-1+xi(2),0,1-xi(2),0,1+xi(2)
,0,-1-xi(2),0;
411
0,-1+xi(1),0,-1-xi(1) ,0,1+xi(1),0,1-
xi(1)];
412
doutlet_1(elem)=doutlet_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
413
doutlet_2(elem)=doutlet_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
414
doutlet_3(elem)=doutlet_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
92
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:101==
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
415
doutlet_4(elem)=doutlet_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
416
417
dload_1(elem)=dload_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
418
dload_2(elem)=dload_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
419
dload_3(elem)=dload_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
420
dload_4(elem)=dload_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
421
422
dpres_1(elem)=dpres_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
423
dpres_2(elem)=dpres_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
424
dpres_3(elem)=dpres_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B'*3*(
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
93
==PAGE:102==
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
425
dpres_4(elem)=dpres_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,3)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
426
end
427
end
428
doutlet_1(elem)=doutlet_1(elem)+.5*dQdh(edof(1))
;
429
doutlet_2(elem)=doutlet_2(elem)+.5*dQdh(edof(2))
;
430
doutlet_3(elem)=doutlet_3(elem)+.5*dQdh(edof(3))
;
431
doutlet_4(elem)=doutlet_4(elem)+.5*dQdh(edof(4))
;
432
doutlet(edof)=doutlet(edof)+[doutlet_1(elem);
doutlet_2(elem);doutlet_3(elem);doutlet_4(
elem)];
433
434
dload(edof)=dload(edof)+[dload_1(elem);dload_2(
elem);dload_3(elem);dload_4(elem)];
435
436
dpres(edof)=dpres(edof)+[dpres_1(elem);dpres_2(
elem);dpres_3(elem);dpres_4(elem)];
437
end
438
f0=-Q;
439
df0=-doutlet;
440
f=1;
441
df=zeros(size(df0));
442
case 'outletC' % Passed FD check 27/6
443
U=zeros(nel,2);
444
Q=zeros(nel,2);
445
XC=zeros(nel,2);
446
[Q,Qface,dQdp,dQdh]=boundaryflowC(fem,sol,h,dh);
447
rhs=-dQdp;
448
449
L=zeros(nn,1);
450
for elem=1:nel
451
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
452
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
453
for i=1:length(gp)
454
for j=1:length(gp)
455
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
456
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
94
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:103==
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
457
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
458
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
459
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
460
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
461
L(edof)=L(edof)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
462
end
463
end
464
end
465
load=L'*sol;
466
rhs(:,2)=-L;
467
468
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
469
adj=M\rhs;
470
471
doutlet_1=zeros(nel,1);
472
doutlet_2=zeros(nel,1);
473
doutlet_3=zeros(nel,1);
474
doutlet_4=zeros(nel,1);
475
doutlet=zeros(nn,1);
476
477
dload_1=zeros(nel,1);
478
dload_2=zeros(nel,1);
479
dload_3=zeros(nel,1);
480
dload_4=zeros(nel,1);
481
dload=zeros(nn,1);
482
483
for elem=1:nel
484
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
485
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
486
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)
*2,edof(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)
*2]; % Variable velocity field 23/5
487
for i=1:length(gp)
488
for j=1:length(gp)
489
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
490
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
491
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
492
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
493
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
95
==PAGE:104==
494
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
495
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
496
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
497
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
498
B=invJ*dN;
499
Bu=invJ*[-1+xi(2),0,1-xi(2),0,1+xi(2)
,0,-1-xi(2),0;
500
0,-1+xi(1),0,-1-xi(1) ,0,1+xi(1),0,1-
xi(1)];
501
doutlet_1(elem)=doutlet_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
502
doutlet_2(elem)=doutlet_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
503
doutlet_3(elem)=doutlet_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
504
doutlet_4(elem)=doutlet_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j
)*detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(
Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
505
506
dload_1(elem)=dload_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[1 0 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
507
dload_2(elem)=dload_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 1 0 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
508
dload_3(elem)=dload_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
96
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:105==
detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 1 0]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
509
dload_4(elem)=dload_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 0 1]'+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*sum
(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
510
end
511
end
512
%keyboard
513
doutlet_1(elem)=doutlet_1(elem)+dQdh(edof(1));
514
doutlet_2(elem)=doutlet_2(elem)+dQdh(edof(2));
515
doutlet_3(elem)=doutlet_3(elem)+dQdh(edof(3));
516
doutlet_4(elem)=doutlet_4(elem)+dQdh(edof(4));
517
doutlet(edof)=doutlet(edof)+[doutlet_1(elem);
doutlet_2(elem);doutlet_3(elem);doutlet_4(
elem)];
518
519
dload(edof)=dload(edof)+[dload_1(elem);dload_2(
elem);dload_3(elem);dload_4(elem)];
520
end
521
f0=Q;
522
df0=doutlet;
523
%f=fem.fGoal/load -1;
524
%df=-fem.fGoal*dload/load^2;
525
f=1;
526
df=1;
527
528
case 'outletChole'
529
% Crude implementation of control volume
530
xmin=10; xmax=40; ymin=10;
531
ind1=find(fem.X(:,1)==xmin);
532
ind1=ind1(fem.X(ind1 ,2)>=ymin);
533
ind2=find(fem.X(:,1)==xmax);
534
ind2=ind2(fem.X(ind2 ,2)>=ymin);
535
ind3=find(fem.X(:,2)==ymin);
536
ind3=ind3(fem.X(ind3 ,1)>=xmin);
537
ind3=ind3(fem.X(ind3 ,1)<=xmax);
538
front=ind1(ind1~=intersect(ind1,ind3));
539
front=front(1:end-1);
540
rear=ind2(ind2~=intersect(ind2,ind3));
541
rear=rear(1:end-1);
542
side=ind3(ind3~=intersect(ind1,ind3));
543
side=side(side~=intersect(ind2,side));
544
side=side(1:end-1);
545
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
97
==PAGE:106==
546
%
ebcMat=zeros(size(fem.IX));
547
%
% Front corner
548
%
ebcMat(fem.IX(:,1)==intersect(ind1,ind3),:)=[1 1 0
1];
549
%
% Rear corner
550
%
ebcMat(fem.IX(:,2)==intersect(ind2,ind3),:)=[1 1 1
0];
551
%
for i=1:length(front)
552
%
ebcMat(fem.IX(:,1)==front(i),:)=[1 0 0 1];
553
%
end
554
%
for i=1:length(rear)
555
%
ebcMat(fem.IX(:,2)==rear(i),:)=[0 1 1 0];
556
%
end
557
%
for i=1:length(side)
558
%
ebcMat(fem.IX(:,1)==side(i),:)=[1 1 0 0];
559
%
end
560
%
[Q,Qface,dQdp,dQdh]=boundaryflowC(fem,sol,h,dh,
ebcMat);
561
562
[Q,Qface,dQdp,dQdh]=boundaryflowC(fem,sol,h,dh);
563
%keyboard
564
rhs=-dQdp;
565
566
L=zeros(nn,1);
567
for elem=1:nel
568
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
569
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
570
for i=1:length(gp)
571
for j=1:length(gp)
572
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
573
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
574
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
575
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
576
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
577
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
578
L(edof)=L(edof)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
579
end
580
end
581
end
582
load=L'*sol;
583
rhs(:,2)=-L;
584
585
%
pres=sum(max(0,-sol));
586
%
rhs(:,3)=0;
587
%
rhs(sol<0,3)=1;
98
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:107==
588
589
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
590
adj=(M)\rhs;
591
592
doutlet_1=zeros(nel,1);
593
doutlet_2=zeros(nel,1);
594
doutlet_3=zeros(nel,1);
595
doutlet_4=zeros(nel,1);
596
doutlet=zeros(nn,1);
597
598
dload_1=zeros(nel,1);
599
dload_2=zeros(nel,1);
600
dload_3=zeros(nel,1);
601
dload_4=zeros(nel,1);
602
dload=zeros(nn,1);
603
604
%
dpres_1=zeros(nel,1);
605
%
dpres_2=zeros(nel,1);
606
%
dpres_3=zeros(nel,1);
607
%
dpres_4=zeros(nel,1);
608
%
dpres=zeros(nn,1);
609
610
for elem=1:nel
611
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
612
doutlet_1(elem)=doutlet_1(elem)+dalpha(edof(1))*
adj(edof ,1) '*([1 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0
0 0]*sol(edof));
613
doutlet_2(elem)=doutlet_2(elem)+dalpha(edof(2))*
adj(edof ,1) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 1 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0
0 0]*sol(edof));
614
doutlet_3(elem)=doutlet_3(elem)+dalpha(edof(3))*
adj(edof ,1) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 1 0; 0 0
0 0]*sol(edof));
615
doutlet_4(elem)=doutlet_4(elem)+dalpha(edof(4))*
adj(edof ,1) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0
0 1]*sol(edof));
616
dload_1(elem)=dload_1(elem)+dalpha(edof(1))*adj(
edof ,2) '*([1 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0
0]*sol(edof));
617
dload_2(elem)=dload_2(elem)+dalpha(edof(2))*adj(
edof ,2) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 1 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0
0]*sol(edof));
618
dload_3(elem)=dload_3(elem)+dalpha(edof(3))*adj(
edof ,2) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 1 0; 0 0 0
0]*sol(edof));
619
dload_4(elem)=dload_4(elem)+dalpha(edof(4))*adj(
edof ,2) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0
1]*sol(edof));
620
621
doutlet(edof)=doutlet(edof)+[doutlet_1(elem);
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
99
==PAGE:108==
doutlet_2(elem);doutlet_3(elem);doutlet_4(
elem)];
622
dload(edof)=dload(edof)+[dload_1(elem);dload_2(
elem);dload_3(elem);dload_4(elem)];
623
end
624
f0=Q;
625
df0=doutlet;
626
f=[]; % Changed by MSS 06-2023
627
df=[]; % Changed by MSS 06-2023
628
f(2)=fem.fGoal/load -1;
629
df(:,2)=-fem.fGoal*dload/load^2;
630
631
case 'stream'
632
[XC,U]=meanStreamline(fem,sol,h,dh,1);
633
f0=XC;
634
df0=0;
635
f=U;
636
df=0;
637
638
case 'outlettopologyandtopography' % Mix of 'outletC '
and 'outletChole ' Added by MSS 25-05
639
% Crude implementation of control volume
640
xmin=10; xmax=40; ymin=10;
641
ind1=find(fem.X(:,1)==xmin);
642
ind1=ind1(fem.X(ind1 ,2)>=ymin);
643
ind2=find(fem.X(:,1)==xmax);
644
ind2=ind2(fem.X(ind2 ,2)>=ymin);
645
ind3=find(fem.X(:,2)==ymin);
646
ind3=ind3(fem.X(ind3 ,1)>=xmin);
647
ind3=ind3(fem.X(ind3 ,1)<=xmax);
648
front=ind1(ind1~=intersect(ind1,ind3));
649
front=front(1:end-1);
650
rear=ind2(ind2~=intersect(ind2,ind3));
651
rear=rear(1:end-1);
652
side=ind3(ind3~=intersect(ind1,ind3));
653
side=side(side~=intersect(ind2,side));
654
side=side(1:end-1);
655
656
[Q,Qface,dQdp,dQdh]=boundaryflowC(fem,sol,h,dh);
657
rhs=-dQdp;
658
659
L=zeros(nn,1);
660
for elem=1:nel
661
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
662
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
663
for i=1:length(gp)
664
for j=1:length(gp)
665
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
666
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
100
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:109==
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
667
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
668
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
669
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
670
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
671
L(edof)=L(edof)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
672
end
673
end
674
end
675
load=L'*sol;
676
rhs(:,2)=-L;
677
678
rhs(N~=1,:)=0;
679
adj=(M)\rhs;
680
681
doutlet1_1=zeros(nel,1);
682
doutlet1_2=zeros(nel,1);
683
doutlet1_3=zeros(nel,1);
684
doutlet1_4=zeros(nel,1);
685
doutlet1=zeros(nn,1);
686
687
dload1_1=zeros(nel,1);
688
dload1_2=zeros(nel,1);
689
dload1_3=zeros(nel,1);
690
dload1_4=zeros(nel,1);
691
dload1=zeros(nn,1);
692
693
doutlet2_1=zeros(nel,1);
694
doutlet2_2=zeros(nel,1);
695
doutlet2_3=zeros(nel,1);
696
doutlet2_4=zeros(nel,1);
697
doutlet2=zeros(nn,1);
698
699
dload2_1=zeros(nel,1);
700
dload2_2=zeros(nel,1);
701
dload2_3=zeros(nel,1);
702
dload2_4=zeros(nel,1);
703
dload2=zeros(nn,1);
704
705
706
for elem=1:nel
707
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
708
doutlet1_1(elem)=doutlet1_1(elem)+dalpha(edof(1)
)*adj(edof ,1) '*([1 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0
0 0 0]*sol(edof));
709
doutlet1_2(elem)=doutlet1_2(elem)+dalpha(edof(2)
)*adj(edof ,1) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 1 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
101
==PAGE:110==
0 0 0]*sol(edof));
710
doutlet1_3(elem)=doutlet1_3(elem)+dalpha(edof(3)
)*adj(edof ,1) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 1 0; 0
0 0 0]*sol(edof));
711
doutlet1_4(elem)=doutlet1_4(elem)+dalpha(edof(4)
)*adj(edof ,1) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0
0 0 1]*sol(edof));
712
dload1_1(elem)=dload1_1(elem)+dalpha(edof(1))*
adj(edof ,2) '*([1 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0
0 0]*sol(edof));
713
dload1_2(elem)=dload1_2(elem)+dalpha(edof(2))*
adj(edof ,2) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 1 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0
0 0]*sol(edof));
714
dload1_3(elem)=dload1_3(elem)+dalpha(edof(3))*
adj(edof ,2) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 1 0; 0 0
0 0]*sol(edof));
715
dload1_4(elem)=dload1_4(elem)+dalpha(edof(4))*
adj(edof ,2) '*([0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0; 0 0
0 1]*sol(edof));
716
717
doutlet1(edof)=doutlet1(edof)+[doutlet1_1(elem);
doutlet1_2(elem);doutlet1_3(elem);doutlet1_4(
elem)];
718
dload1(edof)=dload1(edof)+[dload1_1(elem);
dload1_2(elem);dload1_3(elem);dload1_4(elem)
];
719
end
720
721
for elem=1:nel
722
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
723
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
724
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)
*2,edof(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)
*2]; % Variable velocity field 23/5
725
for i=1:length(gp)
726
for j=1:length(gp)
727
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
728
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi
(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))
*(1+xi(2))]/4;
729
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)),
0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
730
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)
), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
731
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2)
;
732
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)
]/4;
102
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:111==
733
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
734
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); %
Samme som det() - 6/4
735
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J
(1,1)]; % samme som inv() - 6/4
736
B=invJ*dN;
737
Bu=invJ*[-1+xi(2),0,1-xi(2),0,1+xi(2)
,0,-1-xi(2),0;
738
0,-1+xi(1),0,-1-xi(1),0,1+xi(1),0,1-
xi(1)];
739
doutlet2_1(elem)=doutlet2_1(elem)+w(i)*w
(j)*detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[1 0 0 0]');%+6*fem.eta*Np
'*(Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0
0]');
740
doutlet2_2(elem)=doutlet2_2(elem)+w(i)*w
(j)*detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 1 0 0]');%+6*fem.eta*Np
'*(Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0
0]');
741
doutlet2_3(elem)=doutlet2_3(elem)+w(i)*w
(j)*detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 1 0]');%+6*fem.eta*Np
'*(Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1
0]');
742
doutlet2_4(elem)=doutlet2_4(elem)+w(i)*w
(j)*detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,1)'*(B
'*3*(Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*
sol(edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(
uedof))'*B*[0 0 0 1]');%+6*fem.eta*Np
'*(Np)*sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0
1]');
743
744
dload2_1(elem)=dload2_1(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(1))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[1 0 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[1 0 0 0]');%+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*
sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[1 0 0 0]');
745
dload2_2(elem)=dload2_2(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(2))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 1 0 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 1 0 0]');%+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
103
==PAGE:112==
sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 1 0 0]');
746
dload2_3(elem)=dload2_3(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(3))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 1 0]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 1 0]');%+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*
sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 1 0]');
747
dload2_4(elem)=dload2_4(elem)+w(i)*w(j)*
detJ*dh(edof(4))*adj(edof ,2)'*(B'*3*(
Np*h(edof))^2*B*(Np*[0 0 0 1]')*sol(
edof)+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Nu*fem.u(uedof))
'*B*[0 0 0 1]');%+6*fem.eta*Np'*(Np)*
sum(Bu*fem.u(uedof))*[0 0 0 1]');
748
end
749
end
750
%keyboard
751
doutlet2_1(elem)=doutlet2_1(elem)+dQdh(edof(1));
752
doutlet2_2(elem)=doutlet2_2(elem)+dQdh(edof(2));
753
doutlet2_3(elem)=doutlet2_3(elem)+dQdh(edof(3));
754
doutlet2_4(elem)=doutlet2_4(elem)+dQdh(edof(4));
755
doutlet2(edof)=doutlet2(edof)+[doutlet2_1(elem);
doutlet2_2(elem);doutlet2_3(elem);doutlet2_4(
elem)];
756
757
dload2(edof)=dload2(edof)+[dload2_1(elem);
dload2_2(elem);dload2_3(elem);dload2_4(elem)
];
758
end
759
760
761
f0=Q;
762
df0(:,1)=doutlet1;
763
df0(:,2)=doutlet2;
764
%
f=sum(designA)/(nn*fem.volfrac)-1;
765
%
df=ones(nn,1)/(nn*fem.volfrac);
766
f=[]; % Changed by MSS 06-2023
767
df=[]; % Changed by MSS 06-2023
768
f(2)=fem.fGoal/load -1;
769
df(:,2)=-fem.fGoal*dload1/load^2;
770
df(:,3)=-fem.fGoal*dload2/load^2;
771
%
df(:,2)=zeros(nn,1);
772
%
df(:,3)=zeros(nn,1);
773
774
otherwise
775
disp('Wrong selection of objective')
776
return
777
end
778
end
779
780
end
104
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:113==
781
782
function [G,N, Null]=boundary_conditions(fem)
783
% Compute the G, N and Null for enforcing boundary conditions
784
% for linear problems
785
% K = Null '*K*Null - (Null-speye(ndof,ndof));
786
% F(N~=1)=G(N==0);
787
%
788
ndof=length(fem.X);
789
790
N=ones(ndof ,1);
791
G=zeros(ndof ,1);
792
793
% enforce pressure bc
794
for n=1:length(fem.bc_pressure)
795
node=fem.bc_pressure(n);
796
dof1=node;
797
N(dof1)=0;
798
G(dof1)=fem.bc_pressure_value(n);
799
end
800
801
% Enforce outlet pressure bc
802
if fem.outlet
803
for n=1:length(fem.bc_outlet)
804
node=fem.bc_outlet(n);
805
dof1=node;
806
N(dof1)=0;
807
G(dof1)=fem.bc_outlet_value(n);
808
end
809
end
810
811
% Impose using Null space method
812
Null=spdiags(N,0,ndof,ndof);
813
end
814
815
function [M,A,F]=formResidualJacobian(fem,edofMat ,h,alpha)
816
% Makes the residual in terms of K and F and the jacobian
817
%
818
% fem is the information structure
819
% sol is the current solution
820
% edofMat
821
% h is th fluid film height
822
% jac is 0 or 1 depending on if J is computed
823
824
nel = size(edofMat ,1);
825
ndof=length(fem.X);
826
827
% Initialize
828
iM = kron(edofMat ,ones(4,1))';
829
jM = kron(edofMat ,ones(1,4))';
830
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
105
==PAGE:114==
831
iF=edofMat ';
832
jF=ones(numel(edofMat),1);
833
834
M=zeros(16,nel);
835
A=zeros(16,nel);
836
F=zeros(4,nel);
837
838
% u=fem.u;
839
eta=fem.eta;
840
841
for elem=1:nel
842
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
843
he=h(edofMat(elem ,:));
844
ae=alpha(edofMat(elem ,:));
845
edofu=zeros(1,8);
846
edofu(1:2:end)=fem.IX(elem ,:)*2-1;
847
edofu(2:2:end)=fem.IX(elem ,:)*2;
848
ue=fem.u(edofu);
849
if fem.mex
850
[me,fe]=planeMatrix_mex(coords ,he,ue,eta,fem.int);
851
else
852
[me,ae,fe]=planeMatrix(coords ,he,ae,ue,eta,fem.int);
853
end
854
M(:,elem)=me(:);
855
A(:,elem)=ae(:);
856
F(:,elem)=fe(:);
857
end
858
859
% Make load vector
860
F = sparse(iF,jF,F);
861
862
% Assemble matrices
863
M=sparse(iM,jM,M(:),ndof,ndof);
864
A=sparse(iM,jM,A(:),ndof,ndof);
865
866
end
867
868
function [Q,Qface,dQdp,dQdh]=boundaryflow(fem,p,h,dh,gp,w)
869
Q=0;
870
Qface=0; nface=[-1;0]; ntol=pi/36; % Currently: Inlet region
4/6
871
dQdp=zeros(size(p));
872
dQdh=zeros(size(p));
873
ebcMat=zeros(size(fem.IX));
874
for elem=1:size(fem.IX,1)
875
edof=fem.IX(elem ,:);
876
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)*2,edof
(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)*2];
877
coords=fem.X(edof ,:);
878
for j=1:length(fem.bc_pressure)
106
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:115==
879
% Find elements on boundary:
880
if sum(any(edof==fem.bc_pressure(j),2))~=0
881
[~,col]=find(edof==fem.bc_pressure(j));
882
ebcMat(elem,col)=1;
883
end
884
end
885
% Calculate volumeflow across element sides on boundary:
886
border=sum(ebcMat(elem ,:));
887
switch border
888
case 3
889
if isequal(ebcMat(elem ,:),[1 1 0 1])
890
[q1,n1,dq1dp,dq1dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[1 1 0
0],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
891
[q2,n2,dq2dp,dq2dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[1 0 0
1],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
892
dq1dh(1)=2*dq1dh(1);
893
dq2dh(1)=2*dq2dh(1);
894
elseif isequal(ebcMat(elem ,:),[1 1 1 0])
895
[q1,n1,dq1dp,dq1dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[1 1 0
0],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
896
[q2,n2,dq2dp,dq2dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[0 1 1
0],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
897
dq1dh(2)=2*dq1dh(2);
898
dq2dh(2)=2*dq2dh(2);
899
elseif isequal(ebcMat(elem ,:),[0 1 1 1])
900
[q1,n1,dq1dp,dq1dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[0 1 1
0],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
901
[q2,n2,dq2dp,dq2dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[0 0 1
1],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
902
dq1dh(3)=2*dq1dh(3);
903
dq2dh(3)=2*dq2dh(3);
904
else
905
[q1,n1,dq1dp,dq1dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[0 0 1
1],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
906
[q2,n2,dq2dp,dq2dh]=volumeflow(coords ,[1 0 0
1],p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof)
,fem.eta,gp,w);
907
dq1dh(4)=2*dq1dh(4);
908
dq2dh(4)=2*dq2dh(4);
909
end
910
Q=Q+q1+q2;
911
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+dq1dp+dq2dp;
912
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+dq1dh+dq2dh; % Mulig
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
107
==PAGE:116==
fejlkilde! ift dQdh 6/6
913
914
if acos(dot(n1,nface)/(norm(n1)*norm(nface)))<=
ntol
915
Qface=Qface+q1;
916
end
917
if acos(dot(n2,nface)/(norm(n2)*norm(nface)))<=
ntol
918
Qface=Qface+q2;
919
end
920
case 2
921
[q,n,dqdp,dqdh]=volumeflow(coords,ebcMat(elem ,:)
,p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof),fem.
eta,gp,w);
922
Q=Q+q;
923
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+dqdp;
924
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+dqdh;
925
926
if acos(dot(n,nface)/(norm(n)*norm(nface)))<=
ntol
927
Qface=Qface+q;
928
end
929
case 0
930
continue
931
otherwise
932
disp('Unexpected element B.C.s')
933
keyboard
934
end
935
end
936
%keyboard
937
end
938
939
function [Q,n,dQdp,dQdh]=volumeflow(coords,ebc,p,h,dh,u,eta,gp,w
)
940
% Calculate flow across edge defined by ebc
941
q=0;
942
dQdp=zeros(4,1);
943
dQdh=zeros(4,1);
944
for i=1:length(gp)
945
if isequal(ebc,[1 1 0 0])
946
xi=[gp(i),-1];
947
vec=[coords(2,1)-coords(1,1);coords(2,2)-coords(1,2)];
948
elseif isequal(ebc,[0 1 1 0])
949
xi=[1,gp(i)];
950
vec=[coords(3,1)-coords(2,1);coords(3,2)-coords(2,2)];
951
elseif isequal(ebc,[0 0 1 1])
952
xi=[gp(i),1];
953
vec=[coords(4,1)-coords(3,1);coords(4,2)-coords(3,2)];
954
else
955
xi=[-1,gp(i)];
108
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:117==
956
vec=[coords(1,1)-coords(4,1);coords(1,2)-coords(4,2)];
957
end
958
N=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi
(2)), (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
959
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1)
)*(1+xi(2)), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
960
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi
(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
961
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2);
962
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)]/4;
963
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
964
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); % Samme som det() - 6/4
965
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J(1,1)]; % samme som
inv() - 6/4
966
B=invJ*dN;
967
968
% Derivatives - 27/5 Mod: 6/6
969
if isequal(ebc,[1 1 0 0])
970
jvec=[-J(1,2);J(1,1)];
971
elseif isequal(ebc,[0 1 1 0])
972
jvec=[-J(2,2);J(2,1)];
973
elseif isequal(ebc,[0 0 1 1])
974
jvec=[J(1,2);-J(1,1)];
975
else
976
jvec=[J(2,2);-J(2,1)];
977
end
978
q=q+w(i)*(.5*(Nu*u)*N*h-(N*h)^3/12/eta*B*p)'*jvec;
979
dQdp=dQdp-w(i)*(1/12/eta*(N*h)^3*B)'*jvec;
980
dQdh=dQdh+w(i)*((.5*(Nu*u)*N-1/4/eta*(N*h)^2*B*p*N)'*jvec).*
dh;
981
end
982
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
983
n=n/norm(n); % Unit normal
984
Q=q;
985
end
986
987
function [Q,Qface,dQdp,dQdh]=boundaryflowC(fem,p,h,dh,ebcMat)
988
Q=0;
989
Qface=0; nface=[-1;0]; ntol=pi/36; % Currently: Inlet region
4/6
990
dQdp=zeros(size(p));
991
dQdh=zeros(size(p));
992
if nargin~=5
993
ebcMat=zeros(size(fem.IX));
994
for elem=1:size(fem.IX,1)
995
edof=fem.IX(elem ,:);
996
for j=1:length(fem.bc_pressure)
997
% Find elements on boundary:
998
if sum(any(edof==fem.bc_pressure(j),2))~=0
999
[~,col]=find(edof==fem.bc_pressure(j));
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
109
==PAGE:118==
1000
ebcMat(elem,col)=1;
1001
end
1002
end
1003
end
1004
%
else
1005
%
keyboard
1006
end
1007
for elem=1:size(fem.IX,1)
1008
edof=fem.IX(elem ,:);
1009
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)*2,edof
(3)*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)*2];
1010
coords=fem.X(edof ,:);
1011
% Calculate volumeflow across element sides on boundary:
1012
border=sum(ebcMat(elem ,:));
1013
if border >0
1014
[Qe,Ue,dQedp,dQedh]=volumeflowC(coords,p(edof),h(
edof),dh(edof),fem.u(uedof),fem.eta);
1015
if ebcMat(elem ,:)==[1 1 0 0] % Edge 1
1016
vec=[coords(2,1)-coords(1,1);coords(2,2)-coords
(1,2)];
1017
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1018
n=n/norm(n); % Unit normal
1019
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n); % Normal flow wrt. edge
1020
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1021
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*.5;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.25;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.25];
1022
%keyboard
1023
elseif ebcMat(elem ,:)==[0 1 1 0] % Edge 2
1024
vec=[coords(3,1)-coords(2,1);coords(3,2)-coords
(2,2)];
1025
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1026
n=n/norm(n);
1027
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1028
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1029
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.25;dot
(dQedh(:,2),n)*.5;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.25];
1030
elseif ebcMat(elem ,:)==[0 0 1 1]
1031
vec=[coords(4,1)-coords(3,1);coords(4,2)-coords
(3,2)];
1032
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1033
n=n/norm(n);
1034
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1035
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
110
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:119==
(:,4),n)];
1036
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.25;dot
(dQedh(:,2),n)*.25;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.5];
1037
elseif ebcMat(elem ,:)==[1 0 0 1]
1038
vec=[coords(1,1)-coords(4,1);coords(1,2)-coords
(4,2)];
1039
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1040
n=n/norm(n);
1041
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1042
Qface=Qface+dot(Qe,n);
1043
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1044
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*.25;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.25;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.5];
1045
%keyboard
1046
elseif ebcMat(elem ,:)==[1 1 0 1] % Corner N1
1047
vec=[coords(2,1)-coords(1,1);coords(2,2)-coords
(1,2)];
1048
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1049
n=n/norm(n);
1050
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1051
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1052
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*1;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*.5;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.25;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.5];
1053
vec=[coords(1,1)-coords(4,1);coords(1,2)-coords
(4,2)];
1054
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1055
n=n/norm(n);
1056
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1057
Qface=Qface+dot(Qe,n);
1058
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1059
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*1;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*.5;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.25;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.5];
1060
%keyboard
1061
elseif ebcMat(elem ,:)==[1 1 1 0]
1062
vec=[coords(2,1)-coords(1,1);coords(2,2)-coords
(1,2)];
1063
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1064
n=n/norm(n);
1065
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1066
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
111
==PAGE:120==
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1067
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*1;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.25];
1068
vec=[coords(3,1)-coords(2,1);coords(3,2)-coords
(2,2)];
1069
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1070
n=n/norm(n);
1071
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1072
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1073
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*1;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.25];
1074
%keyboard
1075
elseif ebcMat(elem ,:)==[0 1 1 1]
1076
vec=[coords(3,1)-coords(2,1);coords(3,2)-coords
(2,2)];
1077
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1078
n=n/norm(n);
1079
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1080
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1081
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.25;dot
(dQedh(:,2),n)*.5;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*1;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.5];
1082
vec=[coords(4,1)-coords(3,1);coords(4,2)-coords
(3,2)];
1083
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1084
n=n/norm(n);
1085
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1086
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1087
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.25;dot
(dQedh(:,2),n)*.5;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*1;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*.5];
1088
%keyboard
1089
elseif ebcMat(elem ,:)==[1 0 1 1]
1090
vec=[coords(1,1)-coords(4,1);coords(1,2)-coords
(4,2)];
1091
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1092
n=n/norm(n);
1093
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1094
Qface=Qface+dot(Qe,n);
1095
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
112
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:121==
(:,4),n)];
1096
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*.25;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*1];
1097
vec=[coords(4,1)-coords(3,1);coords(4,2)-coords
(3,2)];
1098
n=[vec(2);-vec(1)];
1099
n=n/norm(n);
1100
Q=Q+dot(Qe,n);
1101
dQdp(edof)=dQdp(edof)+[dot(dQedp(:,1),n);dot(
dQedp(:,2),n);dot(dQedp(:,3),n);dot(dQedp
(:,4),n)];
1102
dQdh(edof)=dQdh(edof)+[dot(dQedh(:,1),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,2),n)*.25;dot(dQedh(:,3),n)*.5;dot(
dQedh(:,4),n)*1];
1103
%keyboard
1104
end
1105
end
1106
end
1107
%keyboard
1108
end
1109
1110
function [Q,U,dQdp,dQdh]=volumeflowC(coords,p,h,dh,u,eta)
1111
% Calculate mean velocity and volumeflow at element centroid
1112
xi=[0,0]; % natural center
1113
N=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2))
, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
1114
Nu=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1+xi(2)), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), 0;
1115
0, (1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), 0, (1+xi(1))
*(1+xi(2)), 0, (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
1116
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2);
1117
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)]/4;
1118
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
1119
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); % Samme som det() - 6/4
1120
invJ=1/detJ*[J(2,2), -J(1,2); -J(2,1), J(1,1)]; % samme som inv
() - 6/4
1121
B=invJ*dN;
1122
1123
U=-1/8/eta*B*p*(N*h)^2+Nu*u/2;
1124
Q=-(N*h)^3*B*p/12/eta+(Nu*u)*N*h/2; % Flow per unit width
1125
% Element width definition:
1126
% Distance between midpoints of opposite edges - 23/6
1127
m1=[(coords(1,1)+coords(2,1))/2,(coords(1,2)+coords(2,2))/2];
1128
m2=[(coords(2,1)+coords(3,1))/2,(coords(2,2)+coords(3,2))/2];
1129
m3=[(coords(3,1)+coords(4,1))/2,(coords(3,2)+coords(4,2))/2];
1130
m4=[(coords(1,1)+coords(4,1))/2,(coords(1,2)+coords(4,2))/2];
1131
widthX=sqrt((m3(1)-m1(1))^2+(m3(2)-m1(2))^2); % Width multiplier
for x-dir
1132
widthY=sqrt((m4(1)-m2(1))^2+(m4(2)-m2(2))^2); % -||- for y-dir
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
113
==PAGE:122==
1133
Q(1)=Q(1)*widthX;
1134
Q(2)=Q(2)*widthY;
1135
% Derivatives
1136
% TO DO: Check assumption of x;y - Godkendt
1137
dQdp=-(N*h)^3*B/12/eta;
1138
dQdp(1,:)=dQdp(1,:)*widthX;
1139
dQdp(2,:)=dQdp(2,:)*widthY;
1140
%keyboard
1141
dQdh=(-(N*h)^2*B*p*N/4/eta+Nu*u*N/2);
1142
dQdh(1,:)=dQdh(1,:)*widthX;
1143
dQdh(2,:)=dQdh(2,:)*widthY;
1144
dQdh(:,1)=dQdh(:,1)*dh(1);
1145
dQdh(:,2)=dQdh(:,2)*dh(2);
1146
dQdh(:,3)=dQdh(:,3)*dh(3);
1147
dQdh(:,4)=dQdh(:,4)*dh(4);
1148
%keyboard
1149
% dQdp=dQdp-w(i)*(1/12/eta*(N*h)^3*B)'*jvec;
1150
% dQdh=dQdh+w(i)*((.5*(Nu*u)*N-1/4/eta*(N*h)^2*B*p*N)'*jvec).*dh
;
1151
end
1152
1153
function [XC,U]=meanStreamline(fem,p,h,dh,figN)
1154
nel=size(fem.IX,1);
1155
edofMat=fem.IX;
1156
for elem=1:nel
1157
edof=edofMat(elem ,:);
1158
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
1159
uedof=[edof(1)*2-1,edof(1)*2,edof(2)*2-1,edof(2)*2,edof(3)
*2-1,edof(3)*2,edof(4)*2-1,edof(4)*2];
1160
[Qe,Ue]=volumeflowC(coords ,p(edof),h(edof),dh(edof),fem.u(
uedof),fem.eta);
1161
XC(elem ,:)=[sum(coords(:,1))/4,sum(coords(:,2))/4];
1162
U(elem ,:)=[Ue(1),Ue(2)];
1163
Q(elem ,:)=[Qe(1),Qe(2)];
1164
end
1165
% if nargin==5
1166
%
figure(figN)
1167
% else
1168
%
figure()
1169
% end
1170
%lines=streamslice(reshape(XC(:,1),fem.nnx-1,fem.nny-1),reshape(
XC(:,2),fem.nnx-1,fem.nny-1),reshape(U(:,1),fem.nnx-1,fem.nny
-1),reshape(U(:,2),fem.nnx-1,fem.nny-1));
1171
%set(lines,'LineWidth ',1.5)
1172
%set(lines,'Color','k');
1173
end
1174
1175
function [h,dh]=interpolate(fem,design) % SIMP
1176
penal=fem.penal;
1177
h0=fem.h(1);
114
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:123==
1178
hmax=fem.h(2);
1179
h=h0+(hmax-h0)*design.^penal;
1180
dh=(hmax-h0)*penal*design.^(penal -1);
1181
end
1182
1183
function [a,da]=interpolateAlpha(fem,design) % RAMP
1184
penal=fem.penalAlpha;
1185
amin=fem.alpha(1);
1186
amax=fem.alpha(2);
1187
a=amin+(amax-amin)*design./(1+penal*(1-design));
1188
da=(amax-amin)*(penal+1)./((design -1)*penal -1).^2;
1189
end
C.2
Optimization routine
The optimization of a curved mesh function created by the author taking inspiration from
Asger B. Petersens optimization code. Performs outlet size and location topology opti­
mization on a curved mesh. Topography optimization can be switched on.
1
% Optimisation routine for Reynolds Equation
2
% REVISION: Divide by initial f0 and f to ensure same order of
magnitude
3
% wrt. derivatives
4
%Edited by MSS 04-2023
5
function [Delta,x,y,f0,f1,f2,F1,sol,XC,U]=opt2curved(fem,opt,
xinit,yinit)
6
7
if fem.objective=="outlettopologyandtopography"
8
beta=5; % Regularisation parameter
9
10
% Initialise MMA
11
m=2;
12
n=numel(xinit)+numel(yinit);
13
14
a0=1;
15
a=zeros(m,1);
16
cConst=ones(m,1)*1e3; % Normal: 1000
17
d=ones(m,1);
18
%low=0;
upp=1;
19
move1=0.02;
20
move2=0.1;
21
22
xold1=xinit(:);
23
xold2=xold1;
24
x=xold1;
25
26
yold1=yinit(:);
27
yold2=yold1;
28
y=yold1;
29
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
115
==PAGE:124==
30
ynormold2=[fem.xoutlet;fem.youtlet;fem.routlet];
31
ynormold1=[fem.xoutlet;fem.youtlet;fem.routlet];
32
ynorm=[fem.xoutlet;fem.youtlet;fem.routlet];
33
34
xyold2=[ynormold2;xold2];
35
xyold1=[ynormold1;xold1];
36
xy=[ynorm;x];
37
38
low=y*0;
39
upp=y*0+1;
40
41
% Initialise filter for topography
42
A=1/(fem.nnx-1)*(fem.nny-1); % HARDCODED FITLER AREA
43
iH = ones(fem.nnx*fem.nny*(2*(ceil(fem.rmin)-1)+1)^2,1);
44
jH=ones(size(iH));
45
sH=zeros(size(iH));
46
k=0;
47
for i=1:fem.nn
48
for j=1:fem.nn
49
if fem.rmin-sqrt((fem.X(i,1)-fem.X(j,1))^2+(fem.X(i
,2)-fem.X(j,2))^2)<0; continue; end
50
k=k+1;
51
iH(k)=i;
52
jH(k)=j;
53
sH(k)=(fem.rmin-sqrt((fem.X(i,1)-fem.X(j,1))^2+(fem.
X(i,2)-fem.X(j,2))^2))*A; % TESTING OF A
54
end
55
end
56
57
H = sparse(iH,jH,sH);
58
Hs = sum(H,2);
59
60
if opt.fdcheck
61
figure(1)
62
perturb2=1; fd_err2=1;
63
errPlot2=loglog(perturb2 ,abs(fd_err2),'.b-',perturb2 ,abs
(fd_err2),'.b:',perturb2 ,abs(fd_err2),'.b--');
64
xlabel('Pertubation')
65
ylabel('|Error|')
66
if opt.perturb==1
67
title('Perturbation of x direction')
68
legend('df0/dx','df1/dx','df2/dx')
69
elseif opt.perturb==2
70
title('Perturbation of y direction')
71
legend('df0/dy','df1/dy','df2/dy')
72
73
elseif opt.perturb==3
74
title('Perturbation of radius')
75
legend('df0/dr','df1/dr','df2/dr')
76
elseif opt.perturb==4
116
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:125==
77
if isfield(opt,'fdnode')
78
title('Pertubation of specific node')
79
legend('df0/dn','df1/dn','df2/dn')
80
else
81
title('Pertubation of random node')
82
legend('df0/dn','df1/dn','df2/dn')
83
end
84
end
85
end
86
87
iter=0;
88
change1=1;
89
change2=1;
90
h1=figure;
91
h1.Visible='off';
92
h1.Position=[500,200,1000,500];
93
while change1 > 0.0005 || change2 > 0.005
94
iter=iter+1;
95
96
%Heaviside projection
97
dd =
(((reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny))-y(1))
.^2+((reshape(fem.X(:,2),fem.nnx,fem.nny))-y(2)).^2)/
y(3)^2;
98
yPhys = 1-(1./ (1+exp(-beta*(dd-1))));
99
100
xPhys = (H*x(:))./Hs;
101
102
fem.AC=pi*y(3)^2;
103
104
%FEM analysis and sensitivities of objective function
with respect to
105
%filtered field
106
[sol,f0val,df0dxtilde ,fval,dfdxtilde]=film_2D(fem,xPhys,
reshape(yPhys ,1,fem.nn));
107
108
fval(1)=(pi*y(3)^2)/(fem.A*fem.volfrac)-1;
109
110
%Sensitivities of design variables
111
[fx,fy]=gradient(-yPhys,fem.rr,fem.thth);
112
%
fx=-(beta*exp(-beta*(dd-1))./(1+exp(-beta*(dd
-1))).^2 .* (-2*reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny)
+2*y(1))/y(3)^2);
113
%
fy=-(beta*exp(-beta*(dd-1))./(1+exp(-beta*(dd
-1))).^2 .* (-2*reshape(fem.X(:,2),fem.nnx,fem.nny)
+2*y(2))/y(3)^2);
114
fr=-(beta*exp(-beta*(dd-1))./(1+exp(-beta*(dd-1))).^2 .*
(-2/y(3)*dd));
115
116
%Collected variable derivatives
117
dytildedy=[reshape(fx,[1,fem.nn]);reshape(fy,[1,fem.nn])
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
117
==PAGE:126==
;reshape(fr,[1,fem.nn])];
118
119
%Topograhpy sensitivities
120
df0dx1(:) = H*(df0dxtilde(:,2)./Hs);
121
dfdx1=zeros(fem.nn,m);
122
%
for i=1:size(dfdxtilde ,2)
123
%
dfdx1(:,i) = H*(dfdxtilde(:,i)./Hs);
124
%
end
125
126
dfdx1(:,2) = H*(dfdxtilde(:,3)./Hs);
127
128
%Outlet sensitivities
129
df0dy1=dytildedy*df0dxtilde(:,1);
130
131
dfdy1=dytildedy*dfdxtilde(:,1:2);
132
133
dfdy1(3,1)=(2*pi*y(3))/(fem.A*fem.volfrac);
134
135
%Final sensitivities
136
df0=[df0dy1;df0dx1 '];
137
df=[dfdy1;dfdx1];
138
139
%Second derivatives (not available)
140
df02=0*df0;
141
df2=0*df;
142
143
%Finite difference check
144
if opt.fdcheck
145
%Pertubation vector
146
perturb2=[0.1 0.1e-1 0.1e-2 0.1e-3 0.1e-4 0.1e-5 0.1
e-6 0.1e-7 0.1e-8 0.1e-9];
147
%Initialization
148
fd2=zeros(length(perturb2),3);
149
fd_err2=zeros(length(perturb2),3);
150
for i=1:length(perturb2)
151
if opt.perturb==1 || opt.perturb==2 || opt.
perturb==3
152
y2=y;
153
if opt.perturb==1
154
y2(1)=y2(1)+perturb2(i);
155
end
156
if opt.perturb==2
157
y2(2)=y2(2)+perturb2(i);
158
end
159
if opt.perturb==3
160
y2(3)=y2(3)+perturb2(i);
161
end
162
dd2 =
(((reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny
))-y2(1)).^2+((reshape(fem.X(:,2),fem.nnx
,fem.nny))-y2(2)).^2)/y2(3)^2;
118
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:127==
163
yp2 = 1-(reshape(1./ (1+exp(-beta*(dd2-1)))
,[1,fem.nn]));
164
[~,f0p2,~,fp2]=film_2D(fem,xPhys,yp2);
165
fd2(i,1)=(f0p2-f0val)/perturb2(i);
166
fd2(i,2)=(fp2(1)-fval(1))/perturb2(i);
167
fd2(i,3)=(fp2(2)-fval(2))/perturb2(i);
168
elseif opt.perturb==4
169
if isfield(opt,'fdnode')
170
node=opt.fdnode;
171
else
172
node=randi([1,size(fem.X,1)]); % Random
node
173
end
174
xp=xPhys;
175
xp(node)=xp(node)+perturb2(i);
176
[~,f0p,~,fp]=film_2D(fem,xp,reshape(yPhys ,1,
fem.nn));
177
fd2(i,1)=(f0p-f0val)/perturb2(i);
178
fd2(i,2)=(fp(1)-fval(1))/perturb2(i);
179
fd2(i,3)=(fp(2)-fval(2))/perturb2(i);
180
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-df0dx1(node))/df0dx1(
node);
181
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-dfdx1(node ,1))/dfdx1(
node ,1);
182
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-dfdx1(node ,2))/dfdx1(
node ,2);
183
end
184
if opt.perturb==1
185
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-df0dy1(1))/df0dy1(1);
186
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-dfdy1(1,1))/dfdy1
(1,1);
187
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-dfdy1(1,2))/dfdy1
(1,2);
188
%
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-
df0dy(1))/fd2(i,1);
189
%
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-
dfdy(1,1))/fd2(i,2);
190
%
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-
dfdy(1,2))/fd2(i,3);
191
end
192
if opt.perturb==2
193
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-df0dy1(2))/df0dy1(2);
194
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-dfdy1(2,1))/dfdy1
(2,1);
195
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-dfdy1(2,2))/dfdy1
(2,2);
196
%
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-
df0dy(2))/fd2(i,1);
197
%
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-
dfdy(2,1))/fd2(i,2);
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
119
==PAGE:128==
198
%
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-
dfdy(2,2))/fd2(i,3);
199
end
200
if opt.perturb==3
201
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-df0dy1(3))/df0dy1(3);
202
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-dfdy1(3,1))/dfdy1
(3,1);
203
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-dfdy1(3,2))/dfdy1
(3,2);
204
%
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-
df0dy(3))/fd2(i,1);
205
%
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-
dfdy(3,1))/fd2(i,2);
206
%
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-
dfdy(3,2))/fd2(i,3);
207
end
208
if opt.perturb==1
209
set(errPlot2(1),'XData',perturb2 ');
210
set(errPlot2(1),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,1))');
211
set(errPlot2(2),'XData',perturb2 ');
212
set(errPlot2(2),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,2))');
213
set(errPlot2(3),'XData',perturb2 ');
214
set(errPlot2(3),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,3))');
215
end
216
if opt.perturb==2
217
set(errPlot2(1),'XData',perturb2 ');
218
set(errPlot2(1),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,1))');
219
set(errPlot2(2),'XData',perturb2 ');
220
set(errPlot2(2),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,2))');
221
set(errPlot2(3),'XData',perturb2 ');
222
set(errPlot2(3),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,3))');
223
end
224
if opt.perturb==3
225
set(errPlot2(1),'XData',perturb2 ');
226
set(errPlot2(1),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,1))');
227
set(errPlot2(2),'XData',perturb2 ');
228
set(errPlot2(2),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,2))');
229
set(errPlot2(3),'XData',perturb2 ');
230
set(errPlot2(3),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,3))');
231
end
232
if opt.perturb==4
233
set(errPlot2(1),'XData',perturb2 ');
234
set(errPlot2(1),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,1))');
235
set(errPlot2(2),'XData',perturb2 ');
236
set(errPlot2(2),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,2))');
237
set(errPlot2(3),'XData',perturb2 ');
238
set(errPlot2(3),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,3))');
239
end
240
end
241
end
120
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:129==
242
%
keyboard
243
mmamin=zeros(fem.nn+3,1);
244
mmamax=zeros(fem.nn+3,1);
245
mmamin(1:3)=max(0,ynorm-move1);
246
mmamax(1:3)=min(1,ynorm+move1);
247
mmamin(4:end)=max(0,x-move1);
248
mmamax(4:end)=min(1,x+move1);
249
[mma,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,low,upp] = ...
250
mmasub(m,n,iter,xy,mmamin,mmamax,xyold1,xyold2, ...
251
f0val,df0,df02,fval',df',df2',low,upp,a0,a,cConst,d)
;
252
%Update all design variables
253
fem.theta=mma(2)*fem.deg;
254
yold2=yold1;
255
yold1=y;
256
y=[(mma(1)*(fem.rad_outer -fem.rad_inner)+fem.rad_inner)*
cosd(fem.theta);(mma(1)*(fem.rad_outer -fem.rad_inner)
+fem.rad_inner)*sind(fem.theta);mma(3)*fem.rmax];
257
xold2=xold1;
258
xold1=x;
259
x=mma(4:end);
260
261
ynormold2=ynormold1;
262
ynormold1=ynorm;
263
ynorm=mma(1:3);
264
265
xy=[ynorm;x];
266
xyold2=[ynormold2;xold2];
267
xyold1=[ynormold1;xold1];
268
269
%Calculate the change from the previous iteration
270
change1=max(abs(xy(1:3)-xyold1(1:3)));
271
change2=max(abs(xy(4:end)-xyold1(4:end)));
272
%Print status
273
fprintf(' It.:%3i f0:%10.4f f1: %7.4f f2: %7.4f ch1
.:%6.3f ch2.:%6.3f\n',iter,f0val,fval(1),fval(2),
change1 ,change2)
274
275
%% Save convergence curves and whatever values we want
276
f0(iter)=f0val;
277
f1(iter)=fval(1);
278
f2(iter)=fval(2);
279
Delta(iter ,1)=change1;
280
Delta(iter ,2)=change2;
281
end
282
h2=figure;
283
h2.Position=[50,50,1500,1000];
284
movie(F1,1,2);
285
fem.objective='stream';
286
[~,XC,~,U,~]=film_2D(fem,xPhys,reshape(yPhys ,1,fem.nn));
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
121
==PAGE:130==
287
elseif fem.objective=="outletChole"
288
289
nn=length(fem.X);
290
291
beta=5; % Regularisation parameter
292
293
% Initialise MMA
294
m=2;
295
n=numel(yinit);
296
297
a0=1;
298
a=zeros(m,1);
299
cConst=ones(m,1)*1e3; % Normal: 1000
300
d=ones(m,1);
301
%low=0;
upp=1;
302
move=0.005;
303
304
xold1=xinit(:);
305
xold2=xold1;
306
x=xold1;
307
xPhys=x;
308
309
yold1=yinit(:);
310
yold2=yold1;
311
y=yold1;
312
313
ynormold2=[fem.xoutlet;fem.youtlet;fem.routlet];
314
ynormold1=[fem.xoutlet;fem.youtlet;fem.routlet];
315
ynorm=[fem.xoutlet;fem.youtlet;fem.routlet];
316
317
low=y*0;
318
upp=y*0+1;
319
yPhys=zeros(1,nn);
320
fr=zeros(1,nn);
321
322
323
if opt.fdcheck
324
figure(1)
325
perturb=1; fd_err2=1;
326
errPlot2=loglog(perturb ,abs(fd_err2),'.b-',perturb ,abs(
fd_err2),'.b:',perturb ,abs(fd_err2),'.b--');
327
xlabel('Pertubation')
328
ylabel('|Error|')
329
if opt.perturb==1
330
title('Perturbation of x direction')
331
legend('df0/dx','df1/dx','df2/dx')
332
elseif opt.perturb==2
333
title('Perturbation of y direction')
334
legend('df0/dy','df1/dy','df2/dy')
335
122
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:131==
336
elseif opt.perturb==3
337
title('Perturbation of radius')
338
legend('df0/dr','df1/dr','df2/dr')
339
end
340
end
341
342
343
r=[];
344
iter=0;
345
change=1;
346
h1=figure;
347
h1.Visible='off';
348
while change > 0.0002
349
iter=iter+1;
350
351
%Heaviside projection
352
dd =
(((reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny))-y(1))
.^2+((reshape(fem.X(:,2),fem.nnx,fem.nny))-y(2)).^2)/
y(3)^2;
353
yPhys = 1-(1./ (1+exp(-beta*(dd-1))));
354
355
fem.AC=pi*y(3)^2;
356
357
%FEM analysis and sensitivities of objective function
with respect to
358
%filtered field
359
[sol,f0val,df0dytilde ,fval,dfdytilde]=film_2D(fem,xPhys,
reshape(yPhys ,[1,nn]));
360
fval(1)=(pi*y(3)^2)/(fem.A*fem.volfrac)-1;
361
362
[fx,fy]=gradient(-yPhys,fem.rr,fem.thth);
363
%Sensitivities of design variables
364
%
fx=-(beta*exp(-beta*(dd-1))./(1+exp(-beta*(dd
-1))).^2 .* (-2*reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny)
+2*y(1))/y(3)^2);
365
%
fy=-(beta*exp(-beta*(dd-1))./(1+exp(-beta*(dd
-1))).^2 .* (-2*reshape(fem.X(:,2),fem.nnx,fem.nny)
+2*y(2))/y(3)^2);
366
fr=-(beta*exp(-beta*(dd-1))./(1+exp(-beta*(dd-1))).^2 .*
(-2/y(3)*dd));
367
368
%Collected variable derivatives
369
dytildedy=[reshape(fx,[1,nn]);reshape(fy,[1,nn]);reshape
(fr,[1,nn])];
370
371
%Final sensitivity
372
df0dy=dytildedy*df0dytilde;
373
374
dfdy=dytildedy*dfdytilde;
375
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
123
==PAGE:132==
376
dfdy(3,1)=(2*pi*y(3))/(fem.A*fem.volfrac);
377
378
%Second derivatives (not available)
379
df0dy2=0*df0dy;
380
dfdy2=0*dfdy;
381
382
%Finite difference check
383
if opt.fdcheck
384
%Pertubation vector
385
perturb=[0.1e-2 0.1e-3 0.1e-4 0.1e-5 0.1e-6 0.1e-7
0.1e-8 0.1e-9];
386
%Initialization
387
fd2=zeros(length(perturb),3);
388
fd_err2=zeros(length(perturb),3);
389
for i=1:length(perturb)
390
y2=y;
391
if opt.perturb==1
392
y2(1)=y2(1)+perturb(i);
393
end
394
if opt.perturb==2
395
y2(2)=y2(2)+perturb(i);
396
end
397
if opt.perturb==3
398
y2(3)=y2(3)+perturb(i);
399
end
400
dd2 =
(((reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny))-
y2(1)).^2+((reshape(fem.X(:,2),fem.nnx,fem.
nny))-y2(2)).^2)/y2(3)^2;
401
yp2 = 1-(reshape(1./ (1+exp(-beta*(dd2-1))),[1,
nn]));
402
[~,f0p2,~,fp2]=film_2D(fem,xPhys,yp2);
403
fd2(i,1)=(f0p2-f0val)/perturb(i);
404
fd2(i,2)=(fp2(1)-fval(1))/perturb(i);
405
fd2(i,3)=(fp2(2)-fval(2))/perturb(i);
406
if opt.perturb==1
407
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-df0dy(1))/df0dy(1);
408
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-dfdy(1,1))/dfdy(1,1);
409
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-dfdy(1,2))/dfdy(1,2);
410
%
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-
df0dy(1))/fd2(i,1);
411
%
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-
dfdy(1,1))/fd2(i,2);
412
%
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-
dfdy(1,2))/fd2(i,3);
413
end
414
if opt.perturb==2
415
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-df0dy(2))/df0dy(2);
416
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-dfdy(2,1))/dfdy(2,1);
417
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-dfdy(2,2))/dfdy(2,2);
418
%
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-
124
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:133==
df0dy(2))/fd2(i,1);
419
%
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-
dfdy(2,1))/fd2(i,2);
420
%
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-
dfdy(2,2))/fd2(i,3);
421
end
422
if opt.perturb==3
423
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-df0dy(3))/df0dy(3);
424
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-dfdy(3,1))/dfdy(3,1);
425
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-dfdy(3,2))/dfdy(3,2);
426
%
fd_err2(i,1)=(fd2(i,1)-
df0dy(3))/fd2(i,1);
427
%
fd_err2(i,2)=(fd2(i,2)-
dfdy(3,1))/fd2(i,2);
428
%
fd_err2(i,3)=(fd2(i,3)-
dfdy(3,2))/fd2(i,3);
429
end
430
end
431
if opt.perturb==1
432
set(errPlot2(1),'XData',perturb ');
433
set(errPlot2(1),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,1))');
434
set(errPlot2(2),'XData',perturb ');
435
set(errPlot2(2),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,2))');
436
set(errPlot2(3),'XData',perturb ');
437
set(errPlot2(3),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,3))');
438
end
439
if opt.perturb==2
440
set(errPlot2(1),'XData',perturb ');
441
set(errPlot2(1),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,1))');
442
set(errPlot2(2),'XData',perturb ');
443
set(errPlot2(2),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,2))');
444
set(errPlot2(3),'XData',perturb ');
445
set(errPlot2(3),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,3))');
446
end
447
if opt.perturb==3
448
set(errPlot2(1),'XData',perturb ');
449
set(errPlot2(1),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,1))');
450
set(errPlot2(2),'XData',perturb ');
451
set(errPlot2(2),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,2))');
452
set(errPlot2(3),'XData',perturb ');
453
set(errPlot2(3),'YData',abs(fd_err2(:,3))');
454
end
455
end
456
457
ymin=max(0,ynorm-move);
458
ymax=min(1,ynorm+move);
459
[mma,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,low,upp] = ...
460
mmasub(m,n,iter,ynorm,ymin,ymax,ynormold1 ,ynormold2 ,
...
461
f0val,df0dy,df0dy2 ,fval',dfdy',dfdy2',low,upp,a0,a,
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
125
==PAGE:134==
cConst ,d);
462
%Update all design variables
463
fem.theta=mma(2)*fem.deg;
464
yold2=yold1;
465
yold1=y;
466
y=[(mma(1)*(fem.rad_outer -fem.rad_inner)+fem.rad_inner)*
cosd(fem.theta);(mma(1)*(fem.rad_outer -fem.rad_inner)
+fem.rad_inner)*sind(fem.theta);mma(3)*fem.rmax];
467
468
ynormold2=ynormold1;
469
ynormold1=ynorm;
470
ynorm=mma(1:3);
471
472
%Calculate the change from the previous iteration
473
change=max(abs(ynorm(:)-ynormold1(:)));
474
%Print status
475
fprintf(' It.:%5i f0:%11.4f f1: %11.4f f2: %11.4f ch
.:%7.3f\n',iter,f0val,fval(1),fval(2),change)
476
477
%% Save convergence curves and whatever values we want
478
f0(iter)=f0val;
479
f1(iter)=fval(1);
480
f2(iter)=fval(2);
481
Delta(iter ,1)=change;
482
Delta(iter ,2)=0;
483
484
end
485
fem.objective='stream';
486
[~,XC,~,U,~]=film_2D(fem,xPhys,reshape(yPhys ,1,fem.nn));
487
end
488
489
490
end
C.3
Load fraction study
Load fraction study showing input file generation for optimization of a curved mesh.
1
%simple input file running the FEM script "film_2D.m"
2
clear; close all; clc;
3
4
%some default latex stuff
5
%some default latex stuff
6
set(groot,'defaultAxesTickLabelInterpreter','latex');
7
set(groot,'defaultTextInterpreter','latex');
8
set(groot,'defaultLegendInterpreter','latex');
9
set(groot, 'defaultAxesFontSize', 20);
10
set(groot, 'defaultLegendFontSize', 5);
11
get(groot, 'default');
12
126
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:135==
13
14
loadfrac=[1e
-8,0.05,0.1,0.15,0.20,0.25,0.30,0.35,0.4,0.45,0.5,0.55,0.60,0.65,0.70,0.7
15
obj=zeros(1,length(loadfrac));
16
areaconst=zeros(1,length(loadfrac));
17
loadconst=zeros(1,length(loadfrac));
18
for ii=1:length(loadfrac)
19
20
fem.rad_inner=27.3936; %inner radius of curved shoe
21
fem.rad_outer=51.2346; %outer radius of curved shoe
22
fem.xoutlet=0.5224; %X coordinate of outlet (between 0 and
1) exp= 0.5224
23
fem.youtlet=0.6422; %Y coordinate of outlet (between 0 and
1) exp= 0.6422
24
fem.routlet=0.0445; %Radius of outlet (between 0 and 1) exp
=0.0445
25
fem.rmax=(fem.rad_outer -fem.rad_inner)/2; %Max radius of
outlet
26
fem.deg=57.11; %angle of curved segment
27
fem.A=fem.deg/360*pi*fem.rad_outer^2-fem.deg/360*pi*fem.
rad_inner^2;
28
h0=0.01; %film thickness
29
sh=0.00457285714286; %height of the shoe step
30
nnx=100+1; %discretization of the shoe step in x dir
31
nny=100+1; %discretization of the shoe step in y dir
32
fem.rr=linspace(fem.rad_inner ,fem.rad_outer ,nnx);
33
fem.thth=linspace(0,fem.deg/360*2*pi,nny);
34
35
36
%Defining the FEM structure
37
38
%X is the coordinates of nodes
39
%IX is connectivity
40
%bc_pressure is which nodes have a boundary condition
pressure applied
41
%bc_pressure_value is the pressure value applied at these
boundaries
42
%nnx and nny are the same as before
43
[fem.X,fem.IX,fem.bc_pressure ,fem.bc_pressure_value ,fem.nnx,
fem.nny]=CreateCurvedMesh(fem.rad_inner ,fem.rad_outer ,fem
.deg,nnx,nny);
44
45
fem.nn=fem.nnx*fem.nny;
46
47
omega=25;%angular rotation of pump
48
49
u=zeros(length(fem.X),1);
50
v=zeros(length(fem.X),1);
51
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
127
==PAGE:136==
52
for i=1:length(fem.X)
53
a=sqrt(fem.X(i,1)^2+fem.X(i,2)^2);
54
theta=pi-atan2(fem.X(i,1),fem.X(i,2));
55
u(i)=cos(theta)*a*omega;
56
v(i)=sin(theta)*a*omega;
57
end
58
59
fem.h=[h0,h0+sh]; %h0 and h0+sh
60
fem.u=[u,v]; %velocity vector , x and y
61
fem.eta=9.076087979*1e-8; %viscosity
62
fem.penal=1; %penalty factor enabled if 1 disabled if 0
63
fem.penalAlpha=1e8; %Penalty factor
64
fem.alpha(1)=0; %Minimum penalty factor value
65
fem.alpha(2)=100; %Maximum penalty facotr value (Square: 1e0
Lambda: 1e-3)
66
fem.filter=0; %filtering enabled if 1 and disabled if 0
67
fem.rmin=1e-10; %Filter radius
68
fem.objective="outlettopologyandtopography"; %optimizing
objective , outlettopologyandtopography if both outlet and
topography is wanted
69
fem.int='G'; %Gauss or Lobatto quadrature
70
opt.dim=2; % Dimension
71
opt.fdcheck=0;
72
opt.perturb=4; %If 1 perturb the x direction of the center
of outlet , if 2 perturb the y direction of the center of
the outlet , if 3 perturb the radius of the outlet , if 4 a
node is perturbed
73
% opt.fdnode=17; %Node to be perturbed
74
fem.volfrac=0.01; %Volfrac for hole, how much of area can
the hole use
75
fem.outlet=1;%hole boundary conditions
76
fem.mex=0;
77
78
nn=length(fem.X); %total number of nodes
79
80
circd=@(rad,deg,center)[rad*cosd(deg)+center(1);rad*sind(deg
)+center(2)];%Circle Function In Degrees
81
82
N=1000;%Number of points on the arc
83
r_deg=linspace(0,25.14397233,N);%Vector with angle segments
84
origin=[0,0];%Center of arcs
85
rad_outer=47.568;%Outer radius
86
rad_inner=28.3026;%Inner radius
87
xy_outer=circd(rad_outer ,r_deg,origin);%Matrix (2xN) of x
and y coordinates of outer arc
88
xy_inner=circd(rad_inner ,r_deg,origin);%Matrix (2xN) of x
and y coordinates of inner arc
89
center_end=circd((rad_outer+rad_inner)/2,25.14397233,origin)
;%Origin of end milling arc
90
rad_end=(rad_outer -rad_inner)/2;%radius of end arc
128
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:137==
91
r_deg_end=linspace(25.14397233,180+25.14397233,N);%Vector
with angle segments for end arc
92
xy_end=circd(rad_end ,r_deg_end ,center_end);%Matrix (2xN) of
x and y coordinates of end arc
93
94
xv=[xy_outer(1,:),xy_end(1,:),flip(xy_inner(1,:))];%x
coordinates of polygon
95
yv=[xy_outer(2,:),xy_end(2,:),flip(xy_inner(2,:))];%y
coordinates of polygon
96
97
xq=fem.X(:,1);%x coordinates of nodes
98
yq=fem.X(:,2);%y coordinates of nodes
99
100
[in,on]=inpolygon(xq,yq,xv,yv);%check if coordinates of
nodes are inside polygon
101
102
fem.theta=fem.youtlet*fem.deg;
103
fem.xi=(fem.xoutlet*(fem.rad_outer -fem.rad_inner)+fem.
rad_inner)*cosd(fem.theta); fem.yi=(fem.xoutlet*(fem.
rad_outer -fem.rad_inner)+fem.rad_inner)*sind(fem.theta);
fem.d0=fem.routlet*2*fem.rmax;
104
105
fem.bc_outlet=[];
106
107
yinit=zeros(1,nn);
108
109
%% Initial geometry
110
% simple incline film height
111
% xinit=reshape(transpose(meshgrid(linspace(1,0,fem.nnx),1:
fem.nny)),fem.nn,1);
112
% experimental filmheight
113
xinit=in;
114
% Calculate initial load:
115
[sol]=film_2D(fem,xinit,yinit);
116
gp=[-1/sqrt(3), 1/sqrt(3)];
117
w=[1,1];
118
L=zeros(length(fem.X),1);
119
for elem=1:size(fem.IX,1)
120
edof=fem.IX(elem ,:);
121
coords=fem.X(fem.IX(elem ,:),:);
122
for i=1:length(gp)
123
for j=1:length(gp)
124
xi=[gp(i),gp(j)];
125
Np=[(1-xi(1))*(1-xi(2)), (1+xi(1))*(1-xi(2)),
(1+xi(1))*(1+xi(2)), (1-xi(1))*(1+xi(2))]/4;
126
dN=[-1+xi(2), 1-xi(2), 1+xi(2), -1-xi(2);
127
-1+xi(1), -1-xi(1), 1+xi(1), 1-xi(1)]/4;
128
J=dN*coords; % From Cook - 6/4
129
detJ=J(1,1)*J(2,2)-J(2,1)*J(1,2); % Samme som
det() - 6/4
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
129
==PAGE:138==
130
L(edof)=L(edof)+w(i)*w(j)*detJ*Np';
131
end
132
end
133
end
134
135
fem.fGoal=loadfrac(ii)*L'*sol; % TESTING for hole
136
% Above: Test of initial load - 25/5
137
138
yinit=[fem.xi,fem.yi,fem.d0/2];
139
140
141
fprintf('Optimisation\n')
142
tic
143
[Delta,x,y,f0,f1,f2,F1,sol,XC,U]=opt2curved(fem,opt,xinit,
yinit);
144
toc
145
146
%Save the final outlet flow of each design
147
obj(ii)=f0(end);
148
areaconst(ii)=f1(end);
149
loadconst(ii)=f2(end);
150
151
%% Plot
152
153
%some default latex stuff
154
set(groot,'defaultAxesTickLabelInterpreter','latex');
155
set(groot,'defaultTextInterpreter','latex');
156
set(groot,'defaultLegendInterpreter','latex');
157
set(groot, 'defaultAxesFontSize', 20);
158
set(groot, 'defaultLegendFontSize', 5);
159
get(groot, 'default');
160
161
close all;
162
163
%
PLOT THE CONVERGED SOLUTION
164
figure(2)
165
contourf(reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny),reshape(fem.X
(:,2),fem.nnx,fem.nny),reshape(sol,fem.nnx,fem.nny)./max(
sol))
166
c=colorbar;
167
c.Label.String=('Normalized pressure \it{P}');
168
axis tight
169
axis equal
170
hold on
171
th = 0:pi/50:2*pi;
172
xunit = y(3) * cos(th) + y(1);
173
yunit = y(3) * sin(th) + y(2);
174
plot(xunit, yunit,'r',LineWidth=2);
175
hold off
176
saveas(gcf,sprintf('pres%d',ii),'epsc')
130
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:139==
177
178
figure(3)
179
contourf(reshape(fem.X(:,1),fem.nnx,fem.nny),reshape(fem.X
(:,2),fem.nnx,fem.nny),reshape(x,fem.nnx,fem.nny))
180
c=colorbar;
181
c.Label.String=('Topography - \gamma');
182
axis tight
183
axis equal
184
hold on
185
th = 0:pi/50:2*pi;
186
xunit = y(3) * cos(th) + y(1);
187
yunit = y(3) * sin(th) + y(2);
188
plot(xunit, yunit,'r',LineWidth=2);
189
hold off
190
saveas(gcf,sprintf('top%d',ii),'epsc')
191
192
%Creating the elementwise patch plotting
193
194
k=0;
195
j=0;
196
patchx=zeros(4,(fem.nnx-1)*(fem.nny-1));
197
patchy=zeros(4,(fem.nnx-1)*(fem.nny-1));
198
patchp=zeros(4,(fem.nnx-1)*(fem.nny-1));
199
patchxPhys=zeros(4,(fem.nnx-1)*(fem.nny-1));
200
for i=1:(fem.nnx-1)*(fem.nny-1)
201
k=k+1;
202
j=j+1;
203
if j==fem.nnx
204
k=k+1;
205
j=1;
206
end
207
patchx(1,i)=fem.X(k,1);
208
patchx(2,i)=fem.X(k+1,1);
209
patchx(3,i)=fem.X(k+fem.nnx+1,1);
210
patchx(4,i)=fem.X(k+fem.nnx,1);
211
patchy(1,i)=fem.X(k,2);
212
patchy(2,i)=fem.X(k+1,2);
213
patchy(3,i)=fem.X(k+fem.nnx+1,2);
214
patchy(4,i)=fem.X(k+fem.nnx,2);
215
patchp(1,i)=sol(k);
216
patchp(2,i)=sol(k+1);
217
patchp(3,i)=sol(k+fem.nnx+1);
218
patchp(4,i)=sol(k+fem.nnx);
219
end
220
221
figure(4)
222
patch(patchx , patchy , zeros(size(patchp)),'FaceColor','white
')
223
hold on
224
quiver(XC(:,1),XC(:,2),U(:,1),U(:,2),'blue')
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
131
==PAGE:140==
225
hold on
226
plot(xunit, yunit,'r',LineWidth=2);
227
hold off
228
axis equal
229
axis tight
230
colorbar
231
title('Flow vector plot')
232
saveas(gcf,sprintf('flow%d',ii),'epsc')
233
234
figure(5)
235
plot(linspace(1,length(f0),length(f0)),f0/max(f0),LineWidth
=2)
236
xlabel('Iterations [~]')
237
ylabel('Normalized flow rate $Q$')
238
grid on
239
saveas(gcf,sprintf('obj%d',ii),'epsc')
240
241
figure(6)
242
plot(linspace(1,length(f1),length(f1)),f1,LineWidth=2)
243
hold on
244
plot(linspace(1,length(f2),length(f2)),f2,LineWidth=2)
245
hold off
246
xlabel('Iterations [~]')
247
ylabel('Constraint value [~]')
248
legend('Area constraint','Load constraint',Location='best')
249
grid on
250
saveas(gcf,sprintf('const%d',ii),'epsc')
251
252
figure(7)
253
plot(linspace(1,length(Delta(:,1)),length(Delta(:,1))),Delta
(:,1),LineWidth=2)
254
hold on
255
plot(linspace(1,length(Delta(:,2)),length(Delta(:,2))),Delta
(:,2),LineWidth=2)
256
hold off
257
xlabel('Iterations [~]')
258
ylabel('Change of design variables')
259
legend('$\Delta \xi$','$\Delta \gamma$',Location='best')
260
grid on
261
saveas(gcf,sprintf('delta%d',ii),'epsc')
262
end
263
save('obj','obj')
264
save('areaconst','areaconst')
265
save('loadconst','loadconst')
132
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
==PAGE:141==
Design, optimization and experimental identification of a hydrodynamic pump
133
==PAGE:142==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://construct.dtu.dk/
