==PAGE:1==
Subject-Driven
Generation
Techniques
for
Stable Diffusion Model
A modern approach to data augmentation
Master's Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
A modern approach to data augmentation
Master’s Thesis
June, 2023
By
Mario Lozano Cortés
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard
Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulfilment of the require-
ments for a Master’s Thesis on Artificial Intelligence. The thesis was completed as part of the
Erasmus mobility programme between the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and the
Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC) - BarcelonaTech, and it is a requirement for the
completion of the Master’s degree program in Artificial Intelligence from the Barcelona School
of Informatics of the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) - BarcelonaTech, the School
of Engineering of the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV) and the Faculty of Mathematics of the
Universitat de Barcelona (UB).
The following discussion assumes that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of mathemat-
ics, deep learning and computer vision.
Mario Lozano Cortés - s226536
Kongens Lyngby, June 15, 2023
ii
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-image generation models have led to the development of mature
systems capable of producing highly realistic and detailed images. These models have become
increasingly accessible, empowering researchers to explore novel techniques for enhanced manip-
ulation and control. Subject-driven generation emerges as a technique that allows the synthesis
of new images featuring a subject within diverse contexts. Hence, to what extent can images
generated by text-to-image systems improve the performance of computer vision models? This
thesis addresses this question by developing an experimental framework to test the synthetic
images generated by the Stable Diffusion model on classification and segmentation tasks. Con-
cretely, we approach the issue through the lens of data augmentation. Our findings show that
subject-driven augmentation is a competitive data augmentation technique, being especially rel-
evant in small datasets where data is scarce or expensive. Nonetheless, we showcase that there is
still a relevant gap between synthetic and real images. These findings underscore the potential
for few-shot and zero-shot learning approaches, offering avenues to reduce or eliminate the costs
associated with extensive dataset creation while augmenting the capabilities of computer vision
models. Code released1.
Keywords:
deep learning, computer vision, text-to-image generation, data augmentation,
subject-driven augmentation, Dreambooth, Textual inversion, ControlNet, Stable Diffusion,
few-shot learning, zero-shot learning.
1https://github.com/SrLozano/MSc-Thesis-Subject-Driven-Augmentation
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge my sincere appreciation to all those who have contributed to the
successful completion of this project.
I am deeply grateful for the guidance, assistance and
encouragement I have received from the people close to me throughout these months.
First and foremost, my supervisor, Dimitrios Papadopoulos (dimp@dtu.dk). His experience
and knowledge in computer vision have been invaluable, and his excellent feedback has allowed
me to improve myself as a professional in AI and the quality of the present thesis.
My parents have been a fundamental pillar in my life, providing unwavering support as I pursue
my dreams. They share in my happiness as if it were their own, and their encouragement has
been a constant source of strength for me.
Nor can I forget all the people who have accompanied me throughout the long hours spent in
the library and made them joyful. Luana, Alex, Shenhav, Konstantinos, Natalie, Heleri, and
many more have made the hours fly by.
Finally, I would like to make a special mention to all the people who love me, my chosen family,
who from Madrid and Barcelona have brought warmth to my heart.
iv
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the art
3
2.1
Historical review of text-to-image models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Diffusion probabilistic models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Latent diffusion models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Stable diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Subject-driven generation techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Conditional control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methods
21
3.1
Subject-driven augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Class-name-based augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Conditionally controlled augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Experiments
25
4.1
Experiments overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion
49
6
Conclusions
53
7
Future work and social issues
55
Bibliography
57
A Hardware specifications
61
B Software enviroment
62
C Rigour and reproducibility
63
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Text-based image generation models have reached a point of maturity where they are capable
of generating high-fidelity photorealistic images [1, 2]. These images have attained a degree
of quality that renders them suitable for practical implementation and are often indiscernible
from genuine photographs to the majority of observers [3]. In addition, the availability of text-
to-image models has been increased by private companies, educational institutions, and the
open-source community. Gigantic models such as Stable Diffusion are available in a completely
accessible way for anyone wanting to try or experiment with it.
The increasing accessibility of these resources empowers researchers worldwide to devise novel
techniques that facilitate enhanced manipulation and control of generative models.
In this
line, the work of Textual inversion [4], Dreambooth [5], and ControlNet [6] stand out. These
first two methods allow subject-driven generation, which consists of reconstructing a subject in
different contexts while maintaining its fundamental characteristics and details. In particular,
Dreambooth takes a few images of a subject and returns a personalised text-to-image model by
fine-tuning. Then, a unique identifier refers to the subject. Similarly, Textual inversion takes a
reduced set of images and finds an embedding token for a new token while keeping the model
intact. Lastly, ControlNet introduces conditional control to the generation process, enabling the
precise modification of existing images while preserving high fidelity.
In addition to all these new possibilities, one of the foremost challenges in deep learning emerges.
The utilisation of vast quantities of data and the necessity for extensively annotated datasets
pose significant concerns. The creation and upkeep of these massive datasets incur substantial
expenses and remain beyond the reach of most researchers [7].
Consequently, the scientific
community has primarily directed its efforts towards optimising deep learning architectures
rather than developing methodologies to mitigate the cost of acquiring and maintaining large-
scale datasets [8].
Hence, it is logical to ask the question: to what extent does this set of tools allow the use of
synthetic images in real tasks while allowing the cost reduction of creating and maintaining
datasets? Thus, this thesis focuses on solving this question from the deep learning perspec-
tive. Therefore, to what extent can images generated by text-to-image systems improve the
performance of computer vision models? To address this question, we have developed an ex-
perimental framework to test the synthetic images generated by the Stable Diffusion model on
several classical computer vision tasks. Concretely, we approach the issue through the lens of
data augmentation, with a specific focus on its applicability to classification and segmentation
problems.
First, we take a well-studied dataset such as the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset [9]. Using subject-driven
generation techniques, we create a pipeline in which synthetic images are used to augment the
real images of the dataset in a classification task. Furthermore, we compare the results with
classical data augmentation techniques and automated augmentation policies. We also study
the effect of the size of the proportion of real versus synthetic images by fixing the latter’s size.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
1
==PAGE:10==
Secondly, we test the impact of the size of the proportion of synthetic images compared to real
ones, but this time leaving the number of real ones fixed. Thirdly, we experiment with training
a computer vision model with only generated images. Fourth, we combine the generative data
augmentation approaches used with strategies based on automated augmentation policies to
inspect the consequences. Fifth, we add control over the generated images with ControlNet to
improve image quality. Sixth, we use the additional control provided by ControlNet to increase
the dataset size in a segmentation task. Finally, we reaﬀirm our findings with the Food-101
dataset [10].
Our extensive experiments show that subject-driven augmentation is a competitive data aug-
mentation technique under specific characteristics. In particular, subject-driven augmentation
is really beneficial on datasets with very few training images per class. Thus, considering a
Resnet34 network on the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset using less than 10 real images per class, we
found classification performance 1 improvements of up to 19.11%. Moreover, this result is es-
pecially significant when we consider that classical data augmentation techniques are unable to
improve the no-augmentation baseline.
On the other hand, we show that adding synthetic images to a small dataset only makes sense
to a certain extent.
Again, with a Resnet34 network on the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset using
only 5 real images per class, we show that generating 100% synthetic images improves the no-
augmentation baseline by 18.93%.
Alternatively, by adding 1000% of synthetic images, the
baseline improvement only rises up to 19.11%.
Alternatively, we also experimented with no real images at all.
In this case, we show that
competitive results can be obtained using only synthetic images in the training of a computer
vision task. We also show that adding conditional control with ControlNet can improve the
results. Thus, we obtain up to 23.47% improvement over the no-augmentation baseline when
using 5% real images and 2000% synthetic images in the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset with a Resnet34
network.
Finally, we show how this approach can be employed in different tasks, such as segmentation or
in other datasets, such as Food-101.
Our findings yield clear implications within the realm of computer vision. First, subject-driven
augmentation techniques are a competitive approach. Second, these data augmentation
techniques are especially advantageous in sparse datasets. Lastly, despite advancements,
synthetic images exhibit limitations in faithfully representing reality, indicating ample poten-
tial for further enhancement.
Hence, we envision a future trend towards few-shot and zero-shot learning. These approaches
facilitate the training of models capable of accurate generalisation and prediction even with mini-
mal or zero real training images. With text-to-image models that generate high-quality synthetic
images, reducing or eliminating the expenses associated with creating extensive datasets required
for deep learning model training becomes feasible. Thereby, the capabilities of computer vision
models will be enhanced.
1The model performance metric considered is accuracy.
2
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:11==
2
State of the art
Text-to-image is an emerging field of deep learning where models can generate lifelike and highly
detailed images from textual descriptions. The development of these models is a challenging
task that requires the close integration of both computer vision and NLP approaches.
The
latest advancements in text-to-image models have led to the capability of producing high-quality
images with rich semantic content that can now be used for tons of applications including
video games and virtual reality, e-commerce, or education among others. Even though recent
advancements have allowed the use for commercial applications, generative models remain a
challenging and tough problem.
This section aims to analyse the current state-of-the-art of
text-to-image models.
2.1
Historical review of text-to-image models
Text-to-image models have been present among researchers for a long time. One of the first suc-
cessful attempts came in 2015 from researchers at the University of Toronto, who in their paper
Generating Images from Captions with Attention [11] describe a model that generates images
from natural language descriptions. The results they obtained followed the given descriptions,
but the quality of the images left much to be desired.
Since then, research on the subject has come a long way and better and better solutions have
been proposed. One of the major turning points came in 2020 with the publication of Taming
Transformers for High-Resolution Image Synthesis [12]. In it, researchers at the University of
Heidelberg propose combining two deep learning models, VQ-GAN + CLIP, to improve gen-
eration. VQ-GAN (Vector Quantized Generative Adversarial Network) is a type of Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) [13] that generates images by transforming a random noise vector
into a synthetic image. On the other hand, CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining)
is a model that has been trained on a large dataset of images and texts to understand the re-
lationships between words and images [14]. The combination of VQ-GAN and CLIP combines
the strengths of both models to produce images that are both high quality and representative
of the input text.
Despite all these advances, the real revolution in the field of text-based image generation comes in
2021 with two publications using diffusion models, Palette: Image-to-Image Diffusion Models [15]
and GLIDE: Towards Photorealistic Image Generation and Editing with Text-Guided Diffusion
Models [16]. In the first one, a group of Google Brain researchers develop a “unified framework
for image-to-image translation based on conditional diffusion” [15]. In the second publication,
they explore the use of diffusion models in text-conditional image synthesis.
All the research described above explodes and becomes popular with the general public with the
release of the DALL-E 2 and Stable Diffusion models, described in the publications Hierarchical
Text-Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents [17] and High-Resolution Image Synthesis
with Latent Diffusion Models [18]. These models achieve a level of quality that allows these tools
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Sample of generated images by DALL-E 2. The images are of a quality and
level of detail that are suitable for use in real-life scenarios. [17]
to be used in multiple real-world use cases. Figure 2.1 shows images obtained by DALL-E 2
from the given descriptions.
The generated images, as shown in figure 2.1, are of high enough quality to be used in real-
world projects.
Hence, research has shifted from concentrating solely on the quality aspect
to trying to increase control over the final result.
Therefore, in late 2022 and early 2023,
some of the most influential publications in the field of generative AI seek to facilitate the
manipulation of generated images through subject-driven generation (An Image is Worth One
Word: Personalizing Text-to-Image Generation using Textual Inversion [4] and DreamBooth:
Fine Tuning Text-to-Image Diffusion Models for Subject-Driven Generation [5]) or conditional
guidance (Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion Models [6]).
2.2
Diffusion probabilistic models
Throughout 2022, the capabilities and popularity of text-to-image models have exploded. The
general public is aware of some models, such as DALL-E 2, Midjourney, or Stable Diffusion.
Nonetheless, the vast majority of people are unaware of the technical prowess required in the
field of Artificial Intelligence for these models to exist. This section aims to shed some light on
the internal functioning and processes of these models from an academic perspective.
Diffusion probabilistic models are a class of latent variable models that introduce the ideas of
nonequilibrium thermodynamics into data generation techniques by homogeneously adding noise
into samples. Thus, they join the list of models that manage to generate high-quality images,
such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) or Generative adversarial networks (GANs). The latter
ones have been the reference of academic research in recent years and are the benchmark to be
surpassed by diffusion models.
GANs were introduced in 2014 by researchers at the University of Montreal in the paper Gen-
erative Adversarial Nets [13]. The idea is to create generative models through an adversarial
process in which two neural networks compete against each other. One of the networks will be
generative while the other will be discriminative. Thus, the generative network will be in charge
4
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Overview of GANs and diffusion models.
In GANs, a generative and a
discriminative network compete with each other in a process that improves both at the same
time. Diffusion models, on the other hand, are based on a Markov chain that adds noise and
then learns how to remove it.
of capturing the distribution of the training dataset while the discriminative network must dis-
tinguish whether a sample comes from the generative network or the training data. The idea is
that the generative network maximises the probability that the discriminative network makes
errors.
Diffusion models, on the other hand, achieve high-quality image synthesis results in the paper
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [1] by researchers from the University of California,
Berkeley. These models are based on creating a Markov chain in which at each step they add
Gaussian noise to an image in a diffusion process and then learn to undo it. In this way, a
network is trained that is capable of reconstructing images from random noise. The differences
between GANs and diffusion models are presented in figure 2.2.
Diving further into the workings of diffusion models, we define the forward process of the Markov
chain. The first step is to take a sample of the target data distribution, which we will call X0,
and add Gaussian noise in T steps. The forward process is thus defined as a Markov chain in
which the state of a sample at time n depends only on the state at time n −1. Therefore, one
can denote the distribution of any sample conditioned on the initial state X0.
q (x1:T |x0) =
T
∏
t=1
q (xt|xt−1)
In every step of the noising process, Gaussian noise is added according to some variance schedule
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Markov chain of the diffusion process [1]. As T approaches the limit, the
distribution will lose all the information of the original picture.
β1...βt, normally consider as hyperparameters. The restrictions applied to βt are β1 < β2... < βt
and βtϵ(0, 1). I stands for identity.
q (xt|xt−1) = N
(
xt;
√
1 −βtxt−1, βtI
)
As βt grows in time and T approaches the limit (T →∞, βt →0), the Gaussian mean will
approach zero with identity covariance. In this way, the distribution will lose all the information
contained in the original image. In practice, researchers use a T close to 1000 [1].
q (xt|x0) ≈N (0, I)
Figure 2.3 shows the diffusion process described so far.
In summary, it is proven that the forward process destroys the structure of a data distribution
step by step. The next challenge is to learn the reverse diffusion process in order to generate
data that resembles the training distribution from pure Gaussian noise. As with the forward
process, the reverse diffusion process can be expressed as a Markov chain where the probability
of a sequence of samples can be expressed as the product of conditional probabilities.
pθ (x0:T ) := p (xT )
T
∏
t=1
pθ (xt−1|xt)
The reverse diffusion process involves a neural network to remove noise from an image in a
stepwise manner. Thus, starting from pure Gaussian noise, noise is removed step by step to arrive
at an image that resembles the training distribution. The reason that the process has to be done
in a stepwise manner is that “the estimation is more tractable than explicitly describing the full
distribution” as expressed in the publication Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium
Thermodynamics [19].
The neural network that the authors of DDPM propose aims to predict the noise to subsequently
eliminate it from the image. This is equivalent to obtaining the mean of the distribution since
the authors decide to fix the variance. The authors decide to use the U-Net network [20] for this
purpose. U-Net consists of a bottleneck in the middle that ensures that the network removes
irrelevant information and focuses on the important one. In addition, the network, between the
encoder and the decoder, uses residual connections to improve eﬀiciency. Finally, the authors of
6
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Reverse diffusion learning schema. The network is in charge of predicting the
noise. Afterwards, it is eliminated from the image.
DDPM decide to employ self-attention at the 16 × 16 feature map resolution. Figure 2.4 shows
a schema of the learning process.
Another question that arises when working with diffusion models is how conditional generations
can be provided.
This can be achieved through various techniques.
One way is to feed a
conditional variable into the training so that the model makes use of it in the generation to
resemble a subset of the training distribution. However, guiding the generation process through
a classifier is a more flexible technique that allows even more complex text descriptions than
simple labels to be worked with. The idea is to take an already trained classifier and guide the
generation in the direction of the gradient of the classifier label.
2.2.1
Improvements to diffusion probabilistic models
Although the results obtained by the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [1] paper are
excellent and represent a great leap forward compared to the images that the generative models
were capable of producing until then, researchers at OpenAI suggest some improvements that
increase the quality of the results in their publication Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models [21]. In it, the main improvements they propose to the model are (i) the incorporation
of learned variances and (ii) an improvement of the noise schedule.
As discussed in section 2.2, the authors of the paper Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [1]
decided to fix the variance. However, the OpenAI researchers decide to learn the interpolation
of the variance between an upper and lower bound. This allows them to maintain the quality
of the samples and improve the log-likelihood. Finally, they modify the loss to depend on the
variance by a scaling factor λ set experimentally to 0.001.
On the other hand, the OpenAI authors present a new noise schedule designed to be linear in
the central region and have little change at the beginning and end. It is defined through ¯αt,
affecting the definition of the variances βt as follows.
βt = 1 −
¯αt
¯αt−1
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: Cosine and linear schedules comparison [21]. The cosine schedule is designed
to be linear in the central region and have little change at the beginning and end.
Figure 2.6: Cosine (bottom) and linear (top) schedules comparison on an image [21].
Cosine schedule allows a more controlled addition of noise. Thus, it avoids that last steps are
practically pure noise.
The proposed cosine noise schedule can be seen in figure 2.5. Whereas, figure 2.6 shows how each
of the schedules adds noise to the image. The linear schedule destroys the information faster
and presents a sub-optimal behaviour since the last steps are practically pure noise. Thus, the
cosine schedule is superior as it allows a more controlled addition of noise.
However, the improvements do not stop there. The same OpenAI researchers in a later paper
called Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis [2] demonstrate how a series of modifi-
cations to the architecture and the use of classifier guidance can produce images that are better
than the state-of-the-art at the time. The enhancement they make to the architecture are:
• Increasing the depth while decreasing the width to keep the size of the model relatively
constant.
• Increased use of attention heads and layers
• Upsampling and downsampling the activations by means of the BigGAN residual blocks
[22].
• Use of adaptive group normalization (AdaGN) layers, in which the concept of group nor-
malization is expanded by adjusting the normalization parameters of each group separately
according to the input data.
• Classifier guidance. Employing an additional classifier, the diffusion model is assisted in
generating a certain class.
8
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.7: Latent diffusion architecture [18]. First, a representation of the image in the
latent space is obtained. Then, Gaussian noise is added to the diffusion process. For the inverse
process, a U-Net network is used. Meanwhile, the encoder τθ maps the conditionings. Ultimately,
the result of the latent space is returned to the pixel space.
2.3
Latent diffusion models
Probabilistic diffusion models have enabled the generation of high-quality images with state-of-
the-art results. However, they have a fundamental weakness that the successive iterations of
improvements did not resolve. The fact that they operate in pixel space, dealing with additions
and deletions of noise in a tensor of the same size as the input tensor, means that training these
models requires enormous computational resources.
Therefore, researchers from the Ludwig
Maximilian University of Munich and Runway ML propose in the publication High-Resolution
Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models [18] to use latent space instead of pixel space to
speed up the training and inference calculations of these models. The latent space is obtained
from previously trained autoencoders, thus obtaining a representation of the images in a lower
dimensional space that allows a balance to be reached between the quality of the details preserved
and the reduction of the complexity obtained.
Thus, the operation of latent diffusion models can be summarised in the diagram present in
figure 2.7. The first training step is to obtain a representation of the considered image in the
latent space Z thanks to the encoder E. Then, Gaussian noise is added to the diffusion process
until Zt is reached. For the inverse process, a U-Net network is used. However, the real strength
of this approach lies in the ability to condition the generation. This is achieved thanks to a
dedicated encoder τθ that maps the conditionings in the intermediate layers of the U-Net with
cross-attention layers. Finally, the result of the latent space is returned to the pixel space thanks
to the D decoder.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.8: Stable Diffusion main components. The text encoder produces the encoding of
the description. The latent space diffuser applies the diffusion process into the latent space to
remove the noise. Finally, the autoencoder decoder generates the final image in the pixel state.
2.4
Stable diffusion
As detailed in section 2.1, text-to-image models have exploded in popularity and capabilities
throughout 2022. One of the biggest drivers of this shift in public perception has been Stable
Diffusion, an open-source model whose weights and architecture have been publicly released.
As a consequence, many researchers and enthusiasts have put much effort into optimising and
extending the project’s capabilities. These efforts are led by the British generative AI startup
Stability AI. As a result of the open-source philosophy, this model is capable of running on
consumer-available hardware. This fact allows the community to leverage its capabilities in a
wide variety of cases.
Stable Diffusion is a latent diffusion model that follows the architecture developed by the Com-
puter Vision & Learning group of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich in the paper
High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models [18], which has already been
explained in section 2.3. The proposed technique can also be adapted to other tasks such as
inpainting, outpainting, generating image-to-image translations or increasing the resolution of an
image, all tasks that Stable Diffusion can perform. A high-level diagram of the main components
of the model can be seen in figure 2.8:
• Text Encoder: It creates an encoded representation of the text data’s description. Its
goal is to influence the diffusion process, ensuring that the resulting image corresponds to
the given description. Stable Diffusion’s first version utilizes CLIP [14], while its second
version includes OpenClip [23]. In both cases, the text encoder is used in conjunction with
an image encoder. CLIP and OpenClip strive to maximize the similarity between the two
encodings, enabling the model to associate images with their respective descriptions.
• Latent Space Diffuser: It aims to utilize the diffusion process to eliminate noise from
the image by manipulating the latent space information. As the process progresses, addi-
tional information is added to enhance the similarity between the image and the provided
description. It is crucial to highlight that this operation takes place in latent space, re-
sulting in improved eﬀiciency and being a key advancement. Figure 2.9 provides a visual
representation of the denoising process guided by the text encoder.
10
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.9: Diffusion steps [24].
The diffusion process is applied into the latent space to
remove the noise.
• Autoencoder Decoder: The final image is produced by utilizing the compressed infor-
mation stored in the latent space. This step is carried out only once to construct the
ultimate pixel image.
2.4.1
Training dataset
A significant challenge posed by models like Stable Diffusion is the choice of images they are
trained on.
This issue is not insignificant as image generation models require both textual
descriptions of training images and a suﬀicient amount of variety to enable the model to com-
prehend how the world is constructed and thus be capable of reproducing it. However, the
conventional datasets of the Machine Learning field (COCO, ImageNet, etc) fail to satisfy these
requirements since they are not intended for this purpose. Researchers have discovered that the
solution is the web, where a vast array of diverse images about the world can be found, many
of which have HTML alt attribute tags.
Stable Diffusion has an advantage over some of its rivals, including DALL-E 2, in that it is an
open-source project, meaning that the dataset employed for training is well-known and accessible
to everyone. Specifically, the dataset used by Stable Diffusion is “LAION-5B, a dataset of 5.85
billion CLIP-filtered image-text pairs, 14x larger than LAION-400M, previously the biggest openly
accessible image-text dataset in the world” [25]. In particular, Stable Diffusion presents several
checkpoints on various LAION-5B assemblies. Some of these checkpoints in Stable Diffusion
version 1 [26] are:
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
11
==PAGE:20==
• stable-diffusion-v1-1: 256 x 256 images from a subset of 2.3 billion English-captioned
images called LAION-2B-EN.
• stable-diffusion-v1-2: Resumed training on stable-diffusion-v1-1 with 512x512 images
from the subset LAION-2B-EN, containing a selection of improved aesthetics images com-
pared to the others.
• stable-diffusion-v1-3: Resumed training on stable-diffusion-v1-2 with the same subset
of images but a 10% dropping of the text-conditioning.
• stable-diffusion-v1-4: Resumed training on stable-diffusion-v1-2 with 512x512 images
from the subset LAION-Aesthetics v2 5+, containing 600 million images from LAION-2B-
EN with better aesthetics and low-resolution and watermarked images filtered out.
• stable-diffusion-v1-5: stable-diffusion-v1-4 trained with more steps.
LAION-5B retrieves images from the internet that are not uniformly high in quality. Because
these images are gathered automatically, they do not adhere to the same rigorous standards
as other image datasets. As a result, the checkpoints for training Stable Diffusion use varying
subsets of LAION-5B. Nonetheless, the fact that the images obtained are not accurately labelled
as they are in standard vision supervised learning is actually an advantage. Consequently, Stable
Diffusion is now included in the group of architectures, such as CLIP or DALL-E 2, that have
proven the value of these vast datasets, even though they contain a significant amount of noise.
LAION-5B contains 5.85 billion image-text pairs divided into three subsets.
LAION2B-EN,
which contains 2.32 billion English image-text pairs; LAION2B-MULTI with 2.26 billion image-
text pairs from all other languages (Russian, French and German as top 3) and LAION1B-
NOLANG of 1.27 billion samples where the language is not correctly defined.
LAION-5B Description
The attributes that can be found in LAION-5B are described in table 2.1.
Some statistics of the subsets computed by the LAION team can be found in table 2.2 [25].
By analysing the data presented in tables 2.1 and 2.2, one can infer the rationale behind the
various checkpoints employed in the Stable Diffusion model. The LAION-5B dataset, owing to
its extensive diversity, can be partitioned into subsets that cater to various generation objectives.
As a result, the model can be adapted to different resolutions or the quality of the generated
images can be adjusted by filtering out low similarity image-to-description pairs, NSFW content,
or watermarked content.
It is noteworthy to mention that the primary characteristics of the entries in the dataset are
produced by other pre-trained models. This highlights the significance of incorporating other
models in the data collection process for large AI models, as they can assist in adding supple-
mentary features to the dataset. A more detailed discussion of this fact can be found in section
2.4.1
12
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:21==
Attribute
Description
id
Image identifier
URL
URL from where the image was obtained
Text string
Caption accompanying the image
Dimensions
Height and width of the image
Similarity
Cosine similarity between the text and image embeddings. CLIP-
based models are employed to gauge the level of accuracy with
which an image is described by a given textual description.
pwatermark
Probability that the image presents a watermark. The value is
obtained by a custom model trained by LAION. Value between 0
and 1
punsafe
Probability that the image is NSFW. As some of the content ac-
quired from the web may not be suitable for all audiences, LAION
employs a custom model to assess its adequateness. Value between
0 and 1
Table 2.1: LAION-5B’s attributes. Each of the images contained in the dataset has these
defining attributes of quality and usability.
LAION-5B Collection Methodology
The pipeline followed when creating the LAION-5B dataset involves: (i) obtaining Common
Crawl data, (ii) filtering some web pages, (iii) downloading the image-text pairs, (iv) and filtering
the content according to various characteristics.
Common Crawl is an organization dedicated to web crawling, data collection, and storage. It
makes all the gathered data publicly available. In the October 2022 crawl, the total file size was
380 TBs, comprising 3.15 billion web pages. The dataset’s key feature is that it contains HTML
tag information about the images, including the “alt” attribute, which provides an alternative
description of the images. This attribute is widely used on the web, for example, to address
page rendering issues, assist visually impaired individuals, or aid web content indexing by search
engines. Therefore, it is a ubiquitous attribute on the web that is encouraged to improve page
usability and ranking in web search engines.
After the Common Crawl data is accessible, images that have information in the “alt” attribute
are chosen. Once both images and descriptions are available, a language detection model is
employed on the descriptions, and the data is then divided into three subsets: LAION2B-EN,
LAION2B-MULTI, and LAION1B-NOLANG, as mentioned earlier. It is noteworthy that in
order to incorporate data into LAION1B-NOLANG, a confidence threshold is determined based
on the prediction of the language detection model, and if it is insuﬀicient, it is included in this
subset.
The next step is to clean the dataset of poor-quality images and descriptions. For this pur-
pose, images, and descriptions with less than 5KB data, 5 words and 0.28 cosine similarity
(in LAION2B-EN) are removed. The cosine similarity is computed thanks to Open AI’s CLIP
model, which computes the embedding of images and text.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
13
==PAGE:22==
Subset
Dimensions
NSFW
Watermark
Average text length
2B-EN
- >256x256: 1324M
- >512x512: 488M
- >1024x1024: 76M
2.9%
6.1%
67
2B-MULTI
- >256x256: 1299M
- >512x512: 480M
- >1024x1024: 57M
3.3%
5.6%
52
1B-NOLANG
- >256x256: 1324M
- >512x512: 488M
- >1024x1024: 76M
3%
4%
46
Table 2.2: Statistics summary for LAION-5B. NSFW and Watermark refer to the percent-
age of graphic and watermarked images while Average text length refers to the average length
of the descriptions.
It is important to notice the importance of the CLIP contrastive model in understanding how
the Stable Diffusion training dataset was created. As explained above, CLIP is able to associate
images and text. The way in which it achieves this is very clever as it can solve the classic
problem of labels in deep learning.
Thus, CLIP is a pioneer in bringing together language
models and vision models by making supervision in natural language. And therein lies the key
to LAION-5B: unlike other datasets that require a specialized team to create carefully curated
tags, this dataset relies on natural language descriptions provided by internet users. This allows
for much faster scalability. It is worth noting that CLIP is not only essential in the creation of
the dataset, but it also plays a vital role in the Stable Diffusion model, as previously explained
in section 2.4.
The final stage of the pipeline involves incorporating additional attributes that help categorize
the image in a useful way, beyond just its similarity to text. One such attribute is the probability
that the image contains NSFW content, which is determined using a custom model. Another
attribute is the probability that the image has a watermark, which is determined using a separate
model designed for that purpose.
Summing up, the creation of LAION-5B relies on multiple AI models that help gather reliable
content from the internet and guarantee the accuracy of image descriptions.
This marks a
significant shift in the way we collect data for training models, where the emphasis is on scaling
the dataset rather than carefully generating accurate labels. Instead, models like CLIP enable
the use of natural language descriptions that accompany web images for data collection.
14
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.10: Subject-driven generation problem [5]. The target is to create images of a
specific subject in different contexts.
2.5
Subject-driven generation techniques
Text-to-image models have enabled the generation of high-quality, realistic images through a
textual description of the desired image, as discussed in sections 2.2, 2.3, 2.4. If we take, for
example, Stable Diffusion and want to create an image of a specific subject or object, we will not
be able to obtain the specific details that characterise it. The reason is that even if we perform
multiple iterations on a prompt with a very detailed description of what we want to generate,
the variability of the model will prevent us from reconstructing its key visual characteristics.
Consequently, a new problem arises, subject-driven generation. It consists of reconstructing a
subject in different contexts while being able to maintain its characteristics and details. Figure
2.10 depicts the subject-driven generation problem. The target is to create images of a specific
subject in different contexts.
On the other hand, in deep learning, it has been shown that the way forward is not to train
models from scratch for each task. On the contrary, the way forward for research in recent years
is to use transfer learning techniques to exploit the capabilities of the gigantic models already
created and, in this way, to be environmentally responsible and avoid having to handle colossal
datasets as training data [27].
For these reasons, the community is exploring the subject-driven generation problem in depth.
Among the proposed solutions, two stand out, Textual inversion [4] and Dreambooth [5].
2.5.1
Textual inversion
When introducing new concepts into a large model, many problems must be faced. On the one
hand, retraining is too costly, but on the other hand fine-tuning leads to forgetting previously
available concepts. The authors of Textual inversion propose to solve these problems by finding
an embedding token for a new token while keeping the rest of the components intact. The idea
works because, in text-to-image models, the given textual description is converted into a set of
tokens. Subsequently, each token is replaced by its embedding vector, which is passed to the
final model. Therefore, the approach behind Textual inversion is to find the embedding vectors
that allow new concepts to be represented. The approach is thus potent as it keeps the model
intact, maintaining its ability to generalise and understand textual descriptions.
In the text encoders of text-to-image models, each word or sub-word in the input is associated
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.11: Outline of the text-embedding and inversion process [4]. The input contain-
ing the placeholder S∗is converted to tokens and, subsequently, to embedding vectors. Finally,
the embedding vectors condition the generation through the conditioning code cθ(y).
with a unique embedding vector. This is where textual-inversion comes in. The method takes
a placeholder string S∗to represent the concept to be learned and replaces the associated
embedding vector with the new one. In this way, the concept is represented and associated with
the placeholder S∗. Thus, S∗can be used as any word in the textual description given as input.
For instance, a good example would be “a picture of S∗starring in Breaking Bad”. Image 2.11
shows how the Textual inversion process fits into the operation of the text encoder.
2.5.2
Dreambooth
The Dreambooth approach consists of taking a few images of the subject to be generated together
with the name of the corresponding class and returning the fine-tuned model with a unique
identifier referring to the subject. This approach presents two significant problems related to
overfitting and forgetting how to generate images of other subjects of the same class. To solve
this, the authors propose using a class-specific prior preservation loss. This loss function is
based on supervising the model with its own generated images.
Furthermore, the fine-tuning process involves two steps. Initially, it is performed on the section
dedicated to the low-resolution model, where the loss function is applied to avoid language drift
and overfitting.
Subsequently, fine-tuning is performed on the super-resolution section with
examples in high and low resolution to maintain the subject’s small details. An overview of the
process can is shown in figure 2.12.
2.6
Conditional control
Text-based image creation models offer exceptional flexibility due to the highly adaptable nature
of the text input they receive. In addition, areas of study such as subject-driven generation
16
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.12: Fine-tuning process for Dreambooth [5]. Two main steps are distinguished.
First, fine-tuning is performed on the low-resolution section, where the class-specific prior preser-
vation loss is applied. On the other hand, fine-tuning the high-resolution section with pairs of
high and low-resolution images makes it possible to keep the subject detail.
have further extended the possibilities of these models.
However, there are still significant
shortcomings in the control of the generated image, for instance, in the control of the anatomy
of people or the arrangement of objects in a scene. These weaknesses are why ControlNet [6] was
created with the aim of controlling large text-to-image models to learn specific input conditions.
ControlNet is a neural network architecture. This structure works by creating two copies of the
weights of a text-to-image model. One copy will be “trainable” and the other “locked”. The first
one is trained to learn conditional control for specific tasks. In contrast, the second remains
intact to maintain the network’s capabilities. These two copies are then connected through a
type of convolution layer called “zero convolution”. This layer is a 1x1 convolution layer with
its weights initialised to zero in order not to introduce noise in the deep features and thus allow
the training to be fast.
Hence, the proposed architecture modifies the input conditions of the different blocks of layers
comprising a neural network. Figure 2.13 shows how the structure of the neural network blocks
is changed to condition the neural network. Thus, with the addition of the deep features of the
network with the desired condition, the “trainable” copy can be trained in order to subsequently
be added with the deep features derived from the “locked” copy.
The ControlNet authors provide a list of trained networks with different conditioning modes.
Some of the most useful are Canny edges, segmentation maps, depth maps or scribbles. Image
2.14 shows some of these conditioning examples.
2.7
Data augmentation
Data augmentation is a technique used in the field of machine learning to improve the perfor-
mance of models. The idea behind this concept is to increase the diversity of the training data
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.13: ControlNet architecture [6]. The deep feature x gets added with the condition
c to get passed to the trainable copy. Meanwhile, the output of the locked copy after getting
x as input is added to the output of the trainable copy to produce the deep feature y already
conditioned.
Figure 2.14: Control of Stable Diffusion with ControlNet trained on Canny edge,
Openpose, Hough lines and Openpifpaf pose [6].
18
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:27==
in order to teach the model to deal more accurately with real data. In other words, the aim is to
improve the generalisability of machine learning models. However, despite the great potential
of the idea, most research has focused on creating better and better architectures instead of
improving the already existing data augmentation techniques [28].
Generally speaking, most data augmentation techniques applied to real problems are designed
ad-hoc.
The reason for this fact is that not all available transformations make sense in all
cases. For example, the horizontal flipping transformation does not make sense in the MNIST
digit recognition task. Consequently, the creation of augmentations requires prior experience of
machine learning experts and slows down and makes the creation of computer vision models more
expensive. So much so that in 2018 OpenAI considered the automatic search for augmentations
an unsolved problem [29].
In response to this problem, Google Brain researchers formulated AutoAugment [28] in 2019.
This data augmentation technique automatically searches for the best combinations of trans-
formations to create a policy that obtains good results without needing careful, ad-hoc design.
To achieve this, they formulate the task as a discrete search problem. The search space consists
of a policy with 5 sub-policies, where each sub-policy consists of 2 transformations that are
applied to the images. Their results show state-of-the-art accuracy on ImageNet and CIFAR-
10 and demonstrate that the learned policies can also be transferred to other datasets with
state-of-the-art results.
Despite the promising results obtained by automated augmentation policies [28], their compu-
tational cost makes their massive use in training deep learning models impossible. Their higher
computational cost is because they require an additional search phase. Therefore, although the
improvement of the models’ results is palpable, the dual learning process in which the network
is trained simultaneously as a search is performed in the augmentations space implies a compu-
tational complexity that is not feasible in many tasks. In the original AutoAugment publication,
they try to provide a solution by performing the search task in a minor task than the origi-
nal one. They then transfer the result to the original larger task. However, Google Brain, in
the publication RandAugment: Practical automated data augmentation with a reduced search
space [30], finds evidence that contradicts the approach. Thus, they propose a new automated
augmentation technique that solves the problems raised by eliminating the search task. Conse-
quently, they propose to reduce the search space so much that it allows them to find the best
combination using only grid search on the 2 hyperparameters they propose.
On the other hand, the scientific community has also explored techniques to create new training
data. Thus, not all efforts have been based on transforming the data itself. Instead, some have
been on creating new data automatically. One of the most exciting directions taken in recent
years is Copy-Paste augmentation for segmentation tasks. The idea is to take objects from some
images and place them in the backgrounds of other images. In this way, new training images
are created for free.
Moreover, this idea presents many combinations and allows to explore
many ways of doing it. One of the most successful attempts is detailed in Simple Copy-Paste
is a Strong Data Augmentation Method for Instance Segmentation [8].
In this publication,
researchers demonstrate that a simple strategy in which random objects are taken and pasted
into random locations produces results that improve the baselines of multiple problems. Figure
2.15 shows the result of applying this technique to two images.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.15: Simple Copy-Paste augmentation [8]. This technique generates new training
images by copying objects from one image into the background of another. Moreover, standard
scale jittering (SSJ) and large scale jittering (LSJ) are used to randomly resize and crop images.
The next logical step in creating new training data is to take text-to-image models.
Thus,
the generative data augmentation trend has come with the explosion in the capabilities of such
models seen in recent years [18, 2].
This trend proposes using suﬀiciently advanced image
generation models to create entirely new images in the training dataset. Thus, the approach
consists of synthetically increasing the diversity of the data. In this line, very recent works
(April 2023), such as Synthetic Data from Diffusion Models Improves ImageNet Classification
[31], are unmistakable with their results. They show that augmenting training data with images
generated by text-to-image models creates models that significantly improve past baselines.
Furthermore, other works show that it is possible to train full classification models with just
synthetic images and obtain competitive results [32]. In line with these two publications, the
present work aims to test the effectiveness of subject-driven generation techniques
to increase the performance of classification and segmentation models.
20
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:29==
3
Methods
The primary goal of this study is to assess the practical utility of synthetic images produced by
text-to-image models in real-world computer vision tasks. Consequently, the key contribution
of this research involves developing a pipeline capable of incorporating synthetic images into the
training process of deep learning models. Furthermore, this paper incorporates comprehensive
experimentation to demonstrate the eﬀicacy of this approach.
The constructed pipeline addresses the necessity of implementing the innovative task of gener-
ative data augmentation. The underlying concept of this approach involves utilising generative
models to produce synthetic data to augment deep learning datasets. At the time of writing,
there are no implementations for this novel data augmentation technique in the leading deep
learning libraries. Consequently, we have opted to develop the pipeline from its foundational
components. Figure 3.1 shows a schema of the generative augmentation approach.
3.1
Subject-driven augmentation
One of the most promising subfields within generative augmentation is subject-driven augmen-
tation. This approach synthesises new representations of a specific subject in different contexts.
To achieve this, it has to maintain high fidelity to its key visual features. Therefore, we employ
the two most relevant techniques within this subfield in our pipeline, Dreambooth and Textual
inversion.
Given a dataset categorised into classes, a specific one is taken for analysis. Subsequently, we
randomly select 3 to 5 images from this class. The subject-driven technique then modifies a
text-to-image model, enabling it to generate synthetic images specific to the chosen subject or
class. By adding these images to the training set of a successive task, the original images are
automatically augmented. Figure 3.2 shows a schematic of this subject-driven approach.
…
…
…
Dataset
Class n
Class 1
Class 2
…
…
Text-to-image-model
Generate images within
the domain of the dataset
Augment dataset
Figure 3.1: Generative data augmentation. The concept involves utilizing a text-to-image
model to produce synthetic images. These images serve the purpose of augmenting a dataset.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
21
==PAGE:30==
Text-to-image-model
Randomly selected input images 
within the same class (~3-5)
Personalised
text-to-image-model
Subject-driven
technique
Figure 3.2: Subject-driven augmentation. The objective is to personalise a text-to-image
model to generate synthetic images of a subject of the class under consideration in novel contexts.
To achieve this, multiple images ( 3-5) from the class are employed alongside one of the subject-
driven techniques discussed (Dreambooth or Textual inversion).
3.2
Class-name-based augmentation
Both Dreambooth and Textual inversion strategies allow the developed pipeline to be generalist
and suitable to be applied in a wide range of scenarios. However, it is a complex approach
that requires customising a text-to-image model for each of the classes contained in the con-
sidered dataset. Dreambooth requires fine-tuning of the model, whereas, in Textual inversion,
the embedding token must be found for a new token corresponding to the considered subject.
Consequently, if the aim is to augment a dataset containing numerous diverse classes, a con-
siderable amount of time will be required. Therefore, we propose a solution using the image
generation model directly. For this purpose, we solely use the names of the classes used to build
the dataset. We build a prompt with it and directly generate images of the targeted class.
This approach resolves the challenge of customising the text-to-image model, consequently re-
ducing the time required for data augmentation. However, employing solely the class name
introduces a fundamental issue. The image generation model may not have enough information
to be able to generalise images of certain classes. This will, of course, depend on how sparse
the presence of objects of the class is in the training set of images of the text-to-image model.
Consequently, there will be no complications for classes representing common objects that have
extensively contributed to the model’s training. Conversely, when operating in a non-common
domain, the quality of images generated through this approach may not meet the standards
required for inclusion in the augmented dataset. Figure 3.3 shows an outline of the pipeline
considering only the class name when generating the synthetic images.
3.3
Conditionally controlled augmentation
The subject-driven and the class-name-based approaches have straightforward applications in
tasks such as classification. However, a challenge arises when aiming to control the generated
images for tasks like segmentation. Specifically, generating subjects with specific poses or ar-
rangements becomes diﬀicult due to limitations in textual descriptions’ ability to convey precise
visual details. We propose integrating ControlNet into the pipeline to introduce conditional
22
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:31==
Text-to-image-model
Golden Retriever
1. Select a class
and get its identifier
"A cute photo of a __________,
high
quality,
highly
detailed,
elegant, sharp focus"
2. Complete the prompt 
with the class name
3. Input prompt to model
4. Generate 
synthetic images
Figure 3.3: Class-name-based augmentation. The difference with the subject-driven schema
is that the image generation model is used directly. Only the names of the classes used to build
the dataset are employed to generate the synthetic images. With the class name, a suitable and
general prompt is generated.
Text-to-image-model
Egyptian Mau
1. Select a class
and get its identifier
"A cute photo of a __________,
high
quality,
highly
detailed,
elegant, sharp focus"
2. Complete the prompt 
with the class name
4. Input prompt and
condition to the model
5. Generate 
synthetic image
3. Get an image and its 
associated conditional element
Figure 3.4: Augmentation schema using a conditionally controlled texto-to-image
model. The text-to-image model employs a conditional approach to generate an image based
on a selected element. The idea is to extend class-name-based augmentation by conditional
control. Thus, in this example, the generated image has as segmentation map the one given
as condition. Consequently, it becomes feasible to augment a segmentation task by producing
synthetic pairs of images and segmentation maps.
control to address this challenge. Taking the pipeline for the class-name-based augmentation
case, the only thing that needs to be added is conditional control for the text-to-image model.
In this way, a control element must be provided for each image to be generated. As we consider
a segmentation task, segmentation maps can be provided, although other alternatives, such as
Canny edge detections, may also be valid. With this modification, the generated image will
have the layout of the provided condition. Therefore, the image can be used with its associated
segmentation map to augment the datasets used in segmentation tasks. Figure 3.4 provides a
visual representation of this strategy.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:33==
4
Experiments
This section aims to empirically test how effective subject-driven augmentation is in improving
the performance of computer vision models. Our approach consists of testing how competitive
this data augmentation technique is on real tasks compared to other well-known methods such
as Autoaugment or RandAugment. In addition, we study the behaviour concerning the ratio of
real images to synthetic images and check how much information can be obtained using only
synthetic images. On the other hand, we test control techniques to try to improve the results.
With these, we demonstrate whether the proposed augmentation approach can enhance the
performance of segmentation models. Finally, we test in other domains to see if the process is
generalisable to other datasets.
Our results support the hypothesis that subject-driven augmentation is a competitive data
augmentation technique in real tasks. In particular, we show that it is especially significant when
training data is sparse. Thus, we observe accuracy increases of up to 19.11% in classification
tasks using the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset. However, we show that adding synthetic images to
a small dataset only makes sense to a certain extent, especially when suﬀicient real training
images are available. Furthermore, we show that competitive results can be obtained using only
synthetic images in training a computer vision task. Finally, we demonstrate the versatility of
this approach by showing its application in various tasks, including segmentation, as well as its
potential on alternative datasets such as Food-101.
4.1
Experiments overview
The first step in testing the capabilities of subject-driven augmentation is to know the limitations
of the selected subject-driven techniques. If we consider Dreambooth and Textual inversion, we
will realise that their main input element is images of a specific subject.
Two fundamental
questions arise at this point. Firstly, how many images are to be used? Secondly, is it feasible
to apply Dreambooth and Textual inversion to different subjects of the same class?
For this reason, we initially set up the experiment 01-number-of-images. In this experiment,
we want to test the effect of the number of images used in applying subject-driven generation
techniques on the quality of the images generated. Dreambooth and Textual inversion authors
propose using between 3 and 5 images [5, 4]. However, since the proposed pipeline will push
these techniques to their limits by selecting images of subjects that do not necessarily have to
be the same, it is interesting to see how flexible they are. Therefore, the 01-number-of-images
experiment proposes to test 1, 2, 3 and 5 images. These tests allow the flexibility of Dreambooth
and Textual inversion to be tested to establish an appropriate number of images.
On the other hand, the question remains whether it is feasible to push these methods to the
limit with images of subjects that, although of the same class, are different. Thus, we define
the experiment 02-different-subjects. It aims to test how flexible Dreambooth and Textual
inversion are when provided with several images of different subjects sharing the same class.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
25
==PAGE:34==
To do so, we take the domain of dog breeds and employ subject-driven generation methods on
sets of images that mix dog breeds. Furthermore, we perform the experiment incrementally to
maximise the information we can extract from the performance of Dreambooth and Textual
inversion. Initially, we take dogs with a common breed, and successively, we introduce dogs of
increasingly different breeds. Specifically, we start with a Golden Retriever and successively add
subjects of the following breeds: German Shepherd, Siberian Husky, Bulldog and Welsh Corgi.
At this point, the experiments 01-number-of-images and 02-different-subjects give us an insight
into the possibilities of subject-driven generation techniques. Therefore, we can move on to
experimenting with the entire pipeline. In experiment 003-training-percentage, we intend to
compare it with other data augmentation techniques. The selected task consists of classification
on the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset. The selected approaches are as follows.
• No-augmentation baseline: Common and comparative starting point for assessing the
performance of other approaches. It helps to establish the minimum expected level of
performance. It is the vanilla classification task, i.e. without additional data augmentation
or modification.
• Custom data augmentation: The training set is extended with classical transformations
such as horizontal flips, rotations, and brightness and contrast adjustments, among others.
In particular, the following transformations are used.
– RandomHorizontalFlip(p=0.5): This transform randomly flips the input image hori-
zontally with a probability of 50%.
– ColorJitter(brightness=0.3, contrast=0.1, saturation=0.2, hue=0.1): This transform
randomly adjusts the brightness, contrast, saturation and hue values of the input
image. The specified parameters control the magnitude of the adjustment.
– GaussianBlur(kernel_size=3, sigma=(0.1, 2.0)): This transform applies a Gaussian
blur to the input image. The parameter kernel_size defines the size of the kernel used
for blurring, while sigma controls the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution
used to generate the blur.
– RandomRotation(10): This transformation randomly rotates the input image by a
randomly selected angle in the range of -10 to 10 degrees.
• AutoAugment: An automated augmentation policy developed by Google Brain [28] is
used for data augmentation.
• RandAungment: An improved automated augmentation policy developed by Google
Brain [30] is used for data augmentation.
• Dreambooth: The subject-driven augmentation pipeline based on Dreambooth is used,
as described in section 3.1.
• Textual inversion: The subject-driven augmentation pipeline based on Textual inversion,
as described in section 3.1, is used.
26
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:35==
• Stable Diffusion prompt: The subject-driven augmentation pipeline based on class
names, as described in section 3.2, is used.
However, experiment 03-training-percentage continues beyond there and compares these ap-
proaches by varying the percentage of real data used in the training set. In this way, we can
check what effect the size of the dataset has on the effectiveness of one or the other technique.
Finally, it is important to highlight that subject-driven approaches use 50 synthetic images.
Nonetheless, for specific implementation details, please refer to section 4.2.
Once it is known how the selected techniques perform when the size of the training set is
varied, it is logical to think that the next step is to vary the number of images generated. Along
these lines, in the 004-generation-percentage experiment, we vary the percentage of images
generated while leaving the size of the actual training set fixed. In this way, we can test how
many synthetic images perform better with respect to the accuracy of the task.
After completing experiments 03-training-percentage and 04-generation-percentage, to what ex-
tent are real images necessary to obtain competitive results? To address this question, we set
up experiment 005-all-generated. In it, we only train the classification model with synthetic
images, and the objective is to determine the quality of the information in the images. That
is, to what extent can the text-to-image model generate images with valid information that a
classification model can subsequently extract? In this way, it can be considered a case of transfer
learning in which a larger model transfers information to a smaller model. In this case, through
images.
However, the approach projected in the 05-all-generated experiment has a fundamental problem.
Dreambooth and Textual inversion need real images as inputs. Therefore, the premise of not
using any real images is not being fulfilled. Conversely, the Stable Diffusion prompt approach
(based on generating images using only class names, figure 3.3) does not require any input
images. Therefore, its results are valid.
Experiment 06-controlnet adds conditional control to the images generated by the Stable
Diffusion prompt approach. Figure 3.4 shows the pipeline used. Its purpose is to test whether
the quality of the synthetic images can be improved by adding control.
Another interesting question is whether classical data augmentation techniques are capable
of being used in combination with the subject-driven approach. Thus, the 07-combinations
experiment seeks to merge the best subject-driven configurations found with classical techniques
such as RandAugment. The combination could improve the results of both techniques separately.
So far, we have only considered a classification task on the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset. Thus, the
08-segmentation experiment moves the subject-driven approach to a segmentation task on the
same dataset. It employs conditional control, as does experiment 06-controlnet. On the other
hand, experiment 09-food-101 seeks to test another dataset to demonstrate the versatility of
subject-driven augmentation.
In summary, we conducted the following experiments in this paper to learn about the strengths
and weaknesses of subject-driven augmentations.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
27
==PAGE:36==
• 01-number-of-images: It takes Dreambooth and Textual inversion to study the effect
of the number of real images used as input. This is interesting as it allows us to explore
the limits of these techniques. This is essential since the proposed augmentation pipeline
requires these methods to provide great flexibility.
• 02-different-subjects: The objective is to examine whether it is feasible to push these
methods to the limit with images of subjects that, although of the same class, are different.
Thus, we take the domain of dog breeds and employ subject-driven generation methods
on sets of images that mix dog breeds incrementally by considering less and less similar
breeds.
• 03-training-percentage: This experiment goes on to test the entire pipeline. In this way,
we intend to compare it with other data augmentation techniques. Specifically, we define
tests with a baseline, classical data augmentation techniques, automated augmentation
policies such as AutoAugment and RandAugment, and the subject-driven augmentation
pipeline defined with Dreambooth, Textual inversion and Stable Diffusion prompt.
In
addition, this experiment compares these same approaches by varying the percentage of
real data used in the training set. The number of synthetic images is set to 50.
• 04-generation-percentage: It takes 03-training-percentage and varies the percentage of
images generated while leaving the size of the actual training set fixed.
• 05-all-generated: The purpose is to evaluate whether a computer vision model can only
be trained with synthetic images and obtain competitive results. Nonetheless, it should
be noted that both Dreambooth and Textual inversion need real images to personalise
the text-to-image model.
Therefore, their results should be interpreted with caution.
However, the Stable Diffusion prompt approach can be run with no real images, only with
class names.
• 06-controlnet: It aims to test whether the quality of synthetic images can be improved
by adding conditional control. It considers the Stable Diffusion prompt approach.
• 07-combinations: It merges the best subject-driven configurations found with classical
techniques such as RandAugment. The idea is that the combination could improve the
results of both techniques separately.
• 08-segmentation: It moves the subject-driven approach to a segmentation task.
• 09-food-101: Considering an utterly different dataset, it aims to see how versatile subject-
driven augmentation is.
4.2
Implementation details
Next, the aspects of the code implementation carried out to execute the experiments defined in
4.1 are detailed. Thus, the details concerning the datasets, the neural networks, the subject-
driven techniques and the hardware and execution environment are explained. The aim is to
make the detailed analysis in this work as rigorous and thorough as possible. And, consequently,
to allow replicability so anyone can certify the results obtained.
28
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.1: Examples of each of the 37 Oxford-IIIT Pet classes [9]. Note the significant
variability found in the images, from changes in lighting and size to layout and scenery. This
fact and the fact that it is a fine-grained dataset make it ideal for testing whether subject-driven
augmentation is a competitive strategy.
4.2.1
Datasets
The primary dataset chosen for the present work is Oxford-IIIT Pet [9], a collection of 7,349
images of cats and dogs of 37 different breeds, of which 25 are dogs, and 12 are cats. The
dataset contains about 200 images for each breed. We divide these images randomly into 100
for training, 50 for validation and 50 for testing. Each image is labelled with the breed and a
pixel-level segmentation marking the body. The segmentation consists of a trimap with regions
representing the pet’s body, the background and ambiguous areas (including the boundary of the
pet’s body and accessories such as collars). Figure 4.1 shows examples of each of the Oxford-
IIIT Pet classes. Note the diversity of the images, with a high variability of colour, subject
arrangement or backgrounds. On the other hand, Figure 4.2 shows the pixel-level annotations
used in the segmentation task.
We have chosen this dataset as the primary dataset for our analysis because it is fine-grained.
This type of dataset contains many categories or classes with subtle distinctions between them.
Unlike coarse-grained datasets with broader categories, fine-grained datasets focus on capturing
fine details and subtle variations within a specific domain. Thus, given that the present work
focuses on subject-driven augmentation techniques, such datasets allow us better discriminate
the strengths and weaknesses of these techniques. In addition, the fact that this dataset contains
both classification and segmentation annotations is also helpful.
On the other hand, the dataset used in experiment 09-food-101 to show the versatility of the
subject-driven augmentation technique is Food-101 [10].
This fine-grained dataset contains
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: Oxford-IIIT Pet annotations for segmentation. Green is for the background
region, yellow is for the ambiguous region, and purple is for the subject.
Figure 4.3: Examples of 100 of the 101 Food-101 categories [10]. Notice the significant
variability of the existing food types and the fact that it is a fine-grained dataset.
101,000 images of 101 different food categories. We divide these images into 600 for training,
150 for validation and 250 for testing. It should be noted that both the training and validation
images contain noise that the authors have not purposely cleaned to reflect that the real data is
imperfect and contains large variability. Figure 4.3 shows some images from this dataset showing
the significant variability of the existing food types.
4.2.2
Networks
Concerning the deep network with which the experiments are carried out, the two proposed
scenarios of classification and segmentation must be considered.
For the first task, we take
ResNet34, a variant of the ResNet architecture [33] with 34 layers. This network is considered
medium-sized, being smaller, for example, than ResNet50. ResNet stands for Residual Network,
a reference to the residual connections that this architecture proposes to the problem of vanishing
gradients. This problem occurs during the training of neural networks with methods based on
gradient descent and backpropagation. The residual connections solution allows information to
30
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:39==
flow directly through the network layers, thus enabling the training of deeper networks.
Returning to the main problem of this work, we employ Resnet34 pre-trained on ImageNet-1k
and apply feature extraction with a fully connected classifier suitable for the 37 Oxford-IIIT Pet
classes. The approach works because, even though the network is pre-trained, feature extraction
allows us to exploit the meaningful features of the training images optimally. In this way, we can
determine which data augmentation technique is the one that succeeds in making the extracted
features as informative about the task as possible.
Finally, in the network training, Cross-Entropy is used as a loss function and stochastic gradient
descent - SGD as an optimiser. Additionally, an early stopping with a patience of 5, a learning
rate of 10−3 and a batch size of 16 are used.
On the other hand, for the segmentation task, we use the DeepLabV3 model [34] with ResNet101
as a backbone. The semantic segmentation architecture is based on the intensive use of atrous
convolutions. This type of convolution allows the expansion of the receptive field of a convolu-
tional network without increasing the number of parameters.
Returning to our segmentation task, we take a parallel approach to the classification task by
performing feature extraction. In this case, the last layer of the DeepLabV3 model is modified
so that the segmentation takes place in 3 values (subject, background and ambiguous region).
Cross-Entropy is used as a loss function, and Adam as an optimiser. Additionally and analo-
gously to the classification case, an early stopping with a patience of 5, a learning rate of 10−3
and a batch size of 16 are used.
4.2.3
Subject-driven techniques and text-to-image model
Stable Diffusion in its stable-diffusion-v1-5 version is used as a text-to-image model. The number
of input images is 5, as can be seen from the results shown in 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. The resolution of
the generated synthetic images is 512x512. The rest of the model’s parameters when generating
the images are shown in table 4.1 and are derived from the analysis performed in [35].
Hyperparameter
Description
Value
num_inference_steps
The bigger, the better the results are. However, also
the longer the generation takes
50
guidance_scale
It enhances the compliance with the conditional signal
that directs the creation (text). It compels the gen-
eration to align with the given prompt more closely,
possibly sacrificing image quality or variety in the pro-
cess. Also known as classifier-free guidance
7.5
Table 4.1: Stable Diffusion hyperparameters.
Table 4.2 lists the hyperparameters with which Dreambooth is run. The choice of these is derived
from the analysis of the Hugging Face blog [36].
Table 4.3 contains the hyperparameters with which Textual inversion is executed. Note that
placeholder_token refers to the token used as a placeholder for the concept, initializer_token
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
31
==PAGE:40==
Hyperparameter
Description
Value
instance_prompt
Identifier specifying the instance
<funny-ret>
resolution
Resolution for input images. All of them will
be resized to that value
512
train_batch_size
Batch size for the training data loader
1
gradient_accumulation_steps
Number of updates steps to accumulate before
performing a backward or update pass
1
learning_rate
Initial learning rate
5 · 10−6
lr_scheduler
Scheduler type to use
constant
lr_warmup_steps
Number of steps for the warmup in the
lr_scheduler
0
max_train_steps
Total number of training steps to perform
400
Table 4.2: Dreambooth hyperparameters.
to the token used as the initialiser word and learnable_property as a choice between object or
style.
Hyperparameter
Value
learnable_property
object
placeholder_token
<funny-ret>
initializer_token
animal
resolution
512
train_batch_size
1
gradient_accumulation_steps
4
learning_rate
5 · 10−4
lr_scheduler
constant
lr_warmup_steps
0
Table 4.3: Textual inversion hyperparameters.
Finally, it is important to note that sometimes images generated by the text-to-image model
are black and contain no information. This is because the Stable Diffusion model includes an
NSFW content filter that is very easily activated. Therefore, the implementation made in this
work does not consider these images. They are removed, and others are generated in their place.
4.2.4
Hardware and environment
The execution environment uses the resources provided by the Technical University of Denmark
- DTU through the high-performance cluster - HPC belonging to the DTU Computing Center
- DCC. The use of these advanced computing resources is because the tasks proposed in this
work require significant amounts of processing power and memory. For more details about the
hardware used, please refer to Appendix A.
On the other hand, as for the software used. The programming language chosen to create the
code is Python, in its version 3.8.13. The deep learning library, Pytorch in its version 2.0.1.
32
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Experiment 01-number-of-images. The input images are shown on the left and
the resulting images on the right. Synthetic images with two prompts and four input images
variations for Dreambooth and Textual inversion are included.
Furthermore, as for the library containing the state-of-the-art pre-trained diffusion models as
well as the subject-driven and conditional control techniques, Hugging Face diffusers has been
used in version 0.16.1. For further details and a detailed list of all the libraries and software
tools used, please visit Appendix B.
4.3
Results
This section shows the results obtained throughout the experiments defined in 4.1. Furthermore,
we provide accompanying analyses and observations of significance to enable the interpretation
of these results. Appendix C contains details on how we ensure the rigour and reproducibility
of the experiments.
4.3.1
Influence of the number of images on subject-driven generation
Experiment 01-number-of-images studies the effect of the number of images used as input in
Dreambooth and Textual inversion. Image 4.4 summarises the results of the experiment. It
distinguishes the images used as input on the left and the resulting images on the right. Within
the synthetic images, we provide the results of 2 prompts and 4 different values of images used
as input for both Dreambooth and Textual inversion.
Analysing these results is complex as it is an evaluation that does not rely on any easily mea-
surable metric. However, the results suggest better quality synthetic images are obtained
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
33
==PAGE:42==
using 5 real images as input. To reach this conclusion, we looked at the generalisation ability
of the subject in different contexts or positions. Thus, in the case of Textual inversion, it is
clear that only in the case of 5 images the main characteristics of the creature are maintained.
On the other hand, in the case of Dreambooth, we observe how the generalisation of the entity
starts to be correct from the 2 input images. At this point, Dreambooth obtains more faithful
results than Textual inversion.
In any case, we confirm that using a single image to execute these subject-driven techniques is
unfeasible. This fact has important implications for our work. When using more than 1 image
in a data augmentation use case with a real dataset, these pictures are taken from the same
class. Nevertheless, it is not assured that they are the same subject. In fact, in most cases,
this will not be the case. This use case is not the primary use case of either Dreambooth or
Textual inversion, and, therefore, we must ensure that, even with images of different subjects
of the same class, these approximations work. In this line, special attention should be paid to
experiment 02-different-subjects.
4.3.2
Subject-driven generation with diverse subjects
Experiment 02-different-subjects studies how subject-driven techniques behave when the subjects
of the input images are different. For this purpose, the dogs’ domain is taken, and incremen-
tally, Dreambooth and Textual inversion are used with increasingly different dogs. Image 4.5
summarises the results of the experiment. It distinguishes the images used as input at the top
and the synthetic images for each technique at the bottom. In addition, for each technique, the
synthetic images are divided into 4 subsets, each corresponding to a different subset of input
images. The aim is to observe the differences in the images generated by the personalised text-
to-image model with increasingly less similar inputs. Thus, the subsets of images used as input
are:
• subset 1: golden_1, golden_2, golden_3.
• subset 2: golden_1, golden_2, golden_3, german_1, german_2.
• subset 3: golden_1, golden_2, golden_3, german_1, german_2, siberian_1, siberian_2.
• subset 4: bulldog_1, corgi_1, german_1, golden_1, siberian_1.
Analogous to the 01-number-of-images experiment, evaluating the images without an objective
metric is problematic. However, the results obtained leave no doubt as to their quality. In all
cases, subjects with dog-like characteristics are distinguishable in the synthetic images. It is
especially noteworthy that, even with such different breeds as in subset_4, the images clearly
show a being with dog characteristics. Although these images are readily identifiable as fake
by the human eye, they contain very relevant information about what a dog is. Thus, with an
appropriate architecture, they could be used to train a computer vision model. On the other
hand, we would like to emphasise the magnificent results obtained with subset_1. With different
subjects of the same breed (a fine-grained dataset if we make a parallelism with a computer vision
task), Dreambooth and Textual inversion generate images that start to be diﬀicult to distinguish
from authentic images.
34
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.5: Experiment 02-different-subjects. The images used as input are at the top. The
synthetic images for each technique are at the bottom. The experiment shows the differences
in the images generated by the personalised text-to-image model with increasingly less similar
inputs.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.6: Synthetic images generated using Dreambooth for the Oxford-IIIT Pet
domain. The quality of these images is remarkably high, with some being potentially indistin-
guishable from authentic images. Nevertheless, some have slight anatomical flaws and artefacts.
In summary, the 02-different-subjects experiment leaves no doubt that it is possible to use
subject-driven techniques with different subjects of the same class. Therefore, these re-
sults support the idea that subject-driven augmentation techniques are an approach that should
be considered in the training of complex computer vision tasks. Thus, we defined experiment
03-training-percentage to test subject-driven augmentation techniques on a real task.
4.3.3
Comparative analysis of subject-driven and classical data augmentation
Experiment 03-training-percentage evaluates the entire subject-driven augmentation pipeline and
compares it to other data augmentation techniques in a real task. This includes comparisons
with the no-augmentation baseline, classical techniques and automated policies (AutoAugment
and RandAugment). For subject-driven techniques, it includes Dreambooth, Textual inversion
and Stable Diffusion prompt. In addition, the experiment examines the impact of varying the
size of the real dataset. For this purpose, the percentage of data indicates how many images
have been used. We consider 100% the use of the complete Oxford-IIIT Pet training set. On the
other hand, the number of synthetic images is kept fixed at 50. Unlike the 01-number-of-images
and 02-different-subjects experiments, we have a more rigorous evaluation method in this case.
We use the accuracy of the trained model in the classification task and establish a baseline that
does not employ any data augmentation technique. Figure 4.9 shows a plot of the results.
Figures 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8 show a random selection of synthetic images obtained by the subject-
driven techniques. When evaluating the images generated, it is not easy to give a proper verdict
without objective metrics. However, the images generated by Dreambooth and Stable Diffusion
prompt are of very high quality. Although they indeed have flaws, in general terms, they seem
adequate and faithful to reality. Especially in the case of the Stable Diffusion prompt, since it
is a very present domain in the text-to-image model, the results are particularly good. This is
36
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.7: Synthetic images generated using Textual inversion for the Oxford-IIIT
Pet domain. Although some images are particularly good, overall, there are more anatomical
flaws and artefacts than with Dreambooth or Stable Diffusion prompt.
Figure 4.8: Synthetic images generated using Stable Diffusion prompt for the Oxford-
IIIT Pet domain. The quality of these images is remarkably high, with some being potentially
indistinguishable from authentic images. Nevertheless, some have slight anatomical flaws and
artefacts.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
37
==PAGE:46==
likely not the case for other, less common domains. Finally, the images produced by Textual
inversion show, in general terms, more defects, especially anatomical ones.
The data indicate that subject-driven augmentation techniques significantly improve model per-
formance when the percentage of real data is 10% or less. In this case, we observe significant
increases in accuracy. For example, with 5% real data, Textual inversion achieves a performance
increase of 19.11%. On the other hand, as we increase the number of real images to 10%, the
improvement achieved by Textual inversion is 3.37%. From this point on, Textual inversion,
despite being the most promising subject-driven approach, does not bring any new accuracy
improvements that can be considered relevant. On the other hand, Dreambooth is the worst
performer among the subject-driven techniques. This approach brings improvements of 16.06%
and 0.5% when using 5% and 10% of the real data, respectively. Stable Diffusion prompt shows
similar results to Textual inversion.
If we now look at the classical techniques (Custom data augmentation, AutoAugment and Ran-
dAugment), we can see how they worsen the accuracy when the dataset size is small. It is
not until 50% of the training set is present that they achieve performances that improve the
no-augmentation baseline. Among them, RandAugment is the best performer, with accuracy in-
creases of only 1.12% when 100% of the training set is used. In this case, all classical techniques
can improve the result.
In summary, the data clearly show that subject-driven augmentation techniques are a promising
approach when the dataset size is small. In this case, the training set contains 100 images per
class when complete. Our results show that, for cases where data is scarce or very costly
to obtain, one can take advantage of the capabilities and world knowledge of text-
to-image models to increase the accuracy of classification models for computer vision
tasks by more than 19%. These findings are especially relevant since classical techniques fail
miserably on small datasets.
4.3.4
Impact of the percentage of generated data
Experiment 04-generation-percentage takes experiment 03-training-percentage and varies the
percentage of images generated while leaving the size of the actual training set fixed.
We
consider two different scenarios. In the first one, we take 100% of the Oxford-IIIT Pet training
set and in the second one, only 5%. Figure 4.10 shows a plot of the results.
The data obtained show that when 100% of the real training data is used (i.e. suﬀicient training
data is available), it does not make sense to use subject-driven augmentation techniques. These
approaches are not able to improve the no-augmentation baseline performance in a significant
way. Moreover, the 3 techniques considered show a clear tendency to worsen their results as the
number of synthetic images increases.
On the other hand, using the subject-driven techniques makes much sense when using 5% of the
real training data (i.e., very little training data). By adding only a few images, the accuracy
increases substantially. Adding only 100% new synthetic images (which would imply doubling
the number of images from 5 to 10), up to 18.93% is achieved with Stable Diffusion prompt and
11% with Textual inversion. In this scenario, increasing the number of synthetic images can
38
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:47==
1
0.5
0.25
0.1
0.05
Percentage of data - (log scale)
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Accuracy
Accuracy of augmentations Vs percentage of data used
No-augmentation baseline
Custom data augmentation
AutoAugment
RandAugment
Stable diffusion prompt
Dreambooth
Textual inversion
Figure 4.9: Experiment 03-training-percentage. The experiment looks at how varying the
size of the real dataset affects classic and subject-driven techniques. The percentage of data
used is indicated on a logarithmic scale on the x-axis. We find that subject-driven augmentation
techniques are a promising approach for small dataset sizes.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
39
==PAGE:48==
0.05
0.1
0.5
1
2
10
20
40
80
Percentage of generated data - (log scale)
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
Accuracy
100% - No-augmentation baseline
5% - No-augmentation baseline
Accuracy of subject-driven augmentations Vs percentage of generated data 
100% - Stable diffusion prompt
100% - Textual inversion
100% - Dreambooth
5% - Stable diffusion prompt
5% - Textual inversion
5% - Dreambooth
Figure 4.10: Experiment 04-generation-percentage. The experiment involves manipulating
the proportion of generated data (measured on a logarithmic scale). Our findings indicate that
in large datasets, the techniques do not yield a substantial improvement in system performance.
However, in smaller ones, they do demonstrate an increase.
improve the results, but only to a certain extent. By adding 1000% synthetic images, Textual
inversion offers a performance improvement of 19.11%.
In summary, when there are enough training images, subject-driven augmentation techniques are
not able to increase the performance of the system significantly, no matter how many synthetic
images are added. In contrast, when the dataset is small, these approaches substantially improve
the results.
4.3.5
Feasibility of solely training models on synthetic images
Experiment 05-all-generated studies how necessary real images are in the training of computer
vision models. For this purpose, we take Textual inversion, Dreambooth and Stable Diffusion
prompt and use them to generate synthetic images to train the classification model for Oxford-
IIIT Pet. The idea is to know to what extent the information contained in the synthetic images
is faithful to reality and allows, without the help of real images, to obtain competitive results.
It is crucial to note that, although useful, the results should be taken cautiously in the case of
40
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:49==
Textual inversion and Dreambooth since these techniques use a few real images to personalise
the text-to-image model. In contrast, Stable Diffusion prompt does not use any image from
the dataset, and therefore its results are more faithful to the idea of the experiment. The data
collected are shown in Figure 4.11.
1000
400
200
100
10
5
Generated images - (log scale)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Accuracy
5 real images - baseline
100 real images - baseline
Accuracy Vs number of generated images
Stable diffusion prompt
Textual inversion
Dreambooth
Figure 4.11: Experiment 05-all-generated. The experiment uses only synthetic images to
train the classification model.
The number of synthetic images per class is measured on a
logarithmic scale. Our findings indicate that there is still a gap between models trained with
synthetic images and those trained with real ones.
The results indicate that, although decent results can be obtained, the synthetic images are
not faithful enough to reality to obtain competitive results. Thus, we observe that the best-
performing case, Textual inversion with 400 images per class, only obtains an accuracy of 0.72,
which is 18.04% worse than the baseline using the full real dataset. On the other hand, if we
compare this result with using only 5 real images per class, we are looking at a performance
improvement of 15.44%. This result indicates that the synthetic images contain valid and usable
information about reality. However, this information is still far from being indistinguishable from
the information provided by real images.
The data also show that the more images are added, the better. However, a reduction in the
trend can be seen from 100 images per class, reaching a maximum of around 400-1000 images
per class. On the other hand, Textual inversion obtains the best values and, therefore, its images
contain features that are more faithful to the real images and more usable by the associated
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.12: Synthetic images generated using ControlNet for the Oxford-IIIT Pet
domain. For each pair of images, the original image is on the left side and the variation obtained
by ControlNet is on the right side. These images have fewer anatomical defects as they follow
the anatomical annotation of the real image. However, images are of poorer overall quality.
classification model.
In summary, we show that synthetic images contain usable information in computer vision
tasks. However, these images contain less information than real images. Thus, we show that
there is still a gap between models trained with synthetic images and those trained
with real images. Moreover, by including the Stable Diffusion prompt approach, we endow
the present experiment with rigour since it does not personalise the text-to-image model and,
therefore, does not use any real information about the dataset used.
4.3.6
Effect of adding conditional control
Experiment 06-controlnet examines whether it is possible to improve the quality of synthetic
images by adding conditional control. It takes the Stable Diffusion prompt approach and uses
ControlNet pre-trained with Canny edge detections.
The tests consist of 3 cases where the
number of real images is taken as 100%, 50% and 5% while varying the percentage of synthetic
images. The collected data are shown in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.12 shows a sample of synthetic images achieved by ControlNet. Generally, the images
enhanced by ControlNet exhibit fewer anatomical defects than their non-ControlNet counter-
parts. However, the overall realism of these images is diminished. It is evident that the distinct
identifying features of each breed are accentuated, which can prove advantageous for classifica-
tion purposes. Nonetheless, these images are unlikely to deceive a human observer.
The results indicate that for the cases with 100% and 50% real images, the accuracy does not
improve with respect to the no-augmentation baseline when conditional control is used. On
the other hand, with 5% real images and 2000% synthetic images, the accuracy is 0.77. This
improvement represents an increase of 23.47% over the no-augmentation baseline. Thus, this
increase surpasses the best obtained so far, 19.11% in the case of Textual inversion, with 5%
real images and 1000% synthetic.
42
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:51==
0.05
0.1
0.5
1
2
10
20
Percentage of generated data - (log scale)
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Accuracy
100% - No-augmentation baseline
50% - No-augmentation baseline
5% - No-augmentation baseline
Accuracy of ControlNet Vs percentage of generated data
100% - ControlNet
100% - Textual inversion
50% - ControlNet
5% - ControlNet
5% - Textual inversion
Figure 4.13: Experiment 06-controlnet. The experiment uses conditional control. Textual
inversion is added for comparison purposes. The number of synthetic images per class is mea-
sured on a logarithmic scale. Our findings show that conditional control can improve the fidelity
of synthetic images when small sets of real images are considered.
In summary, our findings show that conditional control can improve the fidelity of syn-
thetic images. Thus, when used in a task associated with a small training set, we observe
performance improvements of up to 23.47%.
4.3.7
Combination of subject-driven and classical data augmentation techniques
Experiment 07-combinations investigates the feasibility of integrating subject-driven approaches
with classical data augmentation techniques.
Consequently, we merge the most favourable
subject-driven configurations with the top-performing classical technique, RandAugment. The
conducted tests and their corresponding results are presented in Table 4.4. The column Variation
denotes the percentage difference in test accuracy before and after the inclusion of RandAug-
ment.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
43
==PAGE:52==
Description
Real data
Synthetic data
Variation
Textual inversion + RandAugment
100%
100%
-1.43%
Textual inversion + RandAugment
100%
50%
-1.24%
Textual inversion + RandAugment
100%
10%
0.61%
Textual inversion + RandAugment
100%
5%
-1.48%
Dreambooth + RandAugment
100%
5%
0.12%
Stable Diffusion prompt + RandAugment
100%
10%
-0.18%
Stable Diffusion prompt + RandAugment
100%
5%
-0.25%
ControlNet + RandAugment
100%
100%
-0.25%
ControlNet + RandAugment
100%
5%
-1.53%
Textual inversion + RandAugment
5%
1000%
-1.83%
Stable Diffusion prompt + RandAugment
5%
200%
1.83%
ControlNet + RandAugment
5%
2000%
-7.23%
Table 4.4: Experiment 07-combinations. The Variation column indicates the percentage
variation of the test accuracy before and after adding RandAugment. Our findings show that
combining subject-driven augmentation with classical techniques does not improve the results.
The findings unequivocally demonstrate that integrating subject-driven augmentation
with classical techniques does not yield improvements in the results.
In 75% of in-
stances, the results exhibited deterioration upon the inclusion of RandAugment.
Moreover,
among the remaining 25% of cases that exhibited improvement, the majority experienced less
than 1% marginal enhancements, rendering them statistically insignificant. The observed detri-
mental effect of combining these techniques might be attributed to the introduction of excessive
data variability that surpasses the model’s capacity for generalisation.
4.3.8
Subject-driven augmentation on a segmentation task
Experiment 08-segmentation investigates the feasibility of employing subject-driven augmen-
tation in a segmentation task. Specifically, we utilise the Stable Diffusion prompt approach,
incorporating conditional control mechanisms based on segmentation maps. This experiment
bears similarity to the 06-controlnet experiment, with the distinction lying in the task being
changed from classification to segmentation and the replacement of Canny edge annotations
with segmentation maps as the control element. The Jaccard score is selected as the reference
metric for evaluating the performance of this task. Additionally, we consider two scenarios: one
utilising 100% of the Oxford-IIIT Pet training set and another utilising only 5%. Figure 4.14
depicts a graphical representation of the data gathered from the conducted tests.
The findings from the experiment indicate that the data augmentation approach based on syn-
thetic imaging has no significant effect on the performance of the associated model.
When
utilising 100% of the real training set, the observed improvements are minimal, ranging from
0.42% to 0.66% compared to the no-augmentation baseline. These results, although consistent,
possess limited strength and should not be given substantial consideration. Furthermore, in-
creasing the number of synthetic images demonstrates a downward trend, indicating that it
does not positively affect the overall outcome. Conversely, when only 5% of the real data is
used, more substantial improvements are observed, with an enhancement of 0.86% compared
44
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:53==
0.05
0.5
1
10
20
Percentage of generated data - (log scale)
0.81
0.82
0.83
0.84
0.85
Jaccard score
100% - No-augmentation baseline
5% - No-augmentation baseline
Jaccard score Vs percentage of generated data
100%
5%
Figure 4.14: Experiment 08-segmentation. This experiment translates the subject-driven
augmentation approach to a segmentation task. The number of synthetic images per class is
measured on a logarithmic scale. Our findings show that despite weak improvements, subject-
driven augmentation techniques are a valid approach in segmentation tasks.
to the no-augmentation baseline. However, these improvements remain modest and should be
approached with caution. Additionally, a peak is observed when the synthetic image proportion
reaches 1000%, suggesting that further increasing the amount of synthetic data does not yield
additional enhancements.
In summary, the results of our study suggest the possibility of enhancing the performance of
segmentation models through the integration of synthetic images. However, these improvements
are not statistically significant and should be interpreted carefully due to potential stochastic
factors. Nevertheless, our findings highlight the relevance of subject-driven augmentation
techniques in domains beyond classification.
4.3.9
Domain change: Food-101
Experiment 09-food-101 aims to demonstrate the generalizability of subject-driven augmentation
across different domains.
In order to achieve this objective, we substitute the Oxford-IIIT
Pet dataset with the Food-101 dataset and conduct a series of tests to assess the viability of
the approach proposed in this paper beyond the realm of pet-related data. To facilitate this
evaluation, we employ the Stable Diffusion prompt approach, which offers faster testing. We
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
45
==PAGE:54==
focus on this study’s two most frequently encountered scenarios: a training set comprising 100%
and 5% of the dataset. The task involves classification, with accuracy as the reference metric.
To accommodate the 101 classes in the new dataset, we continue to utilise the ResNet34 network
architecture, albeit with necessary adaptations. The results obtained are presented in Table 4.5.
The no-augmentation baseline for the case where 100% of the training set is used is 0.5688. For
5%, the accuracy taken as the no-augmentation baseline is 0.3518.
Real data
Synthetic data
Test accuracy
100%
5%
0.5706
100%
10%
0.5482
5%
100%
0.3803
5%
200%
0.3877
5%
400%
0.3586
Table 4.5: Experiment 09-food-101. Our findings show that subject-driven augmentation is
applicable in other domains. Moreover, the results confirm the trend seen in previous experi-
ments such as 04-generation-percentage that the approach is particularly competitive when the
dataset considered has few images.
The findings illustrate the effectiveness of augmenting a dataset with synthetic images,
particularly when the dataset size is small. In the case of utilising only 5% of the training
data, a notable performance improvement of up to 10.2% is observed. However, when the entire
100% of the training data is employed, the performance increase is a mere 0.32%. These results
corroborate the trends identified in the 04-generation-percentage experiment, aﬀirming the va-
lidity and competitiveness of the subject-driven approach to data augmentation, particularly in
scenarios with limited image availability.
Figure 4.15 showcases a selection of synthetic images generated by Stable Diffusion for this
experiment. The quality of these images is remarkably high, with some being potentially indis-
tinguishable from authentic images to certain people. It is worth noting that Stable Diffusion
benefits from a substantial representation of the food domain in its training set, primarily sourced
from the internet. Consequently, in other domains where such comprehensive representation is
lacking, the generated images may exhibit a different level of quality.
46
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.15: Synthetic images generated for the food101 domain. The quality of these
images is remarkably high, with some being potentially indistinguishable from authentic images.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion
In this section, we analyse the implications of the design and experimentation on the subject-
driven augmentation pipeline we developed. The extensive experiments conducted provide ev-
idence that subject-driven augmentation holds its own against other widely used techniques in
the field of data augmentation. In particular, our generative approach is especially useful when
the number of images available for training a computer vision model is limited. In particular,
in our findings, we find an improvement of up to 19.11% over the accuracy on the Oxford-IIIT
Pet dataset when using 5% of the original training set. Moreover, we show that it is possible
to improve this result by adding conditional control. Latterly, considering this case, we obtain
improvements of up to 23.47%.
Nevertheless, we do not stop there, and we extend our investigation to show that competi-
tive computer vision models can be trained exclusively using synthetic images. However, it is
important to acknowledge that a disparity still exists between models trained with synthetic
images and those trained with real ones. Finally, we prove that subject-driven augmentation
is extensible to other tasks, such as segmentation and generalisable to other datasets, such as
Food-101.
Let us consider these results alongside the research question, which asked, to what extent can
images generated by text-to-image systems improve the performance of computer vision models?
In doing so, we can draw the following implications.
• Subject-driven augmentation techniques are a valid and competitive approach to data
augmentation.
• Subject-driven augmentation techniques are especially relevant in datasets where data is
scarce or expensive to obtain.
• There is still a relevant gap between synthetic and real images.
The question then arises, how do these implications affect or contribute to the field of computer
vision?
One of the first effects that stands out in importance is that the cost of creating large,
quality datasets is reduced. The scientific community has paid more attention to improving
architectures than improving and augmenting datasets [8].
This is because it is extremely
expensive to have large datasets with which to train deep learning architectures [7]. Therefore,
generative augmentation approaches allow few-shot learning [37]. They allow a model to be
trained to generalise and make accurate predictions with only a limited number of labelled
examples for each class. For example, in the developed pipeline, with only 5 real images per class,
we can customise a text-to-image model to generate as many images as desired from a category.
Therefore, the capabilities of the models are greatly expanded when reduced information is
available. Furthermore, the cost of creating datasets is reduced because there is no need for
costly and time-consuming data annotation.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
49
==PAGE:58==
Nevertheless, there is no strict requirement to confine analyses solely to finite datasets, as it is
conceivable, at a conceptual level, to contemplate an approach wherein the model encounters
each training image only once [38]. In this way, with a suﬀiciently expressive text-to-image
model, sets of images could be provided that would, in practice, be unlimited [32]. However,
despite the logical coherence of this concept, its actual implementation is unfeasible due to the
imperfect expressiveness of current models.
Another possibility that we study that derives from the idea of few-shot learning is zero-shot
learning, i.e. no real-world training data is available. At a conceptual level, what is being done is
a transfer of information from the text-to-image model to a model specialised in another task. It
is true, however, that this concept is also present in the few-shot learning scheme. Nevertheless,
the fact that there is no real data implies that, in practical terms, all the information with
which the task is learned comes from the text-to-image model 1. Our data imply that it is
possible to obtain usable results with zero-shot learning. However, we found that there is still
a significant gap between synthetic and real images. Thus, it is not possible to obtain the
performance of trained models with a suﬀicient amount of real images regardless of the number
of synthetic images used.
The present study adds to a large body of literature investigating the possibilities of synthetic
imaging. As this area has recently been revolutionised by the increasing capabilities of text-to-
image models [1, 2], there is much interest from the scientific community. Other relevant works
in the area are the following. In [32], the authors explore Stable Diffusion’s ability to create
ImageNet clones to train classification models from scratch using only class names. In [31],
they augment the ImageNet dataset with synthetic images achieving state-of-the-art results.
In [39], the researchers increase the diversity of a dataset with image-to-image transformations
performed with a text-to-image model. Finally, in [40], they explore how synthetic images can
help in zero-shot and few-shot tasks. All these works draw conclusions that align with those
proposed in the present research and, thus, support our conclusions.
Despite the relative success in addressing the research question, the present study has some
limitations. Among the most important is the instability in obtaining consistently good images.
As shown in section 4.3, many of the images we have generated are of excellent quality and may
even confuse some people. However, we have observed that they also generate bad images in a
way that we cannot control. Figure 5.1 shows some of these particularly bad images.
This type of images may explain some of the instabilities found in some graphs, such as 4.10 or
4.14, where the accuracy shows points with strange behaviour. One of the solutions that can
be applied is to perform multiple runs of the image generation to take the average. While it is
true that we have tried to run the runs a minimum of 2 times, this is insuﬀicient and still allows
for instabilities caused by stochastic processes. The reason why we have not run the tests more
times is that they are very demanding in terms of time and computational resources. Therefore,
this fact presents a weakness of our study that can be improved with more time or more polished
and optimised algorithms.
Finally, another particularly relevant problem from a social perspective is that of bias. Although
in this work, we have dealt with domains where this problem is not particularly worrying (animals
1Assuming that there is no pre-trained model
50
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.1: Synthetic images exhibiting anomalies. Artefacts, deformations, and subject
absence are prevalent among the frequently encountered anomalies.
and food), we must warn of the dangers that we observe in this area. Large text-to-image
models inherit the biases present in the data used to train them. Most of this data
comes from the internet and clearly presents significant problems.
For example, DALL-E 2
makes assumptions about race or gender with specific tasks or jobs as detailed by its creators
in [41]. Therefore, stereotypes and biases are carried over and amplified by using the synthetic
images generated by the text-to-image models. However, there are techniques to limit these
problems. For example, the creators of Textual inversion present how their technique can be
used to reduce bias [4]. Their approach involves making the model learn new pseudo-words for
familiar concepts such as CEO or nurse. Image 5.2 shows the results they achieve by applying
their technique to bias and stereotype reduction.
In summary, in this paper, we demonstrate that images generated by text-to-image models
can improve the performance of computer vision models and draw relevant implications in the
field of deep learning. Subject-driven augmentation techniques are especially relevant
in datasets where data is scarce or expensive to obtain (few-shot learning).
On the
other hand, there is still a relevant gap between synthetic and real images that prevents
competitive results in zero-shot learning.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.2: Bias reduction using Textual inversion [4]. Samples obtained from the pre-
trained biased embeddings (left) and the debiased embeddings (right). The methodology facili-
tates bias reduction by acquiring novel pseudo-words representing established concepts. These
pseudo-words can be fine-tuned using datasets thoughtfully curated for bias reduction.
52
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusions
In this paper, we study the capabilities of text-to-image models in the context of synthetic
imaging and their use in deep learning models. In particular, we ask to what extent synthetic
images can improve the performance of computer vision models. This question holds significant
relevance in light of the remarkable advancements observed in text-to-image models and the
substantial expenses associated with acquiring adequately extensive and high-quality datasets.
The open availability of some models, such as Stable Diffusion, has driven the growing ca-
pabilities of text-to-image models. Their broad accessibility to the scientific community and
enthusiasts has facilitated remarkable efforts in optimising and expanding their capabilities and
applications. Thus, we highlight the work of Dreambooth [5], Textual inversion [4] and Control-
Net [6], which are examined in this study. With the support and enthusiasm of deep learning
researchers, the field has witnessed a significant transformation over a span of merely 6 years,
progressing from the initial text-to-image model [11] introduced in 2015 to the diffusion models
[15, 16] that have been demonstrating impressive performance since 2021.
On the other hand, deep learning models consume large amounts of data and require large-scale
annotated datasets. Creating and maintaining these massive datasets is costly and inaccessible
for most researchers. As a result, the scientific community has focused more on optimising deep
learning architectures than on methods to reduce the cost of acquiring and maintaining large
datasets.
In this context, it is logical to ask whether it is possible to improve the capabilities of computer
vision models by using synthetic images produced by capable and expressive text-to-image mod-
els.
Thus, our contribution is manifold.
• We propose the use of the generative approach in data augmentation tasks.
• We build a data augmentation pipeline based on synthetic images generated by a person-
alised text-to-image model for subject-driven generation.
• We compare the effectiveness of our approach with classical data augmentation techniques.
• We study the effect of the number of synthetic images in relation to the size of the original
dataset.
• We study the feasibility of not using any real images in the training of a competitive
computer vision model.
• We propose improving the results obtained by using conditional control to improve the
quality of the images and the combination of the proposed subject-driven augmentation
with classical techniques.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
53
==PAGE:62==
• We show that our approach applies to other tasks such as segmentation and other datasets
like Food-101.
Our extensive experimental investigations demonstrate the effectiveness of subject-driven
augmentation as a competitive data augmentation technique, particularly in datasets
with a limited number of training images per class. Specifically, when employing a Resnet34
network for a classification task on the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset with 5 real images per class,
we observed performance improvements of up to 19.11% for accuracy. This outcome is partic-
ularly noteworthy as conventional data augmentation techniques failed to enhance the baseline
performance.
Additionally, we established that adding synthetic images to a small dataset yields significant
benefits up to a certain threshold. By employing a Resnet34 network on the Oxford-IIIT Pet
dataset with only 5 real images per class, we found that generating 100% synthetic images
improved the no-augmentation baseline performance by 18.93%. However, increasing the pro-
portion of synthetic images to 1000% resulted in a marginal improvement of only 19.11%.
Furthermore, we conducted experiments without real images, demonstrating that competitive
results can be achieved by training a computer vision model solely on synthetic images. Addition-
ally, we explored the incorporation of conditional control using ControlNet, further enhancing
the outcomes. Remarkably, when utilising 5% real images and 2000% synthetic images in con-
junction with the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset and a Resnet34 network, we observed a substantial
improvement of up to 23.47% over the no-augmentation baseline performance.
Lastly, we showcased the versatility of this approach by successfully applying it to different
tasks, such as segmentation and other datasets like Food-101.
Consequently, considering the research question we have posed, we draw the following implica-
tions. First, subject-driven augmentation techniques are a competitive approach. Second, these
data augmentation techniques are especially useful in sparse datasets. And third, synthetic im-
ages are still not suﬀiciently faithful to reality and still have significant room for improvement.
A detailed discussion of these implications can be found in section 5.
54
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:63==
7
Future work and social issues
Overall, the work is solid and successful, offering significant insights into the research questions.
However, as with any analysis of this magnitude, there are limitations, areas for improvement
and new research questions that arise during the work. Among the main limitations already
detected in section 5 are the instability in obtaining consistent quality results, the enormous
computational requirements and the existence of bias. Therefore, we put forth the following
research directions to address these issues and expand the reach of this thesis 1.
Automatic image selection based on the Fréchet inception distance - FID score. This
metric is used to evaluate the quality and diversity of images generated by text-to-image models.
For this purpose, the FID calculates the similarity in the distribution of a set of real images and
synthetic images. Consequently, our proposition involves selecting generated images based on
their FID scores. In this way, even if the model generates images of low quality or with defects,
it would be possible to eliminate them or select only those with higher quality. However, it is
important to note that accomplishing this task is not straightforward and necessitates longer
execution times and establishing an appropriate threshold through experimental means.
Improving and optimising subject-driven methods. Both Dreambooth and Textual in-
version authors propose improvements to their methods. These could improve both execution
times and the representations obtained in custom text-to-image models. In particular, the re-
searchers responsible for Dreambooth highlight the following flaws [5]: errors in the synthesis of
the environment in which the subject is located, changes in the subject’s appearance depending
on the environment and overfitting to the input images. All these flaws have been observed
in the present work 5. On the other hand, Textual inversion warns about anatomical faults
[4], which we have also detected. Finally, our Stable Diffusion prompt approach can also be
improved through an automatic selection method for higher-quality prompts.
Use of better and more advanced text-to-image models. With them, better-quality im-
ages could be obtained. One possible approach is replicating the experiments using an upgraded
version of Stable Diffusion, such as v2-1 or other models, such as Imagen [42]. The reason for
using version v1-5 in the present work is its wide compatibility with the libraries used.
Optimisation of execution times and reduction of environmental impact. We propose
to address this aspect as we recognise it as a significant limiting factor in conducting compre-
hensive and rigorous experimentation. Specifically, the primary dataset analysed, Oxford-IIIT
Pet, only has 37 classes, so it has been feasible to experiment on it. However, in more intricate
datasets encompassing hundreds of categories, the execution times escalate substantially. For
example, applying Dreambooth to 100 classes with the hardware and environment used in this
work would take more than 75 hours (approximately 45 minutes per class). Moreover, generating
images and training the associated task would entail additional tens of hours of computation.
Consequently, we deem it crucial to address this aspect due to the considerable environmental
1These ideas have not been applied or explored because of the time and resource constraints within which the
present work is framed.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
55
==PAGE:64==
impact associated with the energy-intensive hardware requirements.
Bias reduction.
It is a pressing concern in text-to-image models, as expounded upon in
section 5. These models, particularly large-scale ones, often inherit biases and stereotypes from
the training data they rely upon. We propose that further research be conducted to address
this issue comprehensively. In particular, it is crucial to investigate the impact of subject-driven
augmentation techniques, as these approaches can potentially transfer biases from text-to-image
models to the associated models. Given the social implications involved, it is essential to explore
strategies to reduce such biases and mitigate potential societal challenges that may arise as a
result.
56
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), pp. 6840–6851.
[2]
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. “Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), pp. 8780–8794.
[3]
Steven Lee Myers Tiffany Hsu. Can We No Longer Believe Anything We See? Online;
accessed 15-May-2023. 2023. url: https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/08/business/media/
ai-generated-images.html.
[4]
Rinon Gal et al. “An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation
using textual inversion”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618 (2022).
[5]
Nataniel Ruiz et al. “Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-
driven generation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2023, pp. 22500–22510.
[6]
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. “Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffu-
sion models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543 (2023).
[7]
Suorong Yang et al. “Image data augmentation for deep learning: A survey”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.08610 (2022).
[8]
Golnaz Ghiasi et al. “Simple copy-paste is a strong data augmentation method for in-
stance segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. 2021, pp. 2918–2928.
[9]
Omkar M. Parkhi et al. “Cats and dogs”. In: 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (2012), pp. 3498–3505.
[10]
Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. “Food-101 – Mining Discrimi-
native Components with Random Forests”. In: European Conference on Computer Vision.
2014.
[11]
Elman Mansimov et al. “Generating images from captions with attention”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.02793 (2015).
[12]
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. “Taming transformers for high-resolution
image synthesis”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. 2021, pp. 12873–12883.
[13]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial networks”. In: Communications of the ACM
63.11 (2020), pp. 139–144.
[14]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-
sion”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[15]
Chitwan Saharia et al. “Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH
2022 Conference Proceedings. 2022, pp. 1–10.
[16]
Alex Nichol et al. “Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with text-
guided diffusion models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741 (2021).
[17]
Aditya Ramesh et al. “Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125 (2022).
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
57
==PAGE:66==
[18]
Robin Rombach et al. “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
2022, pp. 10684–10695.
[19]
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein et al. “Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermo-
dynamics”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2015, pp. 2256–
2265.
[20]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation”. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October
5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18. Springer. 2015, pp. 234–241.
[21]
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. “Improved denoising diffusion probabilis-
tic models”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2021, pp. 8162–
8171.
[22]
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. “Large scale GAN training for high
fidelity natural image synthesis”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096 (2018).
[23]
Mehdi Cherti et al. “Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language-image learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07143 (2022).
[24]
Wikipedia. Stable Diffusion, Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Online; accessed 12-April-
2023. 2023. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stable_Diffusion.
[25]
Christoph Schuhmann et al. “Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next
generation image-text models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08402 (2022).
[26]
Robin Rombach and Patrick Esser. Hugging Face - Stable Diffusion. 2023. url: https:
//huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion (visited on 03/02/2023).
[27]
Fuzhen Zhuang et al. “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE 109.1 (2020), pp. 43–76.
[28]
Ekin D Cubuk et al. “Autoaugment: Learning augmentation policies from data”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.09501 (2018).
[29]
OpenAI. Requests for Research 2.0. Online; accessed 13-May-2023. 2018. url: https://
openai.com/research/requests-for-research-2.
[30]
Ekin D Cubuk et al. “Randaugment: Practical automated data augmentation with a re-
duced search space”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition workshops. 2020, pp. 702–703.
[31]
Shekoofeh Azizi et al. “Synthetic data from diffusion models improves imagenet classifica-
tion”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08466 (2023).
[32]
Mert Bulent Sariyildiz et al. “Fake it till you make it: Learning transferable representations
from synthetic ImageNet clones”. In: CVPR 2023–IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2023.
[33]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[34]
Liang-Chieh Chen et al. “Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587 (2017).
[35]
Nathan Lambert Suraj Patil Pedro Cuenca and Patrick von Platen. Stable Diffusion with
Diffusers. Online; accessed 13-March-2023. 2022. url: https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_
diffusion.
58
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:67==
[36]
Pedro Cuenca Suraj Patil and Valentine Kozin. Training Stable Diffusion with Dreambooth
using Diffusers. Online; accessed 17-March-2023. 2022. url: https://huggingface.co/blog/
dreambooth.
[37]
Yaqing Wang et al. “Generalizing from a few examples: A survey on few-shot learning”.
In: ACM computing surveys (csur) 53.3 (2020), pp. 1–34.
[38]
German I Parisi et al. “Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review”. In:
Neural networks 113 (2019), pp. 54–71.
[39]
Brandon Trabucco et al. “Effective data augmentation with diffusion models”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.07944 (2023).
[40]
Ruifei He et al. “Is synthetic data from generative models ready for image recognition?”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07574 (2022).
[41]
Pamela Mishkin and Lama Ahmad. DALL·E 2 Preview - Risks and Limitations. Online;
accessed 8-June-2023. 2022. url: https://github.com/openai/dalle-2-preview/blob/main/
system-card.md.
[42]
Chitwan Saharia et al. “Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language
understanding”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), pp. 36479–
36494.
[43]
GPU nodes. Online; accessed 6-June-2023. 2023. url: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=
2129.
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:69==
A
Hardware specifications
An NVIDIA A100 graphics card with the following characteristics shown in table A.1 has been
used to develop this work.
Name
Tesla A100-PCIE
Year
2020
Architecture
GA100 (Ampere)
CUDA capability
8.0
CUDA cores
6912
Clock MHz
1410
Memory GiB
39.59
SP peak GFlops
19492
DP peak GFlops
9746
Peak GB/s
1555
Table A.1: Specifications of the NVIDIA A100 GPUs used in this work [43]
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
61
==PAGE:70==
B
Software enviroment
The software tools used throughout the development of this work are shown in table B.
Tool
Version
Python
3.8.13
PyTorch
2.0.1
Torchvision
0.15.2
Hugging Face Diffusers
0.16.1
xFormers
0.0.19
Transformers
4.28.1
Numpy
1.24.2
Scipy
1.10.0
Scikit-learn
1.2.2
Pandas
1.5.3
OpenCV
4.7.0.72
Pillow
9.4.0
Seaborn
0.12.2
Matplotlib
3.7.1
Table B.1: Versions of the software tools used in the project
62
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
==PAGE:71==
C
Rigour and reproducibility
All experiments in this study have been carried out with a high degree of rigour, employing metic-
ulous methodologies and protocols. The primary objective has been to minimise the stochastic
effects inherent in experimentation within deep learning. Measures have been implemented to
enhance the reproducibility of the experiments.
Throughout this research, multiple sets of images have been employed as input for models and
techniques that are to be replicated and compared. To ensure fair comparisons, the real im-
ages utilised for customising the text-to-image models are consistent across all subject-driven
approaches. It should be noted that the selection of these images is initially completely random.
Conversely, the subsets of training images remain constant across all tests within each experi-
ment. Furthermore, the tests are executed at least twice to mitigate stochastic effects. However,
specific results presented in 4.3 still exhibit instabilities. Due to the substantial computational
demands of the tests, running them more times has been unfeasible from the perspective of time
and energy eﬀiciency.
To guarantee the reproducibility of the experiments, the project code has been published on
GitHub1. The entire development process has been recorded using version control, enabling
exploration of the code to replicate the experiments or expand upon the proposed data augmen-
tation pipeline outlined in the paper.
In short, we underline the commitment to ensure the results are as rigorous and reproducible as
possible.
1https://github.com/SrLozano/MSc-Thesis-Subject-Driven-Augmentation
Subject-Driven Generation Techniques for Stable Diffusion Model
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
