==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Techno-economic optimization of grid-
supporting hybrid power plants
Fotios Stratiotis 
DTU Wind-M-0672 
July 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0672 
July 2023
Project period: 
January - July 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Kai Heussen
Panagiotis Andrianesis
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Fotios Stratiotis
Title:
Techno-economic optimization of grid-
supporting hybrid power plants
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Fotios Stratiotis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Brovej, Building 118,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Wind and Energy
Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of linear programming
and economics of electricity markets.
Fotios Stratiotis ­ s212862
Signature
Date
ii
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
20/07/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The escalating CO2 emissions and the global energy crisis require an urgent and ex­
tensive response aimed at neutralizing their impact. To combat this, the integration of
variable renewable energy sources (RES) in power grids has been increasing, but it has
led to power uncertainty and frequency instabilities due to low inertia. In addressing this
challenge, the development of Hybrid Power Plants (HPPs), combining wind, solar, and
Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS), has been evolving. However, the number of
such HPPs currently under development or operating in Europe remains limited, and their
business case is still being developed or evaluated. Nevertheless, the anticipated ad­
vantages of wind­solar­battery HPPs hold great potential, particularly in terms of the cost­
effective integration of RES, which is crucial for achieving Europe’s decarbonization target
by 2050.
This Thesis project explores the benefits and market opportunities for this type of HPP,
by assessing its investment feasibility. A comprehensive evaluation is conducted using
an operational research approach to design an optimal sizing model for the HPP, which
comprises a wind farm, solar system, and a BESS. The analysis considers various factors
such as the availability of renewable energy sources, technology costs, electricity prices,
and reserves for the ancillary service market to determine the optimized size of the HPP.
The findings indicate that although a feasible investment can be achieved through revenue
generated from the spot market, greater profitability can be attained by participating in the
ancillary service market, specifically focusing on FCR­D services. Notably, the project is
subsidy­free, omitting any support schemes or tariffs, and aims to maximize the HPP’s
cash flows and therefore the Net Present Value (NPV) by identifying the optimal capacities
for each technology.
Although the investment in HPP is considered feasible, while participating in the spot mar­
ket, the desirability of installing BESS is limited due to its significant capital expenditure.
As a result, the installation of BESS is not pursued for energy arbitrage purposes but only
to provide the necessary reserve capacities. To enhance its appeal and investigate its
operational behavior in the HPP, a considerable reduction in capital cost is required.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Associate Professor Panagiotis Andrianesis, and my
co­supervisor, Senior Researcher Kai Heussen, for their invaluable support, and guidance
throughout this thesis project. Their expertise and encouragement have been instrumen­
tal in shaping the outcome of this project. Working alongside these professionals has
been a fulfilling experience that I will always cherish. I am also deeply grateful to my fam­
ily for their constant love, encouragement, and belief in my abilities. Their unwavering
support has been a driving force behind my accomplishments, and I am fortunate to have
them by my side. Lastly, I would like to extend my appreciation to my friends for their
understanding, encouragement, and for being a source of motivation during this journey.
Their presence and help have made the challenging moments more manageable and the
successes even sweeter.
iv
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
HPP Hybrid Power Plant
OM Operation and maintenance cost
CAPEX Capital expenditures
WACC Weighted Average Cost of Capital
TSO Transmission System Operator
UTC Coordinated Universal Time
EAC Equivalent Annual Cost
OoM Order of Magnitude
MILP Mixed Integer Linear Programming
FCR­D Up Frequency Containment Reserve ­ Disturbance Up regulation
FCR­D Down Frequency Containment Reserve ­ Disturbance Down regulation
FCR­N Frequency Containment Reserve ­ Normal operations
RES Renewable Energy Sources
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation for Hybrid Power Plants development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
HPP nowdays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Incentives for HPP development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Research question and thesis objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Thesis overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Ancillary services in Denmark
7
2.1
Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR) in DK2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
FCR­D regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Deterministic model of the Hybrid Power Plant
13
3.1
Investment model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Model nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Data inputs
23
4.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Wind and solar data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
BESS technical parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4
Cost estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5
Discount rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6
Electricity prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Results
31
5.1
HPP sizing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Case 1: HPP participates in the Spot market
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Case 2: HPP participates in the Spot and Ancillary service markets . . . . . 35
5.4
Case 1: HPP participates in the Spot market, using an OoM (­1) in BESS
CAPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.5
Case 2: HPP participates in the Spot market and Ancillary service markets,
using an OoM (­1) in BESS CAPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.6
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Discussion
52
7
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
56
A Appendix
58
vi
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Current operational HPPs around the world [1]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Capacity share of wind, solar, and storage in 24 existing and under devel­
opment HPPs [1]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1
DK1 and DK2 bidding zones of Denmark [6].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Methodology for sizing optimization of the HPP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
BESS power dispatch diagram for the participation in FCR­D up and FCR­D
down services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.1
Correlation between wind and solar power for the year 2019 . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Comparison between electricity spot market prices in DK2 in years 2020,
2021 and 2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Comparison between FCR­D up price in year 2021 and FCR­D down price
in year 2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.1
Power flow diagram of the grid­supporting HPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Revenues compared with the electricity spot price for Case 1 . . . . . . . . 34
5.4
FCR­D reserve capacities aligning with the SOE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.6
Revenues compared with the electricity spot price for Case 2 . . . . . . . . 38
5.7
Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.8
Sample of reserve capacities and BESS interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.9
Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.10 FCR­D reserve capacities aligning with the SOE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.11 Cash flow comparison between Case 1 and Case 2 during the lifetime of
the HPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.12 Different technology mix during the years
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.13 Technology mix for a different order of magnitudes in BESS CAPEX . . . . 45
5.14 Share of capacities of the HPP in different locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.15 Solar capacity factor in Greece and in Denmark (DK2) . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.16 Wind capacity factor in Greece and in Denmark (DK2) . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.17 Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units in Greece . . . . . . . . . 49
A.1 Comparison between FCR­D and FCR­N activation services. [23]
. . . . . 59
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
2.1
Ancillary Services for Nordics and Continental Europe [5]
. . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Nordic obligation for the primary ancillary services in 2023 [8]. . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Technical characteristics of FCR­D up and FCR­D down regulation [11]. . .
11
4.1
Technical parameters of BESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Costs of wind and solar power [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Costs of battery energy storage systems [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Average electricity prices for the years 2020, 2021, 2022. . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Weighted average bid prices [€/MWh] in DK2 for 2021 and 2022. . . . . . . 30
5.1
Characteristics of the two main case scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Optimal sizing of the HPP for Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Results of the investment model for Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.4
Optimal sizing of the HPP for Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5
Results of the investment model, participating in FCR­D regulation with
normal BESS capex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.6
Optimal sizing of the HPP without participating in FCR­D regulation . . . . . 39
5.7
Results of the investment model in Case 1 with an OoM(­1) in BESS CAPEX 40
5.8
Optimal sizing of the HPP, participating in FCR­D regulation . . . . . . . . . 40
5.9
Results of the investment model in Case 2 with an OoM(­1) in BESS CAPEX 43
5.10 Optimal sizing of the HPP in Greece with a normal BESS CAPEX . . . . . . 50
5.11 Optimal sizing of the HPP in Greece with an OoM (­1) in BESS CAPEX
. . 50
5.12 Results of the investment model for the HPP in Greece with a normal BESS
CAPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.13 Results of the investment model for the HPP in Greece with an OoM (­1) in
BESS CAPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
viii
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The growing interest in renewable energy sources (RES) in response to fight climate
change, is creating significant pressure on power systems globally. This urgent need
to address climate change and the transition to renewable energy sources has prompted
the setting of ambitious targets for the deployment of wind and solar power worldwide.
However, this shift towards renewable energy allows the electrification of various energy
sectors, ensuring energy security, but it also presents challenges to existing power in­
frastructures. Particularly, large­scale development of wind and solar power would re­
quire substantial grid infrastructure reinforcement, which could be quite time intensive
and expensive. In order to accommodate the fast growth of RES integration and improve
the power system efficiency and reliability, one option is to combine renewable energy
sources to ensure optimal utilization of the electrical grid infrastructure. This option gives
a more flexible solution for the grid overload and allows the increase of the share of RES
in the power system, leading to the development of hybrid power plants (HPP).
An HPP refers to a power­generating facility that converts the primary energy into elec­
trical energy, combining more than one generator connected to the grid with a single
connection point [1]. Nowadays, the integration of renewable energy sources, such as
wind, solar, and storage within HPPs is creating a promising solution for future energy
generation. These types of HPP have the capability to incorporate large­scale RES in­
stallations through a single grid connection point, aiming for various benefits such as the
increase of the grid’s reliability and profitability. From a producer’s perspective, coupling
wind, solar and storage improves the power­delivering strategy. For instance, it is ob­
served that when wind production is low, the electricity prices increase and vice versa,
however even in such fluctuations, revenue opportunities can still be made by leveraging
the sale of solar production. This diversification of renewable sources allows producers
to optimize their revenue potential and maintain a stable income stream, moderating the
impact of price variations. Additionally, surplus energy generated from wind and solar
sources can be efficiently stored in BESS and utilized during periods of high demand or
when electricity prices are high, a practice known as energy arbitrage. From another per­
spective, the energy from the battery compensates for the output of the HPP when there
is no wind and solar production and ensures in this way a smooth HPP’s production.
The revenue stream opportunities of an HPP depend on the market structure that partic­
ipates. For instance, markets such as the day­ahead market, and capacity market are
suitable for HPPs, but mainly the day­ahead market is currently the dominant source of
revenue [2]. Revenues are mainly based on price fluctuation, feed­in tariffs incentives and
power purchase agreements (PPA). Furthermore, the idea to include energy storage sys­
tems in the HPP can enable the entrance into a new potential market, facilitating revenue
possibilities, i.e ancillary services throughout the year, as in the case study analyzed in
this project.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Motivation for Hybrid Power Plants development
The combination of generation units in HPPs can provide additional resources that offer
flexibility and resilience to the power grid. When HPPs include storage capabilities, they
can help to reduce balancing costs and limit the amount of renewable energy sources
(RES) that must be curtailed. This is particularly important in countries where compen­
sation for curtailed energy is still provided, as the costs of curtailment can be substantial.
Overall, HPPs can serve as a valuable partner to the power grid and help to address
some of the challenges associated with integrating variable renewable energy sources
into the system. As it is known, the grid capacity is limited, creating a restricted environ­
ment for producers, to connect and produce energy. The installation of HPPs offers the
ability for the network to be optimized, by increasing the capacity more than the autho­
rized one in the connection agreement, remaining the maximum power output capacity
point the same. In other words, HPPs are flexible to provide more capacity to the system
when it’s needed, maximizing the use of the existing network, and resolving the bottle­
neck problems in areas where new grid expansion is not allowed. This aligns with the
ability of HPPs to increase the capacity factor, therefore more full load hours and ensure
a more stable power output over time with fewer energy fluctuations than individual wind
or solar plants. As previously mentioned, this occurs due to the fact that each technology
completes the other, in cases where the sun does not shine, or the wind does not blow.
This gives the possibility for partially scheduled power dispatch, fulfilling the system’s and
producer’s power production requirements. In addition, HHPs are advantageous in terms
of economic evaluation and profit, by dispatching power in the market. Due to their flex­
ibility of switching technologies quite easily, HPPs can potentially earn revenue from the
market, by using technologies considering the electricity prices. For example, when the
electricity prices are negatively correlated to wind power due to the high share of wind,
the HPP can switch only to solar resource, when prices are high and gain revenue from
the market [1]. From an investment point of view, HPPs are beneficial due to their sin­
gle grid connection point, reducing in that way infrastructure costs. According to this, a
common grid connection point in combination with the continuous decrease of renewable
generators costs, guarantees a feasible initial investment. Also, in certain frameworks,
reduced subsequent network use tariffs paid by grid end­users [2]. Another significant
reason to increase the HPP’s development is due to its ability to provide scheduled power
dispatch to satisfy the load demand in areas with weak generation output and provide
reliable power support, easing in that way the expansion of rural electrification systems.
1.2
HPP nowdays
Hybrid power plants incorporating wind, solar, and battery technologies around the world
are currently limited, with only a few being developed or operational. The business case
for these HPP is still in the process of being developed or evaluated. However, the antic­
ipated benefits of the HPPs show great potential for enabling the integration of RES on a
large scale. These advantages focus on cost reduction as well as the multiple services of
variable renewable energy sources in the power system, which is of utmost importance
to achieve particularly the EU’s decarbonization target by 2050.
2
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.1: Current operational HPPs around the world [1].
Figure 1.1 presents the already existent HPPs around the world. An overview of these
operational HPPs is discussed in WindEurope’s report [1]. This document points out the
growing prominence of large­scale HPP projects worldwide. An important example of an
already existing large­scale HPP is the 60 MW Kennedy Energy Park in Australia, which
incorporates 74% wind, 26% solar, and only 3% storage. Additionally, the report highlights
the 64 MW Haringvliet HPP in the Netherlands, which participates in both day­ahead and
balancing market, producing energy and providing FCR services with a storage capacity
equal to 12 MW/12 MWh.
On the other hand, India has become a prominent destination for new and ambitious HPP
developments, with notable projects like the upcoming 160 MW HPP in Ananthapuramu
and the already existent 78.8 MW Kavithal HPP. This surge in activity can be attributed
to the implementation of India’s National Wind­Solar Hybrid Policy, which has acted as a
catalyst for numerous HPP initiatives.
These projects are indicative of the ongoing global developments in the HPP sector.
Across the world, similar developments are starting to take shape, driven by the increasing
recognition of BESS as a vital component of the renewable energy mix. As countries seek
to diversify their energy sources and reduce reliance on fossil fuels, HPPs are emerging
as an attractive option due to their potential for large­scale electricity generation and stor­
age capabilities. The current integration of BESS in operational HPPs is limited due to
the high capital costs involved. As a result, most existing HPPs incorporate only a small
share of BESS to examine its behavior and assess its potential benefits within the system.
This cautious approach allows operators to gather valuable data on power curtailment re­
duction, energy arbitrage, and system stability. The low installed capacity of BESS in
operational HPPs reflects the need to carefully evaluate the economic viability and prof­
itability of scaling up storage capacities. However, as the technology advances and the
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
3
==PAGE:14==
costs decrease, it is expected that more HPPs will incorporate larger BESS capacities,
harnessing the full potential of energy storage in optimizing HPP installations.
Figure 1.2: Capacity share of wind, solar, and storage in 24 existing and under develop­
ment HPPs [1].
Figure 1.2 illustrates the distribution of capacity among various technologies integrated
into single HPPs worldwide. It is evident that a significant number of operational HPPs
do not incorporate a storage system, despite its crucial role in reducing power curtailment
and enabling energy arbitrage. However, the emergence of new products and services
in different markets, such as FCR­N and FCR­D, has increased the potential profits for
HPPs utilizing BESS. As a result, an increasing number of HPPs under development now
include a storage system.
Moreover, it is important to note that the ratio between wind and solar energy generation
varies across different HPPs. This discrepancy depends on the geographical location of
each plant and the prevailing weather conditions. Specifically, certain regions may pos­
sess abundant renewable resources, such as higher wind speeds and solar irradiation,
enabling HPPs to enhance their wind or solar production capacities accordingly. Conse­
quently, the installed capacities of HPPs may be adjusted to optimize the utilization of wind
or solar resources. This interdependence between wind and solar resources are further
explored in subsection 5.6.3, where Denmark and Greece are chosen as representative
locations and compared in terms of their characteristics.
1.3
Incentives for HPP development
The growing interest in HPPs incorporating wind, solar, and battery systems is driving their
increasing adoption. However, the rate of diffusion varies among countries, influenced by
the incentives and policies implemented. HPPs represent a relatively new form of energy
generation, and incentives play a crucial role in promoting their widespread adoption.
Therefore, it is essential for countries to establish appropriate and consistent policies that
support the development and deployment of HPPs. The literature review underscores
that while incentives are applied to both HPPs and individual renewable energy plants,
there exists an inconsistency in their implementation across countries. HPPs often do
not receive the same level of support as other power plants, highlighting the need for
4
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:15==
equitable and effective incentive frameworks. In detail, the nature and effectiveness of
incentives vary between countries, reflecting diverse motivations driven by specific system
requirements. In this section, an overall review of incentives in this field is presented.
The role of government in driving the development and continued stimulation of green
incentives is crucial, particularly in shaping energy policies to promote renewable energy
utilization and production. Governments implement direct instruments such as grants,
subsidized loans, and feed­in­tariffs to provide financial support for facility installations
and ensure favorable electricity purchase rates for renewable energy producers. In the
context of HPPs incorporating wind, solar, and battery systems, power purchase agree­
ments and feed­in­tariffs are commonly used incentives, offering fixed payments or long­
term contracts to incentivize renewable energy production and storage capacity. More­
over, governments address grid infrastructure limitations through feed­in­tariffs, setting
electricity prices to benefit producers, and encouraging investment in renewable energy
projects. The active involvement of governments in providing incentives and creating a
supportive regulatory framework plays a crucial role in driving investment, stimulating the
growth of renewable energy projects, and advancing the transition towards a sustainable
and low­carbon energy system [3].
Another advanced incentive regulation is Net Energy Metering or Feed­in Premiums. De­
pending on the specific configuration and regulatory framework, HPPs may be eligible for
net metering, allowing plant owners to receive credits or payments for excess electricity
fed back into the grid. In some systems, additional feed­in premiums may be offered, pro­
viding financial incentives for the electricity generated by the HPP [4]. These incentives
play a crucial role in encouraging the development and expansion of HPPs by ensuring
favorable returns on investment and promoting the integration of renewable energy into
the grid.
In addition, it is worth highlighting the need for incentives specifically targeted at energy
storage technologies, considering their relatively high capital costs. To promote the inte­
gration and deployment of BESS, there is a necessity for specific programs or incentives.
These can take the form of grants, tax credits, or special financing options that support
the installation and operation of BESS. Tax incentives, for example, can include exemp­
tions or reductions on income tax, property tax, or value­added tax. By implementing
such measures, the financial burden associated with installing and operating batteries
can be significantly reduced, encouraging their wider implementation and integration into
the energy infrastructure.
Despite the existence of various incentives aimed at promoting the development of HPP,
this particular project focuses on a subsidy­free approach. The project specifically ex­
amines the installation of an HPP in the DK2 region without relying on any subsidies or
loans. Instead, the emphasis is placed on exploring the economic viability and feasibility
of implementing the HPP without financial support or incentives.
1.4
Research question and thesis objectives
The core research question that this thesis project aims to answer is:
How can the size of the HPP be optimized from a power producer perspective, to provide
energy into the spot market and reserve capacities for the ancillary service market, taking
into account particular operational and market constraints?
To address this question, an optimization model will be developed to determine the opti­
mal sizing and economic aspects of the HPP. The model will consider various technical,
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
5
==PAGE:16==
economic, and operational constraints while providing production and investment profiles
for different technologies. The main objective of the study is to investigate the impact
of delivering reserve capacities for ancillary services in the Nordic synchronous area, on
the HPP’s size and associated investment. To achieve this, a mixed­integer linear pro­
gramming (MILP) optimization problem will be formulated. The optimization problem will
be yearly oriented and designed to maximize annual cash flows related to the HPP, tak­
ing into account factors such as technology costs, operational constraints, and revenue
potentials. With these aims in mind, the following will be done:
1. Identify market conditions and translate them into metrics applicable to the mathe­
matical model
2. Gather and process input data to be applied in the optimization model
3. Formulate the sizing optimization model, considering operational restrictions and
rules
4. Extend the optimization model formulation to include ancillary services
5. Conduct sensitivity analysis to evaluate the accuracy of the model, by modifying the
input parameters and conditions
The sizing model for the HPP will be developed with a strong operational focus, incorpo­
rating the production behavior of each technology. This approach ensures that the model
accounts for the operational characteristics and capabilities of different technologies. To
evaluate the impact of participating in the reserve market, two simulations will be con­
ducted using a deterministic model. These two simulations will provide insights into the
optimal sizing decisions for the HPP, considering the economic viability and potential rev­
enue generation from both energy production for the spot market and ancillary services
(Section 2.1). Furthermore, a sensitivity analysis will be performed by varying key param­
eters to assess the model’s adaptability and robustness. This analysis will help identify
the influence of parameter changes on the optimal sizing outcomes, enabling a better un­
derstanding of the model’s response to different scenarios. The optimization tool used for
the investment model is Python 3.9, with the Pyomo framework, which will be utilized as
the optimization tool for the investment model. The Gurobi 9.1.1 solver will be employed
to solve the optimization problem efficiently and obtain optimal solutions. The location of
the HPP will be specified as the wider area of DK2, without providing the exact position.
1.5
Thesis overview
In this section, the thesis overview is provided. Chapter 2 includes an overview of the
ancillary service market in Denmark, particularly in DK2 price area. FCR­D regulation
is explained, including participation prerequisites, legislation, and rules. In Chapter 3,
a deterministic model is presented for sizing the different technologies within the HPP to
facilitate investment decision­making. Additionally, Chapter 4 focuses on the assumptions
considered and provides a summary and discussion of the input parameters used in the
model. The results of the deterministic model and the subsequent sensitivity analysis
are presented in Chapter 5, focusing on the optimal sizing decisions for the HPP and
exploring their economic viability. The findings are further discussed in Chapter 6, with
limitations of the study and suggestions on possible extensions of the model and additional
research. Finally, Chapter 7 concludes the thesis by summarizing the main contributions,
emphasizing the significance of the research, and offering a comprehensive conclusion
to the study.
6
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:17==
2
Ancillary services in Denmark
The European power grid is divided into different synchronous zones, each maintaining a
nominal frequency of 50 Hz. The Transmission System Operator (TSO) is the organization
in charge on a national scale for the correct operation and maintenance of the power
grid. Within a synchronous area, TSOs share the responsibility of balancing the real­time
supply and demand, ensuring that the grid frequency remains close to its nominal value.
The need of ensuring the correct grid stability constitutes a set of measures that each TSO
adopts, the ancillary services. The specific tool to fight contingencies in a power system
is defined as a reserve, namely the power that can be injected or absorbed from the grid
to balance consumption and production. At the European level, reserves are categorized
into primary, secondary, and tertiary based on their responsiveness. This categorization
refers to how quickly they can respond to a frequency deviation and the order in which
they are activated following a contingency event. The reserves are ranked based on their
activation speed, with the fastest reserves requiring mere seconds to activate, while the
slowest reserves may take more than 15 minutes to become operational.
Table 2.1: Ancillary Services for Nordics and Continental Europe [5]
Reserves
Nordics
Europe
Frequency Containment Reserve ­ Normal
(FCR­N)
Primary
Frequency Containment Reserve ­ Disturbance
(FCR­D up)
Frequency Containment Reserve
(FCR)
Frequency Containment Reserve ­ Disturbance
(FCR­D down)
Secondary
automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve
(aFRR)
automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve
(aFRR)
Tertiary
manual Frequency Restoration Reserve
(mFRR)
manual Frequency Restoration Reserve
(mFRR)
Due to its smaller size and a higher proportion of renewable energy generation, thus less
inertia, the Nordic power grid faces greater challenges in maintaining system frequency
stability compared to the continental grid. To address this issue, additional sub­categories
of reserve services are implemented to provide specific regulations. The primary reserve
in the Nordic grid is further divided into distinct services, namely FCR­N (Frequency Con­
tainment Reserve ­ Normal operations) and FCR­D Up and Down (Disturbance opera­
tions ­ Up and Down regulation). These services are designed to cater to the unique
requirements of the Nordic grid, ensuring effective frequency containment during normal
operations and effective regulation during disturbance events.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: DK1 and DK2 bidding zones of Denmark [6].
Denmark is divided into two different synchronous areas to manage electricity distribu­
tion pricing. DK1 is connected to the Continental European synchronous area, and DK2
is connected to the Nordic synchronous area, including Zealand and Bornholm (Figure
2.1). In this chapter, a thorough description of the primary frequency regulation in the
DK2 region is introduced, focusing on FCR­D down and FCR­D up products, which are
investigated in this project. Primary reserve services include FCR­N and FCR­D, which
are there to stabilize the frequency in the electricity grid in DK2 and in the rest of the
Nordic synchronous area, in case of frequency fluctuations. Energinet procures FCR­N,
FCR­D up and FCR­D down capacity reserve in collaboration with Svenska Kraftnät in
daily auctions where part of the required volume is procured two days before the day of
operation (D­2), and the remaining part is procured the day before the day of operation
(D­1).
2.1
Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR) in DK2
With a focus on the Nordic synchronous area DK2, the primary ancillary service that has
a key role in the maintenance of systems stability and addressing frequency fluctuations
is the Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR). The FCR services act promptly and au­
tomatically, responding to any deviations in frequency to restore it to its nominal value of
50Hz. These services refer to FCR­N and FCR­D products. FCR­N is triggered for both
up and down regulation, whereas FCR­D is an asynchronous product, meaning that up
regulation and down regulation are purchased separately.
In contrast, the Automatic and Manual Frequency Restoration Reserves (aFRR and mFRR)
are products that address slower­response situations and are activated in repetitive fre­
quency deviations that may occur due to production failures or other factors. By leveraging
these ancillary services, the power system in the DK2 region can effectively maintain sta­
bility and ensure reliable operation. The main focus of this project will be on the FCR­D
regulation and particularly in FCR­D up and FCR­D down products.
In Table 2.2 below, the necessary hourly reserve capacities are shown for each individual
8
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:19==
TSO according to the requirements stated in the Nordic system operating agreement. The
distribution key factor is based on the annual consumption and production in each country,
meaning that these volumes are changing every year. For Energinet (DK2), there was an
increase in total share from 2,8% in 2022 to 3,6% in 2023. Is worth mentioning that the
new volume requirements are applied every first day of the year [7].
Table 2.2: Nordic obligation for the primary ancillary services in 2023 [8].
TSO
Share [%]
FCR­N [MW]
FCR­D up [MW]
FCR­D down [MW]
Energinet (DK2)
3,6
18
44
43
Fingrid
20,11
121
292
282
Statnett
38,38
230
557
537
Svenska kraftnät
38,45
231
558
538
Nordic obligations
100
600
1450
1400
• FCR­D up regulation ­ activated to provide only up regulation ­ Hourly total reserve
capacity equal to 1450 MW
• FCR­D down regulation ­ activated to provide only down regulation ­ Hourly total
reserve capacity equal to 1400 MW
• FCR­N regulation ­ activated to provide both up and down regulation ­ Hourly total
reserve capacity equal to 600 MW
As it can be observed in Table 2.2, the share of Energinet (DK2) in the ancillary service
provision is relatively low compared to other TSOs. This occurs due to the capacity lim­
itations of the transmission lines connecting Denmark and Sweden. Those transmission
lines are often congested, and therefore Energinet and Svenska Kraftnät, acquire capacity
reserves together for FCR­N, FCR­D up, and FCR­D down through daily auctions. These
auctions involve procuring a portion of the required reserve volume two days before the
day of operation (D­2), while the remaining portion is procured one day before the day of
operation (D­1).
2.2
FCR­D regulation
The Frequency Containment Reserve ­ Disturbance operations for up regulation (FCR­D
up) is an ancillary service provided by the Danish TSO, (Energinet). This reserve capacity
is procured on an hourly basis to serve as a primary response in the event of grid insta­
bilities and disturbances caused by the outage of major generation units or transmission
lines. FCR­D regulation is an automated regulation service that involves generation or
demand units responding to deviations in grid frequency.
When a plant providing FCR­D regulation has a current FCR­D response and the sched­
uled end of FCR­D provision approaches, the regulation continues until the frequency
deviation comes close to the standardized frequency interval. At this point, the FCR­D
response naturally ends. However, if the frequency deviation persists for an extended du­
ration, the FCR­D response will start to ramp down after 15 minutes from the scheduled
end time. This ramp­down process must occur over a period of 5 minutes. [9]. According
to Table 2.3, the relaxation time for FCR­D regulation is 20 minutes. This means that
FCR­D regulation remains active for a duration of 20 minutes to effectively restore and
maintain the frequency close to its nominal value [10]. These provisions ensure that the
FCR­D response is appropriately timed and gradually phased out, allowing for a smooth
transition back to normal operating conditions.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
9
==PAGE:20==
Energinet and Svenska kraftnät collaborate in the procurement of FCR­D regulation. The
required combined volume is obtained through daily auctions, with a portion being pro­
cured two days prior to the day of operation (D­2), and the remaining portion being pro­
cured on the day preceding the day of operation (D­1). If, after the second auction on
D­1, the reserve volume has not been fully covered, the Danish and Swedish TSOs will
reach out to reserve providers to request additional power to meet the obligation. Each
bid submitted is evaluated, and it has to be either entirely accepted or entirely rejected.
It is worth noting that, on average, 80% of the total reserve volume is contracted on D­2,
which increases the likelihood of rejection if participating in the D­1 auction. For project
purposes, the HPP is considered to participate in hourly reserve market, thus the hourly
co­optimize reserve capacities provided by the BESS are considered as bids.
2.2.1
FCR­D up regulation
FCR­D up is an automated regulation service, where generation or demand units auto­
matically adjust to grid frequency deviations. These plants have the capability to increase
their power output to match the demand and restore the frequency close to its nominal
value of 50 Hz. The activation limits for FCR­D up are defined for frequencies within the
range of 49.5 ≤f ≤49.9 [7]. The reserve capacity remains active until the grid’s balance
has been restored or until manual reserves take over the supply of power. According
to the Nordic obligations, as outlined in Table 2.2, Energinet and Svenska kraftnät are
obligated to procure 602 MW of reserve capacity on an hourly basis.
2.2.2
FCR­D down regulation
FCR­D down regulation is a new product, introduced in 2022 and it can be delivered si­
multaneously with the FCR­D up regulation [11]. This automated regulation service is
procured by Energinet specifically for DK2, providing primary response down regulation
power, as a primary response in case of grid overload. Activation is triggered within the
frequency range of 50.1 ≤f ≤50.5 [7], where the participated demand units provide
reserve capacities to absorb the excess power from the grid, restoring the balance be­
tween demand and production. Consequently, the frequency gradually decreases until
it approaches its nominal value of 50 Hz. In that way, the frequency decreases until the
frequency deviation is close to its nominal value of 50H Hz. According to the Nordic obli­
gations, as outlined in Table 2.2, Energinet and Svenska kraftnät are obligated to procure
581 MW of reserve capacity on an hourly basis.
2.2.3
Pre­qualification requirements
The contracted reserves for FCR­D up and FCR­D down regulation are activated in a
linear manner within the frequency­response range specified in subsections (2.2.1) and
(2.2.2) respectively. The primary limitation is the time it takes for the reserves to respond
effectively. This means that once the activation signal is received, which corresponds to
a reported frequency deviation, the reserves must be able to promptly adjust and provide
the necessary regulation response. Frequency­controlled disturbance (FCR­D) reserve
must be able to [7]:
• Deliver a response within 2,5 seconds
• Supply 50% of the response within 5 seconds
• Supply the remaining 50% of the response within an additional 25 seconds
The Table (2.3) gathers all the information about the technical characteristics of FCR­D
products. It is important to mention that the allowed bid range of the reserve capacities
for individual plants in DK2 is between 1 MW and 70 MW, which is equal to 5% of the total
Nordic demand [9].
10
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.3: Technical characteristics of FCR­D up and FCR­D down regulation [11].
FCR­D up
FCR­D down
Units
Reaction time
50% in 5s
100% in 30s
50% in 5s
100% in 30s
Implementation
Linear
Linear
Limits
49,5 ­ 49,9
50,1 ­ 50,5
Hz
Relaxation time
20
20
min
Minimum bid
0.3
0.3
MW
Maximum bid
70
70
MW
Pricing
Pay as bid
Pay as bid
Market
DK ­ SE
DK ­ SE
Volume
602
581
MW
The technical characteristics of the FCR­D products, as previously discussed, are sum­
marized in Table 2.3.
2.2.4
Energy and price settlement
The FCR­D products in DK2 are per hour for the coming day of operation, hence the HPP
can bid a different volume and price each hour. This means that the hourly co­optimise
reserve capacities can be used in the bidding procedure. The power availability for FCR­D
products is acquired through the pay­as­bid mechanism, using the weighted average bid
market prices [€/MW] per hour for the DK2 price area [12]. The pay­as­bid mechanism
refers to a pricing system where the accepted bids in an auction are compensated at the
price they offered, rather than at a uniform clearing price. In other words, each successful
bidder (producer) receives payment based on their individual bid price, regardless of the
bids submitted by other participants. The pay­as­bid approach can encourage participants
to submit more competitive and accurate bids for their reserve capacities, as they are
directly rewarded based on their offered price.
Particularly, the payment for FCR­D up and FCR­D down service is determined based on
the available reserved power capacity [€/MW] per hour, rather than the actual activation
level[11].
ReservePaymentt = λFCR−D
t
· pFCR−D
t
(2.1)
The equation (2.1) is applicable for both FCR­D up and FCR­D down products, where
the t indicates the hourly base domain, λFCR−D
t
is the average price settlement [€/MW]
for reserved capacities and pFCR−D
t
represents the reserve capacity for FCR­D up and
FCR­D down regulation.
Regarding energy provided, delivering FCR­D products results in a significant reduction of
99.7% in energy throughput compared to FCR­N [11]. This happens due to the frequency
deviation typically being within the range of 49.9 ­ 51.1 Hz, which triggers the activation
of FCR­N. The frequency fluctuations, particularly in DK2 price area, very rarely reach
frequencies below 49,9 Hz and above 51.1 Hz, resulting in the non­activation of FCR­
D up and down regulations, respectively (Figure A.1). The energy delivery of FCR­D is
therefore negligible, and thus it is not essential for a Balance Responsible Party (BRP)
to be involved in providing this service. In cases where activation does take place, it is
treated and settled as a regular imbalance. [11].
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
11
==PAGE:22==
2.2.5
BESS participation
The integration of BESS into an HPP and its participation in renewable energy production
is growing rapidly. This happens due to the fact that a BESS has diverse applications,
such as its capabilities of providing energy arbitrage, reserve capacities, and reducing
power curtailment. In this section, BESS participation is evaluated from a theoretical
perspective in the ancillary service market. Their fast response enables them to contribute
to this market and provide primary reserve services, such as FCR­D, which is one of the
most crucial ancillary services [11]. By leveraging their quick power response, BESS
can potentially replace the frequency regulation requirements of larger generating units
with slower ramp rates, aligning with the transition towards renewable energy generation.
This introduces additional revenue opportunities and enhances energy utilization levels
for HPPs, consequently increasing profits.
When comparing FCR­N with FCR­D products, it is observed that historically, FCR­N has
generated higher revenues but involves greater energy throughput, leading to more bat­
tery cycles and gradual capacity degradation, which reduces energy capacity [11]. Con­
versely, FCR­D, despite having a lower price, demands less energy and is less frequently
activated. FCR­D up regulation is triggered at frequencies below 49.9 Hz, while FCR­D
down regulation activates at frequencies above 50.1 Hz. However, such scenarios rarely
occur in the Nordic synchronous area, resulting in infrequent activation of these products.
Delivering FCR­D reduces the BESS throughput by 99.7% compared to FCR­N, making
the tariffs and battery degradation negligible in comparison.
In summary, the selection of FCR services involves conversion losses, tariffs, and the
long­term impact on battery capacity [11]. In this project, FCR­D product in DK2 is pro­
vided by a BESS integrated into the HPP. The investment decision is investigated based
on a bidding strategy where the BESS will provide only reserve capacities to the TSO
and receive the reserve payment alone. This is based on the assumption of negligible
activation payment as there is low energy production. Section 3.3 analyzes the invest­
ment model’s constraints employed for the participation of the BESS in both the FCR­D
products and spot market.
12
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:23==
3
Deterministic model of the Hybrid
Power Plant
This chapter introduces the deterministic optimization model that is used to evaluate the
feasibility of the investment for the HPP that operates in DK2 price area. The HPP is
designed to provide power in the day­ahead and the ancillary service markets, engage in
energy arbitrage services, and offer frequency regulation to the grid providing FCR­D up
and FCR­D down reserve capacities. Figure 3.1 represents the methodology employed in
this project to evaluate the feasibility of investing in the HPP, with a specific emphasis on
the optimal sizing of each technology. The methodology encompasses a series of steps
designed to thoroughly assess the viability of the investment.
Figure 3.1: Methodology for sizing optimization of the HPP.
The mathematical model is constructed in steps, following the below sections. First, in
Section 3.1 the objective function’s purpose is defined, and the input parameters are
briefly described. In Section 3.2, all the input parameters, as well as the variables that
the model optimizes, are categorized. Finally, in Section 3.3 the investment model is
presented, to determine the size of the HPP, in order to fulfill the given restrictions and
operational requirements. It is important to note that the investment model is formulated
from the perspective of the power producer, taking into account specific market conditions.
Additionally, the model is designed to be independent of any type of incentives, tender
conditions, and demand profiles. However, the only limitation settled is that the hourly
power output cannot exceed 200 MW, restricted by the single grid connection point of the
HPP.
Tariffs are not included in the model, since the HPP produces energy for the grid, by its
participation in the spot market. The only way to absorb energy from the grid is through
the BESS during FCR­D down regulation, to reduce the frequency and stabilize it at 50Hz.
In that case, TSO and DSO tariffs as well as charge cycles are negligible, due to the low
energy throughput equal to 0.3% [11].
The investment model utilized in this project is a deterministic MILP (Mixed­Integer Lin­
ear Programming) optimization model. Unlike a stochastic model, this approach relies
on fixed input parameters and initial conditions to determine the output. Therefore, there
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
13
==PAGE:24==
is no consideration for uncertainty within the model. To address the charging and dis­
charging issue of the battery simultaneously, the MILP utilizes binary variables for the
battery’s power output. Additionally, the results of the model include integer variables,
which contribute to the comprehensive analysis and decision­making process.
3.1
Investment model
The model defines the maximum power capacity parameters as decision variables to
obtain the optimal size of each technology. The model implements as inputs the follow­
ing parameters: technology specifications, electricity prices, cost parameters, and hourly
time­series data indicating the maximum power potential of the wind and solar plants. In
detail, capacity factors for wind and solar power are included as time­dependent parame­
ters to assume the weather conditions. The electricity prices are referring the spot market
while for the reserve market, the weighted average bid prices in DK2 for FCR­D up and
FCR­D down are included. The HPP is participating in the spot market, in contrast with the
reserve market where only the battery is providing the above­mentioned services. Addi­
tionally, CAPEX, fixed operational cost and refurbishment cost of the BESS are included
as cost parameters in the model shown in Table 4.3. During an investment analysis,
the most important economic parameter that needs to be considered is the NPV, which
guarantees the profitability of an energy project for its lifetime. In detail, NPV method as­
sesses the profitability and feasibility of the investment, comparing the present value of
the project’s expected cash flows with the initial capital investment. The cash flows are
typically estimated for future periods, thus a discount rate is used to discount the future
cash flows to the present day. To be a project profitable, NPV must be positive and the
more positive value gets, the most profitable is.
NPV =
∑
y∈Y
[CashFlowy
(1 + r)y
] −Investment
(3.1)
NPV can be calculated as in equation 3.1, where the discounted cash flows encompass
both the revenues generated and the operational costs associated with the HPP [13]. On
the other hand, the investment mentioned refers to the total capital expenditure that is
incurred in the initial year, often referred to as year zero, of the HPP’s lifetime. By in­
corporating the revenues and operational costs into the NPV analysis, a comprehensive
evaluation of the project’s financial viability and profitability is achieved, taking into account
the significant upfront investment required for the HPP. To evaluate the financial viability
of the project, the NPV is calculated using Excel, assuming that the revenues generated
by the HPP will remain constant throughout its entire lifetime (Section 4.1). Since the op­
timization model is designed for a one­year simulation process, it focuses on determining
the maximum yearly cash flows. By applying the NPV calculation to these cash flows,
the project’s profitability can be assessed, providing insights into the long­term financial
prospects of the HPP. This method is further discussed in Chapter 6.
14
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Model nomenclature
This section is dedicated to the definition of the model parameters and variables used in
the deterministic investment model as stated below.
Sets
Each time step in the model is denoted with an index t, which lies in a set T of the total
amount of hours. In this project, the time frame considered for normalized power time
series and electricity prices is one year. As the lifetime of the HPP is assumed to be 20
years, the modeling horizon will span the same. Set Y is the project lifetime over which
the discounted cash­flows are calculated.
T
Hour index t ∈{1, 2, ...., 8760}
Y
Year index y ∈{1}
Parameters
SOCmin
[%]
Minimum share of available energy capacity into the BESS
SOCmax
[%]
Maximum share of available energy capacity into the BESS
nch
[%]
Charge efficiency of BESS
ndis
[%]
Discharge efficiency of BESS
λt
[€/MW]
Spot market price
λFCR−D down
t
[€/MW]
Average bid price for FCR­D down regulation
λFCR−D up
t
[€/MW]
Average bid price for FCR­D up regulation
csolar
fix,y
[€/MW]
Fixed operational cost of the solar system
cwind
fix,y
[€/MW]
Fixed operational cost of the wind farm
cbat
fix,y
[€/MW/yr]
Fixed capacity cost of the BESS
cE
fix,y
[€/MW/yr]
Fixed energy cost of the BESS
cbat
ref,y
[€/MW]
Refurbishment cost of the BESS
cE
ref,y
[€/MWh]
Refurbishment cost of electricity storage for the BESS
csolar
[€]
Capital cost of the solar system
cwind
[€]
Capital cost of the wind system
cbat
[€]
Capital cost of capacity power of the BESS
cE
[€]
Capital cost of energy storage of the BESS
CF wind
t
[%]
Capacity factor of the wind farm
CF solar
t
[%]
Capacity factor of the solar system
GC
[MW]
Grid constraint
OSch
t
[0,1]
Binary indicating charging status of BESS in period t
OSdis
t
[0,1]
Binary indicating discharging status of BESS in period t
∆tf
[h]
Relaxation time of FCR­D products
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
15
==PAGE:26==
Variables
P wind
max
[MW]
Installed capacity size of the wind farm
P solar
max
[MW]
Installed capacity size of the solar system
P bat
max
[MW]
Installed capacity size of the BESS
Ebat
max
[MWh]
Installed energy capacity of the BESS
pHPP
t
[MW]
Power output of the HPP
pFCR−D down
t
[MW]
Reserve capacity for FCR­D down regulation
pFCR−D up
t
[MW]
Reserve capacity for FCR­D up regulation
pbat
t
[MW]
Power output of the BESS
pwind
t
[MW]
Power output of the wind farm
psolar
t
[MW]
Power output of the solar system
Ebat
t
[MWh]
Energy stored in the BESS
pch
t
[MW]
Charge power of the BESS
pdis
t
[MW]
Discharge power of the BESS
SOEt
[%]
State of energy of the BESS
3.3
Model description
3.3.1
Objective function
The optimization model is one­year oriented and is focusing on the investment sizing
of the HPP by maximizing the financial gain of the power producer perspective. Thus
the objective function (3.2) is a maximization of the yearly cash flow by abstracting the
total expenses of the HPP, from the potential revenues. In this project, the revenues
indicate the cash inflows (equation 3.3) and are divided into two parts, the electricity sold
in the spot market produced by the whole HPP as well as the reserved capacities for
FCR­D regulation provided by the BESS. More specifically, the HPP has revenue for its
participation in the ancillary service market (DK2), by providing hourly reserve capacities
to the TSO for FCR­D down and FCR­up regulation. By considering the expenses of the
HPP and maximizing the yearly cash flow, the model aims to find the most profitable sizing
for the HPP.
max
CashFlow = Revy −OPEXfix
y
−CAPEX
(3.2)
where:
Revy =
∑
t∈Ty
[(λt · pHPP
t
) + (λFCR−D down
t
· pFCR−D down
t
)
+ (λFCR−D up
t
· pFCR−D up
t
)]
∀y ∈Y,∀t ∈T
(3.3)
OPEXfix
y
= (csolar
fix,y · P solar
max + cwind
fix,y · P wind
max + cbat
fix,y · P bat
max
+ cE
fix,y · Ebat
max)
∀y ∈Y
(3.4)
CAPEX = (csolar · P solar
max + cwind · P wind
max + cbat · P bat
max + cE · Ebat
max)
(3.5)
16
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:27==
The expenses of the HPP are influenced by fixed operational costs and capital costs
as indicated in equations (3.4) and (3.5) respectively. While variable operational
costs are disregarded due to improved design and manufacturing processes, the
fixed operational costs encompass installation, location, maintenance requirements,
and labor/material expenses for all technologies involved in the HPP. Although the
capital costs of renewable energy technologies like wind farms, solar systems, and
battery energy storage systems may be initially higher than those of traditional fossil
fuel plants, these costs are typically offset over the installation’s lifespan due to lower
operational costs and long­term savings. To compare these capital costs with annual
revenues and operational fixed costs, they are annualized as can be seen in Section
4.4, enabling a comprehensive assessment of the HPP’s financial aspects.
3.3.2
Constraints description
This subsection outlines the operational and technical constraints utilized in the de­
terministic investment model to evaluate the optimal sizing of the HPP for each case
scenario. These constraints play a crucial role in determining the optimal sizing of
the technologies within the investment model, ensuring that the chosen configura­
tion meets the operational and technical criteria necessary for the successful imple­
mentation of the project.
Solar and wind power limitation
Equations (3.6) and (3.7) introduce constraints on the hourly power production of
the onshore wind farm and solar system, respectively, by considering their maxi­
mum and minimum capacities. These equations ensure that the power output of
the wind farm and solar system remains within the defined limits. The normalized
time­series data, related to weather conditions, play a vital role in determining the
maximum production potential of solar and wind power. These data, expressed
through an hourly capacity factor, quantify the amount of energy that can be gen­
erated at any given time. The capacity factor information is further explained in
Section 4.2, analyzing its significance in assessing the power generation potential
of the renewable energy sources.
0 ≤pwind
t
≤CF wind
t
· P wind
max
∀t ∈T
(3.6)
0 ≤psolar
t
≤CF solar
t
· P solar
max
∀t ∈T
(3.7)
This is because capacity factors are dependent on the availability of solar radiance
and wind conditions, which can vary throughout the day and across different sea­
sons and locations. Therefore, predicting and using the capacity factors is crucial
for optimizing the production potential of the HPP.
BESS constraints
BESS throughput has an upper and lower bound defined in constraints (3.8) and
(3.9) showing that charging and discharging power have both positive values and
are limited by the installed BESS capacity. (3.10) constraint defines that when pbat
t
is positive, the battery is providing the grid with power, so it is discharging, whereas
when is negative is charging, absorbing energy from the grid. In detail, the pbat
t
is a virtual ”helping” variable, which indicates the net value of the battery state at
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
17
==PAGE:28==
each time step. With this variable, the battery production state is either negative or
positive.
0 ≤pch
t
≤P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.8)
0 ≤pdis
t
≤P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.9)
pbat
t
= pdis
t
−pch
t
∀t ∈T
(3.10)
Operational state of the BESS
To enforce the condition that the battery can only be charged using wind and solar
power, equation (3.11) is employed. This equation ensures that the charging power
of the battery cannot exceed the combined power generated by the wind farm and
solar system at each time step. Furthermore, it is essential to prevent simultaneous
charging and discharging of the BESS, taking into consideration real­life operational
limitations. To achieve this, constraints (3.12) to (3.14) are incorporated. These
constraints introduce binary variables, OSch
t
and OSdis
t
, which are set to 1 when
the battery is charging or discharging, respectively, and 0 otherwise. By utilizing
these constraints, it is ensured that the operational state of the BESS is accurately
represented, and the charging and discharging powers remain within the specified
upper bounds.
pch
t
≤pwind
t
+ psolar
t
∀t ∈T
(3.11)
0 ≤pch
t
≤OSch
t
· P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.12)
0 ≤pdis
t
≤OSdis
t
· P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.13)
OSch
t
+ OSdis
t
≤1
∀t ∈T
(3.14)
The introduced constraints play a vital role in managing the power flow through the
battery and ensuring its optimal operation. Firstly, the constraints guarantee that
the actual power flowing into or out of the battery does not exceed its maximum
power rating. This ensures the battery operates within its specified limits and avoids
any potential damage or inefficiency. Additionally, the constraints enforce that the
battery can only discharge or charge at any given time step but not both simultane­
ously. This is achieved through constraint (3.14), which activates the corresponding
power constraint (either (3.12) or (3.13)) and deactivates the other. For instance, if
OSch
t
= 1, indicating the battery is in the charging mode at time step t, constraint
(3.12) becomes active, allowing the battery to charge, while constraint (3.13) be­
comes inactive, preventing simultaneous charging and discharging. This constraint
structure ensures the battery operates in a controlled and efficient manner, main­
taining stability and preventing conflicting power flows.
18
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:29==
State of Energy constraints
The state of energy is stated as SOEt, and determines the remaining energy of
the BESS over time, compared with the total amount of energy stored. Constraint
(3.15) indicates the battery’s energy boundaries, where the SOCmin and SOCmax
are technical parameters showing the minimum and maximum share of the available
energy capacity and SOEt is a variable showing the energy capacity [MWh] of BESS
at each hour. So the actual minimum state of energy is the factor SOCmin multiplied
by the maximum energy capacity of the battery Ebat
max. An assumption is made for
model purposes, identifying that the initial state of energy is equal to 10% of the
maximum energy capacity, which means that the battery starts its operation fully
discharged and for the first hours needs to charge to be able to provide FCR­D up
regulation. For the following hours SOEt is calculated as the sum of the state of
energy of the previous hour SOEt−1 with the charged energy and subtracting the
discharge amount (3.16).
According to the constraints (3.12) and (3.13), when the battery is discharging at
time step t (i.e. OSdis
t
= 1), the second term (
1
ndis · pdis
t ) of the equation (3.16) will be
non­zero, and it represents the amount of energy taken out of the battery’s state of
energy due to discharging. ∆t is equal to 1 hour since the model is hourly oriented.
SOCmin · Ebat
max ≤SOEt ≤SOCmax · Ebat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.15)
SOEt =SOEt−1 + ∆t · (nch · pch
t −
1
ndis
· pdis
t )
∀t ∈T
(3.16)
In the given equation, the parameters nch and ndis represent the charging and dis­
charging efficiencies, respectively. These efficiencies represent the fraction of en­
ergy that is effectively consumed or delivered by the battery during the charging or
discharging process. The equation calculates the net change in the battery’s SOE
by subtracting the contribution of the battery’s discharging process from the con­
tribution of the charging process. This net change in energy is then added to the
previous state of energy, SOEt−1, to determine the updated state of energy, SOEt,
at each time step. Essentially, the equation accounts for the efficiency losses during
charging and discharging operations and calculates the net impact on the battery’s
energy storage. By tracking the changes in the state of energy over time, it be­
comes possible to evaluate the battery’s performance and monitor its energy levels
for effective utilization and management.
FCR­D up and FCR­D down regulation constraints
Chapter 2 is mentioned in relation to this investment optimization model, where the
only technology capable of providing ancillary services is the BESS. In order to reg­
ulate the amount of reserve capacity offered by the BESS for FCR­D up and FCR­D
down services, specific constraints are implemented, allowing the model to get the
co­optimized capacities. Constraints (3.17) and (3.18) define the minimum and max­
imum power dispatch of the BESS and the allocation of FCR­D, respectively. These
constraints ensure that the battery always maintains a certain level of capacity re­
served to fulfill the hourly reserve capacities for the TSO. The provided Figure 3.2,
illustrates the installed power capacity of the BESS, where the limitation for charging
and discharging activities are within the blue range, whereas the green areas are
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
19
==PAGE:30==
allocated for frequency response services, namely FCR­D up and FCR­D down reg­
ulation. It is important to note that in the case of activation of the FCR­D products,
the BESS ceases its participation in the spot market. This means that it suspends
charging and discharging activities in order to prioritize the provision of FCR­D ser­
vices. However, this particular scenario is not investigated in this project, as the
activation of FCR­D services is infrequent in Nordic countries.
Figure 3.2: BESS power dispatch diagram for the participation in FCR­D up and FCR­D
down services
pbat
t
−pFCR−D down
t
≥−P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.17)
pbat
t
+ pFCR−D up
t
≤P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.18)
pFCR−D down
t
≥0
∀t ∈T
(3.19)
pFCR−D up
t
≥0
∀t ∈T
(3.20)
The battery capacity at time step (t) pbat
t
has to be co­optimized with the bidding
reserve, as both FCR­D services are asynchronous and activated in different fre­
quency ranges. For instance, for a baseline pbat
t , reserving a capacity for FCR­D
down regulation pFCR−Ddown
t
implies that the battery must always be able to pro­
vide the response under the maximum activation. For example, constraint (3.17)
ensures that the set point of the battery is greater than the minimum power capacity
(−P bat
max), even in case of full activation of the reserve.
Additionally, to guarantee the availability of energy from the BESS for providing FCR­
D services, it is essential to impose constraints that ensure sufficient energy is stored
in the BESS at each time step. These constraints are designed to maintain an ap­
propriate energy reserve in the BESS, enabling it to either supply or absorb energy
from the system when required for FCR­D services. By implementing the following
mathematical formulations, the model ensures that the BESS possesses the nec­
essary energy capacity to fulfill its role in providing both FCR­D up or FCR­D down
reserves, contributing to the overall stability and reliability of the power system.
SOEt + (pFCR−D down
t
· nch · ∆tf) ≤SOCmax · Ebat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.21)
20
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:31==
SOEt −(pFCR−D up
t
·
1
ndis
· ∆tf) ≥SOCmin · Ebat
max
∀t ∈T
(3.22)
This new version of the constraint (3.15), limits the energy of the BESS, taking into
account the SOE at each time step, the reserve capacity, and the relaxation time
that the battery needs to restore the frequency within 20 minutes [10]. Particularly,
in constraint (3.21), the summation of the state of energy and the reserved capacity
for FCR­D down product, which is multiplied by the relaxation time ∆tf and the
charge efficiency, has to be lower than the maximum energy battery limit. This
occurs, due to the fact that the BESS is charging while it provides FCR­D down
regulation, absorbing in that way energy from the system that has to be lower than
the maximum energy capacity of the battery. The same applies for (3.22), where
the battery provides the reserved capacity for FCR­D up while is discharging, and
its energy cannot exceed its lower bound energy capacity.
HPP ­ Grid limitation
The equality constraint (3.23) refers to the actual power capacity produced by the
HPP in the spot market, which combines the contributions from wind, solar, and bat­
tery plants at each time step (t). Conversely, equation (3.24) represents a constraint
that imposes a limit on the total investment size of the HPP. This limitation is based
on the combined production capacity of the solar, wind, and battery components of
the system, as they share a single connection point to the grid. Its purpose is to
prevent grid congestion, ensuring that the total production capacity of the HPP at
each time step does not exceed the available grid capacity (200 MW). By adhering
to this limit, the HPP avoids overloading the grid and the undesirable consequence
of disconnections. Additionally, a lower bound is introduced to restrict the consumed
(charged) power of the HPP, which is provided by the energy storage system, al­
though it is never the case in this project.
pwind
t
+ psolar
t
+ pbat
t
= pHPP
t
∀t ∈T
(3.23)
−GC ≤pHPP
t
≤GC
∀t ∈T
(3.24)
In order to ensure the system’s security and maintain energy balance when the HPP
participates in the ancillary service market by providing FCR­D reserve capacities,
an extension of the aforementioned equations is introduced into the optimization
model. These extensions consider the provision of FCR­D reserves by the HPP,
allowing it to contribute to grid stability and regulation. By incorporating these addi­
tional constraints, the optimization model accounts for the HPP’s role in maintaining
a balanced production, thus enhancing the overall reliability and efficiency of the
system.
pHPP
t
+ pFCR−D up
t
≤GC
∀t ∈T
(3.25)
pHPP
t
−pFCR−D down
t
≥−GC
∀t ∈T
(3.26)
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
21
==PAGE:32==
In detail the constraints (3.25) and (3.26) are crucial in ensuring the safe operation
of the HPP during FCR­D up and FCR­D down regulation. These constraints ef­
fectively limit the power output of the HPP, preventing it from exceeding the grid
constraint, which is set at 200 MW. By incorporating these constraints, the system
takes into consideration the HPP’s total hourly production and the available reserve
capacities provided by the BESS. This approach guarantees the system’s safety
and stability, as discussed in greater detail in Section 5.3.
22
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:33==
4
Data inputs
4.1
Assumptions
In order to evaluate the optimal outcome of the investment optimization model for this
project, a series of assumptions have been made. Firstly, it is important to clarify that the
HPP project is subsidy­free, indicating that it is not financed through a loan or any external
financial assistance. The expected lifetime of the wind and solar plants is assumed to be
20 years, whereas the BESS lifetime is 10 years [14]. Taking into account the warranty
of the BESS and including refurbishment cost in BESS capital cost, a total lifetime equal
to 20 years is taken into consideration. Moreover, no tender conditions are taken into
account, however, a specific grid constraint of 200 MW is considered. This assumption
limits the hourly power output produced by the HPP, ensuring that it does not exceed
200 MW and gets in this way a realistic sizing of the HPP by the investment model. The
maximum hourly power produced is determined by the installed capacities and capacity
factors referred to in Section 4.2.
For the one­year simulation process, the hourly time­series data, indicating the capacity
factors from the year 2019 are considered for the entire lifetime of wind and solar plants,
to predict the hourly power production. As it can be seen in Section 4.2 an assumption of
similar capacity factors is made, considering that the same time­series data applied for the
year 2021. The decision to rely on capacity factor data from the year 2019 instead of 2021
stems from the unavailability of data for the latter year. In the main case simulation of the
project, the model employs the hourly electricity spot prices in 2021 as input (Section 4.6).
Consequently, to align the data inputs, the assumption is made that the capacity factors
observed in 2019 exhibit similar patterns as those anticipated in 2021. This assumption
allows for a consistent and coherent analysis, despite the absence of specific time­series
data for the year of interest.
For the FCR­D products, the weighted average market prices [€/MWh] are used [12] to get
the power available through the pay­as­bid mechanism. For FCR­D up, hourly average
bid prices from 2021 are utilized, while for FCR­D down, as it is a new service introduced
in 2022, there are no available data for the reference year. To estimate the average price
for FCR­D down in 2021, the correlation between FCR­D up and FCR­D down average
prices is examined, assuming it remains the same as in 2022. This assumption yields
an average price of 45 €/MWh for FCR­D down and is based on the weak correlation
between electricity spot market prices and FCR­D prices. It would be more profitable if all
the prices (spot market and FCR­D product) were referred to the same year, in this case,
2022. However, it is important to consider the context of the energy crisis that occurred
in 2022. During this crisis, the average electricity price reached an unusually high level of
210.15 €/MWh, making it an unrealistic basis for determining the optimal sizing solution.
Last, to find the optimal NPV and calculate the IRR and payback time of the project, an
assumption is made to include the same revenues for the next 20 years and multiply them
with the discount factor to estimate their future value (Section 4.4). This assumption is
based on the expectation that day­ahead electricity prices will remain around 60 €/MWh
until 2035 and considering the revenue sources from energy sales in the spot market and
provision of reserve capacities in the ancillary service market, this approach allows for
practical estimation of future revenue streams. It is important to acknowledge that while
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
23
==PAGE:34==
this assumption simplifies the financial assessment, it will not capture potential changes
or fluctuations in electricity prices and market dynamics beyond 20 years.
4.2
Wind and solar data
The capacity factor refers to the actual energy output of the wind farm and solar plant,
relative to their maximum potential output over a given period of time, typically a year. It
is expressed as a percentage and provides an indication of how efficiently wind and solar
power plants are operating. Additionally, the capacity factor of wind and solar is a key
metric for investors, meaning that a higher capacity factor means higher power output
and higher return on investment. The model incorporates hourly time­series data that
are specifically sourced from the year 2019 for the DK2 area, received from the website
Renewable­Ninja [15].
The potential power output of the HPP can vary depending on several factors, including
weather conditions such as wind speed and solar radiance, and location. Onshore wind
farms typically have capacity factors ranging from 25% to 45%. For the year 2019, the
average capacity factor is 37% for wind, while for solar is 12.9%, meaning for example
that the solar system generates 12.9% of the maximum amount of electricity if it operated
at its full capacity throughout the entire year.
Figure 4.1: Correlation between wind and solar power for the year 2019
To provide a clearer perspective of the capacity factors for wind and solar through a year,
the data are normalized into weekly variations. This normalization process allows for
a more concise and easily understandable representation of the fluctuations in capacity
factors over time. According to the data presented in (4.1), it is observed that in the year
2019, the wind power output surpassed the potential output of solar power. This trend
occurred even during the summer season, with the capacity factor of the solar plant being
lower than that of the wind farm.
Over the past five years, the weather conditions in the DK2 price area have exhibited
consistency, characterized by minimal fluctuations in wind speed and solar irradiation. In
detail, the capacity factor for onshore turbines has been fairly stable for several decades
24
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:35==
[16]. These stable weather conditions have allowed for a reliable assumption that the
capacity factors for wind and solar production remain similar.
To ensure the validity of using hourly data for capacity factors from 2019 and electricity
spot prices from 2021, a comprehensive assessment of the correlation between these two
years is performed. This analysis aimed to establish the degree of similarity and relation­
ship between the capacity factors observed in 2019 and the corresponding electricity spot
prices in 2021 and verify this assumption. For analysis purposes, the command ”COR­
REL” is used in Excel to find the correlation of the time­series data between the two years.
The first case examines the correlation between the electricity spot prices and the capac­
ity factors for wind and solar for the same year, 2019. The findings revealed that solar
capacity factors have a weak correlation with electricity prices, indicating minimal impact
on pricing. Conversely, wind capacity factors exhibited a stronger compared to solar, but
still a weak correlation (­0,341), indicating their influence on spot prices, with a negative
correlation implying that increased wind power output led to decreased electricity prices.
Furthermore, the correlation of 2019 wind and solar capacity factors with spot prices in
2021 is explored. The results showed that again solar capacity factors had little influence
on spot prices, while wind capacity factors exhibited a correlation with spot prices slightly
similar to that of the 2019 data (­0,214). Despite the difference in years, these findings
support the assumption that 2019 capacity factors can be used for simulating the year
2021.
4.3
BESS technical parameters
In this section, the technical parameters associated with the BESS integrated into the HPP,
are described. It is assumed that the HPP operates under a constant operating condition
throughout its 20­year lifetime, taking into account the warranties provided. As indicated
in Section 4.1, the assumed lifetime for wind and solar plants is 20 years. Additionally,
the BESS has a specified warranty period of 10 years and to ensure a total lifetime of 20
years, the inclusion of it is considered [14].
Table 4.1: Technical parameters of BESS
Lithium­ion battery
SOCmax
90
%
SOCmin
10
%
Lifetime warranty
10
years
nch, ndis
95
%
Table 4.1 presents the BESS parameters utilized in the investment optimization model.
For simulation purposes, the battery is assumed to be discharged at the start of its op­
eration having an initial SOCmin = 10%. This implies that it requires a charging period
during the initial hours to enable its provision of FCR­D up and energy arbitrage services.
Furthermore, the losses due to energy transition are similar for both charge and discharge
procedures, leading to an overall efficiency of the battery equal to 95%. In this project, the
BESS is designed to have high efficiency and zero degradation. This decision is made to
align with the high capital cost associated with the BESS and to enhance its profitability
within the model. By incorporating high efficiency and eliminating degradation, the BESS
is optimized for maximum performance, making it a more financially viable solution.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
25
==PAGE:36==
4.4
Cost estimation
Since the simulation in Python is for one year, the total capital cost of each technology
is not aligned with the annual cash flows. To make comparable the total investment cost
with the yearly revenues and O&M costs, the Equivalent Annual Cost (EAC) method is
used to annualize the CAPEX of each technology and make them comparable [17]. The
reason for this is to evaluate the future value of the present capital expenditure, taking
into account risks and inflation.
EAC = CAPEX · r · (1 + r)n
(1 + r)n −1
(4.1)
where the CAPEX is the total capital cost of each technology [€/MW], n indicates the
lifetime of the HPP and r is the discount factor.
In equation 4.1 the numerator (r·(1+r)n) represents the discount factor, which discounts
the capital costs of the investment to their present value. The denominator ((1 + r)n −1)
accounts for the annuity factor, which adjusts for the periodicity of the capital expenditures
over the investment’s life. By dividing the total discounted cost by the annuity factor, the
formula provides the equivalent annual cost, allowing for a fair comparison of costs on an
annualized basis.
For this method an assumed lifetime of the HPP equal to 20 years is used, as well as a
discount rate equal to 6% (Section 4.5). The expected lifetimes of wind and solar plants
are 20 years each. On the other hand, the BESS is estimated to have a lifetime of 10
years before requiring cell replacement. To account for the refurbishment cost in the
BESS’s capital expenditure, it can be considered that the total battery lifespan aligns with
the 20 year time frame of the renewable plants. Therefore, taking into consideration the
necessary cell replacement and associated refurbishment cost, it can be assumed that
the BESS will operate effectively for a total period of 20 years.
4.4.1
Capital expenditures ­ CAPEX
For an investment model, the capital cost is the most important factor that influences the
sizing of the HPP. The investment costs of each technology are presented in Table 4.2 and
Table 4.3. For this project, the grid connection cost with a total amount equal to 37k €/MW,
is distributed among each capital cost of the wind and solar plant, since there is a single
connection point for the entire plant. This includes costs spend on transformers, substa­
tions, transmission lines and connection to the local transmission network. Considering
the photovoltaic system, capital cost is divided into three main categories, hardware, in­
stallation, and soft costs. The first two include costs related to the inverter and AC cabling
installation. However, it is worth mentioning that when PV and battery are coupled with
the wind turbine inverter, is possible for only one DC­DC converter to be used, resulting
in cost reduction. On the other hand, soft costs encompass the typical expenses asso­
ciated with the installation of a renewable energy plant, such as financial costs, licensing
and system design [2]. For example, involves costs to obtain the necessary permits for
the construction and development of an HPP as well as for environmental regulations.
Regarding the wind farm, its capital cost can be categorized into three main components.
First, the turbine cost includes various expenses regarding different wind turbine’s compo­
nents, such as blades, gearbox, rotor, etc. On the other hand, civil work costs are related
to the construction activities for site preparation and wind turbine tower establishment.
26
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:37==
The planning and project cost is similar to the soft costs related to solar systems and be­
longs to the group of so­called balance­of­system costs. This includes the expenditures
related to the planning and execution of the wind power project, such as licenses and
feasibility and development studies.
Table 4.2: Costs of wind and solar power [2]
Type
Wind [€/MW]
PV [€/MW]
CAPEX
968k
461k
Fixed OPEX
12.8k
8149
Grid connection cost
37k
Table 4.3: Costs of battery energy storage systems [2]
Type
BESS Capacity [€/MW]
BESS Energy [€/MWh]
CAPEX
137k
181.5k
Fixed OPEX
18k
10k
Refurbishment cost
41.1k
54.6k
Considering the BESS, it is observed that the components of the battery tend to scale
in relation to the nominal energy capacity, whereas the components involved in the grid
connection tend to be formed more in relation to the battery power rating. For this reason,
the capital expenditures associated with the BESS are divided into two categories, those
related to energy capacity and those related to power capacity [2]. The energy capital
cost (cE) refers to the battery pack cost which includes the cells and management of
the battery system. Contrarily, power conversion cost, grid control management control
and balance cost are categorized into the power­related cost [18]. Furthermore, for this
project’s purposes, an additional cost has been added to the BESS CAPEX, so­called
warranty costs, which encompass the installation and refurbishment costs of battery cells.
It is assumed that the battery will be refurbished or replaced, and the warranty renewed
every ten years against a cost. This cost is assumed at 30% of the initial investment cost
of the battery. In this case, this particular extra cost has been annualized and added to
the CAPEX [14].
Battery costs are projected to continue a downward trend and storage is now being seri­
ously looked at for several different applications on the grid. The downside is that costs
are still fairly high and, without regulatory requirements or subsidies, BESS still may not
be cost­effective. To enhance the desirability of BESS in the optimization model and facil­
itate its selection, a significant reduction in the capital cost of the battery can be applied.
By applying an order of magnitude reduction, typically on a scale of 10−1, the capital cost
of the battery is significantly decreased. This cost­reduction strategy aims to make BESS
more competitive and attractive as a feasible solution (Subsection 5.6.2).
4.4.2
Operation and maintenance expenditure ­ OPEX
The operation and maintenance cost of each technology in the HPP can be seen in Table
4.2 and Table 4.3 as well. For this project purpose, it is assumed that the variable O&M
costs of the HPP are disregarded and only fixed costs are considered. This occurs due
to the improved design and operation of these technologies through the years, allowing
the producers to avoid high variable O&M costs [2]. As outlined in the reference [18], it is
observed that the total costs associated with various battery technologies have been con­
sistently decreasing over the years. Additionally, when considering the cost breakdown,
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
27
==PAGE:38==
the variable costs attributed to Li­Ion Batteries are relatively negligible in comparison to
other cost components.
4.5
Discount rate
In NPV analysis, the future value of expected cash flows is compared to the present value
of the capital invested in a hybrid project. To determine the present value, future cash flows
are adjusted using a discount rate, which takes into account the time value of money. This
means that money available today is considered more valuable than an equal amount in
the future. Additionally, higher discount rate results in a lower future value of cash flows.
The discount rate is a crucial input to the economic valuation and has a large impact on
investment. A company can establish the discount rate by considering the expected rate
of return by investors or the cost of capital obtained from different sources. Investors can
compare the returns on an investment project with returns on similar­sized and risk­level
investments in the securities market. The discount rate used for discounting future values
into present values should reflect the cost of capital of the project. Usually, a project has
two sources of capital: equity and debt (WACC). They both have different characteristics
and thus different costs. The WACC reflects the current capital structure of the company
and should be used for discounting cash flows that bear a similar risk to the overall firm.
In Denmark, the social discount rate is equal to 4% (Danish Energy Agency, 2013) and
the private discount rate is higher, because it includes inflation and industry­specific risks,
thus a 6% discount rate is estimated for the NPV calculation [19].
Discountfactor =
1
(1 + r)year
(4.2)
For the deterministic model used in this project, the simulation is conducted for a duration
of one year to determine the appropriate sizing of the HPP and to estimate various finan­
cial aspects such as the total investment cost, yearly operational costs, and revenues.
Additionally, to evaluate the economic feasibility of the project, a discount factor (equation
4.2) is applied to the cash flows over the entire lifetime of the HPP using Excel. In detail,
considering that the total investment cost is incurred in year zero of the HPP’s lifetime,
the discount factor is set to 1. This signifies that the investment cost is accounted for in
today’s value, without any adjustment for the time elapsed. By applying this approach, the
financial analysis takes into consideration the present­day equivalence of the investment
and facilitates a more accurate assessment of the project’s economic feasibility.
4.6
Electricity prices
The optimization model incorporates hourly electricity prices obtained from the spot mar­
ket in the year 2021, specifically focusing on the DK2 price area. These prices are based
on Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), meaning that there are no gaps or extra hours,
and the issue of summer/winter time is disregarded. The hourly data is sourced from
Energinet’s site, which is the TSO responsible for the DK2 price area [20].
28
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.4: Average electricity prices for the years 2020, 2021, 2022.
Year
Average electricity price [€/MWh]
2019
40.03
2020
28.41
2021
87.87
2022
210.15
Table 4.4 illustrates a significant surge in electricity prices in Denmark over these three
years. More specifically, there was a substantial price increase during the energy crisis
in 2022, while electricity prices were relatively lower in 2020. In order to ensure a more
realistic optimal solution, hourly prices from 2021 were utilized and assumed to be the
same throughout the lifetime of the HPP (Section 4.1).
Figure 4.2: Comparison between electricity spot market prices in DK2 in years 2020, 2021
and 2022
Again, to provide a more visible perspective of the difference between the scale of the
electricity spot market prices during the years, the data are normalized into weekly varia­
tions and compared in Figure 4.2.
For this project, the reserve power capacities for FCR­D down and FCR­D up regulation
are settled through the optimization model, setting as input the weighted average bid
prices [€/MWh] per hour, for the DK2 price area, published by Energinet [12]. According
to these prices, the co­optimized reserve capacities of the BESS are estimated.
Taking into consideration the last 2 years with the heavily increased day­ahead prices, an
impact on the ancillary services markets has been observed. Even though FCR­D is a
very fast service with little energy, the availability (capacity that can’t be bid to the energy
markets) often has the day­ahead as an opportunity cost/revenue. However, the correla­
tion is not strong, but there is definitely some dependency when looking at averages over
longer periods.
The pricing for the FCR­D product follows a specific pattern. The hourly bid price for
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
29
==PAGE:40==
FCR­D up regulation is based on the year 2021, with an average yearly bid price equal
to 89,71 [€/MWh]. Since the FCR­D down product was introduced in January 2022 [11],
there are no prices to include for 2021. For this reason, an assumption is made based on
the correlation between the FCR­D up and FCR­D down in the year 2022.
Table 4.5: Weighted average bid prices [€/MWh] in DK2 for 2021 and 2022.
Year
FCR­D up [€/MWh]
FCR­D down [€/MWh]
2021
89,71
45,59
2022
63,17
32,11
As it can be seen in Table (4.5), the prices for 2022 have a correlation factor equal to
0,508, which indicates that the FCR­D down average bid price has almost the half value
of the FCR­D up price. This correlation would be expected to be the same for the year
2021, resulting in an average bid price for FCR­D down equal to 45,59 [€/MWh].
In this way, to have a complete one­year simulation and a more realistic perspective on
the results, 2021 is chosen as a reference year, including electricity spot prices, FCR­D
up and FCR­D down bid prices.
Figure 4.3: Comparison between FCR­D up price in year 2021 and FCR­D down price in
year 2022
Figure 4.3 clearly depicts that the prices for FCR­D down in the year 2022 were signif­
icantly higher compared to the prices for FCR­D up in the year 2021, aligning with the
existent trend observed in the electricity prices during 2022.
30
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:41==
5
Results
This chapter presents the outcomes obtained from the deterministic model. Firstly, the
primary case illustrates the optimal sizing scenario, where the investment model optimizes
the sizing of the HPP by maximizing the annual cash flows of the investment. Several
simulations are examined and analyzed to validate the model’s accuracy and the results,
obtaining the optimal investment decision.
Python is used as the optimization model for simulation purposes, utilizing the ”Gurobi”
solver tool. The simulation is conducted for one year and involves input parameters such
as annualized capital expenditures, technology­related costs, capacity factors, and elec­
tricity prices. Through an iterative optimization process, the optimally installed capacities,
annual revenues, and operational costs as well as the total investment cost are com­
puted. These results are subsequently exported to an Excel spreadsheet to discount the
cash flows, assuming the same revenues throughout HPP’s lifetime (Section 4.1) and de­
termining key financial metrics such as the payback time, NPV, and IRR. For the NPV
calculation, the discounted cash­flows are used (Section 4.5), and the total investment
is paid in the year 0, whereas for the IRR calculation, the free cash­flows are taken into
account.
5.1
HPP sizing
In this project, the HPP combines an onshore wind farm, a solar system, and a BESS,
located in the DK2 area. The HPP optimizes operational efficiency and grid integration
by co­locating these assets and connecting them at the same grid connection point. Fur­
thermore, the HPP shares a common transformer, enabling seamless connection to the
external grid infrastructure. This integrated approach facilitates effective management of
renewable energy generation and storage, enhancing grid stability and maximizing the
utilization of clean energy resources.
The investment model utilized for the simulations in this project does not incorporate spe­
cific tender compliance criteria, such as the implementation of a demand profile. In other
words, the model does not take into account the specific requirements or constraints out­
lined in tender agreements regarding electricity demand. The only assumed tender limita­
tion is the single grid connection point capacity, which has to be lower or equal to 200 MW
each hour. As depicted in Figure 5.1, the HPP generates energy for the spot market and
actively participates in the ancillary service market. The HPP offers reserve capacities
for FCR­D down and FCR­D up regulations in this market, allowing the TSO to use these
capacities in case of frequency deviations and maintain the stability of the grid (Chapter
2).
Contrary, while the HPP provides FCR­D down regulation, the battery has always avail­
able energy capacity to charge from the grid and store the excess energy, reducing in this
way the system’s frequency, and stabilizing it to 50Hz. This is the only case where the
battery absorbs energy from the grid. On this occasion, the TSO pays the HPP to pro­
vide this ancillary service, and there are no tariffs to be paid from the producer’s point of
view [11]. Conversely, when the BESS contributes to FCR­D up regulation, it discharges
energy into the grid to increase the frequency and restore it close to its nominal value.
A significant aspect of the HPP’s operation is the inclusion of the BESS, which contributes
to the power output of the HPP as well, providing energy arbitrage service. It is important
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
31
==PAGE:42==
to note that the BESS exclusively charges from the HPP using excess wind and solar
power when these sources are unable to sell their surplus energy to the grid due to the
constraint of a single grid connection point.
Figure 5.1: Power flow diagram of the grid­supporting HPP
For the main case scenario, there are two different simulations regarding the optimal siz­
ing of the HPP. In the first case (Case 1) the HPP produces energy only in the spot market,
whereas in the second scenario (Case 2), it provides FCR­D reserve capacities for the
ancillary service market in DK2 price area. The investment decision revolves around ex­
ploring a bidding strategy in which the BESS exclusively offers hourly reserve capacities
to the TSO and receives reserve payments independently. A specific day (21/06/2021) is
selected for all the main case simulations to evaluate and compare the variations in the
output profiles of each technology. The results for the two investment models are com­
pared below. The following Table 5.1 illustrates the particular inputs and characteristics
that have been used, aligning with the assumptions discussed in Section 4.1.
Table 5.1: Characteristics of the two main case scenarios
Characteristics
Simulation time
8760
h
Electricity price
2021
year
Grid connection
200
MW
Discount rate
6
%
HPP lifetime
20
years
Relaxation time of FCR­D
20
min
Reserve capacities (<=)
10
MW
FCR­D up price
2021
year
FCR­D down price
45
€/MWh
32
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:43==
5.2
Case 1: HPP participates in the Spot market
In this scenario, the investment decision of the HPP is analyzed considering its participa­
tion solely in the spot market. This implies that HPP’s revenue is derived exclusively from
selling the power it produces directly into the spot market.
Table 5.2: Optimal sizing of the HPP for Case 1
Sizing
Wind capacity
504,5
MW
Solar capacity
11,9
MW
BESS capacity
0
MW
BESS energy
0
MWh
Table 5.2 presents the optimally installed capacities for wind and solar energy. Interest­
ingly, the solar plant has a significantly lower capacity compared to the onshore wind
farm, despite being more cost­effective in terms of capital expenditure. This difference
can be attributed to the area’s limited solar availability, leading to a lower capacity fac­
tor compared to wind. Consequently, the model favors the installation of additional wind
capacity, despite the higher capital expenditure, because of the area’s abundant wind re­
sources and the potential for higher wind energy production. On the other hand, battery
integration is not part of this particular case, since its capital cost is very high and it is not
profitable for the model to invest in it. The over­planting of the HPP is enforced for opti­
mal leverage of wind and solar anti­correlation, taking into account the hourly maximum
power limitation equal to 200 MW, due to the single grid connection point. In this way,
the fluctuations in energy production are balanced out and a more stable and predictable
energy production is provided by the HPP.
Figure 5.2: Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units
The power output graph depicted in Figure 5.2, shows the production of wind and so­
lar plants during the day 21/06/2021. During the midday, low solar production can be
observed compared with wind production, given the installed capacities. The power cur­
tailed for that day is observed from 11 am to 4 pm and is equal to 6,11% of the total energy
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
33
==PAGE:44==
production that day. For the whole year, a total power curtailed is equal to 28,4% indicat­
ing the need for a BESS integration. However, it seems that investment in a BESS is not
an option due to its high capital cost. In other words, the optimization model prefers to
oversize the wind farm and have power curtailment, rather than install a battery to store
the excess energy. This behavior stems from the absence of a penalty or cost associated
with power curtailment within the model. Consequently, without any explicit incentive to
avoid curtailing power, the model prioritizes maximizing energy production from the wind
farm while disregarding the potential benefits of incorporating a BESS for energy storage
and utilization.
In the bellow Table 5.3, the economic­related results of the investment are depicted.
Table 5.3: Results of the investment model for Case 1
Results
Annual revenue
115.951.811,43
€
Annual operational cost
6.555.642,19
€
Investment cost
503.467.977,54
€
NPV
751.297.465
€
IRR
21,3
%
Payback time
5,55
years
Considering the results, a feasible investment is made for the HPP including wind and
solar plants. The IRR is greater than the discount rate, and the NPV is positive showing
that the investment is profitable with a payback time equal to 5,55 years.
Figure 5.3: Revenues compared with the electricity spot price for Case 1
Figure 5.3 illustrates the weekly revenue trend of the HPP, aligning with the electricity
spot prices throughout the year 2021. As the HPP’s only source of revenue comes from
selling energy in the spot market, the revenue pattern aligns with the fluctuations in elec­
tricity prices during this period. Furthermore, a notable observation is the upward trend
of electricity prices and subsequent revenue increase towards the end of the year. This
surge can be attributed to the onset of the energy crisis period in 2022. As the demand for
34
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:45==
energy rises and supply becomes constrained, market dynamics drive electricity prices
to escalate, consequently rising the revenues generated by the HPP. This observation
highlights the sensitivity of the HPP’s revenue stream to external factors such as energy
market fluctuations and underscores the significance of incorporating such considerations
in investment analyses.
5.3
Case 2: HPP participates in the Spot and Ancillary
service markets
In Case 2, the HPP expands its participation beyond the spot market and also engages
in the ancillary service markets, providing FCR­D up and FCR­D down reserve capacities
to the TSO, in case of frequency fluctuations (Section 2). For simulation purposes a
limitation in FCR­D regulation has been taken into account, allowing the HPP to provide
less or equal to 10 MW reserve capacities (Table 5.1). This limitation is made to gain more
reasonable results for the BESS, since the total reserve obligation for Energinet in DK2
is 44 MW for FCR­D up and 43 MW for FCR­D down (Table 2.2). Although, the allowed
reserves that an individual plant can provide for the FCR product is equal to 5% of the
total Nordic demand (=70 MW) [8].
Table 5.4: Optimal sizing of the HPP for Case 2
Sizing
Wind capacity
494,14
MW
Solar capacity
6,57
MW
BESS capacity
10
MW
BESS energy
8,33
MWh
As in Case 1 discussed, the capital expenditure for installing a BESS is very high for
energy arbitrage purposes. In this case, the BESS does not participate in the power
output of the HPP and only charges slightly to offset its losses. This limited utilization is
clarified by the installed energy capacity of the BESS being lower than its power capacity.
However, reserve capacities add an extra profit to the HPP, thus the model installs only
the prerequisite capacity for BESS to be able to provide FCR­D up and down regulation.
To meet the constraint of providing reserve capacities equal to or less than 10 MW, the
model precisely installed the necessary BESS capacity, since it is an optimization model
and tries to maximize HPP’s revenues and therefore the NPV. Notably, compared with
the Case 1 scenario, the share of renewables in the HPP is slightly changed. Wind and
solar plant sizes declined, respecting in this way the grid constraint limitation, since an
investment in BESS is made.
As previously defined in Section 3.3, only the BESS is able to provide the reserve capac­
ities for the FCR­D regulation. To meet this demand, the BESS needs to have enough
capacity to fulfill both FCR­D up and FCR­D down services simultaneously. For this rea­
son, as it can be observed in Figure 5.4, the SOE of the BESS tends to hover around
half of its nominal value, ensuring that it can effectively respond to the demand for both
reserve capacities (see equations 3.21 and 3.22). Notably, in week 36 a reduction in SOE
of BESS is noted, leading to a decrease in the available FCR­D up reserve capacity that
the BESS can provide in the event of a frequency decrease.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.4: FCR­D reserve capacities aligning with the SOE
For a more visible perspective of the reserve capacities provided by the BESS for a
one­year simulation, the capacities are normalized into weekly variations. Despite the
fluctuations observed in the weekly FCR­D up reserves, it is noteworthy that the BESS
consistently provides stable FCR­D down reserve capacities equal to 10 MW, through­
out the entire year. This consistency is achieved through the utilization of constraints
(3.25) and (3.26), which prevent the HPP’s power output during FCR­D up and FCR­D
down regulation from exceeding the grid constraint of 200 MW. By considering the HPP’s
total hourly production and the available reserve capacities, this approach ensures the
system’s safety. For instance, when the HPP’s hourly total power output reaches its max­
imum of 200 MW, the HPP cannot provide FCR­D up regulation by discharging its BESS
into the grid, as the single grid connection point lacks sufficient capacity. Consequently,
fluctuations in FCR­D up reserves are observed due to the HPP frequently operating at or
near its maximum power output. On the other hand, the HPP never reaches a power out­
put of ­200 MW, as the installed BESS capacity is not large enough. Thus, the HPP can
always provide FCR­D down regulation by charging excess energy from the grid, thereby
reducing the frequency back to its nominal value.
36
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.5: Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units
Compared with the Case 1 scenario, and for the same day (21/06/2021), the curtailed
power is decreased since the installed wind and solar capacities are lower, thus less
power is lost. The outcome from Figure 5.5, is that the HPP production follows the same
pattern as Case 1, since BESS does not participate in the HPP’s power output, which is
also the case in this scenario. The only difference is that due to the slight decrease in
installed capacities of wind and solar plants, the power profile is lower.
Table 5.5: Results of the investment model, participating in FCR­D regulation with normal
BESS capex
Results
Annual revenue
121.035.776,12
€
Annual operational cost
6.642.328,8
€
Investment cost
494.382.830,37
€
NPV
817.700.998
€
IRR
22,8
%
Payback time
5,15
years
As far as concerns the revenues obtained from the HPP’s participation in the ancillary
service market, the annual revenue is shown in Table 5.5, where the FCR­D up and FCR­
D down products contribute 2,22% and 3,28% of the total annual revenue, having a yearly
amount equal to 2.691.748,3 [€] and 3.980.547,5 [€] respectively.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.6: Revenues compared with the electricity spot price for Case 2
An hourly time­series data for the average bid prices for FCR­D up product and a stable
average price equal to 45 €/MWh are taken into consideration, as discussed in Section
4.6. Furthermore, Figure 5.6 demonstrates that the revenues follow a similar pattern as
the reserve capacities shown in Figure 5.4. Despite the higher average bid price for the
FCR­D up product, the FCR­D down product generates higher revenues. This can be
attributed to the fact that the BESS provides a greater reserve capacity for FCR­D down
compared to FCR­D up. As a result, the revenue generated from the FCR­D down product
is higher due to the increased availability of reserve capacity from the BESS.
5.4
Case 1: HPP participates in the Spot market, using an
OoM (­1) in BESS CAPEX
A significant outcome from the previous simulations is that the BESS capital cost is high
enough to urge the model not to install the battery for the day ahead market participa­
tion. This leads to a new perspective, that its CAPEX needs to be reduced and reach a
profitable solution for the HPP. The impact of the battery’s capital cost on the size of the
HPP is examined in subsection (5.6.2). The outcome of this sensitivity analysis is that if
an order of magnitude equal to 10−1 is used in the battery’s capital expenditure, a more
optimal sizing solution will get from the optimization investment model. This decision is
verified by this paper [21], in which the same assumption for the reduced BESS CAPEX
is considered.
Consequently, in this simulation, the capital expenditure of the BESS is divided by 10.
This adjustment aimed to make the installation decision for the battery more feasible.
As anticipated, this modification resulted in a BESS size of 38.9 MW in terms of power
capacity and 191.3 MWh in terms of energy capacity. These values indicate that the BESS
is actively participating in the overall power output of the HPP, effectively contributing to
the system’s performance, and providing energy arbitrage services. On the other hand,
the onshore wind plant size decreased by 8,5 MW, whereas the installation of the solar
plant almost doubled. This occurs due to the increased potential of storing excess energy
into BESS, thus better solar resource exploitation is made and therefore a higher solar
plant size is installed.
38
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:49==
Table 5.6: Optimal sizing of the HPP without participating in FCR­D regulation
Sizing
Wind capacity
496
MW
Solar capacity
21,5
MW
BESS capacity
38,9
MW
BESS energy
191,3
MWh
By visualizing the power output of the HPP on the same day as previous examples (21/06/2021),
as shown in Figure 5.7, it is proved that the installation of the BESS enables the model to
engage in energy arbitrage for spot market purposes. Taking into account the electricity
spot prices in DK2, the battery is charged using wind and solar production during peri­
ods of low prices, and then sells the stored energy to the grid when electricity prices are
high. This strategy contributes significantly to the profits gained by the HPP. There is no
demand profile that has to be fulfilled, thus the model tries to optimize the power output
of the HPP, given the hourly electricity prices and capacity factors. For example, in the
first 3 hours, when the prices are low, the model chooses to charge the BESS, while from
03:00 to 06:00 when the prices are high, the BESS discharges into the grid to increase the
power output of the total HPP production, improving its profit from the day­ahead market.
Furthermore, the curtailment power decreases notably, with only 1.71% of the total power
being curtailed on that particular day. This reduction is primarily attributed to the fact that a
portion of the curtailed power is saved in the BESS, even though there may not be enough
SOE available to absorb it all.
Figure 5.7: Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
39
==PAGE:50==
Table 5.7: Results of the investment model in Case 1 with an OoM(­1) in BESS CAPEX
Results
Annual revenue
119.147.573,95
€
Annual operational cost
9.138.847,8
€
Investment cost
504.839.107,75
€
NPV
756.952.315
€
IRR
21.3
%
Payback time
5,5344
years
The results in Table 5.7 concern the economic investment decision of this particular Case
1 with an order of magnitude 10−1 used in the battery’s capital cost. Compared with the
main Case 1 in Section 5.2, the total investment cost for the HPP is slightly lower in this
case, contrary to the annual revenue which is higher. This approves that the integration
of the BESS increases the annual revenue of the HPP by 2,75 % in this case. More­
over, there is an increase in operational costs resulting from the investment in the BESS.
The operational costs of the BESS consist of two components: power­related costs and
energy­related costs. Consequently, a significant additional expense is incurred in the
form of yearly fixed operational costs.
To find the economic indicators and assess the feasibility of the investment, it is assumed
that the total nominal investment cost equal to 504.839.107,75 €, is paid in the year 0. No
discount rate is applied to the total CAPEX since its value does not change in the year
0. Then using the discount factor mentioned in Section 4.5 with a discount rate equal to
6%, the cash flows for each year are discounted. By summing up all the cash flows, the
NPV is calculated, resulting in a higher value than the main Case 1 and a similar payback
period.
5.5
Case 2: HPP participates in the Spot market and Ancillary
service markets, using an OoM (­1) in BESS CAPEX
In this particular scenario, the capital cost of the BESS is scaled to the same order of
magnitude equal to 10−1, to analyze its impact on the sizing of the HPP while it provides
FCR­D reserve capacities. Consequently, the simulation incorporates a larger battery ca­
pacity equal to 44.25 MW (Table 5.8), exceeding the 10 MW size, similar to Case 2 where
the BESS has a normal capital expenditure. The significant energy storage installation
indicates that the BESS actively contributes to the HPP’s power generation by charging
from wind and solar sources and discharging into the grid, enabling energy arbitrage ser­
vices. This configuration highlights the integration of the BESS as an essential component
in managing power output and providing additional flexibility to the overall system.
Table 5.8: Optimal sizing of the HPP, participating in FCR­D regulation
Sizing
Wind capacity
485,34
MW
Solar capacity
13,91
MW
BESS capacity
44,25
MW
BESS energy
187,72
MWh
Compared to the previous main Case 2, the wind plant size decreased and the solar
plant increased, determining a higher battery capacity installed since the total CAPEX
40
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:51==
has to be kept within a certain threshold to ensure positive NPV. This observed trend
of increase in both solar and BESS size, along with the similar relationship observed in
the previous Case 1 where the increase in solar size was accompanied by a rise in the
BESS capacity, highlights the strong interconnection between these two technologies.
This relationship arises due to the specific nature of solar resources, which are more
abundant during certain hours, particularly in the summer months. In most hours, wind
power generation alone is sufficient to cover the entire production capacity of the HPP. As
a result, the surplus solar production remains unutilized and needs to be effectively stored
in the battery for later use. The high­energy installation reflects BESS’s active energy
production and consumption over one year. Additionally, is worth mentioning that the
increase in BESS energy and capacity contributes to a growth in the annual operational
costs as discussed in Section 5.4.
Figure 5.8: Sample of reserve capacities and BESS interaction
To analyze the interaction between the BESS throughput and the reserve capacities, the
diagram in Figure 5.8 is created for the same day of simulation (21/06/2021). The negative
values of the BESS power indicate the charging procedure, aligned with the SOE line.
When the battery charges, the SOE increase, whereas when discharges it decreased
since a share of energy is provided to the spot market. Relating to the SOE behavior,
the BESS is modeled to have available capacity for both FCR­D up and down regulation
only when it is more profitable for the HPP to provide ancillary services instead of energy
into the spot market. Therefore, the hourly reserves are co­optimized with the BESS
capacity to maximize profits from the battery. For example, between the hours of 14:00
and 18:00, it is observed that there is no available FCR­D up reserve capacity due to the
HPP operating at its maximum power output during this time period. However, despite
this limitation, the battery is still capable of charging and providing FCR­D down reserve
capacity throughout the entire day. This behavior aligns with the constraints employed in
the model, which effectively restrict the power output of the HPP to remain below or equal
to 200 MW. The utilization of these constraints ensures the safe operation of the system
and facilitates the reliable functioning of the BESS for providing FCR­D down reserve
capacity, even in instances where FCR­D up reserves are not available. This aspect has
been previously discussed in detail in Section 5.3.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.9: Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units
Furthermore, Figure 5.9 illustrates the power output of the HPP for the same day (21/06/2021),
enabling a comparison of production variations between the different technologies. As
mentioned earlier, in this scenario, the battery is an option for the spot market, resulting in
an interaction between the technologies. This integration significantly reduces curtailment
power, compared with the simulation with normal BESS capital expenditure. The BESS
now has the capability to store excess energy and sell it during periods of high electricity
prices, or alternatively, provide FCR­D regulation.
Figure 5.10: FCR­D reserve capacities aligning with the SOE
Figure 5.10 exhibits a similar pattern to the main Case 2 scenario, indicating that the
battery installation in both simulations is primarily focused on providing ancillary services
with a limit of 10 MW per hour for reserve capacities. However, a noticeable difference lies
in the behavior of the line corresponding to SOE. In this particular simulation, the BESS
42
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:53==
also participates in the spot market, introducing additional fluctuations in the SOE line
throughout the one­year simulation period. It is crucial to emphasize that the optimization
model of the HPP is designed to maximize profits by strategically utilizing the BESS in both
the spot market and FCR­D regulation. By enabling the simultaneous provision of FCR­D
up and FCR­D down, the model determines the optimal operational strategy considering
factors such as electricity prices and price differentials between FCR­D up and down
bids. Consequently, the model co­optimizes the reserve capacities and BESS capacity to
achieve the utmost profitability from the overall system.
Table 5.9 presents the economic outcomes associated with this specific case. The ex­
panded integration of the BESS into the HPP allows it to provide FCR­D reserve capac­
ities along with energy in the spot market, consequently increasing the annual revenue.
This leads to a reduction in payback time and a higher NPV, emphasizing the favorable
economic impact of the increased BESS integration into the HPP operations.
Table 5.9: Results of the investment model in Case 2 with an OoM(­1) in BESS CAPEX
Results
Annual revenue
123.836.015,33
€
Annual operational cost
8.999.675,36
€
Investment cost
490.691.833,81
€
NPV
826.471.939
€
IRR
23
%
Payback time
5,08
years
Figure 5.11: Cash flow comparison between Case 1 and Case 2 during the lifetime of the
HPP
In Figure 5.11, the discounted cash­flows for Case 1 and Case 2 using a reduced BESS
CAPEX are compared. The graph displays both yearly revenues and operating expenses.
Initially, in year zero, the investment cost is paid, resulting in negative cash flows during
the first five years. However, as the cash flows transition into positive territory, it indicates
that the HPP starts generating profits. Notably, Case 2 exhibits a lower investment cost,
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
43
==PAGE:54==
faster payback time, and higher revenues throughout the HPP’s lifetime, making it a more
feasible solution for participating in the ancillary service market. This visual representation
effectively highlights the financial implications, demonstrating the advantages of Case 2
over Case 1 in terms of reduced cost, quicker payback period, and increased revenue
generation.
5.6
Sensitivity analysis
A series of specific sensitivity analysis simulations are conducted to accurately the results
obtained by the deterministic model. By performing sensitivity analyses, the robustness
and reliability of the results are tested, allowing for a more comprehensive understanding
of the investment model’s behavior under varying conditions. Indeed, several risks and
uncertainties are involved in this project. Some of them are technical risks including the
reliability of generation due to dependence on weather conditions, high capital costs of
the BESS and electricity prices fluctuation.
5.6.1
Sensitivity analysis on electricity spot prices
The particular sensitivity analysis is conducted for the Case 2 scenario, where the HPP
participates in both spot and reserve markets. To analyze the impact of the electricity spot
market prices in the optimal sizing of the HPP, a sensitivity analysis is conducted. In this
analysis, it is assumed that the bid prices for FCR­D up and FCR­D down products would
remain the same for all years. The prices considered are based on the values observed
in the year 2022 (Section 4.6). This particular year was chosen due to the availability of
real data for both FCR­D up and down products, as the FCR­D down was introduced in
2022. The assumption of using the same bid prices across years was made considering
the limited correlation between day­ahead and FCR­D prices. By adopting this approach,
more reasonable and realistic results are expected to be obtained from the sensitivity
analysis.
Figure 5.12: Different technology mix during the years
Figure 5.12 illustrates the technology mix installed for each scenario, and Table 4.4 rep­
resents the average electricity spot prices across different years. As can be observed,
in 2019 the optimal sizing of the HPP includes wind and BESS, without any solar be­
44
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:55==
ing installed. This relies on the fact that the electricity spot prices for that year are not
high enough to invest in solar, given the low capacity factor as well. Consequently, the
wind power plant emerges as the primary technology for electricity production. The same
situation applies to the year 2020 where the average electricity price is very low (28,41
€/MWh) compared with the bid reserve prices for the FCR­D products. For this reason,
in order to maximize the profits, the model prioritizes HPPs participation in the ancillary
service market, by installing the necessary wind capacity to only charge the BESS in the
first hours, since it is the only technology responsible to provide reserves for FCR­D reg­
ulation. Contrary, in 2022, electricity prices had a sharp increase due to energy crises,
reaching a much higher average value equal to 210,15 €/MWh. Is worth mentioning that
for this particular year, the HPP adopts an extreme investment strategy, resulting in an
over­sizing of each technology. The main outcome of this simulation is that despite its high
capital cost, the BESS installation reached a size of 41,7MW / 168MWh, without reducing
its CAPEX. This decision indicates that energy arbitrage is a more profitable service for
the HPP, considering the extremely high electricity prices. Furthermore, both wind and
solar capacities proportionally increase, reflecting the unique circumstances of this year.
Given the above results and taking into account today’s high BESS CAPEX, it is estimated
that an average electricity spot price that allows a normal BESS installation should be
close to 200 [€/MWh].
5.6.2
Sensitivity analysis on BESS CAPEX
As previously discussed, one of the key findings from the main case simulation is the
high capital cost associated with the battery, leading to a considerable size impact on
the HPP. Due to that fact, the high capital expenditure poses a limitation on the model’s
ability to invest in BESS beyond a maximum capacity of 10 MW, which is the reserve
capacity required for providing FCR­D regulation. Consequently, it is crucial to undertake
a comprehensive investigation into the capital expenditure of the battery and its direct
impact on the size of the BESS. This deeper analysis is essential to better understand
how the high costs associated with the battery influence the overall size of the HPP.
Figure 5.13: Technology mix for a different order of magnitudes in BESS CAPEX
For the purpose of this investigation, the order of magnitude method is employed to assess
the impact of capital cost reduction on the size of the HPP and its annual revenues. The
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
45
==PAGE:56==
order of magnitude OoM(­1), represented by a value such as 10−1, provides an intuitive
understanding of the effect of cost reduction. In this example, it indicates that the capital
expenditure for the BESS is reduced by a factor of 0,1. Figure 5.13 illustrates the installed
capacities of each technology in relation to the annual revenues, which are categorized
based on different orders of magnitude of the BESS capital expenditure. Overall, looking
at this figure, an exponential increase trend is observed for the BESS and solar capacities,
as well as for the annual revenues of the HPP. However, the wind farm’s installed capacity
is slightly decreased, respecting the grid constraint (3.24) which maintains the relative
proportions between the different technologies. Notably, the increase in solar capacity
resulting from the reduction in BESS CAPEX indicates that it becomes more financially
advantageous to install a larger battery and store excess solar energy, particularly during
the summer period. A lower battery investment cost incentives the optimization model
to prioritize a larger battery capacity and subsequently increase the solar plant capacity.
This solution is influenced not only by the lower capital cost of the solar plant but also
by its lower hourly capacity factor throughout the year. That is why there is no extreme
increase in solar investment because it is balanced with wind installation, which has a
higher average capacity factor.
In detail, in the first case, an order of magnitude OoM(­0,5) is used to reduce slightly the
battery’s CAPEX, multiplying it with 10−0,5. Looking at the installed capacities of each
technology, it is observed that the BESS size is slightly increased compared with the
normal CAPEX case scenario, reaching a size equal to 15 MW/34 MWh. This indicates
that the battery starting participates minimally in the spot market as well as in the ancillary
service market. However, in terms of revenues, this scenario does not exhibit significant
differences compared to the normal case. Therefore, a more substantial reduction in
BESS CAPEX would be required to observe significant changes in the overall revenue
generation.
The analysis of the scenario with an order of magnitude reduction of 10−1 in BESS CAPEX,
discussed in Section 5.5, can be compared to the findings of this sensitivity analysis. Fur­
thermore, when an order of magnitude reduction of 10−2 is applied, meaning that the
battery’s CAPEX is multiplied by 0,01, it has a significant impact on the BESS size, re­
sulting in a high capacity of 64 MW/305 MWh. In this scenario, the HPP can utilize a
substantial portion of the battery for the day­ahead market through the energy arbitrage
service. However, it is important to note that such a reduction represents an extreme
scenario with a significant decrease in the battery’s CAPEX.
The key finding of this sensitivity analysis is the significant influence of BESS CAPEX
on the sizing and composition of the HPP. The results indicate that the most favorable
and realistic cost reduction is achieved when an order of magnitude reduction of 10−1 is
applied. A more profitable solution is obtained for the HPP through this reduction in the
battery’s capital expenditure, resulting in a substantial increase in annual revenues. Con­
sequently, a lower payback time and a higher NPV are achieved, making the investment
in the HPP more feasible and financially attractive. In terms of installed capacity, notable
trends emerge as the study progresses. While the capital cost of BESS is declining, both
the solar plant and the BESS exhibit significant increases in their sizes. In contrast, the
wind farm size experiences a slight decrease. This shift towards larger BESS installations
proves to be a more profitable solution, prompting the model to allocate a larger portion of
the HPP capacity to BESS. However, it is worth noting that wind power generation ade­
quately fulfills the HPP’s total production capacity for the majority of hours. Consequently,
the surplus solar power generated remains unused and must be efficiently stored in the
battery for future utilization. This relationship between solar and battery is not so strong,
46
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:57==
however, affects the model to increase the solar size while the BESS size rises, in accor­
dance with the limitations imposed by the grid.
In conclusion, it can be appreciated that this solution is realistic and can be achieved in
the next 10 years, given the continuous decrease in the CAPEX of renewable energy
technologies [22].
5.6.3
Sensitivity analysis on the potential power output of the HPP
As in Section 1.2 discussed, various different shares of renewable in an HPP can ex­
ist, considering their maximum potential of energy production. The aim of this sensitivity
analysis is to explore the range of wind and solar shares in HPPs based on their loca­
tion, considering the maximum potential energy production. To provide a comprehensive
understanding that encompasses both the day­ahead market and the ancillary service
market, Case 2 is examined, considering two scenarios: one with normal BESS CAPEX
and another with an order of magnitude reduction of 10−1 in BESS CAPEX. This analysis
allows for a deeper understanding of the optimal distribution of wind and solar capacities,
taking into account weather characteristics and the potential revenue generation from both
markets.
A significant observation from the previous main simulations is the relatively small size of
the solar plant in the DK2 price area. The optimization model is not prioritizing investing in
solar power for this region, primarily due to its lower potential for energy production com­
pared to wind power. Despite the advantage of lower capital costs associated with solar
power in that specific area, the model places greater emphasis on wind power investment.
To evaluate the influence of capacity factors on HPP sizing and explore alternative loca­
tions, the island of Crete in Greece is chosen as a viable option. This decision is driven
by the fact that Crete has higher solar irradiation levels, resulting in an average capacity
factor for solar power of 19.8%, surpassing that of the DK2 area. Moreover, the island
exhibits an average maximum energy potential for wind power of 38%, slightly higher than
DK2, as discussed in Section 4.2. By considering similar electricity and reserve prices as
in DK2, this simulation aims to gain insights into the impact of capacity factors on HPP
sizing. The choice of Crete allows for a comprehensive assessment of these factors and
their implications for optimizing HPP operations in different geographical locations.
Figure 5.14: Share of capacities of the HPP in different locations
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
47
==PAGE:58==
The clear distinction in the share of each technology between the two locations is illus­
trated in Figure 5.14. Notably, the most significant difference lies in solar installation, with
Greece exhibiting a much higher share. This discrepancy can be attributed to the prof­
itability aspect of the investment model, where solar proves to be a more favorable choice
for HPP placement in Greece. This preference arises from the normal distribution of the
solar capacity factor throughout the year in Greece, in contrast to Denmark, where the
solar capacity factor mainly concentrates in the summer months (Figure 5.15). The avail­
ability of solar resources throughout the year in Greece enhances the economic viability
and attractiveness of solar installations in HPPs in that location. On the other hand, while
both Greece and Denmark exhibit similar profiles for the capacity factor of wind power
(Figure 5.15), it is important to note that an increase in solar capacity is observed along­
side the need for a reduction in wind installations. This adjustment is necessary due to
the grid constraint equal to 200 MW, which influences investment decisions. The grid
constraint implies that a larger solar size can be accommodated more effectively within
the existing grid infrastructure, whereas adding more wind capacity may pose challenges
in terms of grid integration.
Figure 5.15: Solar capacity factor in Greece and in Denmark (DK2)
48
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.16: Wind capacity factor in Greece and in Denmark (DK2)
Surprisingly, in the scenario with the reduced capital cost of BESS, a notable trend emerges
when comparing the capacity factors from Greece and Denmark. In Greece, the share
of solar power surpasses that of wind power, while in Denmark, the share of solar power
remains relatively low at 2.6%. This significant increase in solar installations, coupled
with the rise in BESS capacity, can be attributed to two main factors. Firstly, as men­
tioned earlier, Greece benefits from a higher maximum potential power output from solar
resources for a greater number of hours throughout the year. This higher solar potential
enables increased energy arbitrage opportunities, leading to a corresponding increase in
the share of BESS capacity. Additionally, the lower capital expenditure associated with
solar installations compared to wind installations plays a crucial role. With solar CAPEX
being nearly half that of wind CAPEX, the optimization model favors a higher investment
in solar installations, further contributing to the observed shift in the technology mix.
Figure 5.17: Sample of power output profiles of the HPP units in Greece
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
49
==PAGE:60==
Additionally is worth showing the interaction between each technology’s output during
the same day of simulation (21/06/2021), when the HPP is placed in Greece including
a reduced battery’s CAPEX. Notably in Figure 5.17, solar power production is the high­
est, peaking during daylight hours, while wind power production does not fluctuate. The
battery energy storage system (BESS) is charged to its maximum capacity during this
period due to the grid connection constraint limiting the hourly production to 200 MW. The
low electricity prices during this time enabled the battery to provide energy arbitrage ser­
vices, optimizing the utilization of stored energy, while also reducing curtailment of excess
power. This dynamic interplay between solar, battery, and grid conditions highlights the
potential benefits of renewable energy integration and smart energy management.
Table 5.10: Optimal sizing of the HPP in Greece with a normal BESS CAPEX
Sizing
Wind capacity
337,88
MW
Solar capacity
237,63
MW
BESS capacity
10
MW
BESS energy
8.33
MWh
Table 5.11: Optimal sizing of the HPP in Greece with an OoM (­1) in BESS CAPEX
Sizing
Wind capacity
280.3
MW
Solar capacity
335.22
MW
BESS capacity
107.02
MW
BESS energy
646,66
MWh
Table 5.10 and Table 5.11 represent the actual installed capacities that the optimization
model chosen to invest in for the location of Crete in Greece. The capacities of each
technology align with the shares from the above graph in Figure 5.14.
Table 5.12: Results of the investment model for the HPP in Greece with a normal BESS
CAPEX
Results
Annual revenue
113.942.093,2
€
Annual operational cost
6.524.751,5
€
Investment cost
451.020.003,9
€
NPV
781.048.447
€
IRR
23,5
%
Payback time
4,98
years
50
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:61==
Table 5.13: Results of the investment model for the HPP in Greece with an OoM (­1) in
BESS CAPEX
Results
Annual revenue
125.585.344,3
€
Annual operational cost
14.712.709,5
€
Investment cost
454.463.668,9
€
NPV
817.236.716
€
IRR
24,1
%
Payback time
4,84
years
Comparing the results of the HPP installations in DK2 and Greece, as shown in Table
5.8 and Table 5.13 respectively, and considering a reduced BESS CAPEX, it becomes
evident that the HPP in Denmark is more profitable with a slightly higher NPV. Despite the
HPP in Greece having higher annual revenue and lower investment costs, its profitabil­
ity is compromised by increased operational costs due to a larger installation of BESS.
This conclusion remains consistent when comparing the results in Table 5.12, where both
simulations use a normal BESS CAPEX.
The key finding of this sensitivity analysis is that, despite the lower NPV in Greece, hav­
ing a high and evenly distributed share of wind and solar is more advantageous. From
a producer’s perspective, combining wind, solar, and storage enhances the power deliv­
ery strategy, especially in meeting demand requirements. For example, even during low
wind production periods and subsequent price increases, revenue opportunities can still
be made by leveraging solar production. This diversification of renewable sources en­
ables producers to optimize their revenue potential and maintain a stable income stream,
mitigating the impact of price fluctuations.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
51
==PAGE:62==
6
Discussion
The main objective of this project is to develop a deterministic optimization model, aiming
to provide the best sizing solutions of an HPP, participating in day­ahead and ancillary
service market (FCR­D service) in DK2. Incorporating wind solar and BESS technologies
and taking into account technical and market characteristics, as well as operation con­
straints, the model gives the power profiles of each technology, the optimal sizes, annual
costs, and revenues. In this way, the feasibility of the investment is examined thoroughly
and assessed for different scenarios.
The investment optimization model effectively analyzes the impact of electricity prices,
weather conditions, and market specifications on the share of renewable energy in the
HPP. While the model successfully meets all specified constraints and accurately de­
scribes the proposed system, it has certain limitations due to simplifications and omis­
sions. Real­life energy systems encompass numerous factors that are not accounted
for in the model. Therefore, it is essential to acknowledge these limitations and explore
potential extensions to enhance the analysis.
A significant limitation of the simulations discussed in Chapter 3 is their duration, which
is restricted to only one year. For a comprehensive investment analysis, it is crucial to
consider data spanning the entire expected lifetime of the project to obtain a realistic
perspective on the investment decision. This can be achieved by incorporating historical
data from previous years or making predictions for future data, considering factors such
as inflation. By incorporating an inflation rate into the electricity prices and forecasting the
future revenues of the HPP, a more realistic sizing solution can be obtained. Alternatively,
input data from the years 2001 to 2021 could be utilized to determine the optimal sizing.
If the simulations were extended to cover the entire expected lifetime of the project, there
would be no need to employ the Equivalent Annual Cost (EAC) function, as discussed in
Section 4.4. The EAC function is utilized to annualize the capital cost of each technology,
making them comparable to annual revenues and costs. Additionally, the reliance on
Excel would be diminished since the NPV could be directly obtained from the Python­
based model, considering its 20­year duration. However, due to the extensive amount
of data required for a 20­year period and potential data gaps, which could lead to slow
simulation processes and incomplete data, a decision was made to focus on a one­year
simulation process.
As mentioned in Section 4.1, the model takes into consideration time­series data for elec­
tricity spot prices and capacity factors from different years. However, this approach could
potentially lead to an unrealistic sizing decision for the HPP by taking into account that
the output of renewable sources directly affects electricity prices. Despite conducting a
thorough analysis of the correlation between electricity prices from 2021 and capacity fac­
tors from 2019 (Section 4.2), which revealed a weak correlation, it would be more reliable
to utilize time­series data from the same year. Unfortunately, due to the unavailability of
such data, it is not feasible to incorporate it into the simulation.
For a further extension of the deterministic model analyzed in Section 3.1, a potential
idea is to incorporate tender compliance criteria. This could be achieved by implement­
ing a long­term Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) into the model, which would impose
a demand profile and restrict the sizing decision of the model, by optimizing the power
producer’s bid. Consequently, the primary objective of the model would shift towards en­
52
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:63==
suring the fulfillment of the contracted power from the HPP, leading to potentially different
sizing decisions. Additionally, the HPP could generate additional revenue by selling ex­
cess power production that exceeds the contracted amount under the PPA. This extension
would provide a more comprehensive analysis by considering contractual obligations and
exploring the revenue potential beyond the PPA arrangement.
Another valuable extension of the investment model involves incorporating the participa­
tion of the HPP in other ancillary services, such as offering FCR­N product or combining
multiple reserve services simultaneously. This expansion would involve modifying the ex­
isting model and introducing additional operational constraints to account for the behavior
of the BESS and consider the technical specifications of the supplementary reserve prod­
ucts. By doing so, the revenue potential of the HPP could be significantly maximized.
However, it is essential to acknowledge that this extension may present challenges, in­
cluding considerations of market structure legislation and the potential degradation of the
battery due to increased utilization.
For project purposes, BESS degradation is not included. This decision is driven by the
aim to maintain simplicity within the model, considering that the FCR­D up and FCR­D
down services, almost never trigger the activation of the BESS to provide the reserve
capacities. This is because frequency deviation never exceeds the activation frequency
limits of these two services, as discussed in Chapter 2. Consequently, the BESS has min­
imal energy throughput and experiences negligible degradation in this context. However,
in the project, the HPP participates in the spot market, and the integrated BESS plays an
additional role by providing energy arbitrage services during periods of excess energy.
Although the strain on the battery would warrant considering a degradation factor, no ex­
plicit degradation cost is included. This omission allows the BESS to be a more profitable
solution within the model selection, given its high capital expenditure. In a potential mod­
ification of the model, BESS degradation could have been included for better and more
accurate results.
In Chapter 5, it is observed that in the simulations conducted using a normal BESS capital
expenditure, there is an increase in power curtailment. This occurs because the determin­
istic model aims to linearly maximize the profits of the HPP by selecting the optimal sizing
without imposing proper limitations, potentially exceeding realistic terms. Consequently,
without including a reduced BESS CAPEX, the model focuses on installing wind and solar
plants, oversizing them to increase the HPP’s revenues and achieve a maximum NPV.
As a result, there is a higher share of power curtailment in the system. To address this,
an additional constraint could be introduced, imposing a penalty cost per MWh of cur­
tailed power, even though this is not currently the case in Denmark. By incorporating this
constraint, we would observe a decrease in the optimal sizes of each technology, reduc­
ing power curtailment. However, the effectiveness of this approach would depend on the
magnitude of the penalty cost. If the revenue gained from the oversized HPP significantly
outweighs the penalty cost, it would still be a profitable solution to have a high share of
curtailed power and generate substantial revenues from the spot and ancillary service
markets.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
53
==PAGE:64==
7
Conclusion
This thesis project investigates the economic viability and optimal sizing of a large­scale
hybrid power plant. The HPP integrates an onshore wind farm, a solar plant, and a bat­
tery energy storage system, co­located in Denmark’s DK2 price area. The study employs
a deterministic investment model to optimize the sizing of the plant taking into account
electricity prices, technical parameters, and normalized time series data representing the
system’s power availability. The model optimizes the sizing of the plant by maximizing
the yearly cash flows of the HPP, focusing on the maximization of the annual power pro­
ducer’s profit. Therefore, important economic indicators are calculated including NPV and
IRR to assess the feasibility of each case scenario. Leveraging the flexibility of HPPs to
accommodate various revenue streams, these plants can serve multiple functions to en­
sure their business case aligns with evolving market conditions. In this project, the HPP
actively participates in both the day­ahead and ancillary service markets, providing FCR­
D reserve capacities for up and down regulation. Is worth mentioning, that these reserve
capacities are almost never activated, due to the extreme frequency fluctuation range that
they need to activate, which is never the case in the Nordic energy systems. In this way,
the HPP uses the battery to provide hourly reserve capacities to the TSOs in case of a
rare activation.
Through simulation processes of the mathematical model in the first two main case sce­
narios, it is evident that the participation of the HPP in the ancillary service market leads
to increased annual revenues and a higher NPV compared to the scenario where the
HPP only participates in the spot market. This is primarily due to the absence of legisla­
tive restrictions regarding the ancillary service marker in the model and the inclusion of
additional profits from FCR­D up and FCR­D down reserves. In addition, an important
outcome from the simulation process is that today’s BESS CAPEX taken into considera­
tion is high enough, leading to a non­investment solution of battery for energy arbitrage
purposes. Despite its high capital cost, in Case 2, the model mandates the installation of
BESS solely to meet the required maximum reserve capacities for FCR­D regulation, with­
out utilizing it in the day­ahead market. To address this limitation, a reduction in BESS
capital cost by an order of magnitude OoM(­1) is explored. The results show that the
model capitalizes on the reduced BESS CAPEX, leading to increased battery capacity
investment for energy arbitrage services. This enables the battery to provide both FCR­D
reserves and energy arbitrage simultaneously, resulting in a revenue increase of 2.75%
and 2.4% for Case 1 and Case 2, respectively. Taking these increases into account, along
with the integration of higher shares of BESS, a more viable solution is observed for both
cases. Sensitivity analysis using different orders of magnitude in BESS CAPEX demon­
strates that as the CAPEX decreases, HPP’s annual revenues show a linear increase,
and there is a greater installation of solar and battery technologies, unlocking additional
profit potential for the HPP. Furthermore, to achieve a well­balanced distribution of re­
newable technologies in the HPP without reducing BESS capital cost, it is estimated that
an average electricity spot price of 200 €/MWh should be considered for the one­year
simulation.
Furthermore, the deterministic model is examined in a different location, where this time
the HPP is placed in Greece, modifying only the hourly time­series data that indicates
the maximum potential of power output for wind and solar. The results of this sensitiv­
ity analysis highlight significant differences compared to the previous case in Denmark.
54
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:65==
In Greece, due to a higher maximum potential power output from solar resources for a
greater number of hours throughout the year, there is a higher installation of solar and
battery technologies. This is because solar production, coupled with the already substan­
tial wind production, allows the HPP to reach its hourly total power production (200 MW)
more frequently, resulting in an increased need for BESS to store surplus energy and
reduce power curtailment. When considering the case scenario with the reduced BESS
CAPEX, it becomes apparent that the HPP’s primary production in Denmark heavily re­
lies on wind sources, resulting in a substantial 89.3% wind installation share and a mere
2.6% for solar. Conversely, in Greece, where solar resources are more abundant, there
is a noticeable increase in the solar share (46.4%) alongside the need for a reduction in
wind share (38.8%) within the HPP. This adjustment is crucial due to the grid constraint
of 200 MW, which significantly influences investment decisions and prevents the model
from making unrealistic choices. These simulations reveal that in Denmark, a more fea­
sible investment is achieved with a predominant focus on wind technology. However, if
the HPP needs to meet a specific demand and prioritize a power delivery strategy, it is
advantageous to have a more balanced distribution among all three technologies. This
is exemplified in the case of Greece, where wind and solar resources are well­coupled,
resulting in better utilization of available renewable sources and enhancing overall energy
security.
With an increasing number of HPP projects in the global pipeline, the sector is poised
for significant expansion and innovation. As governments and energy stakeholders pri­
oritize sustainable and clean energy solutions, HPPs are gaining prominence as reliable
and efficient contributors to the transition toward a greener future. One crucial aspect of
HPP sizing is the integration of storage, which should be optimized on a case­by­case
basis, considering market design, opportunities aligned with system needs, HPP design,
curtailment reduction, and technical parameters. Additionally, it is important to empha­
size that the sizing decision of HPPs is heavily influenced by factors such as electricity
prices, capacity factors, and technical costs. The value served of this particular master
thesis project is the implementation of a developed sizing optimization model in various
locations to determine the feasibility and viability of an investment, in terms of sizing and
market specifications. However advanced methodologies need to be developed to ad­
dress additional considerations such as battery degradation, turbine technology selection,
uncertainties, and various market participation scenarios. By continuously advancing and
refining these approaches, the HPP sector can maximize its potential and contribute even
more effectively to the global energy transition.
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
55
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
WindEurope. Renewable Hybrid Power Plants ­ Exploring the benefits and market
opportunities. 2019.
[2]
Das, Kaushik; Cossu, Alessandra; Sørensen, Poul Ejnar; Murcia Leon, Juan Pablo.
Component sizing of an utility­scale hybrid power plant. 2022.
[3]
Sikandar Abdul Qadir, Hessah Al­Motairi, Furqan Tahir, Luluwah Al­Fagih. Incen­
tives and strategies for financing the renewable energy transition: A review. 2021.
[4]
Nicole Tryndina, Jaehyung An, Igor Varyash, Oleg Litvishko, Lyubov Khomyakova,
Sergey Barykin, Olga Kalinina. Renewable energy incentives on the road to sus­
tainable development during climate change: A review. 2022. URL: https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fenvs.2022.1016803/full.
[5]
RAMBOL. Ancillary services from new technologies: Technical potentials and mar­
ket integration. 2019.
[6]
ENERGINET. OVERVIEW OF SYSTEM SERVICES. [Online; https://energinet.
dk/El/Systemydelser/Introduktion- til- Systemydelser/Oversigt-over-systemydelser/,
Accessed 24/05/2023].
[7]
ENERGINET. ANCILLARY SERVICES TO BE DELIVERED IN DENMARK ­ TEN­
DER CONDITIONS. 2023.
[8]
Svenska Kraftnäts. Beslut om upphandlingsvolym för frekvenshållningsreserver (FCR)
för 2023. [Online; https : / / www . svk . se / press - och - nyheter / nyheter / elmarknad -
allmant/2022/beslut- om- upphandlingsvolym- for- frekvenshallningsreserver- fcr- for-
2023/, Accessed 19/06/2023].
[9]
ENTSO­E. Technical Requirements for Frequency Containment Reserve Provision
in the Nordic Synchronous Area. 2022.
[10]
FINGRID. Changes in the requirements of Frequency Containment Reserve pro­
vision from energy storage. [Online; https://www.fingrid.fi/en/news/news/2022/
changes-in-the-requirements-of-frequency-containment-reserve-provision-from-energy-
storage/, Accessed 24/04/2023].
[11]
Thingvad Andreas, Ziras Charalampos, Le Ray Guillaume, Engelhardt Jan, Mos­
bæk Rasmus Rode, Marinelli Mattia. Economic Value of Multi­Market Bidding in
Nordic Frequency Markets. 2023.
[12]
ENERGINET. FCR, Frequency Containment Reserves, DK2. [Online; https://www.
energidataservice.dk/tso-electricity/fcrreservesdk2, Accessed 31/05/2023].
[13]
Elisabeth Andreae, Tue Vissing Jensen, Daniel Esteban Morales Bondy,Kai Heussen.
Sizing hybrid power plants under round­the­clock tender compliance in India. 2022.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10022596.
[14]
Richard Baxter, Mustang Prairie Energy. Energy Storage Financing: Project and
Portfolio Valuation. 2021.
[15]
Renewables.ninja. [Online; https://www.renewables.ninja/, Accessed 2/04/2023].
[16]
Wind Turbines in Denmark. [Online; https : / / turbines . dk / statistics/, Accessed
20/04/2023].
[17]
Yang Hongxing, Zhou Wei, Lou Chengzhi. Optimal design and techno­economic
analysis of a hybrid solar–wind power generation system. 2008.
[18]
K Mongird, V Fotedar, V Viswanathan, V Koritarov, P. Balducci, B. Hadjerioua, and
J. Alam. Energy Storage Technology and Cost Characterization Report. 2019.
56
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:67==
[19]
Paul Noothout, David de Jager, Lucie Tesnière, Sascha van Rooijen and Nikolaos
Karypidis (Ecofys), Robert Brückmann and Filip Jirouš (eclareon), Barbara Bre­
itschopf (Fraunhofer ISI), Dimitrios Angelopoulos and Haris Doukas (EPU­NTUA),
Inga Konstantinavičiūtė (LEI), Gustav Resch (TU Wien). The impact of risks in re­
newable energy investments and the role of smart policies. 2016.
[20]
ENERGINET. Elspot Prices, DK2. [Online; https://www.energidataservice.dk/tso-
electricity/Elspotprices, Accessed 15/04/2023].
[21]
Habbou Hajar, Leon Juan Pablo Murcia, Das Kaushik. Profitability of hybrid power
plants in European markets. 2023. URL: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/
1742-6596/2507/1/012009.
[22]
IRENA ­ International Renewable Energy Agency. [Online; https://www.irena.org/
Energy-Transition/Technology/Energy-storage-costs, Accessed 20/05/2023].
[23]
Jalal Kazempour. Portfolio Management Problem of Hybrid Power Plants. [On­
line; https://www.linkedin.com/posts/jalalkazempour_portfolio- management- of-
hybrid-power-plants-activity-7046766441529786368-HIbD?utm_source=share&utm_
medium=member_desktop, Accessed 22/05/2023].
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
57
==PAGE:68==
A
Appendix
Deterministic model ­ Optimization Investment model
maxCashFlow = Revy −OPEXfix
y
−CAPEX
(A.1)
where:
Revy =
∑
t∈Ty
[(λt · pHPP
t
) + (λFCR−D down
t
· pFCR−D down
t
)
+ (λFCR−D up
t
· pFCR−D up
t
)]
∀y ∈Y,∀t ∈T
(A.2)
OPEXfix
y
= (csolar
fix,y · P solar
max + cwind
fix,y · P wind
max + cbat
fix,y · P bat
max
+ cE
fix,y · Ebat
max)
∀y ∈Y
(A.3)
CAPEX = (csolar · P solar
max + cwind · P wind
max + cbat · P bat
max + cE · Ebat
max)
(A.4)
0 ≤pwind
t
≤CF wind
t
· P wind
max
∀t ∈T
(A.5)
0 ≤psolar
t
≤CF solar
t
· P solar
max
∀t ∈T
(A.6)
0 ≤pch
t
≤P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.7)
0 ≤pdis
t
≤P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.8)
pbat
t
= pdis
t
−pch
t
∀t ∈T
(A.9)
pch
t
≤pwind
t
+ psolar
t
∀t ∈T
(A.10)
0 ≤pch
t
≤OSch
t
· P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.11)
0 ≤pdis
t
≤OSdis
t
· P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.12)
OSch
t
+ OSdis
t
≤1
∀t ∈T
(A.13)
SOCmin · Ebat
max ≤SOEt ≤SOCmax · Ebat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.14)
58
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
==PAGE:69==
SOEt =SOEt−1 + ∆t · (nch · pch
t −
1
ndis
· pdis
t )
∀t ∈T
(A.15)
pbat
t
−pFCR−D down
t
≥−P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.16)
pbat
t
+ pFCR−D up
t
≤P bat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.17)
pFCR−D down
t
≥0
∀t ∈T
(A.18)
pFCR−D up
t
≥0
∀t ∈T
(A.19)
SOEt + (pFCR−D down
t
· nch · ∆tf) ≤SOCmax · Ebat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.20)
SOEt −(pFCR−D up
t
·
1
ndis
· ∆tf) ≥SOCmin · Ebat
max
∀t ∈T
(A.21)
pwind
t
+ psolar
t
+ pbat
t
= pHPP
t
∀t ∈T
(A.22)
−GC ≤pHPP
t
≤GC
∀t ∈T
(A.23)
pHPP
t
+ pFCR−D up
t
≤GC
∀t ∈T
(A.24)
pHPP
t
−pFCR−D down
t
≥−GC
∀t ∈T
(A.25)
Figure A.1: Comparison between FCR­D and FCR­N activation services. [23]
Techno­economic optimization of grid­supporting hybrid power plants
59
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
