==PAGE:1==
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in
Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
DTU Management
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich
Department of Environmental Systems Science
Environmental Robotics Laboratory
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
Master Thesis
31 July, 2023
By
Iris Kong
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, DTU Management, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
In coorperation with:
ETH Zurich, Environmental Robotics Laboratory
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared abroad over six months at the Environmental Robotics Lab
(affiliation with ETH Zurich and the Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow and Land-
scape Research WSL), in partial fulfilment for the Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng degree in Industrial Engineering and Management awarded by the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, DTU.
Iris Kong - s191407
Signature
Date
ii
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents the development of a novel aerial robot-based delivery and retrieval
system for volatile organic compound (VOC) sensors for crop monitoring and protection
in maize fields. The sensors, designed by the Plant-EcoAIR project, use VOCs as early
indicators of plant stress caused by insect herbivory. The primary objective was to con-
ceptualize, design, and implement a suitable end effector for a drone, taking into account
environmental and user constraints. To achieve this goal, the specific requirements for the
delivery and retrieval of VOC sensors in maize fields were firstly defined. Subsequently,
state-of-the-art drone-based delivery and retrieval techniques were examined. Based on
these insights, a total of 5 prototypes were iteratively developed. The final prototype is
passive, lightweight, robust, and cost-effective and can be attached to a small commer-
cial drone, with the potential for adaptation to other drones fulfilling a similar purpose to
retrieve and deliver lightweight payloads.The proposed solution incorporates a simple yet
effective trapdoor mechanism for sensor collection. Once collected, the sensor securely
slides back into storage rails, ensuring enhanced flight stability during transportation. To
deploy the sensor, the drone places the sensor on the ground and then flies forward to re-
lease it. Through small-scale usability experiments, the system’s performance has been
successfully demonstrated beyond the line-of-sight conditions, where situational aware-
ness is reduced.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Iris Kong, Student, MSc Industrial Engineering and Management, DTU
Author
Christian Geckeler, Doctoral Candidate, Environmental Robotics Lab, Dep. of Environ-
mental Systems Science, ETH Zürich
Supervisor
Stefano Mintchev, Professor, Environmental Robotics Lab, Dep. of Environmental Sys-
tems Science, ETH Zürich
Supervisor
Ole Ravn, Professor, Dep. of Electrical and Photonics Engineering Automation and Con-
trol, DTU
Supervisor
iv
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation - Precise Pesticide Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Plant-EcoAIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Problem Definition
5
2.1
Design Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Human Performance Considerations for Operation of Aerial Robots
. . . .
6
3
State-of-the-Art
11
3.1
Active Actuated Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Passive Non-actuated Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Solution Development
17
4.1
DJI Mavic Pro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Initial Conceptualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Prototype 1 - Passive Collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4
Prototype 2 - Passive Collection and Drop-off . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Prototype 3 - Passive Trapdoor Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.6
Prototype 4 - Passive Trapdoor Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.7
Prototype 5 - Passive Trapdoor Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.8
Prototype Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5
Usability & Performance Testing
55
5.1
Experimental Modifications and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.2
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.3
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6
Conclusion
79
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Bibliography
81
A Appendix
85
A.1 Usability Testing Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.2 Weather data during the experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation - Precise Pesticide Application
Over the past century, pesticides have become prevalent in conventional agriculture due
to their ability to control pests, enhance crop yields, and contribute to food security [1].
However, the extensive and often excessive application of pesticides has raised signifi-
cant concerns about their potential toxicity to both humans and the environment, urging
the need for cautious and limited usage. Several pesticides have been associated with
health risks to humans, ranging from acute effects like skin irritations and respiratory prob-
lems to chronic issues like cancer, neurological diseases, and endocrine disruption [2].
Pesticides can enter the human body through the consumption of contaminated food, in-
halation, or direct skin contact. Additionally, pesticides, particularly synthetic varieties,
can have adverse effects on non-target organisms and ecosystems. Furthermore, they
can contaminate soil, water bodies, and air, leading to the decline of beneficial insects,
harm to wildlife, and disruption of ecological balance [3],[4].
Technological solutions exist to reduce the use of pesticides through precision agriculture.
Using drones equipped with image-based remote sensing, such as hyperspectral imaging,
plant stress can be detected by analyzing crop leaf shape and colour [5]. This allows for
the identification of affected areas, and appropriate plant protection measures can be
implemented to limit the spread of infestations and minimise crop losses. Effective crop
health monitoring and precision pesticide application depend on the collection of data with
high spatial and temporal resolution through an extensive network of sensors distributed
across the field. Methods to efficiently gather and process this data have great potential to
be transformed into actionable change and lower pesticide use in outdoor crop production.
1.2
Project Plant-EcoAIR
Figure 1.1: Plant-EcoAIR
Logo.
Source:
Adapted
from [6]
As mentioned, hyperspectral imaging has been proven to be
an effective, scalable and reliable method to identify plant
stress. However, visual plant stress is only apparent hours
to days after an insect herbivore attack [5]. At this point, bulk
damages and changes in the plant’s chemistry and morphol-
ogy have occurred. By achieving even earlier detection of
herbivore infestations, prompt and targeted treatment mea-
sures can be taken to limit the spread of an infestation, ulti-
mately reducing the reliance on extensive pesticide use (see
Figure 1.2).
The project ”Plant-EcoAIR” has created a lightweight sensor
that can detect the plant stress of young corn plants seconds
to hours after a herbivore attack through the collection of
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) [7], [8]. VOCs are re-
leased by a plant as a defence response and can be used
to identify the type and severity of stress [9]. These sensors have the potential to detect
plant stress from insect attacks much earlier than conventional crop monitoring solutions,
however, the effectiveness of this solution depends highly on whether these sensors can
be deployed and retrieved efficiently at scale. The current method of humans manually
placing, waiting and retrieving these sensors is time-consuming, expensive and difficult
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
1
==PAGE:10==
to scale. However, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), also referred to as drones, are
widely available and can be a better solution to deliver and retrieve these pumps effi-
ciently. They can travel much greater distances in a large field than humans in a given
time frame (See Figure 1.3). Drones can move independently from the obstacles of the
terrain, thus minimizing plant disturbance. Additionally, the localization (waypoint) fea-
ture of many commercial drones can be used to create a map to track where sensors are
placed for retrieval and a cumulative map of all the previously sampled sites. Due to size
and power constraints, drone payloads are limited and have a restricted flight time, which
must be factored into the design of the drone-based sensor delivery and retrieval system.
The objective of this thesis is to semi-automate the delivery and collection of sensors for
precision agriculture using aerial robots beyond line-of-sight (BLOS).
Figure 1.2: Before visual symptoms manifest, volatile organic compounds emitted by
plants in reaction to stress events, can be detected. Source: Adapted from [6]
h
d
ll
l
l
ld
h
l
b
l
b
b
h
Figure 1.3: The use of drones to collect and deploy VOC samplers offers the potential for
accurately detecting plant herbivory earlier. Source: Adapted from [6]
1.2.1
Plant-EcoAIR Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Sampling Pump
The Plant-EcoAIR sampler [7] is designed to be self-sufficient and lightweight, allowing
for repeatable volatile collection in agricultural fields. The sampler consists of a pump and
a cartridge containing an adsorbent material to trap volatile organic compounds from the
air. Initial sampling tests with known volatile blends have been conducted to validate the
ability of the sampler to collect volatiles effectively. In total, the sensor with the battery
2
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:11==
weighs around 72.16 g. A depiction of the sensor can be seen in Figure 1.4. Once the
pump is delivered to the sampling point, the drone should leave the area to minimise
interference with the airflow of the pump during sample collection. The pump needs to
be left in the field upright for about 16 minutes for sample collection. Once sampling is
complete, the sensor must be collected and brought back to the lab for processing.
Figure 1.4: Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Sampling Pump. Source: Adapted from
[6]
1.2.2
Application in Corn fields
The initial prototype of the drone will specialise in the placement of VOC pumps in corn
fields. The detection of VOCs to indicate plant stress can be collected after the plant
emerges to when the plant reaches its full height, but before reproduction. However,
according to the leaf collar classification system to determine the vegetative stage of
corn growth, VOC collection would be most effective during the V2-V3 vegetative growth
stages, which roughly corresponds to 7 days up to 20 days after emergence [10], which
is when the plants are most vulnerable. The corn plant would roughly range from 5 cm
to 12 cm tall [11]. The current pump prototype has four legs so that when the pump is
placed on the ground, the pump is elevated by 20 cm. However, due to the vast range
of corn plant height during different growth phases, a more flexible design of the pump
height placement may be considered for greater collection accuracy in the future.
(a) Adapted from [12]
(b) Adapted from [11]
Figure 1.5: Corn Vegetative and Reproductive Stages
Cornrow widths typically range from 38 cm to 96.5 cm, with an average of about 76 cm for
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
3
==PAGE:12==
most producers. However, many farmers nowadays opt for narrower row widths of around
38 cm or 51 cm [13]. The pumps would be placed between the rows of corn during the
sample collection process. The difficulty to position and orient the drone between the
rows on uneven terrain should also be evaluated in the future.
4
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:13==
2
Problem Definition
2.1
Design Requirements
The potential to use these sensors at scale largely depends on the possibility of efficiently
delivering and retrieving the pumps in the field. The ultimate goal is to design a drone
attachment to collect and deploy these sensors beyond the line-of-sight. From a human
usability standpoint, the task of delivering and retrieving sensors in the field with a drone
is considered a ”teleoperated 3-D positioning task”.
Many design requirements need to be considered for this drone attachment. They are
classified into three categories: General Design Requirements, Drone-specific Design
Requirements and Human Performance Design Requirements (listed in Sections 2.1.1 -
2.1.3 respectively).
2.1.1
General Design Requirements
• The system should be designed for WSL researchers (inexperienced drone pilots).
• The system should attach to widely available commercial drones.
• The system must be a teleoperated system so that a greater sampling range can
be performed.
• The system must be safe and should incorporate fail-safe mechanisms. Safety will
depend on various factors including the prevention of interference to the propellers
(that may lead to drone crashes) and/or the drone’s built-in sensor system (e.g.
obstacle avoidance), etc.
• The system should be efficient and reliable, whereby the sensor can be consistently
deployed and retrieved as quickly as possible.
• The device should have minimal components
• The system should be robust.
• Occurrences of error should be minimised
2.1.2
Drone-specific Design Requirements
Specific to aerial robots, the flight time limitations are restricted to battery capacity. Addi-
tionally, When carrying payloads, it is crucial that the drone remains as stable as possible.
• The drone attachment should be as light-weight as possible.
• The drone attachment must maintain stability during flight with and without the sen-
sor(s) in low-wind outdoor conditions. Usually, this means the attachment should
be balanced and as close to the centre of mass of the drone as possible.
• One attachment should deliver and retrieve VOC sensors so that human intervention
is not necessary between delivery and retrieval. Thus, overall flight time can be
minimised.
2.1.3
Human Performance Design Requirements
The following Human Performance Design Requirements are based on human perfor-
mance principles widely recognised in the field of Human Factors and Ergonomics. De-
signing a drone attachment based on the capabilities, characteristics, and needs of people
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
5
==PAGE:14==
will strive to improve human performance in terms of efficiency and safety. Human perfor-
mance considerations for teleoperated robotic 3D positioning tasks are outlined in greater
detail in Section 2.2.
• The system should enable users to operate the system intuitively and effectively,
even if they have limited technical expertise or training.
• Required attentional demand/cognitive load should be decreased by reducing the
complexity of the system.
• The feedback system should provide valuable information to the user to complete
the task, enabling better situational awareness and decision-making. By deciding
to use a commercial drone, the feedback of the system will be highly reliant on the
visual information provided by the built-in display and the sensors of the commercial
drone.
• The system should provide real-time control, ensuring that the operator’s commands
are executed promptly by the remote drone.
• The sensor should be highly visible in the field (e.g., brightly coloured) for fast sensor
identification.
• The physical design of the teleoperation interface should be comfortable and er-
gonomic, allowing the operator to control the drone without unnecessary strain or
discomfort.
2.2
Human Performance Considerations for Operation of
Aerial Robots
The goal is to design a system based on the limitations and the strengths of a human
drone operator so that the sensors in the field can be accurately delivered and retrieved
quickly and reliably while minimising error. This paper will examine basic principles of
human factors engineering and human performance to improve the human-robot/drone
interaction for this specific use case.
The prototype will be designed for researchers at WSL to deploy and collect these VOC
sensors in corn fields, despite likely having limited experience operating drones. Opti-
mising for human performance will be a priority for prototyping (Chapter 4) and will be
later evaluated during the usability testing (Chapter 5) phase. The focus will be on the
optimisation of Speed, Accuracy and Attention demand [14]. Ideally, the researchers can
operate this drone to pick-up and drop-off sensors as quickly, as accurately and with the
least attentional demand as possible.
In order to understand why human performance changes when design changes are im-
plemented, the human information processing model will be referenced as it generally
shows the flow of information as a human performs tasks through a series of processing
stages and mental operations (Figure 2.1). Great emphasis will be placed on the design
of the feedback system in order to provide the operator with meaningful information about
the drone.
6
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Human information processing model. Source: Adapted from [14]
2.2.1
Robotic Teleoperation
Teleoperation is the control of a robot remotely that could range from a distance of millions
of kilometres away for space exploration or centimetres away for microsurgery applica-
tions [15]. These systems can be controlled by a varying range of input devices, depend-
ing on the needs of the situation. Some input devices may be handheld with or without a
screen - for example, cell phones, joysticks, wheels, or pedals. Some may provide spe-
cific information to the operator - for instance, data transmitted from the robot, commands
issued to the robot, the health status of the robot, the status of the task and/or a map
[16]. In this case, the teleoperation of a drone to deliver VOC sensors will be conducted
by a human operator beyond the line of sight (BLOS), which is also known as beyond the
visual line of sight (BVLOS), with the maximum range limited to the maximum flight dis-
tance specified by the drone manufacturer. The effectiveness of the solution will depend
greatly on bridging the divide between the human and the drone via the input device to
minimise human performance issues related to teleoperated positioning tasks, namely,
remote perception and manual navigation.
Designing a teleoperated system poses specific challenges, as the operator’s situation
awareness of the remote environment can be greatly reduced, especially if performance
decrements are caused by video images bandwidth, time lags, frame rates, lack of pro-
prioception, frame of reference, two-dimensional views, attention switches, and motion
effects [16], which can be seen in the table below. Through the consideration of some of
these factors, the goal is to design a user interface that reduces these potential perfor-
mance degradations in order to enhance operator performance.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
7
==PAGE:16==
Table 2.1: Factors that affect remote perception and manipulation and potential user in-
terface solutions Source: Adapted from [16]
An immersive human-robot experience is required for teleoperation [16]. For this particu-
lar use case, the goal is to increase situational awareness by improving distance estima-
tions, obstacle detection, and improved operator perception of the natural environment.
Thus adequate video image quality of the camera and/or sensors, and reliable bandwidth
on the robot are crucial considerations. The varying daylight of outdoor field conditions
may also increase or decrease the operator’s perception of the environment. Additionally,
one aspect of minimising the difficulty of the task is improving teleoperator feedback [17]
so that a greater sense of operator immersion in the teleoperated environment can be
achieved [18]. The table below by Chen et al. [16], presents a comprehensive summary
of various multimodal user interfaces developed for robotic display and control. As it was
predefined that the sensor collection and deployment solution would be an attachment on
a commercial drone, careful consideration was given to the existing display and control of
the commercial drone and the information and feedback it could provide to the operator
during teleoperation.
8
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:17==
Table 2.2: Summary of various multimodal user interfaces for robotic display and control
Source: Adapted from [16]
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:19==
3
State-of-the-Art
UAVs have been widely used to reach remote locations, such as rural areas, disaster-
struck regions, or places with limited transportation infrastructure, as drones have the
benefit of moving quickly and independently from the terrain [19]. To better understand
various collection and deployment methods using UAVs to deliver lightweight payloads,
literature research was conducted to gain insights into possible feasible solutions that
may be applicable to this specific use case. Publications that presented novel, inexpen-
sive, lightweight, scalable and/or robust drone-based collection and deployment methods
were of particular interest. Additionally, reliable pick-up and drop-off methods that can
potentially minimise error during drone positioning in 3-D space were also observed. The
potential solutions discussed in this section have been categorised into two sections: Ac-
tive Actuated Systems (Section 3.1) and Passive Non-actuated Systems (Section 3.2).
Most active actuated systems are individual grippers intended to pick-up, hold and drop-
off one object at a time. For this reason, they may be more difficult to scale unless the
object can be temporally stored elsewhere to free up the gripper. They usually also have a
distinct open and closed state. Passive non-actuated systems are generally lighter, more
robust, less prone to mechanical failures, cheaper and do not require a secondary input
device.
3.1
Active Actuated Systems
The practicality of active gripper platforms on drones is frequently limited by the weight,
reliability, energy consumption and battery limitations and so various attempts have been
made to develop lightweight grippers for UAVs. In Hingston et al. [20], two re-configurable,
lightweight grasping mechanisms were presented. One is a net-based system that utilises
twisted string actuation (using a micro servo) to pull together eight 3D-printed cylindrical
gripper tips. These gripper tips are anchored at the bottom of the net (Figure 3.1(a)). For
the other design, two halves of a hexacopter slide on two parallel carbon fibre shafts in
order to expand and then contract to conform to the shape and size of the payload (Figure
3.1(b)). Another re-configurable grasping mechanism was designed by Lin et al. [21] to
collect and deploy parcels. The gripper functions in three stages: First, the telescopic
frame conforms to the shape of the parcel to secure it. Secondly, the parcel is lifted from
the ground to expose its bottom surface, and lastly, a net encloses the parcel from the
bottom to secure it for transportation (Figure 3.1(c)).
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
11
==PAGE:20==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.1: Re-configurable drones (a) Source: Adapted from [20] (b) Source: Adapted
from [20] (c) Source: Adapted from [21]
Various claw designs have also been designed for UAV-based collection and deployment
tasks. For example, in [22] the claw was actuated using a servo and the gripper’s strength.
The payload limitations of the claw were highly dependent on the servo’s torque. A com-
pliant gripper, as seen in Figure 3.2(a), was designed by [23]. Although it had various
strengths, when the drone encountered disturbances (a sharp jerk to the system), the
grasper failed to hold onto the object around 76% of the time. It was stated that the grip-
per may possibly be improved by increasing the friction on the claw. Various suction,
12
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:21==
vacuum, and soft grippers (Figure 3.2(b)) have also been developed to improve grasping
and object manipulation [24]. Another example of a low-cost gripper is one designed by
Yang et al. [25]. They designed a manipulator driven by a supercoiled polymer (SCP)
actuator, whereby a soft gripper deforms to encompass the object when a rope’s length
is reduced when coiled by a single motor (Figure 3.2(c)). However, this gripper is best
used to pick-up delicate, fragile objects.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: Claw Grippers (a) Source: Adapted from [23] (b) Source: Adapted from [24]
(c) Source: Adapted from [25]
The cable-driven iris mechanism-based gripper designed by Lee et al. [26] is one of the
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
13
==PAGE:22==
few gripper designs that attempt to compensate for UAV positioning errors. ”Fingertips”
were added to the ”gripper torsion ribs” to pick-up a variety of objects (Figure 3.3a). The
use of an iris-mechanism or a camera shutter mechanism is similar to the end effector
design used in the first space shuttle remote manipulator system (SRMS) developed by
the Canada Space Agency (CSA) and MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates Ltd.(MDA)
[27]. The capture procedure of the SRMS end-effector can be seen in Figure 3.3b. The
end effector of the large space manipulator is valued for its large misalignment tolerance
and soft-capturing capabilities. The SRMS only engaged with a standardised ”grapple
fixture”, oftentimes comprising of a bar with a shaft collar at the tip. With these designs,
by increasing the size of the gripper, the acceptable pick-up range is also increased, thus
minimising error. However, this gripper design may be difficult to scale.
(a) Source: Adapted from [26]
(b) Source: Adapted from [27]
Figure 3.3: Iris mechanism-based grippers
In another context in 2017, a team from ETH Zurich developed a 250 g electropermanent
magnetic (EPM) gripper for the Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge
[28]. For the third challenge they were required to pick-up and relocate ferrous objects
weighing around 200 g. Different from conventional electromagnets, EPMs only draw
electric current while transitioning between the states and thus are also more energy effi-
cient. Four Hall effect sensors were mounted around the gripper to detect ferrous objects.
A diagram of their design can be seen in Figure 3.4. In this competition, the drone had a
high servoing success rate of 93% but a low gripping rate of only 46%, which the engineers
primarily attribute to the EPM being too weak.
14
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.4: Source: Adapted from [28]
3.2
Passive Non-actuated Systems
Figure 3.5: Adapted from [29]
A lightweight mechanically intelligent and passive
(MIP) gripper for grasping and perching cylindri-
cal shapes has been designed by Hsiao et al [29].
Within the gripper, there is a switch part and when
a force is applied to it (e.g. the weight of the drone),
the gripper can switch among three states: an open
state, closed state, holding state and then back to
the open state. It was found that the gripper weigh-
ing around 28 g, could lift up a mass of 3.7 kg under
a static condition. However, in real life, a certain
level of positioning precision needs to be achieved
by the drone in order to apply force to the switch
part.
Compared to a single gripper, a different approach was taken by Jiang et al. [30] to collect
and retrieve a blade crawler (payload) for the maintenance of offshore wind turbine blades
using an autonomous multi-robot system. Two mechanisms are used for collection and
deployment. For deployment, the drone lands on the wind turbine blade, and once it is
safe to do so, a locking mechanism is released to deploy the payload. Once completed,
the UAV returns to the designated resting location. For collection, a pickup line is stretched
horizontally above the payload from two foldable arms. A hook is suspended from the
base of the UAV and so for collection, the drone aligns itself perpendicular to the pickup
line and flies across the payload for the pickup mechanisms to engage. The UAV then
flies up and delivers the payload at the designated position.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Deployment
(b) Collection
Figure 3.6: Adapted from [30]
16
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:25==
4
Solution Development
4.1
DJI Mavic Pro
As the intended operator of this system is likely an inexperienced drone pilot, a small drone
that is widely available on the commercial market was selected, as they are generally
easier to fly due to the various integrated sensors and algorithms that help maintain flight
stability. Flight features like obstacle avoidance should also help to ensure safety during
flight. A DJI Mavic Pro was selected for this project in order to fulfil this criteria. The
Mavic Pro has a maximum controller range of approximately 4 km, a maximum speed of
about 36 km/h in normal mode and 64.8 km/h in sport mode [31]. Without any additional
payload, the Mavic Pro can take-off and land autonomously.
4.1.1
Litchi Waypoint Navigation
Instead of using the standard DJI GO 4 flight app, the Litchi app will be used to control the
Mavic Pro as it offers additional flight features, in particular, Waypoint mode. In Waypoint
mode, users can predefine Waypoint missions (flight routes) where the DJI Mavic can then
follow autonomously. Therefore, a researcher can plan out the flight route and specify
where the sensors should be deployed before going into the field. However, relying only
on the DJI Mavic and the Litchi App will not be sufficient due to the precise manoeuvres
required to deploy or retrieve the sensor. The operator will still need to switch back to the
manual mode to execute these manoeuvres. Nevertheless, using Waypoint navigation
greatly assists the operator by enabling a semi-autonomous and consistent deployment
of the sensor at the desired location.
4.1.2
Maximum Payload Testing
In order to design a suitable manipulator to deploy and retrieve sensors in the field, under-
standing the payload limitations of the Mavic Pro was a crucial consideration. Krasylenko
et al. [32] designed a multifunctional manipulator meant to be attached to small commer-
cial drones for forest canopy and mistletoe research and management, called the Druid
Drone. Their results revealed that their chosen drone platforms under controlled condi-
tions could lift almost half their mass as a payload. As an initial reference, although the
drone models tested are not identical to the one used in this project, it was found that the
DJI Mavic 2 Pro, a similar model, could lift a 400 g payload with a maximum operating
time exceeding 10 min.
Figure 4.1: Clip-on
3D printed base
To determine the payload limitations of the Mavic Pro and
to estimate the maximum weight of the collection and de-
ployment device, a simple experiment was conducted at the
ERL. A 3D printed base that attaches to the base of the drone
was created so that various weighted payloads could be sus-
pended by a 50 cm string to the centre of the drone. The 3D
printed base with four screws and the string weighed a total
of 18.61 g (Figure 4.1).
For all takeoff attempts, there were no visible problems for
the Mavic Pro. It was observed that increasing the payload
weights resulted in higher restabilization times after abrupt
manoeuvres that stopped the drone’s translational move-
ments. When the drone travelled upward, changes to ma-
noeuvrability were not noticeable. However, when the drone
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
17
==PAGE:26==
travelled downward with a heavier weight, the accuracy of the drone decreased as the
drone would often descend lower than intended. The data from this experiment helped to
better understand the payload limitations of the drone for the gripper design and bench-
mark the amount of time a human operator may have to deliver and retrieve a sensor
based on the additional weight of the gripper with and without the sensor.
Table 4.1: DJI mavic pro maximum payload testing (Mavic Pro, 3830 mAh battery)
Takeoff mass, (g)
Payload, (g)
Flight time to 50%, (min)
Wind
(km/h)
Gusts (km/h)
772.91
0
11.35
3
9
822.91
50
11.37
7
22
872.91
100
10.51
6
21
922.91
150
9.45
8
24
972.91
200
9.35
10
25
1022.91
250
9.13
10
2
1072.91
300
8.17
1
3
1122.91
350
7.28
1
17
1172.91
400
7.16
8
20
Figure 4.2: Mavic Pro operating time from 100% to 50% battery charge
4.2
Initial Conceptualization
After conducting literature research on potential solutions that are attachable to a small
commercial drone to pick-up and drop-off lightweight loads, many ideas were formulated.
However, the initial conceptualisation stages revealed an important consideration to de-
sign a gripper that could be mounted as close to the drone’s centre of mass as possible
and to ensure that the entire system remained balanced during flight while unloaded and
loaded with up to three sensors.
18
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:27==
4.2.1
Y-shaped rail design
Although various concepts were formulated during the brainstorming process, one design
seemed to be the most promising. From this point on, this design will be referred to as
the ”Y-shaped rail design”, which can be seen below:
(a) Y-shaped rail structure carrying 3 sensors
(b) Top view of the rail
Figure 4.3: Sketches of the first design
Sensor Design
For the initial design of the sensor, a sphere was added to the top of the rod that extends
vertically from the top of the sensor (Figure 4.3a). This sphere acts as a target for the
drone during positioning, as the shape remains symmetrical whenever the sensor is in
the camera view of the drone, which eliminates the need for the drone to approach the
sensor from a particular side. Ideally with this design, the drone operator would only need
to align the sphere within the desired marked range within the camera view before flying
forward, which potentially reduces the positioning time. An initial diameter of 5.5 cm was
selected for the sphere for the ”Y-shaped rail design” so that three sensors would be able
to be stacked on the storage rails below the drone.
By selecting a highly visible sensor colour, the goal was to improve colour discrimination
so that improved object detection and recognition could be achieved. Determining the
optimal colour to maximize detectability in a given outdoor environment is complex, partly
because of the nature of the perceptual space. This would correspond to the ”Perception”
stage of the Human Information Processing Loop (Figure 2.1) discussed in Section 2.2.
As the sensors are to be deployed in a cornfield, which is an outdoor environment primarily
consisting of green and brown hues, contrasting colours that optimise visibility were con-
sidered. As studies specifically related to optimal colour visibility in agricultural fields were
not found, one article that identified various optimal colours to maximize detectability in
a temperate forest environment was instead referenced [33]. Fennell et al. used image-
processing techniques to embed targets into realistic environments, psychophysics to
estimate detectability and deep neural networks to interpolate between sampled colours.
It was concluded that for trichromats in a temperate forest environment, shades of red,
magenta and neon green are the easiest to find, while for dichromats, shades of blue,
white and bright yellow maximize visibility (Figure 4.4).
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.4: Representation of 25 most-visible randomly sampled colours for the temperate
forest environment that yielded similar reaction times. Source: Adapted from at [33]
In the end, fluorescent/neon pink was selected for the colour of the sensor sphere for
greater visibility in the field within the line-of-sight but also within the video feed from the
drone’s camera. However, if the drone operator is dichromatic (colour vision deficient),
another colour should be considered for greater visibility. Moreover, a fluorescent colour
variety was selected as the pigments have the benefit of absorbing invisible UV light, con-
verting it to a lower energy visible light before reflecting it back for even greater visibility.
For even greater visibility, it could be a consideration to make the entire sensor neon pink.
Gripper Design
This design was developed with the aim to pick-up and drop-off multiple sensors (1-3
sensors), and during the collection and delivery process, ensure that the weight of the
sensors would be as close to the drone’s centre of mass as possible. The queue of the
sensors in the system would follow a first in, first out (FIFO) order whereby the first sensor
to be collected would also be the first to be dropped off and the first to be dropped off would
also be the first sensor to be collected. As each sensor requires 16 min for VOC sampling,
it was speculated that during these 16 min, another sensor could be deployed in order to
increase the number of sensors deployed with one fully charged battery.
There are three main components to this design:
1. Collection
2. Storage
3. Drop-off
20
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.5: The collection structure was angled upward in order to compensate for drone
tilting when flying forward
For the ”Y-shaped rail design”, the drone flies horizontally so that the sensor enters the
Y-shaped frame and after a certain point, the drone flies upward and the sphere is caught
between the rails. A “Y” was selected to act as a funnel, so that even if the drone is slightly
misaligned, the sphere of the sensor would still be aligned with the rail. A larger funnel
would be more effective as the drone has a greater collection range, but on the other
hand, a larger funnel would also require more material and thus increase the payload
of the drone. Additionally, by increasing the opening angle of the ”Y”, a larger sphere
would need to be mounted onto the sensor. Thus, in the design, an attempt was made to
maximise the size of the funnel while maintaining the manoeuvrability of the drone. The
front of the ”Y-shaped” was also designed to be angled slightly upward to accommodate
for the tilt of the drone while it flies forward.(Figure 4.5).
Once the sensor is no longer in contact with the ground, it would automatically slide to
the back of the storage rail so that the drone can maintain greater flight stability. The
length of the parallel storage rails was designed to hold a maximum of 3 sensors each
with a Ø 5.5 cm sphere. At this time the drop-off system was not yet considered, but the
sensor would be dropped off from the back of the drone. The addition of soft spacers
were considered to ensure the sensors would not collide with one another and become
damaged while stacked in the storage rail. In order to create a prototype for this design,
careful consideration was given to the angles of the frame during the dimensioning design
process.
The pick-up design described here is passive (non-actuated) and approaches the sensor
following a ”Horizontal Flight Path”. The ideal flight path for the drone to collect the sensor
into the storage rail is forward and up so that the sensor does not drag on the ground.
However, this is likely less ideal for human operators as two variables must be controlled
simultaneously. This flight path may be more consistently executed by a standardised
autonomous system. However, a certain level of accuracy must be achieved, which may
be fulfilled by certain autonomous systems.
The steps for collection are as follows:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning. Ideally, two squares could be overlaid
on the camera view to show the upper and lower range so that the distance between
the drone and sensor can be better estimated by the human operator.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Camera View. Step 1 ”passive collection”
2. Fly forward horizontally. During this step, the sensor would be out of the camera
view and likely be tilted while caught in the storage rails. Depth/distance may be
particularly difficult to control for the human operator.
Figure 4.7: Camera View. Step 2 ”passive collection”
3. Fly upward. The sphere of the sensor slides backwards to the storage rails of the
frame.
Figure 4.8: Camera View. Step 3 ”passive collection”
Active Pick-up (Vertical Flight Path)
A modification of the ”Y-shaped rail design” was also considered whereby the front arms
of the gripper would be active (actuated) and the drone would follow a vertical flight path
to descend onto the sensor from above. The front arms of the ”Y-shaped” rails would be
connected to the storage rail by rotational joints so that the arms could move freely. A
claw gripper actuated with a servo would be mounted to the base of the drone to control
the opening and closing of the front arms (See Figure 4.9). Once the sensor is within the
ideal range in the camera view, a button would be pressed so that the front arms of the
gripper would close onto the sensor’s rod (under the sphere). The drone would then fly
up, and as the front arms are angled upward like the ”passive pick-up” design that follows
a horizontal flight path, the sphere of the sensor would automatically slide back to the
storage rails of the collection frame.
22
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.9: Conceptualisation of active pick-up mechanism: Side View
The steps for collection are as follows:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning. Like with the passive pick-up design
that follows a horizontal flight path, ideally, two squares could be overlaid on the
camera view to show the upper and lower range so that the distance between the
drone and sensor can be better estimated by the human operator.
Figure 4.10: Camera View. Step 1 ”active collection”
2. Close front arms of gripper. Visual feedback that the sensor has been collected
would be evident when the two front arms of the gripper are underneath the sphere.
Figure 4.11: Camera View. Step 2 ”active collection”
3. Fly upward. The sphere of the sensor would slide backwards to the storage rails
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
23
==PAGE:32==
of the frame.
Figure 4.12: Camera View. Step 3 ”active collection”
As another variation, the two front arms of the gripper could be slightly offset so that when
they close, the arms would cross over, hence pushing the sensor back into the storage
rails. This way, the front arms of the gripper may not need to be angled upward (See
Figure 4.13).
Figure 4.13: Crossing front arms of the gripper: Top view
Drop-off system
Similar to the pick-up systems, both a passive (non-actuated) and an active (actuated)
design were considered to execute sensor deployment. The two designs can be seen
below:
(a) Passive drop-off structure
(b) Active drop-off mechanism
Figure 4.14: Conceptualisation of passive and active drop-off systems
24
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:33==
For the passive drop-off structure, two vertical rods could be added to the back of the
collection frame so that when the sensor is placed on the ground, the sphere of the sensor
lifts off of the storage rail, and once the sphere of the sensor is above the top tips of the
vertical rods, the drone could fly forward to deploy the sensor. It is important to consider
that the camera of the DJI is located at the front of the drone and can only pan 90° from
a forward camera position to a downward camera position, thus, the operator would not
be able to see when the sensor touches the ground. For the active drop-off mechanism,
an actuated mechanism could be used so that when the drone is at the correct altitude
off the ground, a button could be pressed and a mechanism would regulate that only one
sensor would be deployed at a time. This method would bypass the problem posed by
the passive drop-off structure where the operator would not be able to see the sensor and
thus likely encounter difficulties to deploy it.
4.3
Prototype 1 - Passive Collection
4.3.1
Description
It was decided the first prototype to be created and tested would be the”passive collection”
method. The ”Y-shaped” frame of Prototype 1 was made from carbon fibre rods and 3D
printed ABS parts. Carbon fibre rods were selected for their lightweight, high stiffness
and tensile strength properties [34]. ABS 3D parts were selected for prototyping flexibility.
The frame was designed to be modular so that it could be attached with 8 screws to a 3D
printed ABS base that clips onto the base of the Mavic Pro. In the future, if another drone
of a similar size is used, only the base that attaches to the drone needs to be redesigned,
rather than the whole frame.
In order for the drone to remain parallel to the ground during take-off and landing, ”landing
gear” made from paper, tape and wire was attached to the front of the drone, as it can
be seen in Figure 4.15 (a). These were intended to be temporary to demonstrate proof
of concept. In total, the collection frame with the ”landing gear” contributed an additional
122.92 g to the drone.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
25
==PAGE:34==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.15: Prototype 1 (a) Side View (b) Front View (c) Back View (d) Top View (e)
Bottom View
For collection, the camera view is tilted downward so that the front 3D printed joints are
visible in the camera view. When the sensor is centred within the camera view between
the upper and lower boundaries (See Figure 4.16), within the ideal pick-up range, the
bottom base of the drone (where the drone’s downward sensors are) is around 60 cm -
70 cm off of the ground.
Figure 4.16: Camera view of the drone in the ideal position for pick-up
4.3.2
Prototype Evaluation
Flight Tests
During flight tests, a few discoveries were made. To accommodate for the frame, the
drone was elevated by 22 cm during take-off and landing. It was found that the drone did
not have any issues manually taking-off and automatically landing. At this point, automatic
26
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:35==
landing was not tested. To test the passive collection structure the step depicted in the
”Gripper Design” section of Section 4.2.1, the drone was firstly positioned so that the
sphere of the sensor was centred in the camera view around 50 cm away from the sensor.
Conveniently at this position, the front tip of the collection frame is vertically positioned on
a plane 1 cm to 14cm underneath of the sphere. Once the drone was positioned, it then
flew forward. Tests were conducted where the drone gradually accelerated forward but
also where the drone quickly accelerated forward. The same result was witnessed for all
flight tests, once the sensor entered the ”Y” of the collection frame, the sphere would hit
the frame at the point where the front collection arms meet the storage rails. The region
is shown in Figure 4.17. It was hypothesised that if this angle was increased from 150°to
180°, the sensor would not be knocked over during collection.
Figure 4.17: The sensor was knocked over during collection flight tests when the sphere
collided with the collection frame within the region illustrated in pink
Insights
After creating and testing the first prototype, the following insights were gained for the
development of the next prototype:
• Elevating the drone by 22 cm did not pose any problems with take-off and land-
ing. With this verified, more robust ”landing gear” should be created for the next
prototype.
• As the sensor should never be knocked over in the field, the angle referred to in
Figure 4.17 should be flattened to 180°for the next prototype.
• A propeller guard at the front of the drone should be added to help guide the sphere
into the frame and to prevent any unsafe situations where the sensor interferes with
the front propellers.
• The tolerance of the holes of the 3D printed joint pieces could be increased by 0.1
mm to prevent needing to manually drill and enlarge the holes, which affected the
overall precision and alignment of the frame.
• The painted ABS and TPU printed sphere of the sensor, weighing 25.01g, was too
heavy and caused the sensor to fall over occasionally. Thus, the weight of the
sphere of the sensor should be reduced,
• A drop-off system should be implemented
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
27
==PAGE:36==
4.4
Prototype 2 - Passive Collection and Drop-off
4.4.1
Description Prototype 2.1
The angle referred to in Figure 4.17 was ”flattened” to 180° for this prototype. A frontal
propeller guard was created using lightweight materials, including carbon fibre rods, 0.2
mm thick fibreglass and minimal 3D printed joints. For simplicity of assembly, the propeller
guard was combined with the new ”landing gear”. The more robust ”landing gear” consists
of two 4mm carbon fibre square profiles, each with a 3D printed foot piece, that connect to
the front arms of Mavic Pro via a fitted 3D printed piece that can be attached or detached
with cable ties. The passive drop-off structure illustrated in Section 4.2.1 was also added
to this prototype. The two rods installed were 3 mm wooden dowels and intended to be
temporary. Compared to 3 mm carbon fibre rods, the wooden dowels were cheaper and
easier to shorten during the testing phase when the ideal height of the two rods was yet
to be determined. The Ø 5.5cm sphere of the sensor was reprinted fully with TPU. After
being painted the sphere weighed a total of 8.31 g.
In total, the collection frame, propeller guard and ”landing gear” contributed an additional
144.71 g to the drone.
(a)
(b)
(c)
28
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:37==
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.18: Prototype 2.1 (a) Side View (b) Front View (c) Back View (d) Top View (e)
Bottom View
4.4.2
Prototype Evaluation
Flight Tests
When testing the prototype with the new propeller guard, the drone failed to take-off (See
Figure 4.19). Although the propeller guard was designed to be as lightweight as possible,
the drone was not able to accommodate for the weight imbalance.
Figure 4.19: Failure to take-off
After the removal of the propeller guard, it was discovered that the passive pick-up and
drop-off system could successfully retrieve and collect one sensor. For multiple sensors,
the legs of the sensors got caught on the legs of the adjacent sensors and thus could not
be deployed. It was decided that the collection and deployment of only one sensor would
be prioritized for the initial proof of concept of the next prototype.
4.4.3
Description Prototype 2.2
Since the propeller guard created for Prototype 2.1 was not feasible, new propeller guards
were redesigned for Prototype 2.2 to help guide the sphere into the collection frame and
to prevent any unsafe situations where the sensor interferes with the front propellers.
Additionally, after successfully dropping off a sensor with the ”passive drop-off” structure
with Prototype 2.1, it was observed that if the drone was lowered too much during the drop-
off process, the sensor could hit the back propellers. Hence, it was decided that back
propeller guards would also be added. Commercial propeller guards were purchased,
yet as the sphere could still pass through the guards or hit the propellers from the side
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
29
==PAGE:38==
during collection and drop-off, they were modified with additional 3 mm wooden dowels to
prevent these instances (Figure 4.20). The purchased propeller guards weighed 143.02 g
before modification and 158.82 g after modification. In total, the collection frame, propeller
guards and ”landing gear” contributed an additional 263.94 g to the drone.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.20: Prototype 2.2 (a) Side View (b) Front View (c) Back View (d) Top View (e)
Bottom View
4.4.4
Prototype Evaluation
Flight Tests
To test Prototype 2.2 and to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the system, 12
indoor pick-up and 5 drop-off attempts within the line-of-sight (WLOS) were conducted,
without any prior practice with this system. Out of the 12 pick-up attempts, there were 4
successful pick-up attempts and 8 failed pick-up attempts. A failed pick-up attempt was
30
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:39==
recorded when the drone was mispositioned during Step 1 (Figure 4.6), therefore when
the drone flew forward for collection, the sensor did not enter the Y of the collection frame,
and so the drone needed to back-up in order to reposition again. Out of the 5 drop-off
attempts, there were 4 successful drop-off attempts and 1 failed drop-off attempt.
Insights
A few observations were made during the collection process, namely:
• As the propeller guards were very heavy, the drone encountered instability flying
outdoors. Another collection and deployment design may need to be considered if
the weight of Prototype 2.2 cannot be reduced.
• For one instance, the drone was positioned slightly too high from the ideal collection
height, and so the sensor was knocked over. In a real-life setting where a sensor
would be deployed in a field, this would be highly problematic since human inter-
vention would be required to retrieve the sensor.
• Although the weight of the Ø 5.5 cm sphere decreased by 16.7 g (reduction of 66.8%)
from Prototype 1, it oscillated constantly on the Ø 2 mm carbon fibre rod, which made
it challenging to position the sphere in the camera view of the drone. Replacing the
Ø 2 mm carbon fibre rod with a carbon fibre square profile would likely improve the
stability of the sphere.
• An instance occurred where the sphere of the sensor entered the collection frame,
but as the operator flew up too late, the sensor went straight through the frame and
was not collected. Determining the depth at which the sphere of the sensor is in the
collection frame and when to fly up was difficult, as the operator must fly up after the
sphere is out of the camera view (Figure 4.7).
• When the sensor was not positioned correctly and missed the ”Y-shaped” frame, the
operator had to reverse the drone and reposition it for collection. The angle between
the front arms of the ”Y” could be increased, but this would also require the sphere
of the sensor to increase proportionally.
Additionally, a few insights were gained during the drop-off process:
• During the instance where the sensor was not deployed, the drone was not lowered
enough and thus did not leave the collection frame. Shortening the passive drop-
off rods would minimize the distance the drone needs to be lowered for drop-off,
making the deployment potentially easier.
• For some of the drop-off attempts, the rod of the sensor momentarily got caught on
the back joints. By thinning and tapering the walls of the 3D printed joint pieces that
connect to the carbon fibre rods, the walls of the joints should no longer interfere
with the sensor.
• Although deploying the sensor with this prototype within the line-of-sight was possi-
ble, it may be much more difficult beyond the line-of-sight. A “rear-view mirror” or a
First-person view (FPV) camera could be useful by giving the operator insight when
the sphere is over the rods
4.5
Prototype 3 - Passive Trapdoor Collection
4.5.1
Initial Conceptualisation - Passive Trapdoor Collection
One of the major limitations of the passive ”Y-shaped rail” design was that after positioning,
there was limited feedback provided to the human operator to verify that the sensor has
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
31
==PAGE:40==
been collected, which is particularly important for teleoperation. The active ”Y-shaped
rail” collection mechanism was considered, however, an actuated collection or deploy-
ment mechanism would likely require an extra controller in addition to the existing Mavic
Pro controller, which would be less convenient for the operator. Active systems are usu-
ally heavier and less robust than passive systems, as a microcontroller, power source,
actuator and receiver would likely be mounted onto the drone. Meanwhile, in order to
address this problem, a new passive collection design was formulated which is illustrated
below in Figure 4.21. From this point on, this design will be referred to as the ”passive
trapdoor collection” mechanism.
The ”passive trapdoor collection” mechanism was designed to replace the two front arms
of the ”Y-shaped” collection structure, whereby a square frame, angled slightly upward,
with two transparent trap doors was attached to the storage rails. There was a 2 cm
gap between the two trap doors so that when the sphere of the sensor rests between
the edges of the two trap doors the remaining part of the sensor could hang from below.
The drone would follow a vertical flight path for collection. During the flight, the trapdoors
would rest flush against the square frame, and once the drone descends onto the sphere
of the sensor, the trap doors would be pushed from below and open upward no greater
than 90°. Once the sphere of the sensor passed through the trapdoors, the trap doors
would automatically close and the sensor would be collected. The drone operator would
then fly up and the sensor would automatically slide back to the storage rails for greater
flight stability. A funnel was considered to be added to the square trapdoor to reduce
collection error.
Figure 4.21: Prototype 3 - Transparent trap doors collection mechanism
The steps for collection using the ”passive trapdoor” mechanism are as depicted below:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning. The goal of the operator is to position
the of the sensor through the trap doors
32
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.22: Camera View. Step 1 ”trapdoor collection”
2. Verify that the sensor has been collected. Once the sphere is above the trap-
doors, the operator knows that the sensor has been collected.
Figure 4.23: Camera View. Step 2 ”trapdoor collection”
3. Fly upward. The sphere of the sensor slides backwards to the storage rails of the
frame.
Figure 4.24: Camera View. Step 3 ”trapdoor collection”
4.5.2
Description
Prototype 3 was created to test the ”passive trapdoor collection” concept, which can be
seen in Figure 4.25. The trap door frame was tilted 5° upward and dimensioned to be 12
cm x 12 cm so that the top and bottom edges of the trapdoor frame would be visible within
the drone’s camera view. The trap doors are positioned at a vertical distance of 18 cm
away from the camera. The trapdoors were made from 0.5 mm thick polypropylene and
the hinges were 3D printed. In total, the collection frame and ”landing gear” contributed
an additional 121.27 g to the drone.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
33
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.25: Prototype 3 (a) Side View (b) Front View (c) Back View (d) Top View (e)
Bottom View
As the painted TPU sphere on the vertical Ø 2 mm carbon fibre rod of the sensor laterally
oscillated during the positioning attempts of the Prototype 2.2 flight tests, the idea was
considered to swap the TPU sphere for a Styrofoam sphere, as Styrofoam spheres are
cheaper and lighter, weighing around 2.91 g painted. However, as only Ø 5 cm and Ø 6 cm
Styrofoam spheres were available for purchase, it was decided that a Ø 5 cm Styrofoam
sphere would be tested for the Prototype 3 flight tests. Additionally, the Ø 2 mm carbon
fibre rod of the sensor was replaced with a Ø 3 mm carbon fibre square profile.
4.5.3
Prototype Evaluation
Flight Tests
Compared to Prototype 2.2, less time was required to correct for misalignment and there
was a lower chance of knocking the sensor over. Positioning the drone relative to the
sensor was also easier as micro adjustments could be made moments before collection.
During flight tests, it was discovered that after the sensor passed through the trapdoors,
the sensor did not automatically slide back to the storage rails, as there was too much
friction between the surface of the Styrofoam sphere and the trapdoors. The sensor with
the painted TPU sphere from Prototype 2 was also tested, however, it was also unable to
automatically slide back to the storage rails.
Insights
• As the sphere did not slide back automatically upon collection, the angle of the trap
door frame should be further increased.
• There were a couple of instances where unusual upward drifting was experienced.
34
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:43==
It was hypothesised that there may have been some disruptions with the drone’s
visual sensors or GPS.
• For the next prototype, methods to decrease positioning errors were considered.
One idea was to optimise the ratio of the trap door frame size (increase) to the sphere
size (decrease) without compromising flight stability or sensor visibility. Another idea
was to add a funnel that does not significantly obstruct the camera view visibility.
4.6
Prototype 4 - Passive Trapdoor Collection
4.6.1
Sliding Angle Experiment
To determine the minimum angle required for the sphere to slide on the polypropylene trap
doors and the material of the sphere, a simple experiment was conducted to determine the
minimum angle of incline of the trap doors for 5 different materials: Painted TPU, Painted
Styrofoam, Painted ABS, Styrofoam and Fiberglass. Two parallel polypropylene sheets
with a gap of 2 cm in between were connected using hinges to a pivot point (See Figure
4.26a). The weight of the sensor (72.16 g) was attached to each of the tested spheres
to simulate the in-field collection process. The sensor was placed at the furthest-most
point from the hinges so that when the polypropylene was lifted, the sensor would side
toward the hinges. A camera was placed beside the test setup, parallel to the path of
motion (See Figure 4.26b). The minimum angle required for the sensor to start sliding on
the polypropylene trap doors was recorded. An average of 5 trials for each material was
taken to formulate the following results (Table 4.2).
(a) Experimental Setup
(b) Side View
Figure 4.26: Experiment to determine the angle at which the sensor slides on polypropy-
lene
Table 4.2: Experiment to determine the angle at which the sensor slides on polypropylene
Material of the sphere
Trial 1
Trial 2
Trial 3
Trial 4
Trial 5
Minimum sliding
angle on the
polypropylene
trapdoors
(average of trials)
Painted TPU
10.1
10.3
9.7
10.2
10.4
10.2
Painted Styrofoam
16.2
20.2
17.0
18.9
17.5
18.0
Painted ABS
10.1
10.8
9.3
8.2
11.7
10.0
Styrofoam
21.8
24.0
28.1
28.3
28.0
26.0
Fibreglass
20.2
20.3
17.9
19.9
18.5
19.4
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
35
==PAGE:44==
Based on the insights gained from the results of the experiment and to ensure that the
sensor always slides back to the storage rails after collection, it was decided that the
sphere of the sensor will be made out of painted TPU and that the incline of the trapdoor
would be set to 20◦. TPU is a lightweight material that can be 3D printed. Compared to
the painted Styrofoam sphere that must be pierced by hand, a 3D printed TPU sphere
can be more accurately centred on the 3 mm carbon fibre square profile that is necessary
for increased stability.
4.6.2
Description
Compared to Prototype 3 various changes were implemented in Prototype 4:
1. Although sensor-propeller interference seems to be reduced with the ”passive trap-
door collection” compared to the ”passive Y-shaped collection” as minor positioning
adjustments can be more easily executed, front and back propeller guards would
be added to Prototype 4 for additional safety.
(a) In case the sensor travels too far up through the trapdoors during collection, the
front propeller guards prevent the sensor from hitting the camera or the front
propellers. The front propeller guards consist of two parallel Ø 3 mm carbon
rods 4 cm apart extending from the front of the clip-on 3D printed drone base.
A 4 cm long carbon fibre square profile piece was added to the end of the two
parallel rods so that the sensor would not get stuck between the two parallel
rods. When the drone camera is looking directly forward, the propeller guard
is minimally obstructive and while the drone camera is turned downward for
collection, the propeller guard is not viable at all (See Figure 4.29).
(b) In case the drone is lowered too much during the drop-off manoeuvres, the
back propeller guard ensures that the sensor will not hit the back propellers.
The back propeller guard was laser cut from a thin sheet of fibreglass and bent
to make an arch then attached using screws to two points on the collection
frame (See Figure 4.28). Cut-outs were added for weight reduction and the
allowance of airflow.
2. Cobalt blue tape was also added to the edges of the trapdoors and the top tips of
the passive drop-off rods for greater visibility within the camera views of the drone.
3. A funnel laser cut from fibreglass was added to increase the collection region of the
trap doors from 12 cm x 12 cm to 18 cm x 18 cm.
4. The distance between the passive drop-off rods was also increased from 20 mm to
30 mm, so it is possible to deploy the sensor on slightly uneven ground.
Figure 4.27: The distance between the drop-off rods were increased to 30 mm
5. To decrease positioning errors and optimise the ratio of the trap door frame size to
36
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:45==
the sensor sphere size. The sphere of the sensor was decreased to Ø 5 cm. When
painted, it weighed a total of 11.38g.
In total, the collection frame and ”landing gear” contributed an additional 152.52 g to the
drone.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.28: Prototype 4 (a) Right View (b) Left View (c) Front View (d) Back View (e) Top
View (f) Bottom View
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
37
==PAGE:46==
4.6.3
Camera Views
Front Camera View
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.29: Prototype 4 - DJI Mavic Pro Camera View (a) Forward Camera View (b)
Downward Camera View - No Sensor (c) Downward Camera View - ”Positioning” (d)
Downward Camera View - ”Collected”
38
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:47==
Back Camera View
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.30: Back Camera (a) Camera View from LCD Monitor (b) A neck strap was
added to the LCD Monitor (c) The small FPV camera was mounted to assist during the
drop-off process
4.6.4
Prototype Evaluation
Flight Tests
Sometimes during flight tests, when the intention was to hover in a fixed position, the drone
would automatically drift upward without any operator input commands. This unusual
behaviour was highly concerning to the operability and safety of the drone deployment
and retrieval system.
It was a priority to fix this problem so some simple tests were conducted. When the
transparent trap doors were removed completely, the drone was able to hover in place
and unusual drifting behaviour was not witnessed. Meanwhile, when a square sheet of
paper was placed to cover the 12 cm x 12 cm trap door frame, the drone would not be able
to hover in place and would always drift upward automatically. Different levels of coverage
within the frame of the trapdoors were also tested. The less material placed between the
frame of the trapdoors, the lower the frequency the drone would automatically drift upward.
Thus, it was concluded that the obstruction of a physical object, whether transparent or
non-transparent, placed between the frame of the trap doors interferes with the drone’s
onboard obstacle avoidance system sensors.
The hypothesis is that the sensor detects the trap door as the ground, and in order to
avoid the obstacle, the drone automatically flies upward.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
39
==PAGE:48==
Insights
It was also observed that the front propellers heated up more than the back propellers
when the drone was flying with the sensor, but especially when the drone was flying with-
out the sensor. It was concluded that the front of the collection frame was slightly heavier
than the back and its weight could be shifted slightly forward in order to achieve more
optimal weight distribution.
4.7
Prototype 5 - Passive Trapdoor Collection
With the previous prototype, three major issues were encountered. Firstly, sometimes
the drone would not hover in place, as it would register the attachment as an obstacle
and thus it would automatically drift upward, which is further discussed in Section 4.7.1.
Secondly, when the drone is carrying the weighted sensor, the sensor would constantly
swing back and forth, causing the drone to oscillate as the drone attempted to automat-
ically stabilise and correct, meanwhile, this behaviour was not witnessed when only the
collection frame without the sensor was attached to the drone. The details of this issue
are further discussed in Section 4.7.2. Thirdly, after flying the drone for over 10 min, the
motors of the drone would be hot to touch and the batteries would show signs of puffiness.
All of these concerns must be addressed in order to safely conduct usability testing with
humans.
4.7.1
Experiments to tackle the problem of automatic upward drifting
To verify whether the upward drifting was caused by interference of the built-in obstacle
avoidance sensors, an experiment was conducted to test various configurations of the
collection frame:
• A few trap door designs with cut-out patterns of varying levels of coverage were
created using 0.5 mm thick cardstock. As long as the trap doors maintain enough
structural rigidity to allow for the sensor to automatically slide back to the storage
rails during collection, the design can be considered for the next prototype. The
”frame” would not be practical for this reason, but was included in the experiment
regardless.
• For some of the tests, the entire collection mechanism was shifted 1 cm forward
relative to the drone in order to test whether certain configurations yield particular
results. Due to the flexible attachment design to the base plate of the drone, this
was straightforward to implement.
The results are as follows:
40
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:49==
Table 4.3: Usability & Performance Testing
Area covered
within the
12 cm x 12 cm
trap door frame
Percentage of
area covered
within the
12 cm x 12 cm
trapdoor frame
Surface area
covered
within the
12 cm x 12 cm
trap door frame
Mounting Position
Whether
automatic
upward
drifting was
witnessed
1
83.88%
12077 mm2
1 - Original
No
2 - 1 cm forward
No
2
59.10%
8510 mm2
1
No
2
Yes
3
56.40%
8121 mm2
1
No
2
No
4
53.75%
7739 mm2
1
Yes
2
No
5
32.07%
4617 mm2
1
No
2
No
6
0
0 mm2
1
No
2
No
Two flight trials were conducted for each result. By shifting the frame 1 cm forward from
the original position, the front motors were warmer than the back motors, which indicates
that the drone was slightly off balance and heavier in the front. So the original position
was selected for the next prototype for greater balance. In the end, the cross design was
selected as it was the design that and had the least surface area of the designs in the
original position that eliminated the problem of automatic upward drifting.
4.7.2
Experiments to address concerns of oscillations while carrying the
sensor
The drone does not encounter unusual vibrations or oscillations when flying with only the
frame indoors and in low wind conditions outdoors. However, while carrying the sensor,
oscillation concerns were noted in both indoor and outdoor contexts.
It is hypothesised that the oscillations will reduce either if the weight of the sensor is placed
closer to the centre of mass of the drone, or if the weight of the sensor is suspended using
a string further away from the centre of mass of the drone, e.g. like the maximum payload
experiment. With the current design, a solution was not considered to place the sensor
closer to the centre of mass of the drone as clearance needs to be provided in order
to execute the manoeuvres to pick-up and drop-off the sensor. Additionally, the drone
should be able to pick-up the sensor at a certain vertical distance without interfering with
the young corn plants in the field.
Suspending the sensor on a string further from the drone’s centre of mass
A string connected to the sphere and the top of the rod of the sensor with different lengths
was tested.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
41
==PAGE:50==
Table 4.4: Experimental results on whether drone oscillations were experienced when the
sensor was suspended from a string
Length of string
Whether oscillations were
experienced
20 cm
Yes
50 cm
Yes
75cm
Yes
100 cm
No
150 cm
No
200 cm
No
Figure
4.31:
The
sphere of the sensor
was connected to the
top of the sensor at
different string lengths
It was discovered that the oscillations stopped when the length
of the string was greater than 100 cm. With the current prototype
design, it is not possible to pick-up or drop-off the sensor when
the sphere hangs on a string from the tip of the sensor’s verti-
cal square profile. So, two ideas were considered to allow the
sensor to hang from a 100 cm string. The first idea is to incorpo-
rate a device into the sphere that uses a similar mechanism as
a retractable name badge holder, though changes to the spring
would need to be made for the string to extend when subject to
the weight of the sensor or heavier.
The second idea was to thread an elastic string through the mid-
dle of the hollow 3 mm x 3mm square profile. One end would be
mounted to the top of the sensor’s case and the other end would
be attached to the middle of the sphere. The sphere would sit
on top of the vertical 3 mm x 3mm square profile when the elas-
tic string is retracted, but once it is subjected to the weight of the
sensor or heavier, the string would stretch so that 100 cm of string
could be available between the sphere and the tip of the sensor’s
vertical square profile.
A quick test was conducted where 46 cm of elastic string was
threaded through the vertical 3 mm square profile. The drone os-
cillations were no longer observed, however, the elasticity of the
string caused additional unwanted ‘bouncing’ movements of the
sensor, which would make placing the sensor on the ground for
drop-off highly challenging. Despite these tests and discoveries,
it was decided not to pursue and develop these ideas further due to time constraints.
Flying with a reduced payload
Experiments were also conducted to test whether the drone with the attachment could fly
without oscillations with a reduced-weight sensor. It was concluded that the drone could
fly safely without oscillations with the sensor.
Testing the current prototype on the DJI Mavic 3 Classic
Due to concerns with the hot motors and the slightly bloated batteries, it was decided
that the system would be tested on the DJI Mavic 3 Classic to see whether the collection
and deployment frame could be transferred to a more powerful drone. The DJI Mavic 3
Classic has a maximum horizontal speed of 75.6 km/h, a maximum flight time of around
46 minutes, a maximum hovering time of 40 minutes and additionally, it has a maximum
42
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:51==
flight distance of 30 km [35]. So, if the collection and deployment frame can be used on
the Mavic 3 Classic, the sampling range could be increased from 4 km to 30 km. As this
drone model is newer, it is also more expensive.
The collection and deployment frame was adapted to the Mavic 3 Classic, which can be
seen in 4.32. Particularly the clip-on 3D printed drone base needed to be redesigned and
the 3D printed piece of the landing gear that connected to the arms of the drone also
needed to be modified.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.32: Sensor collection and deployment frame on DJI Mavic 3 Classic (a) Right
View (b) Front View
Although not a major issue for the functionality of the system, as the sensor would likely
still be able to be picked-up and dropped-off, it was noted that the trapdoor collection and
deployment frame was smaller and blurrier in the camera view compared to the Mavic Pro
4.33a. A few flight tests were conducted and there were no visible issues was take-off
and landing. Lateral manoeuvres also seemed to be more stable, however, it was quickly
realised that the issue with upward drifting was even more frequent and concerning on the
Mavic 3 Pro Classic. The configuration of the Mavic 3 Classic’s downward sensors can
be seen in Figure 4.33b. Attempts were made to turn off the downward vision sensors
and also cover them, but unexpectedly the problem was still persistent. With this in mind,
it was decided that due to time limitations, modifying the current design for the Mavic 3
Classic would not be pursued.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) The collection frame was blurry within the
camera view
(b) The attachment frame interfered with the DJI
Mavic 3 Classic’s downward vision system
Figure 4.33: Concerns regarding the Mavic 3 Classic
4.7.3
Drone Limitation Concerns
In lieu of safety concerns about the slight bloating of all 3 existing batteries, it was decided
that two new batteries would be purchased for the experiments. After conducting flight
tests it was also decided that the drone should not be flown more than 10 min at a time
and that adequate breaks should be taken between flights in order to let the motors cool
down during the experiments.
As the Mavic Pro has sustained numerous flight tests before and during this project, the
slightly bloated batteries may be a sign of age-related deterioration and/or damage. If
this collection and deployment system were to be used in the future, another drone with
greater power and stability should be used.
4.7.4
Description
As concluded in the experiments illustrated in Section 4.7.1, the third trapdoor cut-out
configuration would be integrated with Prototype 5, the final prototype before the human
usability and performance tests, as it covers 56.40% of the surface area between the
frame of the trapdoors, and thus was the most lightweight of the configurations considered
that did not interfere with the drone’s visual positioning sensors.
The front propeller guard was also shortened by 4 cm to reduce weight in the front as it was
previously longer than necessary. The propeller guard provides the same functionality as
long as it covers the trapdoor frame.
44
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:53==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.34: Prototype 5 (a) Right View (b) Left View (c) Front View (d) Back View (e) Top
View (f) Bottom View
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
45
==PAGE:54==
Collection
The figures below show the drone with the attachment executing sensor collection from
the observer view and the camera view from the drone’s video feed.
Observer View:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning of the trapdoors above the sphere.
Figure 4.35: Observer View
2. Collected sensor (sphere has passed through the trapdoors).
Figure 4.36: Observer View
46
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:55==
3. Collected sensor sliding back to the storage rails of the frame.
Figure 4.37: Observer View
Camera View:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning of the trapdoors above the sphere.
Figure 4.38: Camera View
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
47
==PAGE:56==
2. Collected sensor (sphere has passed through the trapdoors).
Figure 4.39: Camera View
3. Collected sensor automatically slid back to the storage rails of the frame.
Figure 4.40: Camera View
48
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:57==
Deployment
The figures below show the drone with the attachment executing sensor deployment from
the observer view, the drone camera view and the FPV monitor view.
Observer View:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning of the sensor onto the ground.
Figure 4.41: Observer View
2. Collected sensor lifts off of the collection frame and the sphere is positioned above
the top tips of the drop-off rods.
Figure 4.42: Observer View
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
49
==PAGE:58==
3. The sensor is deployed once the drone is flown forward.
Figure 4.43: Observer View
Camera View:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning of the sensor onto the ground.
Figure 4.44: Camera View
50
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:59==
2. Collected sensor lifts off of the collection frame and the sphere is positioned above
the top tips of the drop-off rods.
Figure 4.45: Camera View
3. The sensor is deployed once the drone is flown forward.
Figure 4.46: Camera View
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
51
==PAGE:60==
FPV Monitor View:
1. Vertical, horizontal and depth positioning of the sensor onto the ground.
Figure 4.47: FPV Monitor View
2. Collected sensor lifts off of the collection frame and the sphere is positioned above
the top tips of the drop-off rods.
Figure 4.48: FPV Monitor View
52
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:61==
3. The sensor is deployed once the drone is flown forward.
Figure 4.49: FPV Monitor View
4.7.5
Insights
Flight tests
With the new batteries, when the Mavic Pro flies with the attachment, it took on average
4.42 min for the battery level to decrease from 100% to 75%. For greater consistency and
comparability with the ”Maximum Payload Testing” conducted in Section 4.1.2, the goal
was to drain the battery to 50% from 100%. However, as the motors became very hot
after the battery level decreased by 25%, it was decided to record the time at this point
in order to prevent any further damage to the drone motors before the experiments. This
test also influenced the decision to shorten continuous periods of flying and incorporate
breaks into the experiment.
Waypoint routes were also tested on the drone with the prototype attached and it was
observed that the drone did not encounter issues automatically taking-off, conducting the
waypoint route and then automatically landing.
4.8
Prototype Comparison
As illustrated in Sections 4.3 - 4.7, 5 different prototypes were created iteratively from
the insights that each prototype provided. In the table below a quick comparison of the
5 prototypes can be seen. For Prototype 2, only Prototype 2.2 was listed as flight tests
were able to be conducted.
Issues regarding instability while hovering varied depending on whether the drone was
flying, inside or outside and whether or not the drone was carrying the sensor. For the
first 4 prototypes, insufficient tests were conducted to test whether the drone could hover
with the weighted sensor stably. So, the flight instability was not observed, but as the
storage rail design did not significantly change across all 5 prototypes, with more testing,
it is likely that the flight instability problem would have surfaced as well. All prototypes
were able to fly stably without the sensor outdoors, except for Prototype 2.2, as it was
very heavy compared to the other prototypes due to the purchased propeller guards.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
53
==PAGE:62==
Table 4.5: Comparison of 5 Prototypes
Pick-up
path
Sensor
could be
picked-up
Additional
weight to
Drone
Upward drifting
while
hovering
Diameter
of sphere
(cm)
Material
of sphere
Prototype 1
Horizontal
No
122.92 g
No
5.5
TPU & ABS
Prototype 2.2
Horizontal
Yes
263.94 g
No
5.5
TPU
Prototype 3
Vertical
No
121.27 g
Sometimes
5
Styrofoam
Prototype 4
Vertical
Yes
152.51g
Yes
5
TPU
Prototype 5
Vertical
Yes
138.57g
No
5
TPU
54
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:63==
5
Usability & Performance Testing
5.1
Experimental Modifications and Limitations
5.1.1
DJI Mavic Pro limitations
The three DJI Mavic Pro batteries that were previously used were over 5 years old and
showed unusual signs of bloating, thus, due to safety concerns, two new batteries were
purchased for the experiments. Each battery provides around 14 min of flight time with
the sensor collection and deployment attachment, so, the design of the experiment was
highly dependent on the battery capacity. To collect as much data as possible for each
flight participant, the number of flights conducted per battery was optimized by decreasing
the time required to reset and by reducing the distance between the sensors and the
target. The decision was made to combine the pick-up and the drop-off tasks since when
attempting to pick up sensors, the sensor must be out of the collection frame, and when
attempting to deploy the sensor, the sensor must already be within the frame.
It was also observed that the motors of the drone would become hot to touch after 10 min
of flight time. So, to minimise long-term motor damage, breaks were integrated within the
experimental procedure so that the motors have a chance to cool down. These breaks
would also allow test participants to rest between the rounds.
5.1.2
Sensor Modifications
Due to the problems with oscillations of the drone while hovering while carrying the reg-
ular sensor, as depicted in Section 4.7.2, it was decided that the experiments would be
conducted with a modified lightweight sensor as shown in Figure 5.1. Four M5 nuts were
added to the feet of the sensor for better weight distribution to prevent the sensor from
falling over during pick-up and drop-off.
Figure 5.1:
The sensor used for the
experiment
Figure 5.2:
A small screw was sus-
pended to the centre of the sensor so
that the position of the deployed sensor
could be marked on the target during the
experiment
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
55
==PAGE:64==
5.1.3
Absence of waypoints
Originally, the idea was to incorporate waypoints into the experiment with the hope to
standardize the starting pick-up position. Litchi’s ”Waypoint at Aircraft” function was used
to mark out three points: the location of the first and second sensors and the target. The
altitude of each waypoint was set to 2 m to allow for substantial clearance above the
sensor/target. The sensors were 4 m apart and the target was 2.8 m away from each of
the sensors, creating an isosceles triangle. The experimental setup can be seen in Figure
5.4. The following waypoint route was created:
Figure 5.3: The waypoint route created using Litchi’s ”Waypoint at Aircraft” function
The waypoint mission was tested 10 times on the drone with the collection and deployment
frame attached to observe the accuracy of each waypoint and the repeatability of the
waypoint mission. It was observed that each trial was slightly different whereby the drone
was 0.5 m - 2 m away from the intended position in a random direction. As the test
setup is confined to a small area, this level of accuracy would not achieve the purpose
of standardizing the starting pick-up position, and so it was decided not to use waypoints
during the experiment. Although, this level of accuracy to the waypoint would likely be
sufficient in a real-life cornfield setting. Instead, it was decided that the pick-up time would
start when the sensor entered the drone camera view, and the drop-off time would start
when the target entered the camera view.
5.2
Experimental Setup
The experiments were conducted at the Eidg. Forschungsanstalt WSL in Birmensdorf
(the location of the ERL) due to the availability of open fields for drone flying experiments.
The exact test site was located at 47.362235, 8.455457. For the experiment, subjects
were asked to complete pick-up and drop-off tasks within the line-of-sight and beyond the
line-of-sight. Subjects were asked to complete a questionnaire after the introduction ex-
periment, after the within the line-of-sight pick-up and drop-off tasks and after the beyond
the line-of-sight to better understand their opinion of the system.
In the end, the following experimental procedure was designed and executed. A more
detailed description of each part of the experiment can be seen in Sections 5.2.1 - 5.2.4.
Before the Experiment: 15 min
• Introduction of the project, system, and experimental tasks
• The user watches videos of an ideal drop-off and pick-up
56
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:65==
• The user completes Part 1 of the questionnaire
Collecting and deploying the sensor within the line-of-sight: 19 min Battery 1.
• 3 min: Practice
• 3 min: Break to let the drone motors cool
• 5 min: Round 1. Pick-up and drop-off task
• 3 min: Break to let the drone motors cool
• 5 min: Round 2. Pick-up and drop-off task
Break to let the motors cool: 8 min
• Subject completes Part 2 of the questionnaire
Collecting and deploying the sensor beyond the line-of-sight: 15 min Battery 2.
• 6: min Round 3. Pick-up and drop-off task
• 3: min Break to let the drone motors cool
• 6: min Round 4. Pick-up and drop-off task
After the Experiment: 8 min
• Subject completes Part 3 and 4 of the questionnaire
• Debriefing
5.2.1
Introduction to the system
As none of the participants have used this system previously to collect and retrieve sen-
sors, it was necessary to clearly introduce the system and the tasks of the experiment.
Firstly, a theoretical explanation of the sensor and the drone attachment was presented,
emphasising the trapdoor pick-up, the storage rails, and the drop-off structure. Then, pic-
tures of the real-life prototype were provided. It was mentioned that if the sensor passes
too far through the trapdoors, the propeller guard would prevent the sphere of the sen-
sor from hitting the camera or front propellers. Additionally, if the drone was lowered too
much during drop-off, the propeller guard would also prevent the sensor from hitting the
back propellers. Next, the step-by-step procedure was presented to instruct the test sub-
ject on how to pick-up and drop-off the sensor and the visual cues to remember during
the task. For instance, during collection, once the sphere of the sensor passes through
the trapdoors, the participants had to remember to fly up. On the other hand, during de-
ployment, once the sphere of the sensor is above the cobalt blue tips of the two vertical
rods, they must fly forward. It was also explained that the purpose of the FPV monitor
is to verify whether a sensor is collected and to assist during drop-off. After that, videos
from two perspectives (camera view and observer view) of successful pick-up and drop-
off attempts were shown side-by-side as a demonstration. The goals of the experiment
were explained, and then an introduction to the Mavic Pro drone controls was given. Em-
phasis was placed on navigating, manually taking off, landing, and adjusting the gimbal
dial downward for collection and deployment but also forward if necessary for navigation
during the beyond line-of-sight task.
5.2.2
Practice Round
For the 3 min practice round, the test participant was asked to position the trapdoor of the
drone as close to the top of the sphere without collecting it. Then to reset, they were asked
to fly the drone to 4 m above the ground. Again, the participants were asked to position the
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
57
==PAGE:66==
trapdoor of the drone above the top of the sphere, but this time they were asked to collect
it. To practice the drop-off of the sensor, the operator was asked to place the sensor on
the ground and position the sphere within the “drop-off range” without dropping it off. To
reset, they were asked to fly the drone to 4 m above the ground. Again, the operator was
asked to place the sensor on the ground, but on the second try, they were asked to deploy
the sensor.
5.2.3
Pick-up and Drop-off Rounds
As seen in the experimental procedure, the test subjects were asked to partake in four
pick-up and drop-off rounds, the tasks were identical in all rounds. Two within the line-of-
sight and two beyond the line-of-sight. For the tasks beyond the line-of-sight, the operator
was simply asked to turn around with their back facing the test setup in order to simulate
the teleoperated task of collecting and deploying a sensor far away in a field.
The goal of the operator for each round was to collect and deploy as many sensors as
quickly as possible in the given time frame.
• 5 min: Round 1 - Pick-up and Drop-off (Within line-of-sight)
• 5 min: Round 2 - Pick-up and Drop-off (Within line-of-sight)
• 6 min: Round 3 - Pick-up and Drop-off (Beyond line-of-sight)
• 6 min: Round 4 - Pick-up and Drop-off (Beyond line-of-sight)
When time ran out, if the sensor was collected, the operator was asked to deploy the
sensor on the target, and then land. Otherwise, they were asked to immediately land the
drone.
Additionally for deployment, the operator was asked to position the sensor as close to the
center of the target as possible.
In order to standardise the experiments as much as possible for each participant, each
person was asked to stand in the same position (See Figure 5.4). Two sensors were
placed 4 m apart from one another on a line 3.5 m away from the test subject. The
target was placed 5.5 m in front of the test subject equidistant from both sensors. Shorter
distances were selected for this experiment in order to optimise the number of possible
pick-ups and drop-offs per experimental session, which was limited to two fully charged
DJI Mavic Pro drone batteries.
The diagram of the setup can be seen below:
58
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.4: Usability Testing-Experimental Setup
The user first took off the drone from one of the two specified take-off and landing loca-
tions, this is indicated by an orange Hs in Figure 5.5. Then the user attempted to pick-up
the sensor as quickly as possible. Once collected, the user flew the drone to the target
for deployment. After the sensor was deployed, the user was asked to fly up to 4 m, so
that the sensor position on the target could be marked. After this was completed, the user
verbally received a ”go” to indicate that they were permitted to fly to the next sensor for
collection. In the meantime, the deployed sensor was removed from the target and re-
turned to its original position for pick-up. The test subject was asked to collect and deploy
as many sensors as possible in the given time frame - 5 min for each WLOS round and 6
min for each BLOS round (See Figure 5.6).
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
59
==PAGE:68==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Breakdown of pick-up and drop-off task (a) Steps 1-3 (b) Step 4, then repeat
from Step 1
60
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.6: The user is asked to collect and deploy as many sensors as possible in the
specified time frame
Pick-up Measurement metrics
To measure the efficiency of the pick-up system, the time required to pick up the sensor
and the number of successful collection attempts vs the number of misses was recorded.
The time recorded started when the sphere of the sensor entered the camera view of the
Mavic Pro and ended at the point when the sphere of the sensor entered the trapdoors.
For the first collection attempt after take-off, the time measured started oftentimes from
the point of take-off if the sensor was already in the camera view.
A ”miss” was recorded if one of three instances occur:
1. The sensor does not enter the trapdoor frame and the trapdoor frame is vertically
positioned below the sphere of the sensor
2. The drone directly lands on the sensor with the trapdoor frame and the sensor does
not enter the trapdoor frame
3. The sphere of the sensor pushes the trap door partially, however as the drone is not
lowered enough, the sphere of the sensor does not pass fully through.
In all ”miss” instances, the operator is required to fly back up and reattempt to collect the
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
61
==PAGE:70==
sensor. Additionally, the number of times the sensor was knocked over was also recorded.
Drop-off Measurement metrics
In order to compare the accuracy of the various drop-off attempts of different test partic-
ipants, it was decided that a target would be used. For each trial, the time required to
collect the sensor and the accuracy of positioning onto the target was collected. The time
recorded started from the time the target entered the camera view of the Mavic Pro and
ended when the sensor landed on its final deployment location. The number of times the
sensor fell over during drop-off was also recorded.
The sensor was also modified so that a small lightweight screw would be suspended from
the middle point of the bottom of the sensor. That way, when the sensor is deployed on
the target during the experiment, the centre of the sensor could be easily marked on the
target.
Figure 5.7: A target was used to measure the positioning accuracy of a dropped-off sensor
5.2.4
Questionnaire
A four-part questionnaire was given to the participants. The full set of questions can be
seen in the Appendix (A.1.2). The first part intended to define the test subjects. Questions
in this section aimed to collect information about the subject’s age, gender, education, oc-
cupation, and level of prior drone flying experience. The second part of the questionnaire
contained questions related to the participant’s experience and opinion after using this
system to collect and deploy sensors within the line-of-sight. The third part of the ques-
tionnaire contained questions related to the participant’s experience and opinions using
this system to collect and deploy sensors beyond the line-of-sight. The first 10 questions
of parts two and three are nearly identical and follow the System Usability Scale (SUS), a
widely recognized ”quick and dirty” usability scale used to evaluate system usability [36]
out of a score of 100. With consideration of the purpose of each question, some of the
questions were slightly modified to better represent this system, however, most were left
62
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:71==
unchanged in order to preserve the integrity of the original scoring system. For instance,
the original question was changed from ”1. I think that I would like to use this system
frequently” to ”1. I would like to use this system to collect and deploy sensors (within/be-
yond the line-of-sight)”, both questions intend to evaluate the usefulness of the system.
After the initial SUS questions of parts two and three, other questions were listed to con-
firm or challenge some of the design decisions and assumptions of the prototype and to
better understand what the participants found simple or difficult about the system. These
questions aimed to understand the information processing procedure of the subject during
take-off, landing, navigation, positioning, collection and deployment, but also to identify
aspects of the design that positively, negatively or negligibly impact the performance of
the user conducting the task.
For example, the following statements were part of the questionnaire:
• Taking the drone off manually within the line-of-sight was easy (Rated on a scale of
1(Strongly disagree)-5(Strongly agree))
• It was difficult to position the trap doors above the sphere of the sensor (Rated on a
scale of 1(Strongly disagree)-5(Strongly agree))
• I remembered that I needed to ”fly up” after the sphere passed through the trap
doors (Rated on a scale of 1(Strongly disagree)-5(Strongly agree))
• The FPV monitor was necessary for the deployment of the sensor(Rated on a scale
of 1(Strongly disagree)-5(Strongly agree))
• Sensor collection and deployment was much more difficult beyond the line-of-sight
than within the line-of-sight (Rated on a scale of 1(Strongly disagree)-5(Strongly
agree))
The fourth part of the questionnaire was a short response section that intended to gather
some feedback on the overall user experience from the participants. The goal was to
identify inconsistencies in the system. Five questions were asked:
1. How would you describe your overall experience with collecting and deploying sen-
sors within the line-of-sight and beyond the line-of-sight?
2. What did you like the most about using this system?
3. What did you like the least about using this system?
4. Did anything surprise you while conducting these tasks? If yes, what?
5. Did anything cause you frustration while conducting these tasks? If yes, what?
5.3
Experimental results
5.3.1
Test Subjects
A small sample size of six people was recruited for the experiment, ranging from 23 years
old to 37 years old. All participants are male and conduct research at the Environmental
Robotics Lab (ERL) either as a master’s student, PhD student, postdoctoral researcher or
professor. The highest level of education achieved included a bachelor’s degree, master’s
degree or PhD degree. When asked subjectively on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 meaning no
experience and 10 meaning highly experienced) about their drone flying experience, the
subject’s responses ranged from 6 to 8. All participants have flown a drone before and
half of participants have flown a DJI Mavic Pro before.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
63
==PAGE:72==
Due to resource limitations (e.g., batteries), a different 90 min time slot was scheduled for
each test subject to participate in the experiment within the period of July 13th, 2023 - July
19th, 2023. As the experiments were conducted outside, it should be noted that different
environmental variables could have affected the participant’s performance, which would
affect the overall comparability between test subjects.
5.3.2
Environmental conditions
These environmental variables include wind, wind gusts, wind direction, and temperature
likely would have influenced the participant’s task performance. Weather data for the test
site (47.362235, 8.455457) was found [37], however, only one average value is provided
per hour and so, for greater experimental accuracy more precise measurements on the
wind, wind gusts, and wind direction during the flight experiments would likely draw more
conclusive results. Despite this, the weather data for all the experiments can be found in
the Appendix (A.1). For the 13:00-14:30 time slot, the average weather conditions of the
first three rounds were taken from the first hour (13:00) and the average weather condi-
tions of the fourth round were taken from the second hour (14:00). For the 16:30-18:00
time slot, the average weather conditions of the first round were taken from the first hour
(16:00) and the average weather conditions of the second, third and fourth rounds were
taken from the second hour (17:00). For Participant B, Round 2 was accidentally skipped
and so, the tasks for Round two were conducted 5 days later, hence the inconsistency of
the data.
Table 5.1: Weather conditions experienced during the experiments [37]
Temp. (°C)
Wind Speed (km/h)
Wind Gusts (km/h)
Average
24.4
9.1
20.7
Min
20.4
5.6
12.7
Max
27.5
18.7
37.8
Analyses were conducted to see whether there were correlations between the weather
conditions and the performance of the test subject. It was hypothesised that during windier
conditions (wind speed and/or wind gusts), more time would be taken for the test partici-
pant to collect and deploy the sensor. Also, it was predicted that depending on the wind
strength (wind speed and/or wind gusts) and the wind direction, the deployment accuracy
would also decrease. No particular trends were identified among the test subject, this
could be due to an inaccuracy of the weather data as wind gusts for instance are highly
specific to specific moments during the flight experiments. Besides having a small sam-
ple size, many factors could have influenced human performance, for instance, practice
effects due to previous drone flying experience, the level of cautiousness of the drone
operator, stress etc.
5.3.3
Overview of Results
First off, as a general absolute measure of task performance, the number of pick-up-
drop-off sequences was recorded, which can be seen in Figure 5.8. The subjective self-
identified drone flying experience score did not seem to correlate significantly with the
number of pick-up-drop-off sequences executed. The average number of pick-up-drop-
off sequences among the 6 test participants per round are as follows: 3.50 for Round 1,
3.50 for Round 2, 2.17 for Round 3, and 3.17 for Round 4. For Rounds 1 and 2, which
were conducted WLOS, there were no improvements in performance. As to be expected,
fewer sensor collections and deployments were made BLOS, however, it appears with
64
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:73==
practice, there was a slight overall improvement in performance from Round 3 to Round
4.
Figure 5.8: The number of pick-up-drop-off sequences executed by each test participant
The time required for sensor collection was calculated from the time the sensor entered the
camera view to the point where it passed through the trapdoors. The number of times the
sensor was knocked over during collection was also recorded. If a sensor was knocked
over the participant was asked to simply go to the next sensor and once the new sensor
entered the camera view, the time to collection would restart. This happened a total of 9
times out of 74 successful collections. The number of misses during collection was also
recorded. This happened a total of 31 times. It only occurred once that the sphere of
the sensor pushed the trapdoors but did not fully pass through. In almost all instances,
the sphere of the sensor missed the trapdoor frame and the frame of the trapdoors was
lowered below the sphere of the sensor, thus requiring the operator to fly back up and
reposition the drone. It was clear that all participants experienced lateral drifting because
of wind during the experiments, which made positioning the drone difficult and likely con-
tributed to the miss rate. The average pickup time, the number of knock overs and the
number of misses of each participant per round can be seen in Table 5.2.
The time required for deployment was calculated from the time the target entered the
camera view to when the sensor was placed at its final deployment position on the target.
The number of times the sensor fell over during deployment was also recorded. If the
sensor fell over the deployment time and the accuracy was still recorded, only a note
that it fell over was made. As the lightweight sensor for the experiment has a higher
centre of mass, it may be more prone to tipping over compared to the actual sensor.
This happened a total of 6 times out of 74 successful deployments. The number of times
the sensor was still stuck in the frame because the drone was not lowered enough for
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
65
==PAGE:74==
deployment was recorded, therefore, this required the operator to fly back up and position
for redeployment. This happened a total of 7 times out of 74 successful deployments. The
average deployment time, the number of fallen sensors and the number of instances that
the sensor was still stuck in the frame for each participant per round can be seen in Table
5.3.
Table 5.2: Overview of sensor collection performance of each test subject
Test subject
(subjective
experience
level 1-10)
Round
# of
pick-ups
Total
pick-ups
Average
pick-up
time (s)
Knock
overs
Misses
A (8)
1
3
10
32
1
1
2
2
58
1
1
3
2
80
1
4
3
51
B (6)
1
2
8
51
1
3
2
2
21
1
3
2
39
4
2
60
1
3
C (7)
1
4
18
21
2
5
18
2
3
3
52
1
4
6
19
2
D (7)
1
3
10
37
4
2
3
22
2
1
3
2
49
1
1
4
2
13
2
E (6)
1
4
14
30
2
2
4
37
1
3
3
62
2
4
3
67
3
F (7)
1
5
14
22
1
2
5
16
3
1
179
4
3
51
1
66
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:75==
Table 5.3: Overview of sensor deployment performance of each test subject
Test subject
(subjective
experience
level 1-10)
Round
# of
drop-offs
Total
drop-offs
Average
drop-off
time (s)
Average
distance
to target
Fall
overs
Stuck
in frame
A (8)
1
3
10
26
11.89
2
2
22
7.58
1
3
2
50
10.89
4
3
42
11.68
1
1
B (6)
1
2
8
25
27.96
2
2
44
28.92
1
3
2
39
6.4
4
2
41
6.3
1
C (7)
1
4
18
19
9.38
2
5
20
14.09
3
3
36
29.49
1
1
4
6
21
10.48
D (7)
1
3
10
32
15.59
1
2
3
15
31.85
3
2
26
21.75
1
4
2
23
21.11
E (6)
1
4
14
16
22.41
2
4
18
21.07
3
3
52
16.11
1
4
3
39
27.94
2
F (7)
1
5
14
22
19.89
1
2
5
29
20.36
3
1
50
4.98
4
3
51
20.49
5.3.4
Average Time per Collection Attempt
Originally it was predicted that participants who ”missed” the sensor would require much
more time to collect the sensor, especially compared with the other attempts in the round.
This was not always the case. For instance, one of the participants took 17 seconds
to pick-up one sensor but missed it once, while their second attempt took 24 seconds.
Although for some, this was the case. In another instance, one participant picked up the
sensor in 22 seconds without any misses, meanwhile, for their next try within the round,
they missed 3 times and took in total took 99 seconds to collect. In order to compare the
average collection time of the participants, it was decided that for the instances where a
participant missed 1 or more sensors, a calculation would be made. The time to pick-
up would be divided by the number of misses + 1, and if this value is greater than the
slowest collection time without any misses of that round for that participant, this would be
considered at their new ”average collection attempt time”. This was conducted to better
estimate the amount of time required for each collection attempt. In total, 6 values were
modified, 2 in Round 1, 1 in Round 3 and 3 in Round 4. One trial was also removed from
the data as it was an extreme outlier. For Round 3, participant F’s pick-up attempt took
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
67
==PAGE:76==
179 seconds, the participant was extra cautious during positioning compared to the other
test participants and waited until the wind settled down, in this trial there were also zero
misses. Therefore, 73 data points were plotted on the following graph:
Figure 5.9: Average collection attempt time of all 6 participants
Table 5.4: Time taken per Collection Attempt (s) - 6 Test Subjects
Round 1
Round 2
Round 3
Round 4
Sample size (n)
21
21
12
19
Mean (¯x)
25.04
25.76
50.00
31.41
SD (σ)
12.18
19.25
16.06
19.75
Minimum
6
8
33
9
Q1
14.50
11.50
37.50
15.00
Median
26
20
43.5
24.75
Q3
32.00
34.50
60.25
43.00
Maximum
56
80
85
75
Outliers
71, 80
It was found that the average time taken to make a collection attempt was 25.04 with
a standard deviation of 12.18 for Round 1, 25.76 with a standard deviation of 19.25 for
Round 2, 50.00 with a standard deviation of 16.06 for Round 3 and 31.41 with a standard
deviation of 19.75 for Round 4. There was only a slight increase in the average time taken
to make a collection attempt between Rounds 1 and 2, however, there was a steeper
increase in Round 3 and a decrease (improvement) in Round 4. This may suggest that
the participants did not find Round 2 much more difficult than Round 1 but found Round 3
(BLOS) challenging compared to Round 2 (WLOS). Meanwhile, Round 4 may be easier
than Round 3 after some practice.
68
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:77==
5.3.5
Average Time per Deployment Attempt
It was originally predicted that if a sensor was not deployed because it was still caught
in the frame (because the drone was not lowered enough), it would take the operator
longer to deploy the sensor since they needed to fly back up and reposition. This was
confirmed in the experiment. On average, if this instance were to occur, the average
attempted deployment time when the sensor unintentionally stayed in the frame (Deploy-
ment time/(Number of times the sensors was caught in the frame + 1 )) was almost always
(except for one instance) equal or greater than the average deployment time of the other
attempts made by the same test subject in that round where the sensor was not stuck in
the frame. The average attempted deployment time when the sensor was stuck on the
frame was on average 25.85% greater than the average deployment time of the other at-
tempts made by the same test subject, in the same round, where the sensor was not stuck
in the frame. In order to calculate the average time per deployment attempt of the 6 test
subjects, the average attempted deployment time (Deployment time/(Number of times the
sensor was caught in the frame + 1 )) was calculated for every successful deployment.
One extreme outlier was removed from the calculations. In particular, for Round 4, par-
ticipant F was very cautious and took 101 seconds to deploy. The sensor only touched
down on the target once for deployment, the rest of the time was spent positioning, and
some of the time was also spent waiting for the wind to settle down.
Figure 5.10: Average deployment attempt time of all 6 participants
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
69
==PAGE:78==
Table 5.5: Time taken per Deployment Attempt (s) - 6 Test Subjects
Round 1
Round 2
Round 3
Round 4
Sample size (n)
21
21
13
18
Mean (¯x)
21.38
21.67
36.85
25.11
SD (σ)
9.66
11.47
12.56
9.10
Minimum
9
8
13
12
Q1
14.50
14.00
29.50
18.75
Median
17
18
34
21.5
Q3
24.00
27.50
48.50
30.75
Maximum
46
56
58
44
Outliers
42, 46
56
It was found that the average time taken to make a deployment attempt was 21.38 with a
standard deviation of 9.66 for Round 1, 21.67 with a standard deviation of 11.47 for Round
2, 36.85 with a standard deviation of 12.56 for Round 3 and 25.11 with a standard deviation
of 9.10 for Round 4. The overall trend is similar to the time taken to make a collection
attempt. There was only a slight increase in the average time taken to make a deployment
attempt between Rounds 1 and 2, however, then there was a steeper increase in Round 3
and a decrease (improvement) in Round 4. This may suggest that the participants did not
find Round 2 much more difficult than Round 1 but found Round 3 (BLOS) challenging
compared to Round 2(WLOS). Meanwhile, Round 4 may be easier than Round 3 after
some practice.
5.3.6
Average Deployment Accuracy
Once the sensor was deployed by the test subject, the centre point position of the sensor
was marked on the target. The distance of this point to the centre of the target was
calculated for all deployment attempts. Originally it was hypothesized that depending on
the strength of the wind and the wind direction, deployment precision and accuracy may
decrease. The accuracy of the deployments for each participant per round was compared
with the wind direction data provided by [37], however, no trends were found.
70
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:79==
(a) Test Participant A
(b) Test Participant B
(c) Test Participant C
(d) Test Participant D
(e) Test Participant E
(f) Test Participant F
Figure 5.11: Sensor drop-off position on the target. Red: Trial 1 within line-of-sight. Blue:
Trial 2 within line-of-sight. Green: Trial 3 beyond line-of-sight. Orange: Trial 4 beyond
line-of-sight
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 5.12: Sensor deployment distance to the centre of the target
Table 5.6: Sensor Deployment Distance to Centre of Target (cm) - 6 Test Subjects
Round 1
Round 2
Round 3
Round 4
Sample size (n)
21
21
13
19
Mean (¯x)
17.38
20.24
16.91
15.69
SD (σ)
10.17
12.32
10.52
9.76
Minimum
2.28
1.77
1.79
2.60
Q1
11.75
9.74
8.11
9.40
Median
15.91
17.47
13.44
13.31
Q3
19.60
29.10
28.00
22.81
Maximum
40.51
48.66
36.40
37.03
Outliers
34.70,
37.90,
40.51
Overall, it appears that the mean distance of the deployed sensor to the centre of the
target did not greatly vary across the rounds. On average the sensor was deployed 17.38
cm away from the target with a standard deviation of 10.17 for Round 1, 20.24 cm away
from the target with a standard deviation of 12.32 for Round 2, 16.91 cm away from the
target with a standard deviation of 10.52 for Round 3 and 15.69 cm away from the target
with a standard deviation of 9.76 for Round 4.
5.3.7
Questionnaire Takeaways
As mentioned earlier, the goal of the second part of the questionnaire was to better under-
stand the user’s experience collecting and deploying sensors within the line-of-sight, while
the goal of the third part of the questionnaire was to better understand the user’s experi-
ence collecting and deploying sensors beyond the line-of-sight. The first 10 questions of
72
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:81==
each part used adhered to the System Usability Scale (SUS) and the rest of the questions
of these parts aimed to verify design assumptions. The fourth part of the questionnaire
contained open-ended short-response questions which provided additional insight on the
user’s opinion of the system.
Some opinions of the system were clearly shared among all participants for sensor col-
lection and deployment within and beyond the line-of-sight. For instance, all participants
remembered to ”fly up” after the sphere passed through the trap doors, could identify
when the sensor touched the ground, found that the pink sphere was highly visible in the
field and within the camera view and believed that the cobalt blue lines on the edges of
the trapdoors did not majorly obstruct the camera view. All participants found the drone
stability highly inconsistent due to lateral drifting, especially with any wind. As the drone
frequently did not keep its position, it made it more challenging the align it with the sen-
sor. Therefore, positioning for collection and deployment was the most time-consuming
and difficult part of the task. Greater stability would likely be achieved with a larger drone
platform. Many participants lost visibility of the display of the FPV monitor due to poor
connection, especially when turned around during beyond line-of-sight collection and de-
ployment. Therefore, many participants did not have the display of the FPV monitor avail-
able to use during their tasks, some participants mentioned relying on the shadow of the
sensor in the drone camera view to determine when to fly forward during deployment.
Specific to the beyond the line-of-sight question set, users were also asked for their opin-
ion on finding and navigating to the next sensor for collection by adjusting the controller’s
gimbal dial. All participants found it straightforward and easy. However, for all instances,
due to the limited size of the test setup, the drone was never further than 6 m away from the
next sensor. In a real-life setting where waypoint navigation is used to mark the sensor’s
drop-off location, the drone should always return within 2 m of the sensor, as estimated
in Section 5.1.3. This may indicate that the operator would also be comfortable finding
and navigating to the next sensor with only the camera view of the drone in a real setting,
yet, to confirm, more tests with a larger sample size should be used. A similar question
was asked on finding and navigating to the target. Most answers were identical to finding
and navigating to a sensor, yet some participants found locating the target slightly more
difficult. In real life, there would not be a large white target to mark where the sensor
should be deployed, rather the operator would rely on waypoint navigation to fly to a cer-
tain point, verify the suitability of that location (e.g., that the ground is not too uneven) and
the operator would proceed to deploy a sensor in that specific location.
Within Line-of-sight and Beyond Line-of-sight Comparison
One of the less anticipated discoveries of the questionnaire and study was that not all
of the participants found sensor collection and deployment beyond line-of-sight more
challenging. Instead, 2 of the 6 participants found it easier and 1 participant found it
equally challenging. This was oftentimes reflected in the difference between their WLOS
attempts and BLOS attempts and in their SUS scores. When generally looking at the num-
ber of pick-up-drop-off sequences per minute (as every picked-up sensor is dropped-off),
all participants took longer to complete a pick-up-drop-off sequence BLOS than WLOS.
For some participants, the difference between the rate of pick-up-drop-off sequences per
minute WLOS and BLOS was slight, but for some, especially those who had a significantly
lower SUS score for BLOS than WLOS, the difference between the rate of pick-up-drop-
off sequences per minute WLOS and BLOS was much larger. This can be seen in Table
5.7 and Figure 5.13.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
73
==PAGE:82==
Table 5.7: WLOS and BLOS comparison: Difference of performance and Difference of
the SUS score results
Test Subject
(Subjective
experience
level 1-10)
Visual
line-of-sight
Number of
pick-up-
drop-off
sequences
Number of
pick-up-
drop-off
sequences
per minute
% Difference
of pick-up-
drop-off
rate WLOS
and BLOS
SUS
Score
% Difference
of SUS
Score WLOS
and BLOS
A
(8)
Within - 10 min
5
0.50
-8%
62.5
-4%
Beyond - 12 min
5
0.42
60
B
(6)
Within
4
0.40
-7%
62.5
0%
Beyond
4
0.33
62.5
C
(7)
Within
9
0.90
-15%
72.5
+14%
Beyond
9
0.75
82.5
D
(7)
Within
6
0.60
-27%
80
-22%
Beyond
4
0.33
62.5
E
(6)
Within
8
0.80
-30%
70
-21%
Beyond
6
0.50
55
F
(7)
Within
10
1.00
-67%
67.5
-33%
Beyond
4
0.33
45
Figure 5.13: The % difference of performance and the % difference of the SUS score
were plotted to compare WLOS and BLOS
It is important to note, there are many aspects that influence the performance results of
each participant, for instance, different wind conditions, different levels of experience, the
limited number of trials per person (2 x 5 min per within the line-of-sight round and 2 x 6
min per beyond the line-of-sight round), variations of learning effects etc.
74
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:83==
Collection:
• All participants found it difficult or very difficult to position the trap doors above the
sphere of the sensor WLOS and most participants found it difficult or very difficult
to position the trap doors above the sphere of the sensor BLOS, because of the
drone’s inability to stay in position when subject to even mild wind gusts. However,
once positioned, many participants found that the trap doors were reliable once the
drone was aligned.
• When asked whether the two blue lines on the edges of the trap door helped de-
termine when the sphere was above the trapdoors WLOS, a third found it helpful,
a third found it unhelpful and a third were indifferent, this may be because some
participants relied less on the drone camera view during the WLOS task. However
for BLOS, the majority of participants found it helpful.
Deployment:
• More than half of the participants found it difficult to position the sensor onto the
target during drop-off WLOS. Unexpectedly, it seemed that most participants found
it easier to position the sensor onto the target during drop-off. This may be caused
by the participant’s gained practice or slightly increased familiarity with the system.
• All test subjects could identify exactly when the sensor touched the ground, however,
a couple of people found it slightly easier WLOS than BLOS.
• More than half of the respondents found it difficult to position the sphere within the
ideal range for drop-off before flying forward (above the two rods but also under the
propeller guard) WLOS, but almost all participants found it easier BLOS. This may
be because the participants became more familiar or comfortable with the system
over the course of the experiment.
• Almost all participants, except for one, always remembered to ”fly forward” once the
sphere was above the tips of the two rods WLOS, however by the end of the tasks,
all participants remembered to ”fly forward” once the sphere was above the tips of
the two rods during BLOS tasks.
• The cobalt blue tips of the two drop-off rods were helpful to some participants more
WLOS and for some, more BLOS to determine when the sphere was above the tips
of the rods. If the participant could not see the display on the FPV monitor during
BLOS, they likely would not have found the blue tips of the two drop-off rods helpful.
Take-off and Landing:
• Most people found taking the drone off manually WLOS easy and everyone found
landing the drone WLOS easy.
• Half of the participants found taking-off the drone manually easy, and the rest of the
participants found it moderately easy or slightly difficult. Most people found landing
the drone BLOS easy.
• Throughout the experiments, the drone tipped over a total of 5 times during take-off.
One time for Participant D BLOS, two times for Participant E BLOS, and two times
for Participant F, once WLOS and once BLOS. When the drone tipped over during
take-off, the drone motors would automatically stop and consequently, the drone
needed to be placed upright again for take-off.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
75
==PAGE:84==
• In all instances, the drone required more power for take-off, which is controlled by
the upward throttle input of the left joystick.
• In real life, it has been tested that the drone can take-off and land with the frame
automatically, and so recommending that the user always take-off and land auto-
matically should simplify and standardise the process.
FPV monitor: As the functionality of the FPV monitor varied greatly among the partici-
pants, since oftentimes there was too much static to see the display at all, the value it
may provide to the system is particularly challenging and ambiguous to evaluate. Thus,
the answers listed below are inconclusive:
• After collection, most participants did not check the FPV camera to verify that the
sensor was collected WLOS and BLOS.
• WLOS, all participants stated that the FPV monitor was not necessary for the de-
ployment of the sensor, while about half of the participants found the FPV monitor
necessary for deployment BLOS.
• When asked about the visibility of the top of the drop-off rods on the FPV monitor,
most either did not check or found it difficult to see for both WLOS and BLOS.
• When the FPV monitor was working, all participants found the pink sphere was easy
to see in the FPV camera view.
5.3.8
Additional Observations
During the experiments, a few special cases were identified:
• For one instance, the operator did not fly up after the sphere of the sensor passed
through the trap doors. Thus, the sensor went directly through the frame
• On a sunny day, sometimes some reflections from the trapdoors were seen in the
camera view, but it was always temporary and did not affect the visibility of the
positioning task (Figure 5.14).
Figure 5.14: The % difference of performance and the % difference of the SUS score
were plotted to compare WLOS and BLOS
76
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:85==
• In one instance, the trap door closed on the rod of the sensor and the sensor momen-
tarily stayed at the top edge of the trap door frame instead of sliding back (Figure
5.15). By accelerating to the right quickly and then abruptly stopping, the sensor
was re-positioned and slid back to the storage rails like a usual pick-up.
Figure 5.15: The trapdoor closed on the sensor rod and momentarily the sensor stayed
at the top of the collection frame
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
77
==PAGE:86==
78
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:87==
6
Conclusion
While pesticides have played a vital role in securing crop yields and food security in con-
ventional agriculture, their overuse and potential toxicity to both humans and the envi-
ronment necessitate a more cautious and balanced approach to their use [2]. Precision
agriculture offers a solution to reduce the reliance on pesticides in conventional agriculture
through the early detection of insect herbivory. The project Plant-EcoAIR [7] has devised
a lightweight sampler that has the potential to detect insect herbivory in maize fields ear-
lier than existing solutions by using VOCs as a predictable early indicator of plant stress.
However, the efficacy of their system in a real-life setting requires the collection of data
through an extensive network of sensors distributed across the field. Thus, a solution to
efficiently deliver and retrieve these sensors is essential.
The objective of this project was to develop an efficient UAV retrieval and deployment sys-
tem for delivering and retrieving sensors. Throughout the design process, considerable
attention was given to the strengths and limitations of human UAV operators. Over the
course of six months, multiple prototypes were meticulously designed, constructed, and
tested, with each iteration improving upon the previous version. Upon finalizing the pro-
totype, usability experiments with a small sample size of 6 people were conducted to gain
limited but valuable insights into the system’s performance. The results of these tests,
presented in Chapter 5, demonstrated that even individuals unfamiliar with the system
could successfully collect and deploy sensors in an outdoor context using the trap door
collection mechanism and deployment structure frame.
The primary difficulty experienced by the test subjects during the experiment was related
to positioning the drone due to the excessive drifting when subject to wind. This issue
could potentially be mitigated if the pick-up and drop-off attachment was integrated onto
a more powerful drone with enhanced stability. By addressing this limitation, the overall
performance of the system can be significantly improved.
Despite experiencing issues with lateral drifting and having no prior exposure to this col-
lection and deployment system, all participants were able to execute at least 4 pick-up-
drop-off sequences within the 10 min allocated for the WLOS rounds and at least 4 pick-
up-drop-off sequences within the 12 min allocated for the BLOS rounds. The maximum
number of pick-up-drop-off sequences executed by one test subject within the 10 min
allocated for the WLOS rounds was 10. On the other hand, the maximum number of pick-
up-drop-off sequences executed by one test subject within the 12 min allocated for the
BLOS rounds was 9. It is important to mention that after each pick-up-drop-off sequence,
time was needed to mark down the position of the sensor on the target.
In the experiment, the average time per collection attempt for the 6 participants for each of
the four rounds was as follows: 25.04 seconds, 25.76 seconds, 50.00 seconds, and 31.41
seconds, respectively. Time was calculated from when the sensor entered the camera
view to when the sphere of the sensor passed through the trap doors. The fastest collec-
tion attempt time for each of the four rounds was also recorded: 6 seconds, 8 seconds,
33 seconds and 9 seconds, respectively. Furthermore, the average time per deployment
attempt for the 6 participants for each of the four rounds was as follows: 21.38 seconds,
21.67 seconds, 36.85 seconds, and 25.11 seconds, respectively. Time was calculated
from when the sensor entered the camera view to when the sensor was deployed onto
the target. The fastest deployment attempt time for each of the four rounds was also
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
79
==PAGE:88==
recorded: 9 seconds, 8 seconds, 13 seconds, and 12 seconds, respectively. For all de-
ployment attempts, the sensor always landed within 56 cm of the centre of the target. In
the experiment, the average distance of the deployed sensor to the centre of the target for
the 6 participants for each of the four rounds was as follows: 17.38 cm, 20.24 cm, 16.91
cm, 15.69 cm, respectively. The closest distance of the deployed sensor to the centre
of the target for each of the four rounds was also recorded: 2.28 cm, 1.77 cm, 1.79 cm,
and 2.60 cm, respectively. More practice with the system would likely yield greater results
with regards to speed and accuracy.
In conclusion, this project has achieved its goal of creating a passive, lightweight, robust,
and cost-effective UAV retrieval and deployment system for lightweight sensors. By focus-
ing on human operators’ capabilities and limitations and conducting small-scale usability
testing, this study has successfully showcased the feasibility and potential of the system
for practical integration into real-world agricultural applications beyond the line-of sight.
6.1
Future Work
Given more time and resources, certain modifications of the prototype could be imple-
mented to improve the reliability and usability of the system:
• For this specific use case of carrying a 72.16g VOC sampler, priority should be given
to using a more powerful and stable drone capable of longer flight times in challeng-
ing outdoor environments. This should considerably reduce the lateral drifting in low
wind conditions experienced by the test subjects during the experiment and alleviate
issues of drone oscillations while hovering with the collected sensor.
• With the current drop-off procedure, time is required to place the sensor gently on the
ground for deployment. However, if the sensor were to be redesigned to withstand
being dropped for a height (e.g., 5 m), the speed of deployment has the potential to
be decreased with an active drop-off mechanism. Although lower accuracy may be
achieved.
• Ideally, the sensor should never fall over, redesigning the case of the sensor and
distributing the mass so that it is bottom-heavy could ensure the sensor is always
upright. Also, if the sensor legs were eliminated or modified, multiple sensors may
be able to be stacked on the storage rails without the sensor legs getting caught
during deployment.
• In order to truly determine whether an additional FPV camera is necessary for the
drop-off manoeuvre, more tests need to be conducted with a more reliable FPV
camera, where the display monitor can always be referenced.
80
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Tiziano Gomiero, David Pimentel, and Maurizio G. Paoletti. “Environmental Impact
of Different Agricultural Management Practices: Conventional vs. Organic Agricul-
ture”. In: Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences 30.1-2 (Jan. 2011). Publisher: Taylor &
Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/07352689.2011.554355, pp. 95–124. ISSN:
0735-2689. DOI: 10.1080/07352689.2011.554355. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
07352689.2011.554355 (visited on 02/02/2023).
[2]
How pesticides impact human health and ecosystems in Europe — European En-
vironment Agency. Briefing. June 2023. DOI: 10.1080/07352689.2011.554355. URL:
https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/how-pesticides-impact-human-health.
[3]
Johann G. Zaller and Carsten A. Brühl. “Editorial: Non-target Effects of Pesticides
on Organisms Inhabiting Agroecosystems”. In: Frontiers in Environmental Science
7 (2019). ISSN: 2296-665X. DOI: 10.3389/fenvs.2019.00075. URL: https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fenvs.2019.00075.
[4]
Vinay Mohan Pathak et al. “Current status of pesticide effects on environment, hu-
man health and it’s eco-friendly management as bioremediation: A comprehensive
review”. en. In: Front. Microbiol. 13 (Aug. 2022), p. 962619.
[5]
Anne-Katrin Mahlein et al. “Hyperspectral Sensors and Imaging Technologies in
Phytopathology: State of the Art”. In: Annual Review of Phytopathology 56 (Aug.
2018), pp. 535–558. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-phyto-080417-050100.
[6]
Sergio E. Ramos et al. Plant EcoAir: Plant Ecological Airborne Indicators for Re-
sponse Drone-based survey of plant volatiles for crop monitoring and protection
[PowerPoint Slides]. Aug. 26, 2022.
[7]
Christian Geckeler et al. “Plant-EcoAIR: Scalable Airborne Detection of Plant Her-
bivory using Robotic Volatile Sampling”. In: ICRA 2023, WORKSHOP TIG-IV (2023),
pp. 1–3. URL: https://onedrive.live.com/?authkey=%21AE7rXWZ%2DgD0HZg4&
cid=7B5C80CCBE41D4A5&id=7B5C80CCBE41D4A5%2154234&parId=7B5C80CCBE41D4A5%
2154205&o=OneUp.
[8]
Christian Geckeler et al. Plant-EcoAIR: Scalable Airborne Detection of Plant Her-
bivory using Robotic Volatile Sampling [PowerPoint Slides]. 2023 International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation. June 2023.
[9]
Meredith C. Schuman. Plants in space: studying plant ecological signaling in real
spatial contexts [PowerPoint Slides]. University of Zurich: Spatial Genetics group.
June 8, 2022.
[10]
“Corn Growth Stages and GDU Requirements”. In: Monsanto and Vine Design ().
URL: https://www.corn-states.com/app/uploads/2018/07/corn-growth-stages-and-
gdu-requirements.pdf (visited on 02/14/2023).
[11]
“Determining Corn Growth Stages”. In: Kruger Seeds (2020). URL: https://www.
krugerseed.com/en-us/agronomy-library/corn-growth-stages-and-gdu-requirements.
html (visited on 02/14/2023).
[12]
Joel Ransom and Gregory Endres. “Corn Growth and Management Quick Guide”.
In: NDSU Extension (2020). URL: https://www.ndsu.edu/agriculture/sites/default/
files/2022-09/a1173.pdf (visited on 02/10/2023).
[13]
Lori Abendroth and Roger Elmore. “Row spacing - corn | Integrated Crop Manage-
ment”. In: ISU Extension and Outreach (2006). URL: https://crops.extension.iastate.
edu/encyclopedia/row-spacing-corn (visited on 02/10/2023).
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
81
==PAGE:90==
[14]
Christopher D Wickens et al. Engineering Psychology and Human Performance.
4th. Psychology Press, 2013.
[15]
Jean Vertut and Philippe Coiffet. “Space applications of teleoperation”. In: Teleoper-
ation and Robotics: Applications and Technology. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands,
1985, pp. 205–212. ISBN: 978-94-011-6103-9. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-011-6103-9_9.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-6103-9_9.
[16]
Jessie Y. C. Chen, Ellen C. Haas, and Michael J. Barnes. “Human Performance
Issues and User Interface Design for Teleoperated Robots”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) 37.6 (2007),
pp. 1231–1245. DOI: 10.1109/TSMCC.2007.905819.
[17]
Corinna Lathan and Michael Tracey. “The Effects of Operator Spatial Perception
and Sensory Feedback on Human-Robot Teleoperation Performance”. In: Presence
11 (Aug. 2002), pp. 368–377. DOI: 10.1162/105474602760204282.
[18]
Grigore Burdea, Paul Richard, and Philippe Coiffet. “Multimodal Virtual Reality:
Input-Output Devices, System Integration, and Human Factors”. In: International
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 8 (Jan. 1996), pp. 5–. DOI: 10.1080/10447319609526138.
[19]
Syed Agha Hassnain Mohsan et al. “Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs): practical
aspects, applications, open challenges, security issues, and future trends”. In: In-
telligent Service Robotics 16.1 (Mar. 2023), pp. 109–137. ISSN: 1861-2784. DOI:
10.1007/s11370-022-00452-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11370-022-00452-4.
[20]
Lydia Hingston et al. “Reconfigurable, Adaptive, Lightweight Grasping Mechanisms
for Aerial Robotic Platforms”. In: 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Se-
curity, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR). 2020, pp. 169–175. DOI: 10.1109/SSRR50563.
2020.9292581.
[21]
Shaoqian Lin et al. “An Adaptive, Reconfigurable, Tethered Aerial Grasping System
for Reliable Caging and Transportation of Packages”. In: 2022 IEEE International
Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR). 2022, pp. 7–13.
DOI: 10.1109/SSRR56537.2022.10018625.
[22]
Anjali Mishra and Sonia Behra. “Design of an Aerial Manipulation System with
Robotic Claw for Search and Rescue Operations”. In: 2020 IEEE Bombay Sec-
tion Signature Conference (IBSSC). 2020, pp. 224–230. DOI: 10.1109/IBSSC51096.
2020.9332176.
[23]
Charles Welch et al. “Lightweight, Low-Cost, Compliant Grasper for UAV-Based
Pick-and-Place Operations”. In: Aug. 2015, V05BT08A014. DOI: 10.1115/DETC2015-
47377.
[24]
Patrick Bryan, Shitij Kumar, and Ferat Sahin. “Design of a Soft Robotic Gripper for
Improved Grasping with Suction Cups”. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC). 2019, pp. 2405–2410. DOI: 10.1109/SMC.
2019.8914479.
[25]
Yang Yang et al. “A Compact and Low-cost Robotic Manipulator Driven by Super-
coiled Polymer Actuators”. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). 2020, pp. 1827–18533. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9197390.
[26]
Loong Yi Lee et al. “Closed-Structure Compliant Gripper With Morphologically Opti-
mized Multi-Material Fingertips for Aerial Grasping”. In: IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters 6.2 (2021), pp. 887–894. DOI: 10.1109/LRA.2021.3052420.
[27]
Fei Feng et al. “A review of the end-effector of large space manipulator with capa-
bilities of misalignment tolerance and soft capture”. In: Science China Technologi-
cal Sciences 59.11 (Nov. 2016), pp. 1621–1638. ISSN: 1869-1900. DOI: 10.1007/
s11431-016-0084-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11431-016-0084-7.
82
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:91==
[28]
Rik Bähnemann et al. “The ETH-MAV Team in the MBZ International Robotics Chal-
lenge”. In: Journal of Field Robotics 36.1 (2019), pp. 78–103. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1002/rob.21824. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/rob.
21824. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/rob.21824.
[29]
HaoTse Hsiao et al. “A Mechanically Intelligent and Passive Gripper for Aerial Perch-
ing and Grasping”. In: IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics 27.6 (2022), pp. 5243–
5253. DOI: 10.1109/TMECH.2022.3175649.
[30]
Zhengyi Jiang et al. “A multirobot system for autonomous deployment and recovery
of a blade crawler for operations and maintenance of offshore wind turbine blades”.
In: Journal of Field Robotics 40.1 (2023), pp. 73–93. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
rob.22117. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/rob.22117.
[31]
DJI. MAVIC PRO Specs. https://www.dji.com/ch/mavic/info [Accessed: (Jul. 29,
2023)]. 2023.
[32]
Yuliya Krasylenko et al. “Druid Drone—A portable unmanned aerial vehicle with a
multifunctional manipulator for forest canopy and mistletoe research and manage-
ment”. In: Methods in Ecology and Evolution 14.6 (2023), pp. 1416–1423. URL:
https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/2041-210X.14058.
[33]
J. G. Fennell et al. “Optimizing colour for camouflage and visibility using deep learn-
ing: the effects of the environment and the observer’s visual system”. In: Journal of
The Royal Society Interface 16.154 (2019), p. 20190183. DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2019.
0183. eprint: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/pdf/10.1098/rsif.2019.0183. URL:
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rsif.2019.0183.
[34]
Srinivas Nunna et al. “A review of the structural factors which control compres-
sion in carbon fibres and their composites”. In: Composite Structures 303 (2023),
p. 116293. ISSN: 0263-8223. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2022.
116293. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026382232201025X.
[35]
DJI. Specs: DJI Mavic 3 Classic. https://www.dji.com/ch/mavic-3-classic/specs
[Accessed: (Jul. 30, 2023)]. 2023.
[36]
John Brooke. “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale”. In: Usability Eval. Ind. 189
(Nov. 1995).
[37]
Visual Crossing Corporation. Weather Query Builder. https://www.visualcrossing.
com/weather-data [Accessed: (Jul. 30, 2023)]. 2023.
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
83
==PAGE:92==
84
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:93==
A
Appendix
A.1
Usability Testing Questionnaire
A.1.1
Part 1 of the Questionnaire
1. What is your name?
2. How old are you?
3. What is your gender?
4. What is the highest level of education you’ve completed?
5. What is your occupation?
6. How experienced are you flying drones? (Scale of 1 - 10)
7. Have you flown a DJI Drone before? (Yes, No, Not Sure)
8. Have you flown a DJI Mavic Pro before? (Yes, No, Not Sure)
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
85
==PAGE:94==
A.1.2
Part 2 of the Questionnaire
Figure A.1: WLOS Questionnaire - Likert scale questions
86
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:95==
Additional multiple-choice WLOS questions
• After collection, I checked the FPV camera to verify that the sensor was collected
(2 Yes, 4 No, 0 Sometimes).
• The top of the drop-off rods was difficult to see on the FPV monitor (2 Yes, 0 No, 4
I didn’t check)
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
87
==PAGE:96==
88
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:97==
A.1.3
Part 3 of the Questionnaire
Figure A.2: BLOS Questionnaire - Likert scale questions
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
89
==PAGE:98==
Additional multiple-choice BLOS questions
• After collection, I checked the FPV camera to verify that the sensor was collected
(1 Yes, 3 No, 2 Sometimes).
• The top of the drop-off rods was difficult to see on the FPV monitor (3 Yes, 1 No, 2
I didn’t check).
A.1.4
Part 4 of the Questionnaire
1. How would you describe your overall experience with collecting and deploying sen-
sors within the line-of-sight and beyond the line-of-sight?
2. What did you like the most about using this system?
3. What did you like the least about using this system?
4. Did anything surprise you while conducting these tasks? If yes, what?
5. Did anything cause you frustration while conducting these tasks? If yes, what?
A.2
Weather data during the experiments
Table A.1: Weather conditions during the experiment (47.362235, 8.455457) [37]
Test
Subject
Round
Time Slot
Temp.
(°C)
Wind
Speed
(km/h)
Wind
Gusts
(km/h)
Wind
Direction(°)
A
1
2023-07-13 13:00-14:30
21.4
6.9
20.9
240
2
2023-07-18 9:00-9:05
20.4
5.6
12.8
25
3
2023-07-13 13:00-14:30
21.4
6.9
20.9
240
4
2023-07-13 13:00-14:30
21.4
6.9
20.9
240
B
1
2023-07-13 16:30-18:00
23.1
8.5
18.1
277
2
2023-07-13 16:30-18:00
23.5
11.3
22
250
3
2023-07-13 16:30-18:00
23.5
11.3
22
250
4
2023-07-13 16:30-18:00
23.5
11.3
22
250
C
1
2023-07-14 13:00-14:30
24.6
7.4
17.1
45
2
2023-07-14 13:00-14:30
24.6
7.4
17.1
45
3
2023-07-14 13:00-14:30
24.6
7.4
17.1
45
4
2023-07-14 13:00-14:30
25.6
5.8
18
29
D
1
2023-07-17 13:00-14:30
24.1
6.2
12.7
325
2
2023-07-17 13:00-14:30
24.1
6.2
12.7
325
3
2023-07-17 13:00-14:30
24.1
6.2
12.7
325
4
2023-07-17 13:00-14:30
24.7
6.6
15.5
330
E
1
2023-07-17 16:30-18:00
26.2
10.4
18.8
328
2
2023-07-17 16:30-18:00
26
7.7
21.5
323
3
2023-07-17 16:30-18:00
26
7.7
21.5
323
4
2023-07-17 16:30-18:00
26
7.7
21.5
323
F
1
2023-07-19 13:00-14:30
26.5
14.8
37.8
315
2
2023-07-19 13:00-14:30
26.5
14.8
37.8
315
3
2023-07-19 13:00-14:30
26.5
14.8
37.8
315
4
2023-07-19 13:00-14:30
27.5
18.7
16.6
309
90
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
==PAGE:99==
Positioning and Collecting Sensors in Agricultural Fields with Aerial Robots
91
==PAGE:100==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
