==PAGE:1==
A study of methodologies to maintain in-
tegrity of CT scanned geometry for use in
structural simulations
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in
structural simulations
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Meaghan Fitzgerald
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé, Building 404,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months within the Department of Civil and Me-
chanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. This thesis has been done in
collaboration with LEGO Inc. located in Billund, Denmark.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of finite element analysis,
design, and manufacturing.
Meaghan Fitzgerald - s210276
Signature
Date
ii
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis is an investigation into the feasibility of using CT scans in finite element sim-
ulations to perform sensitivity analyses. The demand within the field of mechanical engi-
neering for evaluating proposed designs and ultimately selecting an optimal one based on
quantifiable metrics serves as the backdrop for this investigation. The primary research
objective is to ascertain an effective approach to achieve this.
Central to this study is the pursuit of a reliable and automated method for converting CT
scans into a format compatible with finite element simulation with minimum manual re-
sources. Several methods are studied and tested using different components scanned
and provided in collaboration with the engineering department at LEGO Inc. Finally, an
overall structure and methodology are implemented to automate the simulation process
for high volumes of CT-scanned components. This work shows the viability of this pro-
cess and provides recommendations for future work to continue developing improved
processes in this field. A focal point of this research is the significance of robust product
design principles that ensure consistent behavior of high-volume components, guaran-
teeing sustained functionality despite deviations from the originally intended dimensions.
This methodology allows for the implementation and validation of these design principles.
By bridging the gap between advanced imaging techniques and simulation methodolo-
gies, this study contributes to the discourse on optimizing engineering practices, enabling
more informed decision-making in design processes.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the individuals who have significantly con-
tributed to both the realization of this project over the past six months and who have
enabled me to strive for a Masters degree.
First and foremost, I wish to acknowledge and express my appreciation to my mentor
at LEGO, Gert Petersen. He not only provided the motivation for this project but also
spent countless hours patiently answering my endless questions about industrial CAE,
both prior to and during the project’s duration. His commitment to sharing his time and
resources is truly appreciated
I am also indebted to my two DTU supervisors, Kim Lau Nielsen and Brian Nyvang
Legarth, for their invaluable support throughout this project. I extend gratitude to Kim for
initiating the project’s momentum and offering insightful guidance along the path. Equally
deserving of acknowledgment is Brian, who seamlessly stepped in midway, rapidly accli-
mating to the project’s context and responding adeptly to my numerous queries concern-
ing element formulations.
I would like to express my thanks to my family, particularly my mother and brother, for
their review and contributions to this work, despite the considerable time difference. My
appreciation also goes to my friends in Denmark, with a special mention to my roommate
Sina, who has made me dinner and baked goods in support many times throughout this
project.
Last, but most certainly not least, I’d like to thank Henry for everything. For allowing me
to bounce ideas off him and giving thoughtful suggestions in areas I hadn’t considered,
despite working on his own thesis in tandem, for constantly providing support, and for
having the idea to pursue a Masters degree in the first place. None of this would have
been possible without him.
iv
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Opportunity Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Major Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Research Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
LEGO as a Test Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theoretical Basis and Literature Review
7
2.1
Robust Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
CT Scanning Overview and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Meshing Methods for Dirty Geoemtry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Development of a Reliable Meshing Method for CT Scans
15
3.1
Scan Defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
General Triangulation Defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Injection Moulding Mesh Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Meshing Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Process Development
29
4.1
Preparing the Baseline Design File . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Generating the Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3
Preparing the Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Quality Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.5
Feature Isolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5
Implementation and Results
41
5.1
Test Case Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Test Setup and Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Mesh Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.4
Component Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.5
Simulation Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.6
Sensitivity Study Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.7
Comparison with Measured Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Conclusions
49
6.1
Summary of Research Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.3
Limitations and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.4
Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.5
Closing Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Bibliography
55
A Appendices
57
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
One of the main tasks of a mechanical engineer is to evaluate the functionality of proposed
designs and select a final design based on quantifiable performance metrics. One way
to evaluate designs is to run simulations, which approximate the design with a simplified
mesh and apply loading scenarios to predict the deformation and internal stress through-
out the structure. In this case, because the geometry is represented with a mesh, the
approach is called Finite Element Analysis (FEA). There are many different ways to test
and simulate functionality, and in general, all these approaches are included in the field of
Computer Aided Engineering (CAE), but FEA is the most common method for structural
simulations which is the focus area for this report.
Although simulation provides insight into the performance of a design, another important
evaluation parameter is the sensitivity of the design. Since all components will have vari-
ations from the original intended dimensions, due to real-life imperfections, variability in
manufacturing environments, and other uncontrollable elements, it is critical that variation
of the physical components does not cause significant degradation of functionality. An
engineer needs to not only ensure a design will function as expected but also that high
volumes of components will behave similarly and will continue to function throughout their
lifetime. Considering these other aspects in addition to the overall function is called robust
product design.
1.1.1
Current Methods for Robust Analysis
Robust design is incredibly important in creating quality products but can be challeng-
ing to evaluate and compare for different designs. In general, there are three different
approaches for evaluating robustness. In order of complexity these are:
1. Calculation at a basic principle level
2. Physical fabrication and testing
3. Simulation on the expected variation
Especially in early stages of the design process, robust design involves basic first principle
level calculations that ensure designs will perform as expected with a range of parameters.
Tolerance stacks, degree of freedom analysis, and mathematical modeling are methods
used to drive design early in the product development process. As the design progresses,
additional methods are necessary to predict performance.
Physical fabrication and testing is the most common secondary stage for quantifying ro-
bustness in the development process. This is why design timelines include multiple proto-
typing phases. Each phase scales the prototype quantities while reducing the number of
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
1
==PAGE:10==
design variations, culminating in a single final design which is ramped to production quan-
tities. Table 1.1 is an example of a common design cycle. The actual quantities will vary
depending on the product but this outline gives a general overview of the concept. Within
each prototyping phase, designs are measured, tested, and evaluated for performance.
POC
EVT
DVT
PVT
Ramp
Typical Units Produced
< 5
< 50
<200
< 500
1000+
Design Concepts
10+
3-5
3
1
1
Table 1.1: Typical design prototyping phases. (POC: proof of concept, EVT: engineering
validation test, DVT: design validation test, PVT: production validation test)
The main challenge with prototyping and testing is cost and complexity. Prototypes can
be expensive to fabricate, and setting up a reliable testing environment and running those
tests can be costly. Also, since multiple different tests often need to be run, the overall
quantities available for each specific test may be limited, especially if the tests are dam-
aging or destructive to the components. High-quality setups and large sample sizes are
important because they help reduce noise in the test. This is important because the noise
of the test must be lower than the functional variation if the goal is to perform a sensitivity
analysis and compare different designs. Tolerances of each concept, equipment setup
consistency, and operator error are possible sources of noise for such experiments.
Another tool becoming more common in the field of robust analysis is simulating expected
variation. Critical geometry features can be purposefully modified within expected toler-
ance amounts and simulated to predict a range of functional outcomes. This provides an
early estimation of robustness and can help with reducing the number of designs carried
into the prototyping phases, thus reducing costs and complexity.
Physical prototyping and testing is a necessary process, but simulating variation is a dras-
tic improvement in costs and greatly reduces noise since the environment is virtual. How-
ever, the results are very hypothetical. It is not easy to modify geometry to capture every
possible variation that may occur during production; especially for production methods
like injection molding, where dimensions are coupled. For example, draft and shrinkage
can affect many dimensions at once. Additionally, the amount of variation applied on
each dimension is an estimate which is roughly based on historical productions or typical
values for the manufacturer, so it is possible to vary from actual results.
1.1.2
Proposed Method for Robust Analysis
With these downsides and trade-offs in mind, a third methodology for robust analysis is
beginning to emerge: running simulations on scans of fabricated geometry. This ap-
proach uses a combination of the two previously described methods. Different concepts
are physically manufactured and then scanned using CT scanning technology, these
scanned files can then be imported into simulations and run to test different functional
requirements. This approach will never fully eliminate the need for physical testing, but
it does provide advantages that work well in tandem with physical testing. Firstly, since
2
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:11==
scanning and simulating are non-destructive methods, the scans of different parts can be
used for multiple simulation types, ultimately increasing the sample size for each study.
These parts can then still be used for physical testing with simulations running in tandem.
Simulations also reduce the noise associated with testing, making it easier to isolate the
results specifically due to geometry variation. This is especially useful if the functional
variation due to geometry is very small and usually difficult to differentiate from general
testing noise. In addition, comparing simulation functional results to test data can help
engineers make improvements to the simulation parameters so they better model the
realities of physical testing.
1.2
Opportunity Space
This new approach is feasible due to the relatively recent adoption of scanning tech-
nology as a manufacturing inspection method. Scanning technology has been around
for decades, but utilization within the metrology space for dimensional measurements is
fairly recent, with some first examples of CT scanning for dimensions being exhibited at
the Control Fair in Germany in 2005 [1]. There are two major categories within scanning
technology: photogrammetry, and computational tomography (CT). Photogrammetry in-
volves reconstructing the outer surface of a 3D object from a series of 360◦images taken
around the object. CT scanning technology works by shooting X-rays through an object
and reconstructing a full 3D body, including internal features. Figure 1.1 shows an exam-
ple of how the internal features of a component can be realized using CT scans. These
images were taken by Lumafield, a United States startup developing CT scanners for
commercial use, demonstrating just how far the industry has progressed in recent years
[2].
Figure 1.1: CT Scanned LEGO figure (credit to Lumafield)
The major drawbacks of the technique are accuracy, speed, and cost; however, these
have significantly improved over time to the point that the process is now viable in the
production space. Because scanners can process multiple components at once and au-
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
3
==PAGE:12==
tomatically align and compare geometry, manual measurement costs are drastically re-
duced and so many companies have started adopting this technology.
When components are scanned for dimensional measurement, the entire 3D body is
recorded and saved. This presents an opportunity for design engineers to run simula-
tions on scanned geometry with little additional costs since the high cost of implementing
scanners into production is already validated by the cost savings in manual inspection. If
a company has not implemented automated CT scanning of manufactured components,
there are still options for obtaining scans that are relatively low cost. It is possible to send
parts to a third party for scanning inspection. In this way, the data can be obtained without
the additional cost and complexity of sourcing and installing a scanner.
1.3
Major Challenges
As discussed, utilizing CT scans of prototypes in simulation proposes a new methodology
for robustness analysis that could be an improvement over existing methods due to cost
reduction and increased testing capability. However, the process is still in its infancy and
requires solutions to solve some of the major challenges.
The first challenge is due to the complexity of converting a scanned object into a mesh
while minimizing geometrical changes.
There are common defects in CT scan point
clouds, which can create ”dirty” geometry after reconstruction. These will be discussed
in detail in the proceeding chapters, but the ultimate effect is that creating finite element
meshes from this geometry can be difficult. It is especially challenging because the benefit
of simulating real geometry is negated if the simulation is being done on overly smoothed
meshes of the scanned files, so accurate geometry representation is critical.
These meshing issues are compounded by the need for automation in the process. Au-
tomation is necessary because performing a tolerance sensitivity analysis requires many
parts, so the overall meshing and simulation process must use minimal engineering time
and effort to be practical. The goal is not only to create a high-quality mesh of an in-
dividual scan but also to create an automated process that is robust enough to perform
high-quality meshing on any scanned geometry. Additionally, there must be some kind of
feedback provided to give insight into the quality of the mesh elements and the accuracy
of the mesh geometry, since an engineer would not be able to visually inspect every mesh
generated.
1.4
Research Approach
The goals of this thesis are to investigate the overall process of automating the meshing
and simulation of bulk CT scan geometries. Within this, there are two ultimate research
questions to answer:
• Is it possible to automate the meshing process of CT scans such that the resulting
meshes account for defects and reliably represent the true geometry?
4
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:13==
• Is it possible to use scanned geometry to perform sensitivity studies? Are the results
meaningful?
The overall approach to this research is to first dive into the source of defects and evaluate
different meshing techniques to resolve them. Once meshing methods are established,
automation of the overall process will be implemented with a focus on the appropriate or-
der of operations to reduce computational costs and engineering manual setup time. This
overall method will then be utilized in a test case to see if the results provide any mean-
ingful sensitivity data. Advantages and disadvantages to this technique will be provided
along with recommendations for additional areas of research.
The literature review in the following chapter will provide more background context for
the decisions and methodologies tested throughout this project. Examples of existing
research using CT scanned bodies are presented. Although many of these examples
utilize different simulation methods, for example, the Finite Cell Method (FCM) is used
several times, the work done here will focus specifically on meshed methods within the
Finite Element field. More reasoning for this decision is provided in the following chapter
where these prior studies are discussed.
1.5
LEGO as a Test Case
This thesis was done in partnership with the computer-aided engineering (CAE) team at
LEGO to utilize CT scanned components to improve simulation models and better under-
stand the pull-apart force sensitivity between LEGO bricks.
LEGO is an ideal test candidate for this project for several reasons. For one, they are
utilizing CT scanning in manufacturing since there is a high concern for quality and toler-
ances. It is practical for them to own and operate scanners since the parts are injection
molded at high volumes in-house, and most parts are small and contain significant de-
tail. Inspection and control of these small details throughout the design and prototyping
phases are critical for proper functionality and concept evaluation.
Additionally, the volume of parts produced and the overall similarity of products produced,
in terms of production method, material, and even geometrical features, aligns well with
the goal of automating the entire simulation process. This is coupled with the high noise
generated in physical testing of small plastic parts, where factors like cycling, temperature,
humidity, lighting, and friction (even due to oil on the skin of operators) can all cause
variability in the force measurements. Being able to run simulations that isolate these
noise factors is very beneficial to evaluating different design concepts.
Finally, LEGO as a company has ambitious sustainability targets for its future and is there-
fore investing in technologies that enable more sustainable design. This means an in-
creased focus in simulation, for both design feature optimization and material validation
purposes. By using simulation to better understand the mechanisms enabling brick con-
nection, teams can optimize designs to use less material and enable more robust designs.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
5
==PAGE:14==
More robust designs also mean fewer products that are wasted in the production process
due to geometrical defects.
As this partnership is with LEGO, all of the scans and studies presented in this research
are done on various plastic LEGO bricks and focus on the simulation of forces between
the bricks. Although this is the main application here, in general, the approach applied to
automate and run the simulations should apply to other industries and products. For ex-
ample, analysis of 3D printed and scanned bodies, for validation of topology optimization,
would be a relevant use case. Additionally, the examination and simulation of high-quality
medical-grade products could also be an application area for this research.
6
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:15==
2
Theoretical Basis and Literature Review
This project touches on a broad range of study specialties. It’s possible to approach the
project from the perspective of finite element theory, robust design, data analysis, DOE
(design of experiments), manufacturing, or even computational reconstruction. Since the
field is so broad, an extensive literature review was done to better understand the latest
relevant research and methodologies across these fields and understand which were the
most relevant to focus on. A summary of this research is given here to provide familiarity
and context to the directions taken throughout the project.
2.1
Robust Design
2.1.1
Principles of Robust Design
Robust Design Methodology (RDM) was a concept invented by Dr. Genichi Taguchi in
the 1950s, with the main purpose of maintaining product functionality despite variation
[3]. The Functional Parameters (FP) are the key performance indicators of the product
and the Design Variables (DV) are the factors that influence the FPs. The relationship
between the DVs and the FPs is called the Transfer Function [4]. For example, with a
LEGO brick, one of the main FPs is the force required to pull two bricks apart. Many
DVs affect this, but some specific ones of interest are the wall thickness, internal draft
angle, and internal tube diameter. When manufacturing, these dimensions will vary and
will impact the pull apart force. Using RDM involves studying the sensitivity of the pull
apart force to these parameters and implementing changes to reduce the variation in pull
apart force regardless of variation in dimensions.
There are three levels in RDM: system design, parameter design, and tolerance design
[4]. These stages repeat iteratively throughout the design process. In parameter de-
sign, the transfer function is found through testing and is ideally improved through design
changes, and in tolerance design the ranges are set on the design variables such that the
resulting functional parameters (defined by the transfer function relationship) will always
be in an acceptable range. This thesis will focus mostly on the latter two stages, ultimately
proposing a tool that can be used in the parameter design phase to help determine the
transfer function.
2.1.2
Virtual Robust Design
As mentioned in the introduction, it is possible to use simulation tools to intentionally mod-
ify design geometry and study the effects on functional parameters. A large motivation
for this thesis was the work done by Tim Brix Nerenst in A Coherent Approach to Virtual
Assessments of Structural Robustness. In his work, Nerenst gives a detailed explanation
of the process and challenges associated with performing virtual simulations along with
several practical examples. Some of the main challenges he highlights are due to the
nature of geometry changes feeding into simulation meshes. The structure for building
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
7
==PAGE:16==
3D geometry (CAD) can be inconsistent, so when trying to change a dimension at the
base level there can be cascading effects that break the model. When performing a vir-
tual sensitivity study, a simulation engineer will need certain dimensions to vary across
an array of possible values (expanding beyond the expected tolerances). Ideally, this
is automated, because manually changing many dimensions to create a large range of
parts would be time-consuming. Unfortunately, many 3D geometries are made using non-
parametric methods which makes dimensional changes difficult. This challenge is made
more difficult because it’s often two different engineers working on the problem, with a
CAE engineer performing the virtual simulation and a design engineer working on the 3D
design CAD. Since the two engineers are focused on different aspects of the design, an
optimal procedure for one may not be used by the other. In his work, Nerenst proposes
one way to improve this process by introducing CAD hierarchy training to better control
and standardize the process for both parties [4].
This thesis takes a different approach to the process of virtual robust design. Rather than
attempting to manipulate the dimensions of CAD geometry, fabricated parts are scanned
and meshed directly. The tolerances of the parts can be intentionally varied by using a
range of manufacturing parameters outside the normal operating conditions, or the stan-
dard procedures can be used to gather expected variation. The dimensions of interest are
extracted from the scanned geometry and the sensitivity analysis is performed by compar-
ing these dimensions to the simulated forces. Using this method, the varying dimensions
are coupled in a way that mimics the actual production process. More random data is
obtained and analysis can be done to study how a variety of different parameters and
possible combinations of parameters affect functionality. The major disadvantage of this
approach is that it requires physical fabrication of components, and therefore cannot be
utilized at very early stages in the design process. Because of this, the method is not an
alternative to a completely virtual robust design, but rather an additional tool in the design
process to define the transfer function for different variables. It may be a more or less
practical approach depending on the company and type of product being designed, being
mainly dependent on low-cost manufacturing capabilities and high-volume production.
2.2
CT Scanning Overview and Terminology
Computed tomography (CT) scanning is the major tool utilized for this project. Although
this thesis will not focus extensively on the scanning process itself, a thorough understand-
ing of the technology is useful for appreciating possibilities and shortcomings in various
aspects of the project. Because of this, an overview of the technology and process is
presented here.
2.2.1
How CT Scanning and Reconstruction works
CT scanners survey components and generate three-dimensional data that represent the
geometry. The main components comprising a CT scanner are the X-ray source, rotary
table, and detector. Objects being scanned are fixed to the rotary table and then incre-
mentally rotated while radiographic images are taken on the detector [1]. The grey value
8
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:17==
of the image from the detector is based on the x-ray attenuation coefficient of the part ma-
terial and the intensity of the x-rays. By analyzing the radiographic slices at many angles,
the component can be reconstructed into a three-dimensional voxel model (where a voxel
is the 3D equivalent of a pixel) [5].
2.2.2
CT Scanning and Dimensional Measurement
The utilization of CT scanning for dimensional measurements is relatively new, and be-
cause of this, there is still research being done to evaluate the precision of this measure-
ment technique. Similarly to other measurement devices, accuracy is dependent on the
machine operator, operating parameters, and the machine itself [5]. Some examples of
each of these influencing factors are the amount of time to warm the machine, the heat
of the chamber during operation, proximity of component to X-ray source, accuracy of
rotation increment, voxel size, and number of angles used in the scan [5]. These are
just a small subset of the total sources of variation, so it is impossible to give an abso-
lute value of precision in the measurement process without performing a proper gauge
reproducibility and repeatability (Gauge R&R) study on the specific measurement setup.
In general, however, it is useful to know an order of magnitude for the expected precision
of measurements obtained in this manner. In a study by Villarraga-Gómez et. all, CT scan
measurements for varying feature types were compared with measurements obtained by
CMM (coordinated measuring machine). For external feature dimensions, the certainty
was quantified as ± 0.004mm [6]. This is specific to the setup and equipment used in this
study but shows that with high-quality setups the level of measurement precision is on the
micron order of magnitude.
2.2.3
Common Defects and Challenges
Typically the output file type for CT scanning reconstruction is an STL (also referred to as
Standard Triangle Language, Standard Tesselation Language, and Stereolithography file)
[7]. STL files represent surfaces with a series of connected triangles and are generated on
CT scans by performing triangulation on the 3D voxel cloud. When rebuilding a tessellated
surface from point cloud geometry, the process is referred to as reverse engineering.[8].
STLs are used for exporting CT scan data, not necessarily because they are the best file
format, but rather because they are common and compatible with many different types of
3D software, being utilized especially in the rapid prototyping industry.
Although STLs are very commonly used, they have a considerable amount of issues [7].
They approximate geometry, can contain overlapping or redundant nodes and edges, and
can have holes, cracks, or overlapping surfaces which are difficult to fix [9]. Because of
the nature of STL files, and the generally imperfect process of de-noising density point
files, CT scanned virtual geometry tends to have a lot of defects. This type of geometry
is often termed ”dirty geometry” because the defects can cause challenges downstream,
either when trying to modify or measure with 3D visualization tools or when trying to mesh
and simulate. More specifics on this will be provided in Chapter 3 where the meshing
challenges and techniques are discussed in more detail.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: CT scanning process for dimensional measurement. [1]
2.2.4
Existing Research on CT Scan Simulation
The use of CT scanning for part inspection is still a relatively new concept, and because of
this, running simulations on scanned geometry is an even more recent process. Despite
10
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:19==
this, there are several research examples where scans have been utilized to perform
structural simulations.
In their paper, BIM From Laser Clouds and Finite Element Analysis: Combining Structural
Analysis and Geometric Complexity, Barazzetti et al. perform finite element simulation on
an entire historical building, scanned using photogrammetry methods. Since this is a
much larger scale, their research utilized Building Information Modeling (BIM) techniques
coupled with FEA. The BIM tools were used to reverse engineer the point cloud data
into representative parametric models which could then be meshed and simulated [10].
Although effective for this application, the scale of civil structures like this is such that the
acceptable variation and tolerances are much larger than in the product design space.
The defeaturing used to convert bodies into parameterized objects is not as valuable
when scanning small bodies and investigating how tolerances affect functionality since
these small details are relevant to the functionality.
A much more relevant product scale example of simulating scanned geometry is research
done by Agarwal et al. [11]. In their work, they scanned a 3D printed bracket, designed
with topology optimization, and utilized a set of different software to mesh and simulate the
geometry, comparing the results with those of the CAD geometry. This showed that a finite
element mesh approach is feasible and presented an interesting application of using this
methodology to evaluate topology optimization; however, there was not extensive detail
on the process or analysis of the different methods and trade-offs. The process was also
done on a single component, so no aspects of automation were necessary or utilized.
Another example of research on simulations of scanned geometries is by Miron et al.
[12]. In their research, carbon fiber structures were scanned which consisted of internal
microstructure air gaps and defects. They evaluated different methods for simplifying and
representing these microstructures so the bodies could be cleanly meshed and simulated.
Although their focus was more on internal structure detail, and not external surfaces, this is
a good example of evaluating the meshing quality necessary to represent physical bodies
acceptably.
2.3
Meshing Methods for Dirty Geoemtry
As discussed, CT scans can produce dirty geometry which is difficult to mesh. There are
many other applications where dirty geometry is generated, some examples are the con-
version of CAD geometry from one software to another, defective triangulation of complex
curve-generated surfaces, and results of topology optimization. Because this problem is
common, there is extensive research on different methods for repairing and meshing de-
fective geometry.
2.3.1
Utilization of the Finite Cell Method
One proposed method for cleaning dirty geometry is to utilize the Finite Cell Method (FCM)
[13]. In their paper, Wasserman et al negate the need for meshing by using FCM to
group areas into certain domains with specific boundary conditions, this is then used to
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
11
==PAGE:20==
perform the analysis. Although the finite cell method is typically used for computational
fluid dynamics, it is still possible to use in structural analysis.
In a similar approach, Direct structural analysis of domains defined by point clouds, Kudela
et al. utilize the actual point cloud results obtained directly from scanning to create finite
cell domains. The researchers took advantage of the inside/outside boundary condition
approach to work well with point cloud data in terms of determining and defining the edges
[14]. This is one method for getting around the triangulation defects of STL files and work-
ing directly on the raw data from scan geometry. Although compelling, this is practically
challenging due to the large file size of point cloud datasets. The data may need to be
subsampled to be processed in a manageable time frame.
Utilization of the finite cell method for structural simulation of scanned data seems practi-
cal because it treats the scanned data points essentially as a volume, and performs similar
boundary conditions to those used in fluid flow simulations. It’s an interesting approach
and worthy of more investigation; however, the structural simulation field is heavily dom-
inated by the finite element method. This is because finite elements can lengthen and
contract in a way that is better representative of structural deformations, while finite vol-
umes do not change in size and rather assess the energy entering and exiting. In this dif-
ference, finite elements are better able to capture geometry that changes overall shape.
Since finite element analysis (FEA) is so dominant in this area, it is necessary to assess
and document the details and challenges associated with using FEA to process scanned
data before reverting to alternative methods which may have a subset of other challenges.
Once the FEA process is thoroughly vetted, other methods can then be compared with
the existing approach to determine other benefits. Early in this thesis, meshless methods
were heavily considered as a study focus for point cloud data simulation, but since the
field of simulating scanned components is still so new, it was deemed more relevant to
focus on evaluating the feasibility of meshing first.
2.3.2
Modifying Geometric Meshes by Projection
Within the FEA field, projection was considered as a method for creating a high-quality
mesh by overlaying the geometry onto the scanned bodies. Research by Porziani et
al,Update of CAE models on actual manufactured shapes, utilizes a similar method. For
their analysis, surveyed geometry is saved as a tesselated body and projected onto the
CAD model, which is forced to morph onto the manufactured shape and effectively create
a digital twin [15]. The digital twin can then be updated over time and continuously simu-
lated to predict lifetime functionality. This can be particularly relevant for structural support
beams that need to be assessed over time. A similar approach to the projection and mor-
phing method utilized in this research was tested for this application and evaluated for
automation feasibility. This is discussed more in Chapter 3.
2.3.3
Wrapping Mesh Methods
In contrast to the projection meshing method utilized by Porziani et al, there are several
papers discussing another meshing method referred to as the shrink-wrapping method.
12
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:21==
One example is A Shrink Wrapping Approach to Remeshing Polygonal Surfaces, wherein
Kobbelt et al. provide a detailed mathematical proposal for a shrink wrapping algorithm
to clean defective surfaces. This approach focuses on subdivision connectivity, where
triangles are uniformly divided into certain areas until the shape has been resolved to an
acceptable approximation. The paper also explains how shrink wrapping is used in tan-
dem with projection to prevent bunching and folding. Essentially the mesh shrinks and
inflates to fit the surface as closely as possible [16]. Since these methods have been
around for some time, the algorithms are fairly established and are built-in to most pre-
processing software. Chapter 3 discusses how wrapping methods were implemented to
automate meshing for CT scans. The process of iterating between wrapping and projec-
tion was also considered for improving the mesh quality.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
13
==PAGE:22==
14
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:23==
3
Development of a Reliable Meshing
Method for CT Scans
Up to this point, general CT scan defects and challenges have been discussed, for the
following two chapters more specific examples will be investigated. Scans of a basic 1x1
LEGO brick were studied to understand the range of defects and challenges produced
in the scanning process. Some other geometries were also considered to test for edge
cases. Using these samples to define categories of defects, different meshing methods
were then evaluated based on the ability to manage the defects and other criteria set by
the overall goals of the project.
3.1
Scan Defects
The overall methodology behind CT scanning was explained in the preceding chapter,
but there are some additional details of the scanning process that can affect the recon-
struction of meshes. The technological details involved in the CT scanning process are
out of scope for this project, so this section will instead focus on the specific defects found
after reconstruction of 3D bodies which are related to meshing challenges. Appendix A
contains images of different CT errors that can contribute to these defects.
3.1.1
Fixture Related Defects
A key requirement to obtaining a high-quality scan is the utilization of appropriate fixtures.
Fixtures are used to hold the scanned component rigidly throughout the survey so that it
doesn’t move during the process. They should be made of materials that have a signifi-
cantly different X-ray attenuation coefficient than the object of interest so the components
can have sufficient contrast on the radiograph to be isolated [17]. Typically foam blocks
are used because they have very low X-ray attenuation coefficients and are effective hold-
ing devices. For the scanning of LEGO bricks in this study, foam blocks were used which
had cavities machined into them based on the size and desired orientation of the bricks
being measured. Each cavity was filled with an individual brick to space the components
out and make reconstruction easier. To increase the number of elements scanned at one
time, multiple tiers of foam fixtures were stacked and scanned simultaneously.
Common defects found on the CT scanned bodies were particle defects, which were
largely due to these fixtures since foam machining tends to generate small particles that
are difficult to remove. These particles, along with small flakes of plastic or dust, can show
as part of the scanned surface after the reconstruction process [17]. This is especially
prevalent in scans of plastic components because the X-ray attenuation coefficient of
plastics tends to be low. Essentially, radiographs of plastic components can be difficult
to isolate from their backgrounds because they are not particularly bright. Additionally,
since the foam used in the fixture is also a plastic (polystyrene), its attenuation coefficient
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
15
==PAGE:24==
is similar to the bricks themselves (ABS) and therefore does not contrast significantly
against the plastic bricks. Figure 3.1 shows a sample scanned slice of a LEGO brick
used in this study. The image gives some context for how setting the greyscale threshold
to isolate the component can be difficult. Since some of the background pixel colors are
close to those of the part itself the contrast is not sharp.
Figure 3.1: Slice of LEGO brick from CT scan process
Figure 3.2 shows two examples of particle defects perpetuating the final tessellated STL.
The particle can appear either attached to the surface or isolated and floating near the
surface as an additional volume. Small particles like these cause difficulties in the mesh-
ing process. Ideally, they are removed completely, but this is difficult, especially in the
case where the particle has fused with the surface. It can be challenging to automatically
differentiate between this defect and a small surface detail
Figure 3.2: CT scans showing defect caused by particles in the scan. a) Particke merged
with the surface. b) Floating particle.
In addition to particle defects, other fixturing aspects must be accounted for when prepar-
ing a scanned component for simulation. During the scanning process, parts should be
intentionally oriented off-axis to limit horizontal surfaces[17]. This is because X-rays may
”skip” on horizontal surfaces causing the output image to contain artifacts where that sur-
face is represented [18][19]. This is a small technical detail, but the overall outcome is
that components will require re-alignment later in the process. Realignment is incredibly
important because in a contact simulation even small misalignment can have a signifi-
16
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:25==
cant influence on the overall forces. Some reconstruction software automatically realigns
components to their design files, especially if dimensions are being extracted; however,
parts are not always corrected or may not be aligned to match the simulation setup so it is
still critical to have alignment built into the simulation preparation process. This step will
be discussed more extensively in the following chapter.
3.1.2
Scanner and Reconstruction Defects
Besides fixture-related defects, there were other issues found in several different scan
files that were due to the reconstruction process or the scanner itself. Two examples are
shown in Figure 3.3. Figure 3.3a is an interesting defect found in several files consisting
of a pinpoint line-like feature extending through the internal volume of the component. In
some parts, this feature extends across the entire part, and in some, it is small like the one
shown here. One possible explanation for this abnormality is a pixel defect in the detector
screen of the CT scanner. The detector degrades throughout the scanner’s lifetime and
periodically needs to be replaced or defects like this can be present. In scans with a
well-calibrated scanner, this defect does not exist, so this was relatively uncommon.
Figure 3.3: CT scans showing additional defects. a) Internal pinpoint, b) Artificial volume
Another example of a reconstruction defect was having artificial overlapping volumes, one
of which is shown in 3.3b. These were similar to the floating particle defects described
earlier but the volumes were located within the body of the part itself or penetrating the
outer wall, so it’s unlikely that they were caused by particles on the parts. It’s unclear
what specific aspect of the reconstruction created this geometry, but it caused many is-
sues when trying to mesh the part into a solid since penetrating volumes cannot be solid
meshed. Ideally, these artificial volumes can be recognized, isolated, and removed.
3.2
General Triangulation Defects
Many of the defects found in components were due to the CT process, but some others
were common defects with STL files. Finite element meshes are often generated by
defining a shell mesh of the surface and then extrapolating this mesh through the part
to create a solid mesh. Triangle elements are commonly used in meshes to capture fine
details of the geometry so in theory an STL, which is a surface triangulation, should be
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
17
==PAGE:26==
viable as the shell mesh. Unfortunately, STL triangle attributes and the defects common
with STL files make this very difficult.
Figure 3.4: Raw CT scan shown as a shell mesh. There is a large range in the triangle
aspect ratios as shown by the range of smallest internal angles.
The most glaring issues with using STL surfaces as a finite element mesh are the quan-
tity and quality of triangles. STLs attempt to capture all the details of a surface and use
as many triangles as necessary. For example, on the scans of the 1x1 bricks, one ex-
ample shown in 3.4, STLs typically contained 1-2M elements for the surface alone. This
many elements are excessive to capture the details of the geometry and would result in
unnecessarily long simulation times (12+ hrs estimated). Additionally, the quality of the
triangles is not acceptable for simulation. Ideally, triangle elements composing a finite
element mesh are very similar in shape and as equilateral as possible [20]. One way to
assess this is to look at the minimum angle used in the triangles creating a surface. As
shown in Figure 3.4, there is a great variation in triangle shape with the STL file, with
some triangles being extremely acute (internal angles down to 2 degrees).
Besides element count and quality, STLs can contain many connectivity defects [13]. Tri-
angulation performed on voxel cloud data can even increase the occurrence of defects
since the surfaces and edges aren’t as clear as a design surface, which has well-defined
and connected perimeters. In a finite element triangular shell mesh, every edge should be
connected by exactly two triangles, all nodes and triangles should be unique, triangle nor-
mal vectors should be oriented correctly, and there can be no holes, gaps, or intersections
18
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:27==
in the mesh [20]. The triangle’s normal orientation is only an issue when post-processing
results as the local coordinate system for that element will be inverted, the mesh will still
successfully run in the simulation. Figure 3.5 shows visualizations of the different types
of defects found in unstructured STLs. Any of these examples present in a FE shell mesh
would prevent the generation of a solid mesh.
Figure 3.5: Common triangulation defects found in STL files. a) Double vertices, edges,
or faces, b) Wrong normal orientation, c) Missing faces, d) Gaps, e) Offsets, f) Artifacts,
g) Overlaps, and h) Intersections [13]
3.3
Injection Moulding Mesh Challenges
Another meshing challenge with scanned injection molded components is the gate sur-
face. The gate is where the plastic comes into the mold and is the location where the
excess plastic is cut to isolate the part. Because of the nature of cutting, this area is often
very rough or may consist of paper-thin or sharp plastic areas that easily deform. Triangle
surfaces in this area are particularly messy when turning the voxel cloud into a surface,
sometimes being inverted or cross joined.
Some examples of STL surfaces of scanned gates are shown in Figure 3.6. 3.6e, in
particular, shows a cross-section of the gate in 3.6d to highlight the complexity. These
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: CT scans of several different gate geometries which cause challenges for
meshing
gates need to be fixed and smoothed to create clean meshes for finite element analysis.
Most of the time the area is on a non-critical surface so the smoothing can be excessive
without affecting the results, but sometimes gates can be located on critical surfaces and
the goal of the study is to understand the impact of the gate on the functionality. In this
case, it’s important that the gate is not overly smoothed and still has representation in the
simulation mesh.
3.4
Meshing Methods
Since it was not viable to use the unmodified STL surface as the shell mesh, new ap-
proaches for meshing were tested. Three different methods in particular were evaluated
for meshing the STL geometry: parameter based meshing, projecting, and wrapping. This
section will describe each of these methods in detail, outlining the benefits and down-
sides of each. Most pre-processing software includes tools capable of performing these
different meshing methods, although custom tools could be made to dictate the exact
mathematics behind the mesh. For this particular study ANSA, a product by BETA CAE
Systems, was selected as a pre-processor due to its high level of parameter customization
20
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:29==
and compatibility with Python scripting. These methods were initially tested and compared
on the 1x1 brick. The design mesh and the raw scanned STL are shown in Figure 3.7 for
reference. Besides this component, additional LEGO bricks were evaluated to test the
robustness of the final selected method.
Figure 3.7: 1x1 Brick meshes used in the initial analysis. a) Design mesh b) CT STL
3.4.1
Mesh Quality Criteria
The first step in method evaluation is to determine which criteria are most important for
success. The ultimate goal for this project was to develop a meshing process that auto-
matically handles geometry with defects and generates a viable mesh for use in simula-
tion. For this focus, the most important factors, in order of relevance are:
• Geometrical Accuracy: retain features of scanned geometry such that the simula-
tion represents the physical performance of the part.
• Automation Feasibility: use scripts to handle a variety of defects without errors,
require minimal manual cleanup of files in preparation.
• Good Element Quality: ensure element shape and size are acceptable for finite
element simulation.
• Ease of Refinement: method is compatible with additional refinement methods to
focus detail on particular areas of interest.
From these criteria, geometrical accuracy and automation feasibility are the most impor-
tant and also most challenging aspects. All the meshing methods considered ensure good
element quality, the assessment of which is discussed in the following chapter. Ease of
refinement is a feature that is necessary only for very large files.
3.4.2
Parameter Based Meshing
This first method considered was very similar to standard meshing methods used on de-
sign files. Parameter based meshing considers the provided surface and generates a
mesh that best fits the perimeters and surfaces of the body. Different parameters can
be assigned that limit the element count and complexity; such as the minimum element
size allowed, the number of elements to use on specific features (like radii or fillets), and
feature recognition and removal (like logos or details under a certain size). Most pre-
processing software contains some kind of batch meshing or automated meshing option
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
21
==PAGE:30==
that allows parameters like these to be defined. For meshing design files, this is a fairly
common and simple process since design files have clearly defined perimeter lines, and
the mesh works along the perimeter lines to create the mesh. With unstructured triangular
surfaces, like those of the CT scans, there are no defined perimeters so the results are
not as clean.
Parameter based meshing worked to improve element count and quality on the sample
file but was unable to remove many of the defects. Specifically, multi-volume defects and
penetrating elements needed to be removed manually. Without this manual operation, the
final solid mesh could not be generated since multiple volumes were detected. Some ad-
vantages of this method worth noting, however, were in local refinement. With parameter
based meshing, it’s possible to specify a volume (subset of the part) where more refined
elements should be used. In this way, it’s easy to decrease the overall simulation time
and still get high-quality results that focus on specific areas. This can be very valuable
when performing simulations on parts where the functional area is relatively small in com-
parison to the overall size of the part. Visualizations of parts meshed with parameters, at
high and low resolution, can be found in Figure 3.8. In this case, the different resolutions
were set by modifying the average element length parameter.
Figure 3.8: Meshes of 1x1 brick generated with parameter based meshing (smoothed).
a) Low resolution, b) High resolution
3.4.3
Projection Meshing
Projection meshing is a more complicated approach than parameter based meshing. It
involved taking the mesh of the original design file and aligning it with the unstructured
ct scan. The nodes of the original mesh were then adjusted such that they touched the
nearest surface of the unstructured mesh. Then the unstructured mesh was deleted and
the resulting modified design file represented the scanned geometry.
This method is very effective at resolving defects in the scanned triangulation because
the original defective geometry is deleted. The clean mesh of the design file is simply
adjusted to account for the true variations in the part. A big advantage to this approach is
that the variation between geometries is directly obtained in this step since the distance
between the design and the scan must be calculated to adjust the design mesh. By doing
this calculation as part of the mesh process the quality evaluation step of determining
22
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:31==
the variation is eliminated. Additionally, the modified mesh has the same node count and
resolution as the original design mesh so the meshes can be directly compared when
analyzing results. This also enables local refinement mimicking the design file. Whatever
kind of mesh refinement setup on the design file will be mimicked for all scanned geometry
automatically.
Figure 3.9 shows the results of the projection method on the 1x1 brick at high and low
resolution, where the logos have been de-featured and surfaces projected onto the un-
structured mesh.
Figure 3.9: Meshes of 1x1 brick generated with projection of the design mesh. a) Low
resolution, b) High resolution
Unfortunately, upon further analysis with different geometries, the process was not as
robust as desired. The main reason for this is projection of geometry can create inverted
elements, especially when the design file originally has a sharp feature projected onto
a curved surface. An example of this can be found in Figure 3.10. As shown here, the
meshed design logo varies significantly from the actual molded and scanned logo. When
the design nodes attempt to project onto the other surface there will be areas of drastic
misalignment which may result in inverted elements. One step towards fixing this issue
is to ensure that logos and other small steps are de-featured from the design mesh since
it is more feasible to project a flat surface onto a logo.
Figure 3.10: Challenges with projection meshing due to small feature misalignment
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
23
==PAGE:32==
Although the automated projection method worked on the 1x1 brick geometry, when per-
formed on a LEGO headgear component (discussed extensively in Chapter 5), the method
failed. Where the sharp edges of the design file (grey) are projected on the rounded edge
of the CT scan (beige), the elements are inverted, as shown in Figure 3.11. This created
a shell mesh that could not generate a solid mesh due to inverted and self-penetrating
elements. Those needed to be removed manually to create a closed volume.
Figure 3.11: Challenge with projection meshing on headgear components.
3.4.4
Wrap Meshing
The final method tested was wrap meshing. After projection meshing demonstrated fail-
ures on some edge cases, additional research was done on possible methods for im-
proving the projection approach. A paper from 2001, A Shrink Wrapping Approach to
Remeshing Polygonal Surfaces, proposed a method of shrink-wrapping surfaces to gen-
erate triangulated surfaces with subdivision connectivity. The premise of this approach is
to project a structured spherical mesh onto the unstructured mesh and continue to refine
and increase node count until a minimum matching criterion is met. This method does
this by parameterizing the nodes of the unstructured mesh onto a spherical coordinate
system and then projecting the spherical mesh onto this[16].
Upon further investigation, it was discovered that this wrapping functionality exists in most
pre-processing packages, ANSA included. The main parameters that could be modified
for wrapping were maximum and minimum element lengths. Additionally, parameters
could be set to ignore volumes containing fewer than a set number of elements. This
additional feature greatly helped with removing particle defects floating in space, although
particles on the surface were still considered part of the overall surface. Additionally, since
the wrap started on the outside and moved toward the surface, it ignored internal defects.
Similarly to the projection method, the unstructured mesh was deleted after the process
was completed, so any of the defects associated with the original STL were removed, and
what remained was a structured mesh of a closed volume.
The results of high and low-resolution wrapped meshing are shown in Figure 3.12. These
images show some of the disadvantages of this method, namely that there is no control
24
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:33==
over local refinement. The wrap mesh will only refine areas of high detail, up to the limits
of the set parameters. Although this seems like an advantage, there are instances where
high detail in a certain area does not improve the simulation results but only increases
simulation time. For example, in this case, parameters for a high resolution are required
to capture the radii at the base of the knob, a feature very relevant to pull force simulation.
But this refinement also means increased refinement around the LEGO logo, which is an
area that is likely to have no impact on the simulation results.
Figure 3.12: Meshes of 1x1 brick generated with the wrapping method. a) Low resolution,
b) High resolution
3.4.5
Method Final Selection
Given the three approaches and their associated advantages and disadvantages, wrap
meshing was selected as the best final approach. This is mostly because wrap mesh-
ing was the most effective way to automatically remove CT defects without the need for
manual modifications.
The other critical meshing parameter is the ability to capture the geometry of the scan. To
quantify this and compare the different methods, the differences between the meshes and
the STL surface were calculated. This was done by taking every node of the unstructured
mesh and measuring the normal distance to the nearest triangular surface of the struc-
tured mesh, more detail on this method will be discussed in Chapter 4. The calculated
distance values are shown in Figure 3.13. From this graph, it’s clear that the parameter
based meshing (smoothed) method produced the closest geometry to the original scan;
however, this was only accomplished after several manual defects were removed be-
cause it was not possible to mesh with this method with the defects. This explains why
many of the outliers are reduced in those cases.
One challenge when comparing results in this way is that the meshes have different el-
ement counts, so they’re not directly comparable. Low resolution and high-resolution
meshes consisted of approximately 40K and 120K respectively. A visual inspection of
the meshes showed that the high-resolution methods all produced geometry that accept-
ably captured the features of the scanned geometry. Visual inspection coupled with the
distance calculation points towards wrap meshing being one of the best methods. More
discussion on element count for these meshes can be found in the Appendix.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.13: Box plots of distance measured between CT scan nodes and nearest surface
on meshes created with different methods.
In addition to meshing automation, there are additional benefits to wrap meshing. This
technique can be coupled with other methods to improve results. Wrapping is very ef-
fective at removing defects without manual intervention; once this is done projection or
parameter based meshes can be done on this cleaned mesh. There are two potential
pathways for this. The first is that a low-resolution wrapping can be performed to create a
close approximation of the part. Once this is complete, that mesh can be projected onto
the scanned surface so that it more closely matches the geometry. In this way the pro-
jection will be generated from a similar geometry and projection inversion will not occur,
and a low element count geometry can be generated which represents the surfaces better
than just a wrapped mesh. The second approach would be to first apply a high-resolution
initial wrapping to remove defects and capture all the detail. Once this is completed, pa-
rameter based meshing can be applied to the wrapped mesh in certain regions to reduce
the detail on areas that are not expected to be critical to functionality. With this approach,
local refinement capability can be added.
3.4.6
Additional Geometries Considered
The same mesh method comparison was also done with a LEGO headgear component to
ensure the robustness of the process on different geometry. Figure 3.14 shows the differ-
ent headgear meshes and Figure 3.15 shows the variation results compared to the STL.
One point worth noting is that, as discussed previously and shown in Figure 3.11, the pro-
jection failed along the edges of the headgear files due to inverted elements. Because of
this, these elements were deleted and the holes needed to be manually filled. This is why
in Figure 3.15 the projected mesh distances contained significant outliers compared to the
other methods. In the test on the headgear component, a combination of wrapping and
projection was tested to see if it resolved the projection issue. This worked successfully
26
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:35==
and resulted in a mesh slightly more improved than the wrapped mesh alone.
Figure 3.14: Visual of meshes created using different methods. a) Design mesh, b) Raw
CT STL, c) Projected mesh, d) Wrapped mesh, e) Smoothed mesh.
Figure 3.15: Distance measured between CT scan of headgear and different meshes
created from that STL
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
27
==PAGE:36==
28
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:37==
4
Process Development
The overall goal of this thesis is to test the feasibility of utilizing CT scans with finite ele-
ment simulation to perform sensitivity analyses and to propose an overall best method for
accomplishing this. For this kind of analysis to be practical, a high level of automation is
required because many scans will need to be processed to capture the sensitivity. Since
automated exporting of dimensional reports from CT scans is already being implemented
in the manufacturing space, it is a reasonable goal for the simulation of manufactured
components to be automatically running as well. With this integration, a final report for
each part could be produced documenting the expected dimensions and functionality of
the part. With this report, components could fail inspection based on either of these two
criteria. Figure 4.1 shows an overview of what the overall process would look like for au-
tomating the simulation process. This chapter will discuss the process in depth using the
1x1 LEGO brick as an example.
Figure 4.1: Overall process for performing sensitivity tests with CT scans and simulation
4.1
Preparing the Baseline Design File
The starting point for this process is the non-automated step of preparing the baseline
simulation. This stage will be unique for each geometry or functional requirement being
tested and will require manual setup by a CAE engineer. However, this stage only hap-
pens once in the test so the time taken does not scale with the number of components, so
a manual procedure is acceptable. The overall goal is to set up the parameters that are
best for the geometry and simulation, these parameters will be exported and utilized for
all scanned copies so it is critical to thoroughly consider them before applying and running
on all scanned bodies.
The main factors that are considered in the setup are the choices for element type and
refinement, along with the overall parameters for the simulation setup.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1.1
Element Selection and Refinement
In preparing these LEGO bricks for simulation, the process was to first perform a shell
mesh of the outer surfaces to capture the details of the geometry. A solid mesh was then
created from the shell mesh to capture the internal geometry.
The first stage of preparing a mesh requires selecting the type of element to be used. A
quadrangle (quad) 2D element (which becomes a hexahedron in 3D, see Appendix A for
visualizations) is typically the best choice for structural analysis, especially if the analysis
involves bending. However, when designs have a high degree of detail, triangle elements
(tetrahedron in 3D, also shown in Appendix A) can be utilized to better capture the detailed
features [20]. For most LEGO bricks, the components are quite small and highly detailed.
In this case, small tetrahedron elements are preferred to capture the geometry.
Aside from the overall shape of the element, choices must also be made about element
size and number of nodes to utilize. In general, there are three possible ways to refine
meshes, these are shown in Figure 4.2, where (a) is the baseline mesh, (b) shows refine-
ment by increasing the number of elements, (c) shows refinement by increasing the nodes
utilized in each element, and (d) shows local refinement by increasing element count in
specific areas of interest. These three refinement methods were all tested in a conver-
gence study of the 1x1 brick to determine the best parameters to use. The functionality
parameter evaluated for the convergence study was the maximum force required to pull
apart the brick and a test component consisting of one knob.
Figure 4.2: Visualization of different refinement methods.
When evaluating the number of nodes per element, linear elements demonstrate partic-
ularly poor results because they add artificial stiffness. This is especially true for linear
tetrahedra which can cause nodal locking and are typically considered the worst element
30
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:39==
formulation. Ten-node quadratic elements are preferred, but they can increase simula-
tion time significantly. Linear elements can be improved by implementing nodal pressure
averaging. This type of element was proposed by Bonet and Burton [21] and is an im-
plemented element type for utilization in LS DYNA [22]. They are recommended espe-
cially for structural simulations with plastic materials. Tetrahedral elements with ten nodes
(TET10), standard linear tetrahedral elements (TET4), and linear tetrahedral elements
with nodal pressure averaging (TET4+) were considered and included in the convergence
study done for this body.
Because of the way these meshes are developed, with first the external shell defined and
then the solid mesh created using the shell, another parameter to modify is the element
growth rate. This sets how large elements can grow towards the center of the solid body,
as it is expected that most of the geometry detail is on the surfaces. In general, growth
rates of 1-3x are used, and 1.2x is a standard setting. In this convergence study, the
extremes of 1x and 3x growth rates were considered.
The meshes generated for the convergence test were driven by average characteristic
lengths (CL) of 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5mm. With this main factor driving overall
node count, additional refinement parameters were added: local refinement (LR, con-
trolled by setting four rows of elements for every radius feature), growth rate (GR, either
1 or 3), and element type (TET4, TET4+, or TET10). The total number of nodes for each
combination is shown in Figure 4.3. Detailed images of the meshes used for the conver-
gence study can be found in Appendix A. The results of the convergence study are shown
in Figure 4.4, and the simulation times for the different meshes are shown in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.3: Total number of nodes vs. average element length for each of the meshes
used in the convergence study
The results show that TET4 elements behave more stiffly, as expected, and did not con-
verge even at high node counts. TET10 elements fully converged but took significantly
more time to run. Given that the variation was within 1N, it was unnecessary to utilize
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.4: Maximum pull apart force convergence curve
Figure 4.5: Simulation time for different meshes of increasing node count
TET10 elements for this simulation. TET4 elements with nodal pressure averaging out-
put values that were more consistent with TET10 convergence, but required much less
run time so these were selected for the final simulation. Local refinement (LR) and high
growth rate (GR3) produced results that were aligned with the convergence curve but
required fewer nodes, and thus less overall run time. A target element length of 0.2mm
(corresponding to roughly 100,000 nodes) was deemed an acceptable balance of conver-
gence and simulation time.
A synopsis of the final parameters selected is given below:
• Target characteristic length: 0.2mm
• Growth rate: 3x
• Local refinement: up to 0.05mm on detailed areas
32
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:41==
• Element type: Linear tetrahedron elements with nodal pressure averaging
4.1.2
Simulation Setup
For this analysis, a contact simulation was prepared with a test component being con-
nected and separated from the 1x1 brick. Contact sets were defined to control the rigidity
and motion of the two components. In the 1x1 brick, the circular face of the knob was con-
strained in all dimensions, while the test component was configured with a motion curve
that would approach the fixed brick, then after being fully connected, pull away. Figure
4.6 shows an image of this setup. A sensor to measure the force during the process was
also implemented. This sensor was used to control the motion rate (time step) of the
components such that when the force between parts was low the step size was larger,
but as the force increased the step size decreased to better capture the details while still
operating with an efficient simulation time.
Figure 4.6: Cross section of test setup for pull apart force simulation.
For this particular analysis on the 1x1 brick, the functional requirement measured was
the maximum force necessary to take the two components apart after they have been
connected to a certain pressure. The Z force experienced by the top component during
the simulation was saved during the process. This curve is shown in Figure 4.7. Contact
between the two components is shown as the force begins to increase, with full contact
between the two components occurring when the force begins to spike (loading until the
force steps above 50N, as set by the simulation), then the direction of the force becomes
negative as the components begin to separate. The absolute value of the minimum point
on this curve is recorded as the maximum force required to separate the components,
here it is around 10N.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.7: Z-force (vertical force) output from the simulation of a 1x1 brick.
Once fully defined, the setup for the simulation was saved as a text document with the
appropriate key indicators for the simulation processor (in this case LS DYNA). The sim-
ulation folder also contained a folder that had several entities of the simulation saved
separately, such as the material property card (for ABS in this case), the mesh of the
component, and the motion curve. By setting up the simulation in this way, it was ready
for later in the process when the mesh utilized in the simulation could be swapped for the
mesh of the CT scan mesh.
4.2
Generating the Mesh
Once the simulation had been prepared using the design file, the automated meshing
process was set up. In the previous chapter, a script to automate the wrapping method
was developed and utilized. This script was designed to load parameters from a separate
file so they can be easily modified and updated. To ensure good quality components
the parameters for the wrap mesh should be evaluated on a test component and set for
compatibility with the convergence study of the design file. Unfortunately, it’s not possible
to use the same parameters as those used to mesh the design file since the meshing
process is different, but it is still possible to ensure proper refinement in critical areas and
the convergence study will help estimate the amount of run time based on node count.
For the 1x1 brick, a sample scan was used to test the wrapping parameters. A maximum
element size of 1mm was set, and a minimum element size was used to refine the detail.
Minimum element sizes of 0.02mm, 0.05mm, 0.1mm, 0.2mm, and 0.5mm were tested.
Some examples of these meshes and the associated refinement are shown in Figure 4.8,
see Appendix A for images of all meshes. Table 4.1 lists the number of nodes generated by
these meshes, which is useful for comparison against the values found in the convergence
study. A minimum element size of 0.05mm was considered acceptable for capturing the
details of the component with a reasonable simulation run time (based on node count).
34
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:43==
The wrap parameters for this component type were saved so they could be utilized by the
automated scripts on additional 1x1 brick scans.
Figure 4.8: Meshes generated from the CT scan file using different wrap parameters.
Variation by minimum element size, here a) 0.02mm, b) 0.1mm, and c) 0.2mm.
Min. Element Length
Number of Nodes
0.02mm
193262
0.05mm
62829
0.1mm
23511
0.2mm
8277
0.5mm
1878
Table 4.1: Nodal count for different wrap parameters tested on the 1x1 scanned brick.
4.3
Preparing the Simulation
Once the scan was meshed, another critical aspect of preparing for simulation was align-
ing the body to the correct orientation matching the design file. This will always be a
necessary step in the process since CT scans are oriented off-axis for better scan quality
and variation due to misalignment in the simulation could be significant. Alignment of non-
identical bodies is not a trivial computation, especially because the misalignment requires
correction in all six degrees of freedom. Fortunately, most pre-processors offer a tool to
calculate the transformation matrix to align parts. Different software uses different meth-
ods to compute this, within ANSA alone there are three different options. Since alignment
is so critical, the automated script implemented an iterative approach. With this method,
the transformation matrix was computed, the nodes were adjusted, and this was repeated
until the difference in position dropped below a certain threshold value. This iterative pro-
cess is especially important in the event of flipped alignment, where the components are
axially aligned but rotated 180◦around the cross axis, as this correction typically takes
at least two corrections to resolve. Since this is a relatively heavy computation, it was
performed after the mesh was generated and only performed on the mesh itself since the
mesh is a reduction in nodes from the original scanned STL.
Once aligned, the remaining elements of the simulation were gathered. A script was
prepared which would copy the package of files used for the simulation, rename the as-
sociated files and folders, insert the new mesh file, and modify the pathways to reference
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
35
==PAGE:44==
the new geometry. In the end, a new package was exported which was ready to be pro-
cessed.
One small change was made to the original simulation setup to make the new geometry
more acceptable. Previously, specific faces of the geometry had been selected to manage
the system constraints (rigid, motion control, etc). Occasionally scanned faces of bodies
may vary enough to be unrecognizable as the surface set. Because of this, the constraints
were set to bounding boxes instead of specific faces. Boxes were set in the simulation
space such that any nodes which lay within the box would have the appropriate constraints
assigned. Since the parts are aligned to the design mesh, they insert into the same
space as the design mesh, and the constraint boxes allowed for robust assignment of
sets regardless of part variation.
4.4
Quality Evaluation
Automating the meshing and simulation process saves significant time for the CAE engi-
neer and ultimately makes it feasible to get meaningful data by analyzing high volumes
of components. However, without the checks typically done when manually meshing, it’s
possible that artificial errors could be present. The two biggest potential issues are:
• Meshes of scanned geometry could vary significantly from the scanned geometry,
such that a simulation of the mesh does not effectively represent the component.
• Elements generated by the automated meshing process could be of poor quality,
resulting in failed or misrepresentative simulations.
Since the engineer cannot manually oversee this throughout the process, the best alter-
native is to calculate and generate a report of the quality that can be referenced along with
the simulation results. These quality results will give a credibility level to the simulation,
where poor geometry matching or element quality would mean the simulation is worth
rerunning or manually evaluating.
4.4.1
Evaluating Scanned Mesh Variation
The goal of evaluating the scanned mesh variation is to compare the geometry of the CT
scan to the geometry of the meshed representation. In most pre-processor software, there
is built-in functionality to compare two meshes; however, it is difficult to know exactly how
the variation is computed (using nodes or faces, which element is compared to which, how
internal vs. external surfaces are considered, which method of calculation is utilized, etc).
Since mesh similarity is such an important performance metric, it was decided to write
a custom method for calculating the variation. Up to this point, most mesh manipulation
utilized built-in ANSA functions, where the exact methodology is proprietary, but by doing
this calculation with a custom script, the computation method was completely understood.
This better enables future utilization because different pre-processing software could be
used for the meshing process but the quality results are still comparable because the
calculation method is independent of the software used.
36
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:45==
More detail on the exact calculation method for mesh variation is described in Appendix
A. The overall methodology is to use the nodes of the scanned geometry since this should
always be higher than the final mesh, and calculate the normal distance to the nearest
triangle on the clean mesh. The result is a list of distances equivalent in length to the
number of nodes in the STL. If the STL files have an extremely high node count, a step
size can be used to subsample the total node count.
Figure 4.9: Computed distance curves for the 1x1 brick for varying wrap parameters.
Distances are sorted in ascending order.
An example of this is shown in Figure 4.9. The curves are the distance from a node to
the nearest surface, calculated at each STL node, sorted in ascending distance order. In
prior chapters, these calculated distances were shown as box plots. The different curves
correspond to the different wrap parameters tested on the scanned 1x1 brick. Without
visually looking at the meshes, it’s clear that the 0.5mm mesh is a poor representation of
the scanned component since the geometry varies significantly. On the other side, the
0.02mm and 0.05mm meshes are close representations of the scanned brick.
Min. Element Length
σraw [mm]
σdesign [mm]
σraw/σdesign
0.02mm
0.0039
0.0397
0.10
0.05mm
0.0085
0.0398
0.21
0.1mm
0.0128
0.0401
0.32
0.2mm
0.0266
0.0443
0.60
0.5mm
0.107
0.103
1.04
Table 4.2: Standard deviation report for different mesh wrap parameters applied to 1x1
brick, shows relative geometrical representation of the different meshes.
It can be difficult to determine what exactly defines an acceptable mesh in terms of geo-
metrical similarity. A method used here was to evaluate if the mesh of the CT scan was
significantly more similar to the scan than to the original design file. To evaluate this, the
distances between the STL nodes and the mesh were computed. The standard devi-
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
37
==PAGE:46==
ation of these distances was then calculated (σraw). To obtain a comparable reference
value, the distances between the generated mesh of the scan and the design mesh were
also calculated, this time using the design mesh nodes as reference points. The stan-
dard deviation for these distances was also calculated (σdesign). Comparing these values
demonstrated how well the generated mesh represents the scanned STL. In general, if
σraw/σdesign < 0.25 the mesh was acceptable. One way to think about this approach is
testing to see if the mesh is more similar to the scanned body from which it was gener-
ated or more similar to the general design body. If the mesh is a poor representation of
the scanned body then either option will be possible. This is demonstrated by the stan-
dard deviation results for the 0.5mm minimum length mesh. In this case, the standard
deviation between the mesh and the scanned file, and between the mesh and the design
file is essentially the same. With this evaluation criteria, the mesh does not acceptably
represent the scanned component.
There can be a high number of outliers when performing difference calculations this way.
This is especially true if there are defects in the CT STL that are being removed for the
final mesh. For example, if there is a small particle defect in the CT STL file, the distances
calculated from those nodes to the nearest mesh surface would be large compared to the
other distances. This is good because it means the defect has been eliminated, but the
distance standard deviation will be high. One way to avoid this would be to use the nodes
of the clean mesh instead and calculate the distance to the STL. Unfortunately, these
results are not as meaningful, because the nature of the generated mesh is to force nodes
to exist on the original surfaces. Even if the node locations match, the faces connecting
the nodes could be overly smoothing the geometry, so computing with the STL nodes
is more conservative. Files that are flagged with high standard deviation ratios can be
visually inspected for quality when evaluating results.
4.4.2
Element Quality Evaluation
For tetrahedron elements, an ideal element is equilateral, with all edges the same length.
This is important because parameters of interest in the simulation are only solved at node
locations. Values within an element are obtained by nodal averaging, and in linear tetra-
hedrons there is only one central evaluation point for each tetrahedron. If elements are
largely skewed from equilateral then nodes comprising a single tetrahedron can vary sig-
nificantly and the resulting average value can be misleading. Stacking these results to
get the total force can influence the accuracy of the overall value. Because of this, having
roughly equilateral tetrahedra is important and there are recommended ranges to follow
depending on the evaluation method [20].
There are several ways to quantify how much a tetrahedral element varies from an equi-
lateral one. For this analysis, aspect ratio was used as the metric and was calculated in
the following way:
AR = hmax
√
Aopp
×
√
Aeq
heq
(4.1)
38
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:47==
Where AR is the aspect ratio, hmax is the maximum distance from one node to the oppos-
ing face, Aopp is the area of the opposing face, heq is the height of an equilateral triangle,
and Aeq is the opposing face area of an equilateral triangle. Using the known values of
an equilateral tetrahedron, this becomes:
AR = 0.805 × hmax
√
Aopp
(4.2)
Using Eq. 4.2, tetrahedra that are close to equilateral will report an aspect ratio close to
1. The quality evaluation reports the highest aspect ratio for the generated mesh. Values
under 8 can generally be acceptable [20]. Because of this, a quality step was implemented
in the meshing process. After the solid mesh has been generated, the script evaluates
the aspect ratio of the mesh and attempts to improve the quality of any elements which
have a high AR. This usually forces all meshes generated to have ARs lower than 8, but
the quality evaluation is still performed in case there were errors in the process. If an
aspect ratio higher than 8 is reported in the mesh, then that file should be investigated
more thoroughly before trusting the simulation results.
4.5
Feature Isolation
Up to this point, the primary focus of discussion has been on the simulation process and
obtaining the maximum pull-apart force; but to complete the sensitivity analysis, dimen-
sions of interest must also be extracted. The tool for geometry comparison can also be
used to compare the clean scanned meshes with the design mesh. This provides infor-
mation on how different the produced components are and where these differences are
located.
Often the overall variation is not as interesting as the specific variation in a certain area
that is suspected to have an impact on the function. Different methods can be utilized
to isolate these dimensions. For example, on the 1x1 LEGO brick, the diameter of the
knob feature is expected to have an impact on the pull apart force. One way to quantify
the diameter of this feature is to select three nodes on the design surface that define the
diameter and then search the scanned mesh for the nearest three nodes to these. A
new circle is defined by these three points with a resulting diameter that approximates the
diameter of the scan.
Since the specific features and dimensions of interest vary significantly between designs,
this aspect of the analysis was not automated in the testing phase. For different studies,
a unique script would need to be prepared and run on the resulting meshes to export the
dimensions needed to perform the sensitivity analysis. Additionally, CT scans are often
taken for dimensional evaluation. When this is the case, reports of critical dimensions are
automatically generated by the dimensional software used in tandem with the CT scan-
ners. If this is available then it’s unnecessary to derive custom tools to extract dimensions,
and instead, the dimensions measured in the evaluation should be utilized.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
39
==PAGE:48==
40
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:49==
5
Implementation and Results
5.1
Test Case Overview
Once the process of automating scanned meshes and simulating was finalized, it was
implemented on a larger-scale test case. A dataset was provided which included a high
volume of scans of a LEGO headgear component design. Four different injection mould-
ing parameters were varied at multiple levels, and the machine was run using a 16-cavity
mould consisting of two slightly varying designs - Design A and Design B, where the dif-
ference between the two designs was in the details of the connection feature.
The purpose of this test setup was to use different manufacturing parameters to intention-
ally induce variation in the two designs, and ultimately test the sensitivity of the pull apart
force to the connector diameter. The test was to see if the force variation was related to
the diameter and if the two designs had different sensitivities, ideally isolating one con-
nector type as performing better than the other. Table 5.1 provides an overview of the
scanned quantities. In total, 384 unique components were scanned.
Parameter
Number of Levels
Design A
Design B
Total Components
Setting 1
6
8
8
96
Setting 2
4
8
8
64
Setting 3
10
8
8
160
Setting 4
4
8
8
64
Table 5.1: Headgear sensitivity analysis test setup
This test case is especially relevant because it is an example of a set of components that
are notoriously difficult to test. LEGO headgear, pieces designed to sit on top of the head,
come in a large variety of shapes and sizes. They typically only have one connection
point, and no easy attachment features to hold during testing, each requiring a custom
fixture instead. These pieces are typically produced in lower volumes because there are
so many different design variations. Additionally, since they represent aesthetic details
like hair, clothing, and hats, the pieces are usually made with different types of materials
and so sensitivity analyses are particularly important when trying to have a consistent
connection force. There is significant value in obtaining sensitivity results with simulation
because of these factors.
5.2
Test Setup and Process
Overall two sub-sampling experiments were performed on the full dataset to test the sim-
ulation process. The first experiment selected five random and unique samples from all
the different mould settings and levels, with the ultimate goal of analyzing the overall force
sensitivity to designs A and B. In this study, 120 components were meshed and simulated.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
41
==PAGE:50==
Although these results provided a range of inner diameters, the variation cavity to cavity
was significant, so it wasn’t possible to isolate the different mould parameter settings from
the cavity noise. The diameter variation measured for the different cavities is shown in
the Appendix. Because of this, a secondary test was run.
The second experiment focused on analyzing the influence of the different mould machine
settings, so the variations from cavities were removed. Three random cavities from both
design A and design B were meshed and simulated at every mould setting. For overall
reduction in time, setting 3 (with the 10 different levels) was not included in this study,
resulting in 84 components meshed and simulated. Some components were used in both
studies, so the resulting total unique simulations run across both studies was 175.
For the simulation setup, a test component was used as the opposing connector similar
to the 1x1 brick simulation described in Chapter 4. The mesh of this test component was
consistent throughout all simulations. Additionally, since the connection feature on the
headgear is very similar to the one on the single 1x1 LEGO brick a new convergence
study was not run, instead, resolutions similar to those in the 1x1 brick were utilized. In
the wrap parameter settings, elements were permitted to vary from 0.5mm to 0.01mm
minimum length on detailed features. An example of one of the final meshes is shown in
Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Example of scanned headgear after meshing, design A
42
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:51==
5.3
Mesh Quality
The quality of the meshes generated from the raw scan files was evaluated using the
methods proposed in Chapter 4. The aspect ratio for all elements of the meshed com-
ponents was measured, with the worst-case aspect ratio being reported. Additionally,
the surfaces were compared with the nodes of the matching scanned STL. The standard
deviation of the measured distances was reported for each mesh. Finally, all the mesh
surfaces were compared with the node locations of the design mesh. The standard devi-
ation of this variation was also reported for each mesh.
Table 5.2 shows a subset of the overall quality report. These results all pertain to com-
ponents moulded in cavity 6 at the different settings and levels shown. ARmax is the
worst-case aspect ratio, and σraw and σdesign are the standard deviations of the distance
between the mesh surface and the scanned STL nodes and the design nodes, respec-
tively. The ratio of σraw/σdesign is also reported.
Parameter
ARmax
σraw [mm]
σdesign [mm]
σraw/σdesign
Setting 1
Lv. 1
7.83
0.0036
0.028
0.13
Lv. 2
7.60
0.0036
0.030
0.12
Lv. 3
7.79
0.0038
0.032
0.12
Lv. 4
7.79
0.0041
0.034
0.12
Lv. 5
7.97
0.0036
0.037
0.10
Lv. 6
7.97
0.0036
0.040
0.09
Setting 2
Lv. 1
7.86
0.0162
0.028
0.59
Lv. 2
7.40
0.0041
0.026
0.16
Lv. 3
7.84
0.0044
0.024
0.19
Lv. 4
7.76
0.0056
0.024
0.24
Setting 4
Lv. 1
7.87
0.0053
0.045
0.12
Lv. 2
7.80
0.0043
0.046
0.09
Lv. 3
7.89
0.0056
0.046
0.12
Lv. 4
7.82
0.0043
0.046
0.10
Table 5.2: Cavity 6 quality report
This quality report is useful because it flags some potential areas of concern and gives
the CAE engineer feedback on the performance of the automated meshing process. For
example, the mesh created from Setting 2, Level 1 shows a high σraw, 0.0162mm, and a
correspondingly high ratio of 0.59. This flags that the mesh is worth inspecting for issues.
Upon further investigation, the raw STL shows a defect of a small closed-volume particle
floating in space around 4mm from the actual volume of interest. The mesh cleans this by
removing it, but when analyzing, the distance from these nodes flags for potentially low
quality. Additionally, the file generated by Setting 2, Lv 4. had a high ratio of σraw/σdesign.
This was not due to a particular defect but rather due to σraw being on the high side
of the dataset and σdesign being on the lower end. A value around 0.2 is still relatively
reasonable. Although this quality metric is a conservative approach for evaluation, it is
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
43
==PAGE:52==
better to flag false positives than to overlook poor-quality meshes. For all simulations, the
worst-case solid element aspect ratio was less than 8, which was deemed the acceptable
limit for this process.
Figure 5.2: Computed distance between the generated mesh and raw scan STL nodes,
shown for different mould settings with outliers cut off slightly.
Figure 5.3: Total variation between CT scan STLs and their associated meshes
In addition to the quality report table, Figures 5.2 and 5.3 show more detail on the com-
puted variation beyond the standard deviation values for the cavity 6 generated meshes.
In Figure 5.2, outliers are shown in red and have been cut off to show more detail.
When evaluating all the total distances, shown visually in 5.3, only 2.04% were greater
than 0.01mm, including outlier points; another statistic demonstrating that the simulated
meshes were very similar to the scanned dataset.
44
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:53==
5.4
Component Variation
As stated, part of evaluating the mesh similarity involved computing the distances between
the simulation mesh and the design mesh (with standard deviation referred to as σdesign
in Table 5.2). One benefit of this calculation is that when processing results, the total
geometric variation of the components can be investigated. This can be useful to visualize
if the simulations yield unexpected results as it can show if another region has a large
variation that could be affecting the results. A three-dimensional heatmap surface is the
best method to visualize this information because it provides information on the location
and relative intensity of the variation. One example of this is shown in Figure 5.4. In this
heatmap, the color intensity is set by the range of variation of all parts included in the
analysis, here only the variation range of cavity 6 is shown.
Figure 5.4: Total variation between meshes of cavity 6 and design file mesh
This Figure shows some expected values, such as high variation at the gate surface
(which varies significantly due to different sprue cut heights) and at the inner center where
unique text is imprinted. Besides these, there are more unexpected variations on the inner
walls of the body, likely due to warpage. In this case, it is unlikely that this wall variation
would have a significant impact on the functionality, but in other components, this could
have a large influence.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
45
==PAGE:54==
5.5
Simulation Failures
The majority of the 175 scans were processed successfully, but 3 failed; resulting in less
than 2% failure rate. These three all failed for the same reason during the simulation
process: a particle defect was present on the surface of the scanned connector. Figure
5.5 shows an image of this defect, colored by Von Mises stress, immediately before failure.
This surface is critical to the simulation because when the two bodies fully connect, the
load is increased to ensure the parts are fully seated. Unfortunately, when a small point
defect is located on this surface, the load becomes highly concentrated. The high load
at this point causes the local nodes to experience high deformation and enter the non-
linear region of the force curve for the plastic. Since this simulation is not set up for high
deformations, it terminates with an error.
Although failures in the process are not ideal, they are expected. A failure rate of less
than 2% is acceptable for this kind of study because an engineer can still manually fix
the small quantity of failed files in a reasonable time frame. To determine other potential
sources of failure, more testing of the automation process on different file types and scan
processes is necessary. Regardless of the mesh method used, small particle defects on
critical surfaces will always be very difficult to remove automatically.
Figure 5.5: Example of a surface defect causing failed simulation. (b) is a detailed view
of (a)
5.6
Sensitivity Study Results
One of the main goals of this test was to examine the sensitivity of pull force to the inner
bore diameter and to see which design was less sensitive. Figure 5.6 shows the pull force
as a function of the measured inner bore diameter for both designs. This test showed
that pull force decreases linearly with increasing bore diameter. Additionally, it shows
that Design A is less sensitive than Design B, with the Design A fit curve having a slope
of 380.1 N/mm and B having 471.5 N/mm. In terms of robustness, design A would be
46
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:55==
preferred over B since it results in a more consistent pull force for the same diameter
tolerance.
Figure 5.6: Simulated pull force vs. measured inner bore diameter, plotted for the two
different designs.
Design B has an intentionally larger bore outer diameter than Design A, this diameter
was measured on all parts. In addition, design B has some ribbing and other detail that
could influence the pull apart force. Additional analysis of the results was done to see if
these other factors were significant to pull force in addition to the inner diameter. Only the
inner diameter showed significance with a p-value less than 0.05, see results shown in
Figure 5.7. Note that ring thickness is considered a relevant parameter as well but was
not evaluated on its own since it is dependent on both inner and outer diameter. Plots of
pull force vs. ring thickness and diameter are shown in Appendix A but displayed no clear
trends.
Figure 5.7
5.7
Comparison with Measured Dataset
When performing simulations, it’s always useful to have real test data to compare against
the simulation. For the headgear components in this study, historical measured pull force
vs. overlap data (mean and standard deviation) was provided. Here overlap is defined
as the difference between the knob diameter and the inner diameter, essentially the in-
terference that causes connection. These measured results are shown together with the
simulation calculated overlap in Figure 5.8. From these results, it appears that the simu-
lation results predict a lower force than what is typically measured in the pull force tests,
but the behavior is very similar.
Although disheartening to not have simulations that exactly match test data, these results
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
47
==PAGE:56==
show another benefit to this type of automated variation simulation. By simulating real
geometry, the noise from geometry variation is eliminated from the simulation results. This
means that geometry is unlikely the cause of inaccurate simulation results, and so other
parameters can be varied to better tune the simulation to reality. In this case, two plastic
properties directly impact the force that could account for the difference: Young’s modulus
and friction coefficient. Young’s modulus is the easier one to account for because it is
measured and reported y plastic manufacturers for each plastic batch. For a more precise
simulation, a Young’s modulus specific to the plastic batch used could be implemented.
The friction coefficient is slightly more difficult to capture because it is notoriously difficult
to measure accurately. A large range of friction coefficients are measured in practice, and
for this simulation, the average one was used. Adjusting this coefficient slightly would
generate results that align better with true results, and this newly tuned simulation package
could be used to predict variation in new designs with results more similar to measured
values.
Figure 5.8: Simulation results compared to measure results for pull force as a function of
component overlap. Measured averages are black dotted lines and highlighted area is
the standard deviation of the measurement results.
48
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusions
6.1
Summary of Research Findings
Figure 6.1: Overview of simulation process
A detailed schematic of the finalized mesh conversion process is presented in Figure 6.3,
with scripts grouped by major steps of the process. Processes that require customization
and effort by the design engineer are those outside the grey box, while those within are
fully automated. The flow of the individual sub-steps is important because it optimizes
computation time and storage; with more complex computations being minimized (only
occurring once) or performed on simplified geometry. For the LEGO test application, the
most effective automated meshing method utilized a shrink-wrapping approach.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
49
==PAGE:58==
One conclusion from this project is that grouping or blocking the script process is valu-
able since there are many different tools to utilize. If the inputs and outputs of a certain
block remain constant, the exact methodology within the block can be modified and as-
sessed. For example, the automated meshing process is currently done via ANSA python
scripting, but if a custom tool was written to perform the mesh wrapping then it could be
exchanged for this block.
The only exception to the interchangeability of sections is the quality calculation block.
The method utilized for this should not be modified without proper documentation, since
it is the baseline calculation by which comparisons are made.
6.2
Performance evaluation
The major performance factors for this automation process are the overall time and re-
sources required to run the analyses. In general, simulation is known for being resource
heavy and slow, so the notion of simulating hundreds of files can be daunting, even if
the process is automated. With this in mind, processing times and associated file sizes
were measured for the headgear test described in the previous chapter. The results are
discussed more extensively in this section. For additional reference, an overview of all
scripts utilized for the automation process, along with inputs, outputs, timing, and relevant
file sizes are provided in the Appendix.
6.2.1
Processing Time
Overall, 175 scans were simulated and it took approximately four days to run all the pro-
cesses. The total time to prepare and run a single file was 42mins, where the size of the
scanned STL file was 0.2GB and the approximate nodal count of the simulation (including
connector component) was 125,000. Of this 42mins, the majority of time was due to the
30mins required for simulation.
Figure 6.2: Time breakdown for automated meshing and simulation of a single ct scanned
component, where total time was 42mins per file.
50
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:59==
The total breakdown of time by category in the automated process is shown in the pie
chart in Figure 6.2. Many of the time-intensive processes could be run simultaneously. In
this case, it was possible to run ten simulations in tandem (on a remote server), and both
meshing and quality evaluation could be done in parallel with these simulations.
Besides the 30min simulation time, the quality evaluation was the second most time-
intensive step. Upon further investigation, it was found that this was mainly due to the
alignment procedure, where the entire raw STL must be aligned with the mesh in order
to compute the variation of the mesh. The raw STL files can be quite large (0.2GB here,
and potentially much larger for bigger parts), so in the future, it may be best to try and find
more optimized alignment methods. One method for optimizing this would be to export
the meshed surfaces before they are aligned to the simulation setup. By doing this, the
geometry comparison can be done between the STL and the mesh without the alignment
of the large STL file.
Figure 6.3: Overview of simulation process
In this project, the automated steps were scripted, but the linking between them was
done manually. For example, the meshing for all files was done with one process, but the
simulation package preparation needed to be manually triggered to start. Similarly, once
triggered all files within one folder would be prepared for simulation, but would not be sent
for simulation without an additional manual trigger. This was done intentionally since it was
the first time testing the process, and manual validation was done at each step to ensure
the previous test had been completed properly. In a production setting, the separate
steps could be fully linked and triggered to run consecutively. With this in mind, the total
engineering manual effort required to run the tests was around 2hrs of organizing files
and triggering scripts. This was staggered throughout the four-day process depending on
when files finished one stage and needed to run in another.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
51
==PAGE:60==
6.2.2
Storage Requirements
In addition to processing time, the data storage requirements for this kind of analysis are
very large and scale quickly with the number of components used in the test. For the
headgear case, the files required and output from the process along with the associated
storage size are listed in Table 6.1. The total storage required per individual component
scanned is 0.56GB. This scales quickly with the number of files that are scanned and
studied for the test, for example, this single test with 175 components required around
100 GB of storage space.
File Source
File Size
Raw scan STL
0.2 GB
Raw scan STL - aligned
0.2 GB
Mesh of scan, saved as STL
0.025 GB
Complete simulation package, post run
0.125 GB
Quality report files
0.01 GB
Total storage per file
0.56 GB
# of components simulated
175
Total storage required for test
97.9 GB
Table 6.1: Storage requirements for headgear test case
Although this is an immense amount of storage, there is plenty of room for optimization.
Firstly, there’s no need to save the raw scan STL and the aligned STL. At the end of the
simulation, files used to generate the results could be deleted, with only the quality report
files and the reported force values being saved; however, in some situations, it can be
useful to retain the data used to obtain the results in case it needs to be referenced later.
For simulations like this, where all the simulation setups are the same, it would reduce
storage space significantly to keep only the simulation template file and the mesh file,
which is not a heavy file on its own.
6.3
Limitations and Challenges
Overall this analysis demonstrates that it is feasible to perform simulations on a high
volume of scanned components and obtain meaningful results; however, there are some
limitations and challenges.
The most significant drawback to this overall simulation strategy is that it is not com-
pletely virtual. Not only are physical components necessary, but also a high volume of
scans is needed to ensure enough variation to have meaningful results. Accessibility to
high-resolution scanning capability is another downside to this method since those ma-
chines are quite expensive; although, as discussed previously, lower-cost machines are
being manufactured and it is possible navigate this barrier by sending components to a
secondary scanning facility to contain results.
Another aspect that was not thoroughly vetted with this test was the utilization of large or
52
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:61==
complex geometry. Local mesh refinement was discussed as a possibility, with the pro-
posed path forward being to perform mesh reduction on non-critical areas after running the
high-resolution wrapping on the entire body. This seems feasible but was not specifically
tested in this analysis. The added complexity of this approach is that the mesh quality
evaluation would also need to be targeted to specific areas. Additionally, high-resolution
wrap parameters may take excessive computation time and space to generate on large
bodies. It may be more appropriate to use the approach of applying a low-resolution wrap
mesh and then projecting it onto the bodies in this case, to make the mesh generation
time more practical.
Another limitation of the overall approach given here, which may be more relevant for
different products or materials, is the inability to capture completely enclosed internal fea-
tures. The wrapping method works from the outside going inwards and finalizes when
the mesh conforms to the external surface, this method is not capable of capturing in-
ternal vacancies. This is a particularly important downside because a potential use of
this approach would be the evaluation of additive manufacturing parts and methods, and
internal feature recognition is necessary to capture different infill methods. To accommo-
date for this, it may be necessary to develop different meshing algorithms that need to be
used in different scenarios. For example, different mesh algorithms may be necessary
for different manufacturing methods.
6.4
Future Directions
This work demonstrates a successful approach for generating finite element meshes of
CT-scanned bodies and running high-volume simulations. With this methodology vali-
dated, there are many different directions to take this project and build further.
For starters, one investigation would be to see if it’s possible to tune the simulation param-
eters to improve results to better reflect reality. More different components and metrics
would need to be tested in order to validate this possibility. It might also be useful to per-
form a study where the functional performance and sensitivity curves are tested on the
same components as those scanned and used in the simulation. The ability to remove
variation due to geometry would make it would be more feasible to tune the material pa-
rameters of the simulation, which could lead to testing comparing the performance of
different materials.
Another utilization of this method would be to feed mould simulation results directly into
structural simulations. Doing this would allow the process to be entirely virtual since phys-
ical prototypes could be replaced with the results of the flow models. The same meshing
methods could be used on these models to streamline implementation into structural simu-
lation packages. This method would make it possible to evaluate manufacturing sensitivity
earlier in the design process and would lower the testing costs.
A general future direction for this project would be to optimize the algorithms for better
computational performance and efficiency. The computation methods utilized in this ap-
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
53
==PAGE:62==
plication were largely based on ANSA built-in functionality, but it would be possible to
write custom scripts that are more targeted for this specific application. As CT scanning
metrology capabilities continue to rise, it is likely that different pre-processor software will
need to have prescribed methods for handling CT-scanned geometry, so more methods
with this specific focus will need to be developed.
In addition to improving finite element meshing of CT scans, it would also be interesting to
study the utilization of meshless methods for this approach. As discussed in the literature
review, meshless methods for structural simulation are not incredibly common, but there
is still potential for them to be very effective and efficient. There is a great deal of research
on simulations using isogeometric analysis where simulation can be performed directly on
exact geometry and NURBs surfaces. It would be interesting to see if this approach would
represent the scanned geometry better or more efficiently.
Finally, another interesting application for continued research in this field would be in
the rapidly increasing artificial intelligence field. It could be possible to use the total part
variation to train predictive models that could be used to optimize structures for certain
functionalities. This would be especially interesting to apply to scanned geometry because
many parameters are changing at once with a scan, rather than an intentional specific
geometric change that would be done in the design process. Predictive models could be
built using different design variations and coupled with the different tolerances of the part
to see which specific aspects of the part have the greatest impact on function. This model
could be fed using the automated pipeline used in this project.
6.5
Closing Remarks
In conclusion, this thesis has demonstrated the feasibility of utilizing CT-scanned geome-
try for structural simulations and recommends a methodology for automating the removal
of defects and streamlining the process to reduce manual resources. In addition to a
meshing methodology, a pipeline for the overall process has been proposed and eval-
uated. A critical tool implemented is the quality evaluation report to provide engineers
with insight into what is happening behind the scenes of the automated process and lend
credibility or skepticism to the results. This overall method of sensitivity analysis isolates
functional variations due to geometry and can be used to improve the ability of simula-
tions to represent physical testing. It can also be used to determine and compare the
robustness of different contending designs in the product design process.
Ultimately, this thesis presents a contribution to bridging the gap between advanced imag-
ing and simulation techniques, both of which are rapidly growing industries. While the
journey has been illuminating, certain limitations and challenges have been presented
with the hope that future research will investigate these areas more significantly, ideally
advancing the practicality and applicability of these methods for use in standard engineer-
ing practice.
54
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Herminso Villarraga Gómez. “X-ray Computed Tomography for Dimensional Mea-
surements”. In: The American Society for Nondestructive Testing, Inc. (July 2016),
pp. 44–57.
[2]
Lumafield. Only the best is good enough; LEGO minifigures. Nov. 2021. (accessed:
AUG 2023).
[3]
Coşkun Hamzaçebi. “Taguchi Method as a Robust Design Tool”. In: Dec. 2020.
ISBN: 978-1-83962-497-1. DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.94908.
[4]
Tim Brix Nerenst. “A Coherent Approach to Virtual Assessments of Structural Ro-
bustness”. In: PhD Thesis: Technical University of Denmark (2022).
[5]
J.P. Kruth et al. “Computed tomography for dimensional metrology”. In: CIRP Annals
60.2 (2011), pp. 821–842. DOI: 10.1016/j.cirp.2011.05.006.
[6]
Herminso Villarraga Gómez, Chabum Lee, and Stuart Smith. “Dimensional metrol-
ogy with X-ray CT: a comparison with CMM measurements on internal features and
compliant structures”. In: Precision Engineering 51 (Jan. 2018), pp. 291–307. DOI:
10.1016/j.precisioneng.2017.08.021.
[7]
USA Library of Congress. STL (STereoLithography) File Format Family. Sept. 2020.
(accessed: AUG 2023).
[8]
Fabio Remondino. “From point cloud to surface: The modeling and visualization
problem”. In: International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spa-
tial Information Sciences 34 (Mar. 2004). DOI: 10.3929/ethz-a-004655782.
[9]
Chua Kai, Gan Jacob, and Tong Mei. “Interface between CAD and Rapid Prototyp-
ing systems. Part 1: A study of existing interfaces”. In: The International Journal of
Advanced Manufacturing Technology 13 (Aug. 1997), pp. 566–570. DOI: 10.1007/
BF01176300.
[10]
Luigi Barazzetti et al. “BIM From Laser Clouds and Finite Element Analysis: Com-
bining Structural Analysis and Geometric Complexity”. In: ISPRS - International
Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences
XL-5/W4 (Feb. 2015), pp. 345–350. DOI: 10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W4-345-2015.
[11]
Yash Agarwal et al. “Inspection of Computed Tomography (CT) Data and Finite El-
ement (FE) Simulation of Additive Manufactured (AM) Components”. In: Mar. 2019.
[12]
Matei-Constantin Miron, Zoltan Major, and Bernhard Plank. “Structural FE simu-
lations of CT scanned microstructures: A comparison between idealized and real
microstructures”. In: e-Journal of Nondestructive Testing 25 (Feb. 2020). DOI: 10.
58286/25114.
[13]
Benjamin Wassermann et al. “Integrating CAD and numerical analysis: ’Dirty ge-
ometry’ handling using the Finite Cell Method”. In: Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 351 (Apr. 2019). DOI: 10.1016/j.cma.2019.04.017.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
55
==PAGE:64==
[14]
László Kudela et al. “Direct structural analysis of domains defined by point clouds”.
In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 358 (June 2019).
DOI: 10.1016/j.cma.2019.112581.
[15]
Stefano Porziani et al. “CAE Up - Update of CAE models on actual manufactured
shapes”. In: (Sept. 2019). DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.31557.40164.
[16]
Leif Kobbelt et al. “A Shrink Wrapping Approach to Remeshing Polygonal Surfaces”.
In: Computer Graphics Forum 18 (Dec. 2001). DOI: 10.1111/1467-8659.00333.
[17]
Lonnie Andersen and Lorenzo Carli. “Good Practice Guide CT”. In: (2016).
[18]
Lumafield. Orienting and Fixturing Parts for CT Scanning. 2022. (accessed: AUG
2023).
[19]
Jochen Hiller. DTU Lecture Slides: Systematic Errors in Dimensional X-ray Com-
puted Tomography. 2012. accessed: AUG 2023.
[20]
Altair University. “Practical Aspects Of Finite Element Simulation: A Study Guide,
5th Edition”. In: Apr. 2019.
[21]
J. Bonet and A. J. Burton. “A simple average nodal pressure tetrahedral element for
incompressible and nearly incompressible dynamic explicit applications”. In: Com-
munications in Numerical Methods in Engineering 14 (1998), pp. 437–449. DOI:
10.1002/(SICI)1099-0887(199805)14:5<437::AID-CNM162>3.0.CO;2-W.
[22]
Tobias Erhart. “Review of Solid Element Formulations in LS DYNA: Properties, Lim-
its, Advantages, Disadvantages”. In: Oct. 2011.
56
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendices
A.0.1
Chapter 2 Addendum
Figure A.1 shows some of the specific CT scanning defects that can create downstream
defects in component reconstruction.
For the most part, these issues should not be
present in optimized industrial scanning processes, but some aspects of these errors
could still persist. These kinds of errors in the scanning process can exacerbate defects
downstream that will cause issues with mesh generation.
Figure A.1: Example of errors in the scanning process which can lead to reconstruction
defects. These defects perpetuate through reconstruction to make meshing challenging
[19].
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
57
==PAGE:66==
A.0.2
Chapter 3 Addendum
The number of elements used in each mesh method described in Chapter 3 are as follows:
• Parameter-based low-resolution: 36954
• Parameter-based high-resolution: 143822
• Projected low-resolution: 37406
• Projected high-resolution: 140522
• Wrapped low-resolution: 43574
• Wrapped high-resolution: 110192
The high-resolution wrapped method proved to be the closest match to the CT-scanned
component despite having the relatively lowest element count of the high-resolution meth-
ods tested. Another visualization of the closeness match of the different methods is shown
in Figure A.2.
Figure A.2: Distance curves, where the calculated distance from each STL node has been
sorted in ascending order.
58
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:67==
A.0.3
Chapter 4 Addendum
Figure A.3: Bottom view of meshes used in convergence study. a) Standard, 0.4mm, b)
Local refinement, 0.4mm, c) Standard, 0.15mm, d) Local refinement, 0.15mm
Figure A.4: Cross section of wall with varying growth rate parameter. a) GR=3, b) GR=1
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.5: Isometric views of several meshes used in convergence study. Standard
mesh: a) 0.5mm, b) 0.4mm, c) 0.3mm, d) 0.2mm, e) 0.15mm, f) 0.1mm
Figure A.6: Isometric views of several meshes used in convergence study. Local refine-
ment mesh: a) 0.5mm, b) 0.4mm, c) 0.3mm, d) 0.2mm, e) 0.15mm, f) 0.1mm
60
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.7: All meshes tested in varying wrap parameter study. With modifying minimum
element length: a) 0.02mm, b) 0.05mm, c) 0.1mm, d) 0.2mm, and e) 0.5mm
Figure A.8: a) Linear quadrangle shell element, b) Quadratic quadrangle shell element,
c) Linear hexahedron solid element, d) Quadratic hexahedron solid element
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.9: a) Linear triangle shell element, b)Quadratic triangle shell element, c) Linear
tetrahedron solid element (TET4), d) Quadratic tetrahedron solid element (TET10)
Figure A.10: Method used to calculate the distance between surfaces. The nearest point
(m) of a triangulated surface to a point (p) from another surface is found. The normal
distances to all triangles connected to this nearest node are returned and the final distance
reported is the minimum of these. This method was first developed in MATLAB using
K-Tree search and Delauney Triangulation methods. The file was then converted into
Python to be compatible with the automation processes. Results from the two scripts were
identical. In Python, the Trimesh package was utilized to export the nodes and triangles
of the surfaces and to perform the nearest point search. The method used in this Python
script required the geometries to be saved as STL surfaces. These were generated from
the solid meshes such that the triangle surfaces and nodes were identical.
62
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.11: Simple meshes of known shapes were used to validate and test the dis-
tance calculation script during the development. These images are visualizations of the
differences calculated between a meshed cube and a meshed sphere.
Figure A.12: An example of feature recognition. For features like the bore diameter of the
LEGO brick, 3-4 points are taken from the surface and used to define the measured inner
diameter.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
63
==PAGE:72==
A.0.4
Chapter 5 Addendum:
Figure A.13: Inner diameter variation for different mould cavities. Cavities 1-8 are Design
A and 9-12 are Design B. Cavities 1, 5, 6, 9, 12, and 15 were used for test two, so there
are more results for these cavities.
Figure A.14: Plots of the outer diameter of headgear compared to simulated pull force for
Designs A and B. There is no clear correlation between these two parameters.
64
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.15: Plots of the ring thickness of headgear compared to simulated pull force for
Designs A and B. There is some correlation between these two parameters but it is only
due to the correlation between the inner diameter and pull force.
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
65
==PAGE:74==
A.0.5
Chapter 6 Addendum:
Figure A.16
Figure A.17
66
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.18
Figure A.19
A study of methodologies to maintain integrity of CT scanned geometry for use in structural simulations
67
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
