==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Natural Language Processing applications for Phar-
macovigilance based on the Transformer architec-
ture
Victor Hamel (s213285)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Transformer, a neural network architecture introduced in 2017, has led to expo-
nential progress in natural language processing and paved the way to the development
of advanced language models. These models have enabled AI engineers to tackle com-
plex language tasks through transfer-learning and fine-tuning. Simultaneously, the
rapid advancement of computational power has led to the emergence of larger, task-
agnostic models with billions of parameters, bringing generative AI into the realm
of NLP with variant of the same architecture. Consequently, companies now face
the decision of training their own models or utilizing existing large language models
through APIs. This study explores the applications of natural language processing in
pharmacovigilance, the science and activities aimed at ensuring drug safety globally.
Multiple Transformer models were trained on three selected tasks: Adverse Drugs
Events (ADE) and Individual Case Safety Report (ICSR) classification, Named En-
tity Recognition (NER) for drugs and reactions and relationship extraction (RE) for
ADE characterization. The best performing models were subsequently compared to
GPT-3, a leading generative model, on the NER and RE tasks. The results indi-
cate that much smaller fined-tuned models significantly out-perform GPT-3 across
all tasks. Furthermore, fined-tuned Transformer models adhere by design to stronger
industry-standards metrics making them more suitable for integration in regulated
environments. Two models developed in the study achieve new state-of-the-art per-
formance in Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Relationship Extraction (RE)
tasks on a publicly available dataset. Additionally, this work presents some emerg-
ing techniques to augment Transformer language models with retrieval systems and
overcome some limitations for their usage in medical writing. It suggests a high-level
framework for integrating such systems in the activities of a medical writer. The
study shows that combining systems that employ embeddings and vector databases
with large language models opens up new possibilities for AI-assisted safety report
writing and should be explored further with fine-tuned generative models. Pharma-
covigilance activities and global drug safety can benefit from the latest NLP progress
with carefully designed models and measured integration in human-based processes
using the Transformer architecture.
Keywords: Transformer, Natural Language Processing, Generative AI, Deep Learn-
ing, Pharmacovigilance, Drug Safety
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was written over five months and prepared at the department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in ful-
fillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master degree in Computer Science and
Engineering.
This thesis was supervised by Professor Ole Winther.
It was designed and conducted in partnership with Quartica, a company located in
the U.S. which provides software solutions for pharmaceutical companies, under the
co-supervision of Ikram Baig, Quartica’s CEO. Confidential information have been
removed to make this report publicly available.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of deep learning concepts.
Kongens Lyngby, July 6, 2023
Victor Hamel (s213285)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude to all those who
have contributed to the completion of my master’s thesis.
First and foremost, I
would like to extend my sincere appreciation to the teaching staff of the Deep Learn-
ing course at DTU, particularly Professor Ole Winther, for his unique instructions
and guidance. The knowledge and skills acquired in this course formed the foundation
for the research presented in this thesis, which is a continuation of a project initiated
in the Fall of 2022. His expertise and insights have greatly contributed to shape my
understanding of neural networks and their applications in the software industry.
I would like to also express my profound gratitude to Ikram Baig, the CEO of Quar-
tica. His support and collaboration have been essential in the design and execution
of this project. I am grateful for his willingness to provide guidance and feedback,
which not only contributed to the success of this thesis but also enriched my learning
journey. I feel truly privileged to have had the opportunity to work on a project that
not only advances my own knowledge but also aligns with the goals and aspirations
of Quartica as a company.
Finally, I would like to extend my deepest appreciation to my family and partner.
Their continous support, encouragement, and belief in my abilities have been a driver
for my pursuit of higher education.
In conclusion, I am filled with a sense of pride and accomplishment as I present the
results of several months of dedicated work. I look forward to the exciting possibilities
that lie ahead as I continue to explore the ever-evolving world of Deep Learning.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction of the concepts
1
1.1
Artificial Intelligence: to train or not to train . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Pharmacovigilance and its challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Natural Language Processing: from grammar rules to neural networks
7
2.2
Attention is all you need: from RNN to the Transformer . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Evolution of the Transformer architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Natural Language Processing applications in Pharmacovigilance . . . .
14
3
Methods and theoretical framework
17
3.1
The transformer architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
The Longformer variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Training and fine-tuning Transformer models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Named Entity Recognition and Relationship Extraction fine-tuning . .
25
3.5
Language models and instruction-following alignment . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
31
4.1
Datasets: from Pharmacovigilance to NLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Models: Transformer encoders and GPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Implementation and experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Results: fine-tuning vs prompt-engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Medical Writing
55
5.1
Pharmacovigilance challenges with safety reports . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.2
The problems of knowledge and context-window . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3
Combining language models with retrieval systems . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.4
Implementation and experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6
Conclusion
65
A
Training runs
67
B
Prompt engineering
75
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction of the concepts
1.1
Artificial Intelligence: to train or not to train
On a weekly basis, new research articles unveil state-of-the-art results in Artificial In-
telligence, highlighting a remarkable pace of progress in this realm. This AI revolution
is the result of the democratization of a class of systems called neural networks along
with the dramatic continuous increase of computational power available to companies
and researchers. According to an Open AI study in 2018, the amount of compute
used in the largest training runs has increased exponentially with a 3.4-month dou-
bling time [AD18]. A rhythm dramatically higher than the 2-year doubling period
of Moore’s law [Sch97]. Nevertheless, the past decade of progress with AI has been
built on computing systems and methods that originated more than 70 years ago.
While various initiatives can be considered the first evidence of neural networks, the
perceptron proposed by Frank Rosenblatt was one of the first systems considered as
such, invented in 1957 and aimed at modeling some of the most complex processes
in the brain with a rather simple mathematical structure [Ros58]. Additionally, the
introduction of back propagation, an algorithm developed in the 1960s for eﬀicient
training, and further applied to neural networks in the 1980s with computer systems
progress, stands as one of the fundamental building blocks of neural networks success
[RHW86b]. Together, these developments paved the way for what we now refer to as
deep learning, allowing models composed of multiple processing layers to learn rep-
resentations of data with multiple levels of abstraction [LBH15] . Many fields have
benefited greatly from these developments, such as image processing, speech recogni-
tion, data analysis, and one in particular: Natural Language Processing.
Natural Language Processing is a branch of artificial intelligence that is concerned
with the interactions between computers and human language. It studies how com-
puters can process, analyze and understand text and spoken words in the same way
humans can.
Different architectures such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
implemented the concept of memory for neural networks and led to significant break-
throughs in making computers achieve language-oriented tasks close to, if not exceed-
ing, human benchmarks. However, an architecture in particular, the Transformer,
developed in 2017 [Vas+17], kicked off another AI revolution and a race to build the
largest models ever built before. The Transformer architecture has allowed to achieve
state-of-the-art results in most areas involving language understanding. It gave rise
to language models, a new class of models trained with self-supervised learning over
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction of the concepts
a huge amount of human language, where they learn a general understanding of lan-
guage and versatile knowledge. Building on top of these language models, engineers
and researchers have been able to fine-tune new models, a transfer-learning process of
retraining the weights of a pre-trained model to benefit from its existing capabilities,
to achieve remarkable performance.
More recently, with modified versions of the Transformer architecture and different
training methods, even larger models have gained the capabilities not only to solve
constrained language problems, but also to understand new queries, i.e. formulations
of problems on which they were not initially trained, and follow instructions provided
as input [Ouy+22]. This constitutes a major shift compared to the more classical
fine-tuning tasks-specific model approach, which lacked generalization capabilities
and oriented the research toward creating what we refer now as Large Language
Models (LLM.). These billion-parameter models have brought generative AI to the
NLP realm with systems capable of not only understanding but also generating new
content simply by providing prompts to a model. This rapid progress has given rise to
a new branch of Artificial Intelligence, prompt-engineering, the science of construct-
ing input instructions to directly prompt existing models without training in order to
solve problems. In fact, training LLM is something that only few companies and AI
research laboratories in the world can achieve for both technical and financial reasons.
The size of the models requires huge amounts of compute and training runs over weeks
or months in data centers that few can have access to. This has led companies such as
OpenAI to provide access to their models (for instance, the well-known GPT-3), run-
ning in their own infrastructure through APIs (Application Programming Interface)
sold as a service, and unveiling impressive capabilities through simple input-output
systems driven by the prompts provided to the models.
Companies and AI engineers are now left with a dilemma : training their own new
models designed to solve specific problems, building on top of Language Models via
transfer learning, or using some of the most powerful generative models by designing
the right prompts and integrating APIs in their pipelines. The goal of this work is
to compare both approaches, analyze their strengths and limitations, and propose
a framework to guide the decision-making process when building new AI systems
for NLP applications. More specifically, the analysis and experiments conducted in
this thesis will focus on a domain-specific case study aimed at biopharmaceutical
companies: pharmacovigilance.
1.2
Pharmacovigilance and its challenges
Pharmacovigilance is a critical component of healthcare systems worldwide. It is de-
fined by the World Health Organization as ”the science and activities related to the
detection, assessment, understanding, and prevention of adverse effects or any other
medicine/vaccine related problem” [Org+02]. For all pharmaceutical companies, it
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Pharmacovigilance and its challenges
3
constitutes a set of responsibilities to ensure the safety of all products marketed or in
development. Regulatory guidelines are defined internationally and locally through
health authorities (for example the Food and Drug Administration in the US) for
companies to continuously monitor, collect data, analyze and update drug 1 interac-
tions and patient safety risks.
Figure 1.1: Pharmacovigilance components.
Figure 1.1 illustrates the key components of pharmacovigilance. Pharmacovigilance
key activities and stakes can be summarized in a process flow. It starts with the de-
tection and identification of drug-linked adverse events. These can come from various
sources, such as articles from the literature, spontaneous reports by health profession-
als, social media, and others, making it a first challenge to monitor at scale. The cases
are extracted from these sources and then processed and analyzed to identify various
information about the reported events. A reaction reported after a drug ingestion is
characterized as an Adverse Drug Event (ADE). If direct causality is demonstrated by
medical expertise under normal dosage, an ADE becomes an Adverse Drug Reaction
(ADR). This concept of causality will be further detailed in the following chapters
as it proves challenging to translate for AI systems. A new reported event can then
become a signal, i.e., there are observations suggesting a potential causal association,
which in turn can become a risk if the causality is confirmed. This data collection and
analysis are the basis for various safety reports, known as aggregate reports, requested
periodically by health authorities, as well as risk management plans to ensure that
all measures are taken to guarantee patient safety for a given drug. This workflow is
illustrated in Figure 1.2.
1Throughout this thesis, the term ”drug” will be used for the sake of simplification to describe
any pharmaceutical product, including vaccines.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction of the concepts
Figure 1.2: Pharmacovigilance simplified workflow.
When looking at the challenges of pharmacovigilance, two particular aspects can
be drawn as the main pain points.
Literature (and social media, more recently)
screening requires reviewing vast amounts of text. It is not uncommon for an average-
sized pharmaceutical company to receive thousands of abstracts of articles to review
and evaluate each month.
This assessment is done manually in most companies,
consisting of identifying suspect drug / adverse reaction pairs, determining if causality
is demonstrated, and ruling out non relevant abstracts or non related events. With
the rapid progress made in Natural Language Processing, these three tasks are good
candidates for AI to filter the noise and reduce screening time so that medical experts
can focus on medical assessment rather than processing hundreds of non-relevant
articles. Similarly, in the reporting phase of pharmacovigilance, companies with a
vast portfolio of drugs have to produce hundreds of aggregate reports. Although these
reports contain medical analysis, most of the documents consist of repetitive tabular
data, summaries, and high-level analysis of the reported numbers. This constitutes
another use-case where the latest AI models, with the ability to generate language
and achieve versatile language tasks, could bring high benefits.
1.3
Research objectives
The purpose of this work is to explore different NLP applications, powered by Transformer-
based models, to address some of the challenges encountered with pharmacovigilance.
This thesis will investigate how some of the activities described in the previous work-
flow can be turned into language tasks that AI models can solve. With two main
methods available to AI engineers, namely fine-tuning (and as such retraining) or
prompt-engineering on existing LLM, this work will experiment and assess what are
the best performing methods for each problem and the associated limitations.
Fine-tuning Transformer models typically requires a large amount of data. This is one
of the characteristics of neural networks; they demonstrate impressive performance
but at the cost of long and computationally intensive trainings. Although transfer
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Structure of the Thesis
5
learning on pre-trained language models allows to reduce the required amount of data
for new tasks, how much data will be required to obtain high performance remains
a research question diﬀicult to address and highly dependent on the task itself. The
other challenge in training a task-specific model is the need for annotated data. While
language models are pre-trained on large-scaled non-annotated corpora and as such
self-supervised, the fine-tuning phase requires annotated datasets specifically designed
for the models to learn how to solve the task of interest. This poses a significant chal-
lenge, particularly in the pharmaceutical industry, where most of the datasets exist
in proprietary safety databases and are not publicly shared. This work will explore
the influence of domain-specific annotations strategies on the performance of a model
and how the amount and quality of available datasets can affect the result on different
tasks.
When working with models trained within the constraints of a language task, for
instance, a classification problem (where both input and output have a standard for-
mat), it is typically straightforward to evaluate the performance using ground truth
and industry standard metrics such as precision or recall. When it comes to genera-
tive AI, where the goal is to generate language with fewer boundaries and less control
over output, it is more diﬀicult to evaluate the performance. While some metrics such
as ROUGE and BLEU exist and will be used, it remains an active research topic. For
that reason the chapter exploring medical writing will focus on a rather qualitative
analysis, with some degree of quantitative assessment, of existing techniques that
can be associated with LLM for language generation in the context of writing safety
reports. In particular it will show how the context-window limitation and knowledge
cutoff of LLM can be addressed with retrieval systems.
The goal of this work is to propose a broad view of techniques and methods that
can be applied to pharmacovigilance. It constitutes a knowledge base that explores
and compares different approaches and provides support for future studies.
1.4
Structure of the Thesis
This thesis will be organized into several chapters to ensure a clear and cohesive
structure. In this chapter, the high-level concepts, namely Transformer neural net-
works and pharmacovigilance, have been introduced and some challenges highlighted
to be addressed through the research objectives. The second chapter will review the
relevant literature to understand how the research of the last few years led to the
state-of-the-art models used in this work. It will also assess the related work and
studies that explored applications of deep learning AI to pharmacovigilance. The
third chapter will dive into the models architectures and methods to establish a the-
oretical framework for the study. The experiments and results of the thesis will be
split into two chapters. The first one will propose a quantitative study dedicated to
applications for drug safety monitoring, where fine-tuning and prompt-engineering
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction of the concepts
will be compared in several selected NLP tasks. The second is a qualitative study to
explore recent techniques that give LLM access to external knowledge and a frame-
work to use generative AI for medical writing.
Each of these chapters will detail
various challenges encountered, the experiments performed, and the results obtained
along with considerations on the use of AI in the pharmaceutical industry. The last
chapter will conclude on the findings of this work and reflect on the next steps to
develop further each of approaches explored.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
2.1
Natural Language Processing: from grammar rules
to neural networks
The history of Natural Language Processing is made of a succession of breakthroughs
over almost a century of research that led to recent exponential progress, closer than
ever to what Vernor Vinge described in 1983 as ”the singularity”, a turning point
where machine intelligence exceeds human intellect [Vin93]. The first initiatives con-
sidered as natural language originated in the 1940s with some of the first computer
systems developed during World Word 2 for different applications such as calculations,
and in particular for machine translation uses, in hope of breaking codes exchanged
during the war. Many consider Alan Turing, as the father of machine learning and
natural language, with innovative contributions such as the ”Turing Test” and a
famous paper entitling ”Computing Machinery and Intelligence”, which raised the
interest in Natural Language Processing [Tur50]. In the following decades, radically
different schools of thought emerged to tackle the challenge of understanding language
for machines. Before the invention, democratization, and research consensus on the
use of neural networks for NLP, different major approaches were developed among
which grammar-based theories, symbolic artificial intelligence, and statistical models.
The idea of the first concept was to treat language as a grammatical framework with
sets of rules to always generate grammatically correct sentences. Symbolic models
were developed in an attempt to embed human knowledge and behavior rules into
computer programs with a deterministic approach involving various logical conditions.
Later, with the advances achieved in machine learning, statistical models were devel-
oped, and as a consequence, language rules running on computer systems transitioned
from being generated by linguists to being based on linguistic statistics [MS99]. Neu-
ral networks were introduced and engineered for NLP in the early 2000s and within a
decade became the most successful systems to achieve various language tasks, building
on the advantages brought by deep learning methods for modeling sequential data and
the flexibility of transfer learning. While a succession of new innovative techniques
was introduced in the 2010s, the pace of progress dramatically increased from 2017
with the introduction of a new architecture of neural networks called the Transformer.
Ever since then, there has been a tremendous amount of publications and contribu-
tions from both the private industry and academia, resulting in an unprecedented
speed of development and state-of-the-art advancements. Figure 2.1 illustrates the
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Literature review
volume of citations and publications that followed the year 2017 and the increase in
the pace ever since.
Figure 2.1: Citations and publications over time with key words ”Natural Language
Processing Deep Learning” (source: Web of Science).
2.2
Attention is all you need: from RNN to the
Transformer
As of June 2023, the number of citations for the article ”Attention is all you need”
[Vas+17] published by a team at Google in 2017 adds up to 77804 in Google Scholar.
This shows how significant and influential this work was for the entire AI community.
What Ashish Vaswani and his co-researchers brought was a new neural network ar-
chitecture aimed at addressing some of the limits of recurrent neural networks, the
preferred systems when dealing with sequence of text until then.
Recurrent neural networks, an invention that dates back to the 1980s, are partic-
ularly well suited to process sequence data, and thus text, with a succession of words
treated as input [RHW86a]. However, they have significant limits, especially when
dealing with long sequences with a phenomenon called the vanishing-gradient prob-
lem, making it diﬀicult for models to learn features or patterns in long texts. Most
of these issues were addressed with a variant architecture invented in 1997 called
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), which introduced a system capable of capturing
long-term dependencies with a memory cell and gating mechanism [HS97]. LSTM
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Attention is all you need: from RNN to the Transformer
9
and a variant called GRU [Chu+14] led to state-of-the-art performance for various
language applications in the 2010s, taking advantage of rapid advances in computa-
tional power capabilities. In fact, one of the other reasons for the success of neural
networks is their design, which makes them suitable for parallel run and training.
When GPUs, processing units particularly eﬀicient for parallel computations, were
used for the first time to train neural networks, the industry and research community
realized that they were the most suitable and would bring significant improvements.
What followed was a dramatic decrease in the time required to train these models
and large efforts from chip makers to design new hardware specifically designed to
support AI and, in particular, rapid deep learning progress.
The key novel idea behind the Transformer architecture is an attention mechanism
that will be described in more detail in the next chapter along with a review of the
architecture components. It allows models to focus their attention on specific parts of
an input sequence, thereby enhancing their ability to capture complex relationships
and dependencies, a crucial aspect of language [Vas+17]. This further improved the
ability to learn and process patterns in long texts without the vanishing gradient
problem.
Furthermore, the Transformer architecture was designed to enable high
parallelization, leading to a better utilization of computational resources. The struc-
ture of the proposed model was composed of two parts: an encoder that processes
the input and returns context-aware representations for each input token and a de-
coder that generates an output sequence token by token based on this representation
and the previously generated token. The encoder brought major improvements in
transfer learning applications with its flexibility to integrate with additional layers to
adapt to different tasks, while the decoder brought substantial progress for text-to-
text task and generative AI in general. A year after, a different team from Google’s
AI laboratory released a new model, called BERT (for Bidirectional Encoder Repre-
sentations from Transformers) considered one of the first language models [Dev+19].
Built only with the encoder component of the Transformer architecture, they intro-
duced a new training method based on bidirectional representations and delivered a
state-of-the-art model enabling fine-tuning for a wide range of tasks. BERT was a
turning point in the course of natural language processing development, as it became
a building block of many new AI systems taking advantage of transfer learning. It led
to many subsequent language models, released open source, with added enhancements
such as domain-specific understanding or task-specific capabilities. Although many
models, from Google’s own team and others, have succeeded BERT and achieved
new state-of-the-art results, it remains a first choice for fine-tuning when considering
computational cost and infrastructure requirement. It is the third most downloaded
model on HuggingFace, a company and open source community known for its ”Trans-
formers” library that helped democratize the use of Transformer models [Wol+20],
with more than 50 million downloads.
One of strengths of models like BERT is their adaptability and ability to be retrained
through transfer learning while keeping their general knowledge and language under-
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Literature review
standing learned in the pre-training phase [Sun+19].
This is especially useful for
adapting a model to a specific task or to give it domain-specific understanding. This
is what a team demonstrated in 2019 with a new model called BioBERT [Lee+19].
Their motivation was driven by new NLP advancements to biomedical applications
yielding ”unsatisfactory results due to a word distribution shift from general domain
corpora to biomedical corpora”. Starting from the initialized weights of BERT, they
trained their new model specifically on biomedical corpora using the same training
approach and obtained results significantly outperforming BERT on three represen-
tative biomedical text mining tasks. The key takeaway from this work was to show
that a model can gain domain-specific understanding, even from a complex language,
such as biomedical text, through transfer learning without having to start from the
ground up. Many models were developed following similar approaches, such as SciB-
ERT [BCL19], trained on scientific papers, or PubMedBERT [Gu+20] trained from
scratch exclusively on biomedical abstracts. Chapter 3 of this thesis will detail how
these models can be developed and then used for additional task-specific fine-tuning.
Then in Chapter 4, they will be used in training experiments and formally compared
for a set of selected pharmacovigilance-specific tasks along with other language mod-
els.
2.3
Evolution of the Transformer architecture
Over the past few years, the Transformer architecture has evolved in multiple variants,
while still preserving its core concept of attention. The research work that followed
brought about significant improvements with different ideas.
In order to address the relatively small context window (the maximal input size of 512
tokens) of BERT and its derived versions, a research team proposed a version called
”Longformer” in 2020 [BPC20]. It introduced a sliding window attention mechanism,
inspired from convolutional neural network, to significantly reduce the memory used
by the attention layers. The result was a model capable of processing sequences eight
times longer than BERT, a significant improvement for language tasks dealing with
long text such as summarization or Question-Answering. This architecture will be
detailed in the next chapter, and some clinical Longformer, particularly suitable for
abstract processing, will be used in the fine-tuning experiments.
With the observation that labeled data for learning specific tasks are rather rare
(compared to unlabeled text corpora), researchers started developing general task-
agnostic models.
GPT, for Generative Pre-Training, a model built only with the
decoder component of the Transformer in 2018, outperformed fine-tuned models on
multiple tasks with a single model and the use of generative AI [Rad+18a]. The key
novel idea was to convert all text-based language problems into a text-to-text for-
mat, for which the decoder component is particularly adapted. It was confirmed in a
follow-up study, improving a larger version (GPT-2) and finding that ”language mod-
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Evolution of the Transformer architecture
11
els begin to learn tasks without explicit supervision when trained on a new dataset”
[Rad+18b]. Following a similar approach, a team of researchers at Google conducted
in 2019 a systematic study to compare architectures, unlabeled datasets, transfer
approaches and other factors for various language understanding tasks [Raf+20]. It
resulted in a shared text-to-text framework suggesting to also reframe all NLP tasks
into a unified text-to-text format where inputs and outputs are always text strings
(in contrast to BERT-style models that output vector representation or class labels).
With T5 (for Text-To-Text Transfer Transformer), the model developed as part of the
study, the researchers explored training larger models (up to 11 billion parameters,
more than 30 times bigger than the 350 million parameters of BERT) and achieved
new state-of-the-art across many benchmarks.
While research on BERT-like models and transfer learning persisted, significant efforts
were dedicated to building larger generative language models, with the aim of enhanc-
ing their versatility for various language applications. A study by OpenAI found that
”scaling up language models greatly improves task-agnostic performance” [Bro+20].
They built GPT-3 a model with 175 billion parameters, 10 times larger than any pre-
vious language model at the time. The study found that the performance of language
models could be significantly improved by providing a few training examples directly
in the input sequence. This is what the researchers referred to as ”few-shots learning”.
This work brought prompt-engineering into the spotlight, demonstrating that one sin-
gle large model could handle a vast amount of tasks and even outperform task-specific
models when given just a few examples at query time. GPT-3 was not released open-
source; as such, the final architecture is not known, but it today constitutes one of the
most versatile and powerful language models ever built, with follow-up versions such
as GPT-4. Only a few companies in the world have the computing power to train such
a model and its use is exclusively done via OpenAI paid API. In Chapter 4, GPT-3
and the prompt-engineering approach is formally compared to BERT-like fine-tuned
models for pharmacovigilance language tasks. Other AI laboratories such as Meta AI
developed similar models (OPT for Open Pre-Trained Transformer [Zha+22]) in an
effort to keep research open-source even though its massive size also makes it very
diﬀicult to use for AI engineers without large infrastructures. Running the largest
OPT model requires, for instance, 350GB of GPU memory, and as such, costly par-
allel computing platforms. Figure 2.2 illustrates the evolution of the size of some of
the most popular language models over the past few years.
Although additional studies, mostly from private AI laboratories, explored continuing
to scale model size such as Google with PaLM (Pathways Language Model) and its
540 billion parameters [Cho+22], Meta AI published a study in 2023 showing that
smaller models trained over more tokens outperformed some of the largest models.
They introduced a collection of open-source language models (LLaMA, Large Lan-
guage Model Meta AI), with a 13 billion parameter version outperforming GPT-3
(10 times larger) and 65 billion parameters competing with PaLM (8 times larger)
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Literature review
Figure 2.2: Number of parameters of some of the most popular language models.
Source: HuggingFace blog [Sim].
[Tou+23]. This study nuanced the idea that larger models mean higher performance
and highlights how researchers are still trying to find areas of improvement other than
mere scaling.
The latest breakthrough in language models came with new training methods (al-
though invented decades ago) that gave them the ability to follow user instructions
with remarkable accuracy.
In an article by OpenAI, researchers highlighted that
increasing the size of language models did not inherently make them better at follow-
ing user instructions [Ouy+22]. They discussed the challenge of ”aligning language
models with user intent” to generate output that is truthful, nontoxic, and, in the
end, helpful for the user. They proposed to fine-tune their current GPT-3 model
with labeler demonstrations of the desired behavior and use reinforcement learning
to further fine-tune the supervised model with human feedback. The result was a new
class of models, InstructGPT. The output of the InstructGPT model 1.3B parame-
ters was found to be preferred to the output of 175B GPT-3, although it had 100x
fewer parameters. This type of model trained with reinforcement learning proved to
be particularly eﬀicient for dialog applications. One of the most famous examples,
which promoted AI and its progress to the world public is ChatGPT. This AI chatbot
developed by OpenAI and based on InstructGPT brought the power of billion-size lan-
guage models to any web browser through an application and infrastructure capable
of serving millions of user requests within seconds. The revolution of ChatGPT was
enhanced by the fact that it can not only do classic NLP application, but also under-
stand and generate code, dialog with users, and answer vast queries from generating
a list of recipes based on one’s fridge ingredients to ideas for a marketing campaign.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Evolution of the Transformer architecture
13
While ChatGPT is also a commercial product with no architecture details, the success
of applying reinforcement learning allowed researchers to develop other instruction-
following systems based on open-source models. For example, Standford Alpaca was
trained by a group of students using Meta’s LLaMA 7B model with only 52,000
instruction-following demonstrations (for less than 100$ according to the author of
the study) and proved to be competitive with OpenAI models [Tao+23]. Although
these results need to be carefully interpreted since evaluating instruction-following
models is still being actively researched and is often done qualitatively via human rat-
ing, this study showed how open source models can contribute to significant research
progress and high-performance with a fraction of the computational power used by
private technology companies.
While the previously cited works mostly cover improvements of the Transformer archi-
tecture through new training methods, variation of components, scaling of parameters,
and other inherent properties, many other studies are currently exploring how to make
these models more secure, less biased, and non-toxic. There is a large effort to im-
prove the safety and factual grounding of these models in the AI community. This is
especially important for applications such as pharmacovigilance that involve patient
safety and highly regulated environments. Google published in 2022 an article in
which they presented a family of models called LaMBDA (LaMDA: Language Models
for Dialog Applications) and some methods to address some of the challenges cited
above [Tho+22]. One the major risk with language models is their tendency to gen-
erate content, with a confident tone, that is either nonsensical, invented information
or deviated from the provided source content, a phenomenon called ”hallucination”.
This is explained by several reasons, among them the fact that language models do
not have access to real-time information and have a knowledge cutoff corresponding
to the training data. They sometimes lack common sense and real-world logic, since
they are trained only on language without any representation of the physical world,
and their knowledge is acquired with a large amount of Internet text that can be
biased or harmful [Tho+22]. The authors investigated several strategies, such as fine-
tuning language models with specific datasets, to address the safety challenge and
allow the model to consult external knowledge for factual grounding. Groundedness
and safety metrics were developed to quantify the result and the study found signifi-
cant improvements on the two previous limitations of large language models. While
these results are important to guarantee that language models are not harmful and
toxic for the users, they also highlight promissing ideas to provide external knowl-
edge to the models via different retrieval techniques. Enhancing these models with
the ability to use information from outside of its own context would be especially
useful for various applications such as Question-Answering tasks or to assist in tasks
requiring compiling and summarizing information from multiple sources.
All these findings and studies serve as a starting point for this thesis. Chapter 4
will be dedicated to comparing the performance of fine-tuned Transformer models
and OpenAI GPT-3 for language tasks related to pharmacovigilance, while Chapter
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Literature review
5 will investigate how language models, coupled with information retrieval techniques,
can be used for medical writing.
2.4
Natural Language Processing applications in
Pharmacovigilance
Using artificial intelligence in pharmacovigilance has become an increasingly impor-
tant area of research as healthcare systems evolve. While the literature is not as
developed on the topic compared to other less specialized areas, two recent studies,
a systematic review [Sal+22] and an analysis of AI readiness for pharmacovigilance
[BP22] discuss general frameworks and use cases. Most applications have targeted
the detection of adverse drug events (ADE) for safety surveillance in social medias
and in electronic health records using different machine learning algorithms[Sal+22].
The use of deep learning and neural networks is, however, relatively new and most
of the techniques used before 2019 involved statistics and feature extraction. The
processing of safety reports is another application in which researchers found ma-
chine learning algorithms and text mining useful to analyze and classify free text
with patient safety incident reports [Sal+22]. Other applications include identifying
drug-drug interactions, simulating clinical trials, or identifying patients at high risk
for adverse.
The authors of the second article conclude that ”AI can usefully be
applied to some aspects of ICSR processing and evaluation, but the performance of
current AI algorithms requires a ‘human-in-the-loop’ to ensure good quality”. This
aspect and the implications of using AI models for pharmacovigilance application will
be discussed further in Chapters 4 and 5.
While several studies have used some classical machine learning techniques such as
Support Vector Machine (SVM) or Naive Bayes (NB) [Alv+15], when it comes to deep
learning and Transformers, only a few have resulted in training new models. This
is explained by the lack of publicly available annotated datasets required to obtain
good results when training neural networks. In fact, most of the existing studies were
either conducted on social medias or public websites manually annotated, such as
Twitter or Drugs.com, or on the two known available datasets with ADE annotations
described in further detail below. Some studies do not differentiate ADE and ADR,
even though the latter involve demonstrated causality between the drug and reaction
of interest. The distinction will be further detailed in Chapter 4.
When it comes to detecting ADRs and ADEs, the most common NLP tasks are
full text classification, named entity extraction (NER), and relationship extraction
(RE). The first allows to classify full text, an example could be classifying whether
the text contains an ADR/ADE or not, and is usually the easiest method to imple-
ment [Fan+20] [Gur+12] [HLL22]. The second consists in identifying entities, that
is, a word or combination of words belonging to a certain class (for example, a drug
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Natural Language Processing applications in Pharmacovigilance
15
or reaction) [SY19] [McM+21] [Mar+22]. This task typically identifies all entities,
regardless of their semantic or medical relationships, and is useful to process a text
and store structured information. It can, however, generate noise in the context of
drug safety since biomedical texts usually contain many occurrences of drugs and re-
action entities unrelated to any ADR/ADE. The last one, the least studied yet, aims
to classify the nature of the relationship between two given entities [EU19] so that
an exact drug and reaction can be characterized as related or not in the context of
ADE or ADR depending on the target. Only a few articles have applied the concept
of RE to assess drug/reaction relationship in the context of ADE, but no work was
done directly on causality assessment for the identification of ADRs. This can be
explained by the absence of public dataset with causality labels and the fact that this
is typically a medical expert evaluation. This work will show how that under certain
conditions, NER can be used to directly classify implied relationships and filter the
noise of non-relevant entities without using RE.
The most cited publicly available dataset originated from a study in 2012 [Gur+12]
and contains sentences classified as containing ADE or not along with the drug and
the reaction entities for positive cases (with causality) 1. The choice of annotation
made by the authors and its implications on training a model are crucial and will
be discussed in Chapter 4. Most of the studies used BERT-like Transformer models
with this dataset and covered some of the tasks described above. While it has allowed
researchers to demonstrate the promissing applications of Transformer-based models
for ADE detection, the method of annotation and the fact that the corpus is made
of single relatively short sentences represent some limitations for applications such as
literature screening where full abstracts need to be analyzed with more complex lan-
guage patterns (across sentences, for example). The other dataset, called n2c2-2018,
is not publicly available directly, but was released by Harvard Medical School as part
of the National NLP Clinical Challenges for the task of extracting ADE. It contains
all entities and the relationship in electronic health records (EHR). Similarly to the
previous dataset, several teams proposed neural networks to achieve the NLP tasks
including relationship extraction, but at that time Transformer models were a brand
new research topic not yet fully understood and generalized. The models were not
tested on abstract or literature articles, raising the question of whether they would be
able to generalize their capabilities from a very specific EHR language to biomedical
literature language.
Another dataset, BioDEX, was released in 2023 on the HuggingFace platform con-
taining ICSR (Individual Case Safety Report) extracted from articles in the litera-
ture and annotated with the target of medical case processing (seriousness, sex of
the patient, drugs and adverse reactions, etc.) [DOo+23]. This dataset is one of the
most promissing as it contains full text of several paragraphs and the corresponding
1In the original paper, the authors described the ”effect” entity rather than ”reaction”. Since
the target of identifying ADE is the same, ”reaction” will be the preferred term in this thesis.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Literature review
case processing analysis, allowing to test the capabilities of Transformer models to
understand and analyze longer medical text. On the basis of available information,
no other studies have yet utilized it. With abstracts longer than the maximum input
size for BERT-like models, it is a particularly well suited to utilize the Longformer
variant of the Transformer with a version pre-tained on clinical language [Li+22] and
test it for the first time on the task of detecting relevant drugs and reactions for case
processing. Regarding out-of-the-box language models such as GPT-3, no other work
has studied their use for any of the biomedical NLP tasks listed above, although GPT-
3 demonstrated good performance on standard classification and NER benchmarks
[Bro+20].
Medical writing includes a wide spectrum of tasks, from clinical notes, medical re-
ports to regulatory writing, the latest being the most relevant to pharmacovigilance
activities and the object of Chapter 5 of this thesis. Most articles mentioning artificial
intelligence and medical writing have been written by medical experts and assess at
a high level how technologies such as ChatGPT can reshape the field and address
some of its challenges and redundant activities [FW23] [Kit23] [Bis23]. While they
provide insights on the areas where NLP and GPT-like models, with their ability to
generate a readable, correct medical writing style, can have the most impact, they
invite more research on how exactly these models can be used. When it comes to
safety/regulatory reports, there is no framework to suggest how transformer-based
models can be leveraged. In particular, writing these reports usually involves com-
bining various sources and summarizing aggregated data which ChatGPT and other
chatbot, with their fixed internal knowledge constraints, may not handle well on their
own. To exploit the power of transformer models for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,
it is necessary to use them in conjunction with retrieval systems that can use data
from various sources and documents [Lew+20] [Ram+23]. This aspect will be ex-
plored further in Chapter 5.
By further investigating ADE detection with relation extraction, a task that has
only been studied on EHR or single sentences, this thesis will further assess how
Transformer-based models can address a key challenge of pharmacovigilance. Fur-
thermore, based on the available information, no other study has formally compared
fine-tuned models and text-to-text language models on the biomedical tasks listed pre-
viously. This work will build on the existing ADE corpus dataset, providing results
that can be compared to the state-of-the-art while also using a novel dataset with
longer texts, and show the benefit the Longformer architecture can bring. Finally, it
will investigate how language models coupled with retrieval systems can be used to
support writing safety reports.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Methods and theoretical
framework
3.1
The transformer architecture
The objective of this section is to review the Transformer architecture and the innova-
tions it brought to neural networks and NLP. The article Attention is All You Need
[Vas+17] presented the Transformer architecture for the first time in 2017. The orig-
inal model was composed of two main components : an encoder and a decoder, each
made of a stack of 6 layers. This architecture did not contain any RNN (Recurrent
Neural Network) or LSTM (Long-Short-Term Memory) components. Instead, it in-
troduced several new blocks based on new innovative ideas illustrated in the original
diagram from the paper in Figure 3.1:
• A two components-architecture
• Multi-head attention blocks introducing the novel attention mechanism
• Input and output embedding blocks
• Positional encoding blocks
The encoder takes a full sequence input that goes through 6 layers with the same
structure. In the original paper, the author introduced a very eﬀicient constraint
with a constant dimension for all the sub-layer outputs, referred as the model di-
mension dmodel (defined originally as 512). This dimension imposes a constraint on
the sequence input size, known as the context-window. The benefit of adding such
constraint is to keep the dimensions stable inside the model, where most operations
are dot products, and reduce the overall calculation for both training and inference.
The first block, the input embedding converts each input word (previously tok-
enized) into a vector of size 512.
Each token is as such represented by a 512 di-
mensions mathematical object that can be processed by the subsequent layers. The
intuition behind the input embedding is to map each token to a high-dimensional
vector space (the embedding space) and to allow the model to learn this mapping
during the training and capture meaningful semantic relationships between tokens.
For instance, two words such as ”cat” and ”dog” are expected to have similar word
embedding, which can be verified using vector measures such as cosine similarity,
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Methods and theoretical framework
Figure 3.1: The architecture of the Transformer [Vas+17].
while carrying information specific to each word based on the sequence context.This
means the subsequent layers are provided with a word embedding that already pro-
vides information on word association but still lack of the language representation
such as the position of each word in a sequence which a critical aspect.
To address this challenge, the authors introduced a positional encoding block.
Rather than introducing additional vectors that would increase the complexity for
the subsequent layer, the position of each token is captured by adding a positional
encoding value to the input embedding directly. Since each input has a fixed size 512,
the positional encoding value needs to be added to all the embedding vector values
while remaining small to not supersede the initial embedding. The authors novel idea
is to use a positional encoding based on the unit sphere with sine and cosine functions,
as such addressing the size concerns and covering all dimensions.
PE(pos,2i) = sin(
pos
100002i/dmodel )
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos(
pos
100002i/dmodel )
==PAGE:29==
3.1 The transformer architecture
19
This calculated positional vector is then simply added to the embedding vector, mul-
tiplied by an arbitrary value √dmodel to ensure that information about the word
embedding is not lost. This input is then ready to go through the 6 layers of the
encoder. One of the particularity of the Transformer architecture is that, unlike RNN
which processes tokens one by one in sequential order, the full sequence is provided
as input and processed by the encoder at once.
The attention mechanism is probably the most influential and impactful concept
developed with the Transformer architecture. It occurs in the multi-head attention
sub-layer which contains 8 ”heads” that process in parallel a smaller piece of the
input of size dmodel. The idea introduced by the authors is to divide each of the
tokens, now represented in an embedded vector including the positional encoding,
into 8 dimensions of size 64 to be processed by one head each. This design choice is
key, as it allows the model to learn different perspectives of the same input and, as
such, complex patterns while optimizing computations with parallel operations. The
outputs of each head are then concatenated to obtain a vector of the same dimension
as the input :
MultiHeadi(output) = Concat(Zi,0, Zi,1, Zi,2, Zi,3, Zi,4, Zi,5, Zi,6, Zi,7, Zi,8) = x, dmodel
Inside each head, the authors introduced the concept of query, key, and value. The
goal is to compute some attention scores for each transformed token with respect to
the other tokens of the input sequence. The query vector (Q) represents the elements
for which to compute the attention scores; it ”seeks” all the key-value pairs of the
other token vectors. The key vectors (K) represent the elements to which the query is
compared, while the value vector (V) represents the values associated with each key.
The attention is defined as ”Scaled Dot Product Attention) given by the following
equation:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
The intuition behind this query, key, and value system is based on the concept of
information retrieval and relevance, similar to what can be seen with retrieval sys-
tems. The query is mapped to the keys and returns some values. In the case of the
Transformer, each token is compared with all the other tokens of the sequence, so
that it can have a different level of attention to each of them. Figure 3.2 illustrates
the attention values that each token receives in its representation with respect to
the other. In the example, the word ”it” corresponds to ”the animal”; as such, the
latter will have a higher attention with ”it” compared to other words like ”because”
or ”street”.
In order for the model to learn how to assign the right attention scores and calculate
the vectors Q, K, and V all 64 in size, each of them is associated with a weight matrix
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Methods and theoretical framework
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the attention mechanism for the word ”it” in a sentence
[Vas+17].
Qw, Kw and Vw with 64 columns and 512 rows. The weights are parameters of the
model which will be adjusted during the training to learn how to attend to words
in human language. The input is multiplied by each weight matrix to obtain each
vector (Q,K,V) and calculate the attention score matrix with the scaled dot product.
Figure 3.3 provided by Yasuto Tamura in a data science article [Tam21] translates
the original diagram from Attention is All You Need into a comprehensive represen-
tation of the mathematical operation where the weight matrices are represented by
the ”linear” blocks.
Figure 3.3: Scaled Dot-Product Attention with Key, Query and Value vectors
[Tam21].
==PAGE:31==
3.1 The transformer architecture
21
Figure 3.4: Illustration of a Multi-Head Attention layer and concatenation [Tam21].
After concatenation of the output of each attention head, the result is a new represen-
tation of the original input where each token now has a contextual representation of
the embedding, positional encoding and attention with respect to the other tokens of
the sequence. This representation has been embedded with the different relationships
and dependencies within the sequence. The concatenation then goes through a fully
connected layer with additional trained parameters. Figure 3.4 from the previous
data science article illustrates the 8 heads providing the attention scores in parallel
to a linear layer. A post-layer normalization (”Add & Norm” block on the original
diagram) is added and serves as a residual connection and normalization block. The
residual connection allows the model to retain the original information from the input,
which prevents the problem of vanishing gradients during training, and normalization
helps stabilize the distributions of values across layers. This will lead to faster and
more stable convergence during training and can improve the generalizability of the
model [Vas+17]. A final fully connected layer (feed-forward) completed with another
post-layer normalization completes one encoder layer. This process is stacked in 6
layers to obtain a final output corresponding to a highly contextualized representa-
tion of the original sequence. Section 3.3 will explore how this representation enables
fine-tuning of other models through transfer learning.
The decoder is designed in the same way with 6 layers stacked in the original architec-
ture. Each layer reuses some similar blocks and brings some adjustments compared to
the encoder. The three sub-layers are a multi-headed masked attention mechanism,
a multi-headed attention mechanism, and a fully connected layer. In the original
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methods and theoretical framework
paper, the decoder’s main goal was to output a text sequence based on the output
of the encoder and the output already generated by the decoder itself. In order to
generate text, unlike the encoder, the decoder is designed to sequentially predict the
next token of the output while reusing the already predicted token. As such, the
output embedding and positional encoding blocks are the same as the encoder,
but process the already generated output sequentially as it unfolds until completion.
This design has allowed other researchers to develop language models based solely on
the decoder component, where the input prompt is processed directly through the
decoder’s input and treated as a sequence to complete.
The particularity of the multiheaded masked attention mechanism is that the at-
tention must only apply to the position up to and including the current position.
When trained, the future words of a sentence are hidden from the model, forcing it
to learn how to predict the next token. The same ”Add & Norm” layer completes the
first attention block. While the first attention block focuses on the already generated
output, the other multihead attention sublayer helps the decoder focus on relevant
parts of the encoder input. It does so by taking as input the key-value pairs for each
input token from the encoder and the query vector from the previous attention sub-
layer. The decoder is now ”seeking” how the already generated output should attend
the information from the encoder input sequence at each step until completion of the
output. The final layer of the decoder has the same structure as the fully connected
layer of the encoder and adds a soft-max layer that converts the output from the last
layer into a probability over the vocabulary which allows to predict the next token.
As such, new text is generated token by token, making it a generative AI system.
3.2
The Longformer variant
The Longformer variant of the Transformer architecture was proposed in 2020 based
on the observation that ”Transformer-based models are unable to process long se-
quences due to their self-attention operation, which scales quadratically with the
sequence length” [BPC20]. In fact, most of the models built on the architecture have
a limited context window of 512 tokens, which corresponds to dmodel, the dimension
of the model defined above. Depending on the vocabulary and tokenizer algorithm
used, 512 tokens approximate around 400 words. This is a major limit for several
NLP applications such as summarization, or in the case of this thesis NER/RE tasks
on literature text. Although this may prove suﬀicient for abstracts, some may end up
truncated, which is not acceptable in a regulated domain such as pharmacovigilance.
Splitting long text into smaller chunks to fit the context window and repetitively
applying the task on the new subtexts is an option to mitigate this issue, but it can
affect long-term dependencies and may result in losing crucial information relevant
to other paragraphs further away in a text. For all these reasons, the Longformer
architecture stands as a good alternative for long text processing.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 The Longformer variant
23
The designers of this architecture introduced a modified attention mechanism that
scales linearly (rather than quadratically) with the sequence length and greatly reduce
the memory required to process documents of thousands of tokens or more. In partic-
ular, they introduce a combination of local windowed attention and task-motivated
global attention as illustrated in figure 3.5. The sliding window emphasizes the
importance of local context and employs a fixed-size window attention surrounding
each token. The idea behind the windowed attention is that while some information
may be lost at a given layer, multiple layers stacked will result in a large receptive
field with the propagation of attention from top to bottom layers and allow to retain
some of the long-term dependencies. A token in the last layer will attend to surround-
ing tokens, which in turn will attend to their surroundings in the previous layer, and
by propagation it is expected that at least some degree of information can be main-
tained between distant tokens. This approach is inspired by the sliding window of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image processing. In the dilated sliding
window, the researchers further increased the receptive field to thousands of tokens
by adding gaps of size dilation d in between the tokens that can be attended. They
found that setting different dilation values per attention head improves the perfor-
mance by alternating local and longer context. Finally, the global attention is a
mechanism that allows to engineer the architecture in such a way that certain tokens
are given the ability to attend to all the others. This proves critical for task-specific
models that aggregate the representation of a whole sequence into a special token
([CLS] for instance for BERT as seen in the next section).
All together, the researchers combine these different mechanisms and propose a final
architecture with different window sizes used at different layers based on several ex-
periments that consistently outperforms other Transformers on long document tasks.
Figure 3.5: Full attention and self-attention pattern proposed in the Longformer
[BPC20].
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methods and theoretical framework
3.3
Training and fine-tuning Transformer models
Given the large number of parameters and complex patterns that need to be learned
from language, Transformer models in their pretraining phase need to be trained over
a large amount of text. The original Transformer was trained on 40+ million sen-
tences, and some last works have reached state-of-the-art while training on trillions
of tokens. The pre-training phase of the Transformer consists of a self-supervised
mechanism where a model learns to predict the next word in a sequence given the
context of the previous ones. This can be done on existing text-to-text datasets such
as translated sentences (the original sentence is given to the Encoder and the De-
coder needs to predict the translation, learning token by token), or pure text such as
the Internet corpus where the models learn to complete sentences and compare its
prediction to the original full sentence. In this setting, no particular annotations are
required, making it scalable and relatively easy to implement.
Training domain or task specific models became very popular in the field after the pub-
lication of BERT. It introduced a new training method and objective called ”masked
language modeling” (MLM) which allowed to train the model to predict masked words
in a bidirectional manner. The researchers arbitrarily masked words in the training
sentences and train the model to predict it by considering both its left and right
contexts. The original Transformer on the contrary was only trained to predict using
its left context. This innovative idea allows Transformer models to learn complex
patterns in a sequence and utilize semantic relationships in the two directions. BERT
was also pre-trained on next sentence prediction (NSP) by adding a special token
[CLS] at the beginning of each sentence, which output in the context vector can be
used to classify how likely it is that the current sentence is the next sentence of the
first one. This is illustrated in the left diagram of Figure 3.6. As such, BERT was
designed to be used in two approaches. The model is first pre-trained on large corpus
of text using the MLM and NSP tasks, which results in a language model that can
be further fine-tuned on downstream tasks using task-specific datasets.
The ouput of BERT is a context-embedded vector that makes it particularly conve-
nient to use with additional layers, for instance for classification, using the special
token [CLS] or the full output. In fact, many language problems can be turned into a
classification task (sentiment analysis, NER as token classification, RE as pair classi-
fication, text classification, etc.). With simple modifications to adapt to the specific
task, it is possible to add custom classification layers on top of BERT and retrain
the augmented model on the specific task, so long as they have the appropriate anno-
tated dataset. This process corresponds to removing the ”head” of the original model
and replacing it with a new custom head. The key strength of this approach is that
both the weights of the added layer(s) and the weights of the original language model
(BERT in this case) can be re-trained and adjusted during the fine-tuning phase.
This provides high flexibility and significantly reduces the amount of data required
to obtain good performance by benefiting from the understanding and knowledge of
the language model, a process called transfer learning.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Named Entity Recognition and Relationship Extraction fine-tuning
25
Figure 3.6: Pre-training and fine-tuning approach for BERT on different NLP tasks
[Dev+19].
3.4
Named Entity Recognition and Relationship
Extraction fine-tuning
In Chapter 4 of this thesis, fine-tuning experiments are performed using an open
source library of natural language processing called Spacy.
It integrates with the
Python package Transformers and enables training on various tasks using existing
pre-trained models hosted on HuggingFace, including BERT and many others. In
this section, the two main tasks that will be used are defined formally together with
the architecture used for training and inference. For full-text classification, the same
approach as above is used by simply adding a feed-forward classification layer as head
of the pre-trained model and a soft-max layer to obtain a probability over the classes.
The task of Named Entity Recognition consists in identifying and classifying
entities into predefined categories. It is similar to a classification task, but it is ap-
plied to the words of a sentence and supports the classification of one or several as
forming a given class (for example, COUNTRY and REGION in Figure 3.7).
The diﬀiculty with NER is that once tokenized the models need to classify unknown
combinations of tokens instead of a full fixed sentence. Spacy has implemented in its
training pipeline a technique called transition-based dependency parsing developed
by a team of researchers in 2016 [Lam+16]. The idea is to parse a sequence token
by token and execute a series of state transitions that allow to predict the structure
of the sentence, in this case, what token(s) may form an entity. In an example from
the original paper, the possible transitions are SHIFT, REDUCE(PER) to identify
PERSON entity, REDUCE(LOC) to identify LOCATION entity, and OUT. A stack
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methods and theoretical framework
Figure 3.7: Named Entition Recognition task on a sentence for classes COUNTRY
and REGION.
is maintained with the processed token, and a buffer contains the remaining ones to
process. At each time step, given the content of the stack, buffer, and output (as well
as the history of actions taken), a neural network predicts the next action. At the
end, the full sentence has been parsed and the entities are returned. The algorithm is
designed to work with vector representations of the token, which makes it particularly
well suited to use with Transformers (the original paper uses LSTM). Spacy combines
this NER component with a Transformer block and allows to choose any Transformer
model compatible (BERT-like as encoder) with a listener connection that enables
retraining the Transformer weights along with the NER component.
The dataset
required for this task is a set of sentences with annotations of the entity classes to
predict. Providing examples without entities can also be a good way for the model to
learn how to discriminate non-relevant words in relation to the selected entities and
avoid false positives.
Figure 3.8: Dependency parsing transition sequence for a sentence as seen in the
original paper ”Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recognition”
[Lam+16].
The task of Relationship extraction on the other hand consists of classifying the
relationship between a pair of entities with or without direction. It requires a set of
entities already identified and a set of relationship classes. In the same example in
Figure 3.9, the relationship ”located in” is tested against each potential pair. The
model for RE prediction also builds on top of the Transformer context-embedded
vectors.
After the full sentence goes through the Transformer model, the entities
token representations are stacked and go through a pooling layer to obtain an instance
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Named Entity Recognition and Relationship Extraction fine-tuning
27
matrix representing a potential relationship in each direction. This then goes through
a classification layer (linear layer) with a soft-max function to convert the output into
a probability distribution for each class and direction of the relationship. Similarly to
the NER training process, the required dataset is a set of sentences with annotations
of all relevant entities and their relationship. In the case where a relationship can
have a positive or negative polarity (for instance, related or not related), providing
training examples of both cases typically helps the model to learn how to correctly
discriminate relationships and avoid false positives. This will be further explored in
the next chapter. The final model is illustrated in Figure 3.10
Figure 3.9: Illustration of relationship extraction COUNTRY and REGION entities
with relationship LOCATED IN.
Figure 3.10: Components of the relationship extraction model.
With the appropriate datasets, these two model architectures allow to fine-tune any
compatible Transformer (BERT-like encoder), including domain-specific pre-trained
models, on the two tasks of NER and RE. Chapter 4 will describe the experiments
done with different Transformer models and results on the two available datasets for
pharmacovigilance. The full-text classification task is not described further, as it cor-
responds to the same components as in the original BERT paper with a classification
layer added to the [CLS] parameter of the final output and a soft-max function to
obtain a probability over the classes.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methods and theoretical framework
3.5
Language models and instruction-following
alignment
For the comparison between fine-tuning and prompt-engineering with large language
models, this work will use GPT-3 the model developed by OpenAI. More precisely,
it will leverage the ”Instruct” version called ”text-da-vinci” which has been trained
using reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF). While the exact archi-
tecture is not known since OpenAI provides access to its model through a paid API,
the article released by its designers explains how this novel approach allowed to gain
much better alignment between the user instructions and the model [Ouy+22].
The RLHF training method starts with a language model that has already been
pretrained with the approach described above. In the case of OpenAI, a version of
GPT-3 built with the decoder component of the Transformer architecture is used.
The language model can be used as-is or further fine-tuned with human demonstra-
tions of desired output based on sampled prompts. This can make the model less
harmful and more helpful through additional fine-tuning. The key difference is the
next step which consist of developing a reward model using a different dataset in
order to train the model to understand human preferences. The idea behind the re-
ward model is to train a separate model, typically a smaller version of the language
model used [Ouy+22], to return a scalar reward from a text input that represents
the human preference. To obtain this reward model, prompts need to be collected
and passed several times to the language model to sample several different possible
answers. The answers are then ranked by human labelers by order of preference. The
reward model is trained on all the comparisons for each prompt using a specific loss
function that allows learning a scalar output representation of the preference.
To train the language model with reinforcement learning using the reward model,
a policy-gradient algorithm need to be used. In reinforcement learning there is typi-
cally an agent, responsible for taking actions and receiving rewards or penalties and
a policy which defines the behaviors of the agent. Based on a certain state of an en-
vironment, an agent takes an action mapped from the policy, observe the new state
of the environment and gets a feedback from its decision with the reward function.
The training process consists of exploration and exploitation, which means that the
agent will try to find different actions to gain more knowledge about the environment
while also trying to choose actions that will maximize the reward based on its exist-
ing knowledge. In this case, the policy is the language model which takes as input a
prompt and returns a text answer while the possible actions are all the tokens in the
vocabulary. The goal of the policy-gradient is to optimize the policy to maximize the
long-term cumulative reward by gradient descent (an optimization algorithm). The
algorithm used in this case is the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) which role is
to update the policy based on the reward. In order to avoid changing the weights
of the language models in a way that would affect its ability to generate meaningful
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Language models and instruction-following alignment
29
language, a copy of the model is added with frozen parameters. It is used to com-
pare the probability distributions from the policy (the language model not frozen)
and the original model and compute a penalty on the difference between them. This
is done using KL divergence ([Ouy+22]) and prevent the policy from moving away
significantly from the original model. The training then happens as follow: a prompt
is taken from the dataset and an output is generated from both the current policy
(language model to fine-tune) and the original model. The output from the policy
goes through the reward model to obtain a scalar which is corrected with the diver-
gence coeﬀicient obtained with the other output. This final reward is used to update
the policy (change the weights of the language model) using PPO. This process is
illustrated in Figure [Lam+22] extracted from a blog article from the HuggigFace
website.
Figure 3.11: Illustration of the reinforcement learning procedure to fine-tune a lan-
guage model. Source : [Lam+22].
In the next chapter, GPT-3 is leveraged using OpenAI API and prompt engineering.
This later is defined as the process of designing and formulating effective descriptions
of a task or instructions to guide the behavior and output of a language model. The
prompts generated are directly embedded in the input of the model, which means
that no further training occurs, only inference is done as part of prompt-engineering.
Prompts can go from simple instructions, questions, or sentences to complete, to
a complex description of a task with examples (few-shot learning) provided for the
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Methods and theoretical framework
model to understand the logic and output expected. Large language models have
proven effective at performing tasks they were never trained before, and this is mostly
linked to understanding how the construction of prompts significantly impact the
performance of the models. Prompt-engineering is typically a matter of trial and
error. Although there are some research works that formally compared and identified
techniques to improve the output [Whi+23], there is no one way to design prompts.
However, for optimal results, most prompts should contain : a task description, a con-
text or input indicator if relevant, some examples (if using one- or few-shot training)
and an output indicator as illustrated in Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12: Illustration of prompt-engineering with a language model.
Source :
https://docs.cohere.com/.
All language models have a context window that corresponds to the maximum input
size. When they are exposed with a paid API there is also typically a maximum
number of tokens that cannot be exceeded with input and output cumulated. In the
case of GPT-3 and the version ”text-davinci-003”, the context window is 4097 tokens
which also corresponds to the limit supported for prompt and completion cumulated.
These constraints make prompt engineering even more challenging, especially when
providing a large context or some examples of tasks, to find a good trade off between
providing enough context and instructions in the input while keeping enough tokens
for the output. These challenges will be experimented and discussed in Chapter 5
where the context window becomes a crucial element when designing writing assis-
tants capable of NLP tasks on large documents. OpenAI’s API provide additional
parameters to prompt their model including temperature, maximum length, or some
penalization values to influence the model’s output. In this work, only the first two
parameters will be considered; the first one (temperature) controls randomness to
make the model’s output more deterministic or, on the contrary, more creative while
the second one (maximum length) controls the maximum number of tokens to gener-
ate to add more constraints on the output. The API can then be called with just a
few lines of code and an API key using the OpenAI Python library.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Applications in
Pharmacovigilance for Drug
Safety
4.1
Datasets: from Pharmacovigilance to NLP
Three NLP tasks have been selected to translate some of the drug safety pharmacovig-
ilance challenges into language problems (classification, NER and RE). The main tar-
get here is to generate ICSR case processing using artificial intelligence over abstracts
found in the literature.
Assuming that a company receives hundred or thousand
abstracts 1, and several goals are listed.
• Filtering the noise: detect which abstracts are relevant for case processing
and exclude articles that do not contain any ADE (for example, a study pre-
senting findings for a drug with no negative outcome or events to report).
• Case processing: provide an AI-powered processing of relevant cases to ex-
tract structured information to be stored in a safety database and for medical
reviewers to analyze further. This includes attributes such as the outcome of
the case, the severity, the dose, the patient’s characteristics, and the suspected
drug/reaction pair. A simplified example of a processed case is provided in List-
ing 1. Although an abstract may report several events with several suspected
drugs, a final processed case must characterize the causality for each suspected
pair individually.
• Relationship characterization: for relevant articles and the pairs selected,
identify the relationship between the drug and the reaction to characterize an
ADE and, if possible, a potential ADR. Figure 4.1 illustrates the difference be-
tween an ADE and an ADR. By definition, all ADRs are ADEs with a causality
determined between a drug and a reaction under normal dosage.
1The process of retrieving abstracts from a database using standard pharmacovigilance search
strategies is not covered in this work as it typically involves mining and search algorithm not related
to Transformer and artificial intelligence.
It is assumed that a pool of abstracts is provided for
analysis directly
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
Figure 4.1: Distinctions between ADR and ADE for Pharmacovigilance.
Classification can be used over a full abstract to predict attributes whose values are
constrained into several classes (for instance, the attribute seriousness will always be
either ”Serious” or ”Non-serious”). Named entity recognition is well suited to extract
all the occurrences of entities such as drugs, reactions, formulations, and dosages in
a full abstract. It will also be shown that NER can be used to extract occurrences
directly with implied relationship or in specific scenarios without the need to apply a
relationship extractor. Finally, relationship extraction offers the potential to predict
the relationship between a drug and a reaction, and potentially the causality, or
characterize the relationship between a dosage or formulation and a drug. The exact
capabilities are however constrained by the available datasets and, more importantly,
by the rules chosen for annotations.
ADE Corpus: The first dataset explored in this work is the ADE corpus from Gu-
rulingappa et al. [Gur+12] which contains several annotated subdatasets. The first
one contains 23500 sentences marked as ”Positive” or ”Negative” based on the ques-
tion ”Contains drug-related adverse effect ? Yes/No”. This is a well-suited dataset to
train a classifier and filter the noise of non-relevant texts that do not contain drug-
related adverse effects. However, since the dataset only contains single sentences, the
trained model may have limited capabilities, and it is unclear whether it will be able
to generalize the classification task to a full abstract that contains multiple sentences
and semantic relationships shared across sentences or even paragraphs. The second
one is a subset of the first corpus with sentences annotated with a drug and an effect
entity only when a relationship is demonstrated. The definition of the annotation
is crucial, as it will drive what the model tries to learn during training. The paper
guidelines were to annotate all drugs and chemicals in a therapeutic context, all ef-
fects ”strictly occurring as a consequence of drug intake”, and all relationships defined
as ”a mention of a drug/chemical resulting in an adverse effect defined within the
context of a sentence”. This definition is crucial as it explains that the relationship
here will not contain the concept of medical causality, but only of drug intake and
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Datasets: from Pharmacovigilance to NLP
33
1
{
2
"Case Number": "XYZ123",
3
"Case Outcome": "Death",
4
"Description as Reported": "HIGH-RESPONDING INHIBITOR",
5
"Event Preferred Term (PT)": "Factor VIII inhibition",
6
"Patient Gender": "Male",
7
"Event Seriousness": "Serious",
8
"Causality": "Related",
9
"Suspected Drug": "Drug ABC",
10
"Dose Description": "70IU/kg",
11
"Formulation": "Powder for solution for injection",
12
"Report Type": "Study Literature",
13
"Narrative": "[...]"
14
}
Listing 1: Simplified structured output from an ICSR processed case
experienced reaction which identifies ADEs but not ADRs. The final corpus contains
4272 unique sentences with at least one relation for a total of 6821 relationships (pair
drug/reaction). 2
It is clear how NER coupled with RE tasks are suitable for these annotations;
however, the article does not further discuss the implications of such an annotation
strategy for the pharmacovigilance prediction it enables and some alternative options.
The first limit of this dataset is the absence of annotated ”non-relationship”. The en-
tities have only been annotated on sentences with positive relationship and not over
the full dataset of sentences. This means that when training a model, it is unclear
whether it will be able to eﬀiciently learn how to discriminate positive and negative
relationships (a negative relationship being the presence of a drug and an effect with
no apparent relation in the sentence). The risk is to produce false positives and lower
precision. An additional annotation step will be proposed in the following sections to
address this limit. Furthermore, given the short length of the sentence and, as such,
the limited semantic patterns available, the NER model will likely learn to recognize
any drug and reaction of a text including entities with no particular relationship.
Which could prove very useful for text processing but is not the original intent of
the annotation. This is why the NER task needs to be coupled with the RE task to
characterize each identified candidate pair. The notion of ADR is not included in this
dataset since the causality would need to be annotated by medical experts who can
identify the difference between an ADE and an ADR based on context and medical
2In this dataset, the concept of ”effect” can be generalized as ”reactions” and for simplifications
purposes, ”reactions” will be the preferred term for the rest of this document.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
background, not exclusively the semantic relationship. This raises an open question
as to whether a model can distinguish an ADE and an ADR solely on the basis of
language, although domain-specific models embed some degree of medical knowledge
in their weights. This would require a dataset annotated with demonstrated ADR,
and not just sentence-level relationship, to assess the capability.
BioDEX: The second dataset, BioDEX, consists of 15659 abstracts and full-text
articles extracted from PubMed with some attributes relevant to case processing. It
is a unique dataset as it was created by combining hundreds of thousands of expert-
created drug safety reports with both the abstract and the original medical article to
obtain a global target drug safety report. Each compiled safety report is provided as
a structured object and contains: patient sex, seriousness classification, list of drugs
taken, and reactions experienced. Although the dataset does not contain the causal-
ity that would allow characterizing an ADE as an ADR, it annotates entities that
are directly relevant for a safety report and excludes other occurrences of drugs and
reactions entities. This is particularly interesting as it allows to train a NER model
not only on the concept of drug and reaction, but directly on the concept of ingested
drugs and reactions experienced, which already contains implicitly the relationship
for the characterization of ADE. In fact, when given suﬀicient text to learn patterns,
a model trained on NER can learn to only identify a subset of entities depending
on a certain context. for instance, the presence of a relationship. This means this
dataset can be used to train an NER model that can directly identify drugs and
reactions as ADEs without the need to train a RE model on top. However, it will
not provide direct pairs suspected, but rather two lists of drugs and reactions that
are of interest for the safety report. Patient and seriousness attributes are also well
suited to train a classifier on full abstracts. Combined, the output would provide
a significant part of what is expected from the ICSR case processing, as previously
described. For computational reasons and context-window constraints, the model will
be trained using the abstracts and not the full articles, which can be several pages
long. The literature screening for pharmacovigilance is typically done on abstracts,
so this does not significantly affect the previous goals. The following sections will
describe the modifications made to the dataset to train using abstrats only.
After applying some data transformation described in the next section to obtain
datasets that can be used for NER and RE (with polarity) for the first and NER
for the second, two new modified datasets with a significant difference in size are
obtained. As illustrated in Figure 4.3, the datasets also differ greatly in their word
count distribution. The BioDEX datasets, for which the abstracts are used in this
work, contains much longer text compared to the ADE corpus, which contains single
sentences. This has major implications, which will be discussed with the results of
the experiments.
However, the ADE corpus contains a greater variety of entities,
for both drugs and reactions, making it suitable for general drug/reaction entity ex-
traction model (when use standalone without relationship; to identify all entities for
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Datasets: from Pharmacovigilance to NLP
35
Figure 4.2: Drug Safety Report attributes extracted from medical papers in the
BioDEX datasaet [DOo+23].
indexing purposes, for instance). The dashed line represents the approximate maxi-
mum number of words that the BERT-like models will support as input (512 tokens)
and explains the motivation to experiment with the Longformer variant. Although
most abstracts still fit the context window of the BERT-like models, it is interesting to
test if Longformer models, beyond their greater context window size, can demonstrate
better performance.
Figure 4.3: Size, count of entities and distribution in word counts of each dataset
after data processing (before data augmentation for ADE corpus).
Table 4.1 summarizes the available datasets, the type of annotations provided, the
compatible NLP tasks, and the target results of trained models for pharmacovigilance
activities. This shows how annotation choices significantly impact what the model
will be trained to reproduce and ultimately what tasks can be achieved. None of the
datasets include the causality assessment, which is typically done by pharmaceutical
companies and kept private in their safety database. This means the models will
not be trained to identify ADR specifically but all ADEs. The success of identifying
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
and detecting adverse drug events in long texts will give positive signals to reproduce
the same approach with relationships annotated as ”medically causal” assuming that
such a dataset is made available.
While both datasets were annotated using different approaches, both target the iden-
tification of drugs and reactions and, as such, the detection of ADEs in texts. Since
they are made of corpus of significantly different sizes (sentences versus abstracts),
the experiments detailed in the next sections will compare their generalization capa-
bilities by testing each model on the other respective dataset, with the appropriate
compatibility modifications. If the models generalize well, it would be expected that
inferring using the ADE Corpus NER and RE models on the BioDEX dataset should
identify related entities that are included in the respective entities of the BioDEX
dataset while, on the other hand, the BioDEX NER model should identify the pairs
of entities characterized as related in the ADE corpus dataset.
Size
Type
Annotations
NLP Task
Pharmacovigilance goal
ADE
Corpus
(Clas.)
23500
Sentences
Contains
ADE yes/no
Classification
Filter noise
Rule out non ADE text
ADE
Corpus
(Rel.)
4272
Sentences
Drugs and reactions
entities only for
positive sentences
NER + RE
Identify all drugs and reactions
Characterize relationship
as ADE or not
BioDEX
15659
Abstracts
Full articles
Seriousness class
Patient sex class
Drugs taken
Reactions experienced
Classification
Classification
NER with
implicit RE
Case processing attributes
Extract drugs and reactions
relevant for ADE
Table 4.1: Datasets for pharmacovigilance applications and related NLP tasks.
4.2
Models: Transformer encoders and GPT
For experiments on the different NLP tasks, seven Transformer models have been
selected (including variants):
BERT: one of the first language models that originated shortly after the paper ”At-
tention is All You Need” [Vas+17] from researchers at Google. It has been trained
on Wikipedia and english book texts with 110 millions parameters.
BioBERT: a version of BERT, using the same initial weights, further fine-tuned on
PubMed text with 108 million parameters. It is a domain-specific Transformer model
since it has been trained on biomedical language.
PubMedBERT: a model with the same architecture as BERT but trained from
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Implementation and experiments
37
scratch with only PubMed texts, without transfer learning from the original BERT.
It has been developped by reseachers at Microsoft and has 109 millions parameters.
RoBERTa: a general knowledge model following the same architecture as BERT but
trained on 100 times more data than BERT and with 123 million parameters. It was
developped by reserchers at Facebook AI (Meta) and outperformed BERT on many
NLP tasks when released.
Clinical Longformer: a domain-specific model based on the Longformer variant
architecture. It can support up to 4096 tokens as input in its released version (com-
pared to 512 tokens for the four previous models) thanks to its sliding attention
mechanism. It has 149 million parameters and was fine-tuned on MIMIC-III clinical
notes, initialized with the weights of the original Longformer base model.
Biomedical Longformer: another domain-specific Longformer model. It was ob-
tained as a derivative of the PubMedBERT model by cloning the parameters and
embeddings multiple times to convert them to the Longformer mechanisms. It has
133 million weights and supports up to 4096 tokens as input.
BigBird pegasus Large: another domain-specific model trained on PubMed texts
that can handle sequences up to 4096 tokens.
It is built with another variant of
the attention mechanism called ”sparse attention”. Its inclusion in the experiments
is not so much about comparing another architecture but about exploring whether
the size of the model (five times larger than the other) can lead to better performance.
As part of the experiments performed, all these models have been fine-tuned using
different sets of parameters to assess their best possible performance on the tasks
listed previously. The second part of the experiments leveraged GPT-3, and more
specifically the model ”text-davinci-003” from OpenAI which is a Transformer-based
generative model with 175 billion parameters (more than a thousand bigger than
the previously listed models). It is a text-to-text model trained using reinforcement
learning to obtain a model with better instruction-following capabilities, as seen in
the previous chapter. Built only with the decoder, this model is not meant to be
fine-tuned (although it is possible with OpenAI API, but at high cost), but to be
used directly through prompt-engineering and OpenAI API by converting any NLP
task into a text instruction with or without examples in the input. The process of
creating these prompts, using few-shot learning, and comparing the performance of
GPT to the other fine-tuned models is detailed in the next sections. All models used
in the following experiments and their characteristics are summarized in Table 4.2.
4.3
Implementation and experiments
Computing All experiments were performed using DTU HPC (High Performance
Computing) and the available GPU nodes. Depending on the architecture and mem-
ory requirements, the GPUs used were Tesla A40 (48GB memory) or Tesla A100 (up
to 80GB memory). All trainings were done on a single GPU and submitted as jobs
in the Central DTU HPC Cluster (LSF10).
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
Trained on
Parameters
Architecture
Domain
BigBird pegasus large
PubMed
577 millions
Transformer
Biomedical
RoBERTa base
English text
News, Stories,Wiki
123 millions
Transformer
General
BERT base
Wikipedia
BookCorpus
110 millions
Transformer
General
BioBERT
BERT + PubMed
108 millions
Transformer
Biomedical
PubMedBERT
PubMed only
109 millions
Transformer
Biomedical
Clinical Longformer
Clinical notes
149 millions
Longformer
Clinical
Biomedial Lonformer
PubMedBERT
133 millions
Longformer
Biomedical
GPT-3
WebText + RLHF
175 billions
Transformer
Text-to-Text
General
Table 4.2: Models used for experiments.
Data preparation
The datasets were pre-processed on a local machine using the
data modifications and methods described below and converted to the binary format
that Spacy can handle. The training configurations were provided in configuration
files (.cfg) describing the different components to be used during the training and
the parameters. All training files were then transferred to DTU HPC with a Python
script to run the training experiments. Samples are provided in Appendix.
Performance metrics In order to save and compare each run, the open source tool
WandB (Weights and Bias) was used to log training and system metrics. WandB
provides a cloud-based interface for visualizing runs in real time and creating inter-
active reports. It also allows to run hyper-parameter search through ”sweeps” with
simple configuration file and single job submission. The training datasets were shuf-
fled and divided into a training set and a test set with a ratio of 80/20. The test set
was used at equal intervals to evaluate the performance of the model during training.
Further modifications to improve balance, prevent over-fitting, or avoid memorization
phenomenon without generalization are described below for each dataset. The three
performance metrics used are F1, precision, and recall.
Precision is defined as:
P =
TruePositives
TruePositives + FalsePositives
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Implementation and experiments
39
Recall is defined as:
Recall =
TruePositives
TruePositives + FalseNegatives
F1 score is defined as:
F1 = 2 ∗(precision ∗recall)/(precision + recall)
When a distinction can be made between macro- and micro-metrics, macro-metrics
were chosen. They correspond to the arithmetic mean of all F1 class scores, which
is more suitable in the case of unbalanced datasets. The micro metrics on the other
hand, are weighted by computing the global average using the sum of all True Pos-
itives (TP), False Negatives (FN) and False Positives (FP). Since all models went
through multiple training runs, while logging metrics at each evaluation step, the
best model according to the F1 score is selected an the corresponding precision and
recall scores used for the comparisons in the results section. Models often alternate
during training between higher precision at the cost of lower recall or the other way
around, so extracting the best value of each metric considering all training steps
would not be realistic of the model true capability. The picked values are provided
on a single evaluation step considered best for the model overall.
Training parameters There are many parameters that can be set in the training
pipelines for classification, NER and RE tasks. Training neural networks is typically
a matter of trials and errors to find the best combinations. In this work, the pa-
rameters related to the training (dropout, patience, seeding, etc.) have been kept as
default along with the optimizer (Adam with L2 regularization). These parameters
are suggested by Spacy and provide the best results for most NLP tasks. The train-
ing parameters tested were the number of epochs (number of times the model goes
through the entire dataset) up to 8 and the batch size. The other parameters specific
to Spacy implementations of its NLP models are the window and stride sizes from
the ”get_spans” component. In the context of NLP tasks over medical text, these
parameters are especially relevant as they set the maximum number of tokens that
will be considered, and in the context of Transformers attended, and whether to apply
a stride so that tokens can be counted several times with a left and right context (see
Figure 4.4 for illustration). For NER and RE specifically, these parameters will con-
strain how far away two entities can be identified in a relationship. For Longformer
models, the window can be increased to let the model process the full text at once,
while for BERT-like models lower window sizes were tested, constrained by the 512
tokens context window. These parameters were the object of several hyper-parameter
searches in this work to assess the impact on the different tasks and models. Some
additional parameters provided by Spacy, such as the hidden width of feed-forward
layers for both NER and RE were also experimented with. The full configuration file
examples are provided in the Appendix.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
Figure 4.4: Illustration of window and stride parameters on an abstract.
4.3.1
ADE Corpus dataset
In the ADE Corpus, only entities found in positive relationship are provided with no
”non-related” examples. To overcome this limitation, the dataset was augmented by
generating negative relationship examples to force the model to learn to discriminate
between the two cases. In fact, biomedical text contains many occurrences of drug
entities and reactions entities outside of an ADE context. From the description of a
patient’s history of treatments, a positive drug study, or statements describing the
mechanism of action of a drug, there are many possible contexts involving these en-
tities without ADE. Since the original dataset for classification contains more than
10,000 sentences that are known to not contain an ADE (class negative) but have
not been annotated with entities, an NER model was first trained over the entities
found in positive sentences and then ran over the sentences known as negative. This
was motivated by the empirical observation that the NER model, trained on short
sentences, identified all entities of drug and reaction in any sentence regardless of the
relationship (even though it had been trained only on positive ADE sentences). The
new corpus of ADE-negative sentences, now annotated with all drugs and reactions,
was then filtered to keep only sentences with at least one drug and one reaction, and
all combinations of these were annotated with the relationship ”not related”, derived
from the knowledge that no ADE was present. This augmented the original dataset
with 3941 new data-points and balanced it to train the RE model with both ”related”
and ”non-related” relationships.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Implementation and experiments
41
While training on the NER task, F1 score metrics close to 0.99 were observed, sug-
gesting that there might be an over-fitting phenomenon or that the model may be
memorizing the drugs entities. In fact, most drug entities occur several times in the
data set. To force the model to learn and not memorize, the training split was con-
structed by taking sentences with drug entities that occurred the least in the dataset
and maximizing the count of unique entities seen during training.
Figure 4.5: Hyper-parameter grid search for NER on ADE corpus.
Since no sentences were longer than the minimum context window for the BERT-like
models (512 tokens), there was no influence in changing the window size and stride
for all models. An hyper-parameter search, set up as grid search (testing all possible
combinations) was performed for the NER task on the model selection, hidden width
of the NER feed-forward layer [32,64,128] and batch size [500,1000,2000]. Figure 4.5
shows the visualization of a ”sweep” with Weights and Bias that coordinates the dif-
ferent runs required for the grid search. It was found that the hidden width, even
though tested on a three-doubled values (32, 64 and 128) had no influence and cor-
relation with the performance of the model (F1 score). However, the batch size had
a significant impact with a negative correlation (-0.330), suggesting that a smaller
batch size leads to higher performance with constant other parameters and that the
model benefits from more frequent weight updates. The choice of model also signifi-
cantly influenced the performance of the model as presented in the results section.
Spacy RE model consists mainly of a classification layer running over the concate-
nated embedding representation of a pair of entities. As such, the experiments con-
sisted of adding another hidden layer and assessing the performance outcome. The
extra layer was found to actually decrease the performance of all models under the
same conditions by almost 5%. In addition, it is possible to train a model on both
NER and RE simultaneously in the same training pipeline. In some cases, the gradi-
ent from the NER task can be used when computing the RE back-propagation and
can improve the performance. However, it was found that the performance of all
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
models was also reduced by approximately 5% when using a pipeline combining both
tasks during training.
The modification of the dataset to include negative relationships, which had not been
done in the literature yet (based on available information), proved to be effective and
appears to successfully give the model the ability to discriminate relationship and
reduce noise. For qualitative assessment, the same RE model was trained on the orig-
inal dataset with no negative relationships and both were tested on a set of sentences
created specifically to assess this capability. In Figure 4.6, a sentence with one drug
and three reaction entities is provided, but without ADE. The model trained on the
original dataset predicts all three relationships as ”Related”, while the other model
(polarized) correctly outputs all relations as ”Non-related”. In this scenario, there is a
semantic relationship in the sentence between the drug and the reactions (treatment),
but the relationship is not the one that the model was trained to recognize (ADE).
Figure 4.6: NER + RE with polarized and non-polarized models on a sentence with
no apparent ADE.
Similarly, in Figure 4.7, an example is provided with no semantic relationship at all
and entities placed in two different sentences. Again, the first model outputs all pos-
sible relationship as ”Related” and the other not. Finally, when provided an example
with an actual ADE (Figure 4.8), both models correctly identify the relationships
as ”related”. While this is only one example and not a quantitative assessment, it
shows what problems may arise when not training a model with polarized relation-
ship, especially when the texts are already fairly short with limited patterns to learn.
The results obtained from these experiments are presented and discussed in the next
section. The training runs are added to the Appendix.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Implementation and experiments
43
Figure 4.7: NER + RE with polarized and non-polarized models on a text with
entities separated across sentences and no ADE.
Figure 4.8: NER + RE with polarized and non-polarized models on a sentence with
ADE.
4.3.2
BioDEX ICSR dataset
The BioDEX dataset requires a lot of data processing before it is available in a format
that is usable for training. First, the annotations are provided as a list of strings in a
text format without the index reference in the original text, unlike the ADE corpus.
Furthermore, it is not indicated whether the drugs and reactions listed come from the
full-text article, the abstract, or both. This can become a problem when tracing back
each entity to its position in the text for training purposes, as several of the same
entities may occur in a completely different context. This can confuse the model as to
when an entity needs to be identified or not and become inconsistent with the target
classes (drug ingested and reaction experienced). Using Regex expressions, the target
output of the safety report was parsed to extract the seriousness class, the patient
sex, the list of drugs taken, and the list of reactions experience. Since it was chosen to
train the models using abstracts only, for computational reasons, the extracted list of
drugs and reactions were reduced to the entities located in the abstracts using string
search. A script was also run to detect drug and reaction abbreviations and identify
them as entities, as it was observed that often the abbreviation was not included in
the list of safety reports but present in the abstracts.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
Figure 4.9: Example of output of the NER model trained with the BioDEX dataset.
Reducing the lists of drugs and reactions is mandatory since each entity must be in
the text used for training, however this approach does not guarantee that each oc-
currence found will be involved in the same context that made the entity part of the
list. For example, an abstract that describes an ADE on a given drug may also refer
to that drug when describing the mechanism of action or indications. In this case,
the entity would be provided as three occurrences to the model when only the one
in the ADE context is relevant. Without having the safety expert annotating each
occurrence individually, there is no direct solution to this issue. It shows that in this
specific task, what is more important is the identification of a list of relevant drugs
and reactions more than the highlighting of the exact location in the text where these
occur. However, NER performance is evaluated based on each individual occurrence
in the text, which may lead to lower training metrics even if the model extracts a
set of correct drugs taken and reactions experienced. To keep the results meaningful
and in line with the ground truth of the dataset which is a list of taken drugs and
experienced reactions, not of all occurrences, another set of performance metrics were
calculated. The list of unique drugs and reactions returned by the model were treated
as sets (no matter the location and number of occurrences), and F1, precision and
recall were calculated by comparing these sets directly to the ground truth sets, which
constitute the target of the dataset. These metrics turned out to be actually slightly
lower than the default NER metrics calculated. This can be explained by a leverage
phenomenon where the impact of a positive identification of an entity can poten-
tially be multiplied by the number of times it occurs. Since these additional metrics
were not part of the training pipeline and required re-running validation after each
training without showing significant performance difference, the default NER metrics
were preferred in the results tables. The results obtained from these experiments are
presented and discussed in the next section.
Similarly to the ADE corpus, a hyper-parameter search, set up as grid search, was
performed for the NER task with the Biomedical Longformer model over the win-
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Implementation and experiments
45
dow size [128,256,512], stride size [64,128] and batch size [1000,2000] as illustrated
in Figure 4.5. Since the abstracts have multiple sentences and paragraphs, the goal
was to assess a potential correlation between the size of the window and the overall
performance. It was found that, unlike the batch size (positive correlation - larger
batch providing better performance), both the window and stride sizes had limited
influence on how the model performed. The best set-up found was with a batch size of
2000, a window size of 256 and a stride size of 64. This suggests that the information
required for a model to correctly identify and characterize entities is located in the
surrounding of the span and not necessarily further away in the text. All training
runs were done for 4 epochs given the length and computational power required to
train over long texts. The training runs are added to the appendix.
Figure 4.10: Hyper-parameter grid search for NER on BioDEX dataset.
4.3.3
GPT and prompt-engineering
When designing prompts for models like GPT-3 the instructions must be carefully
written and contain the elements described in the previous chapter. An important
consequence of using generative models is that the output returned is a sequence of
text and not a structured object constrained by the task of interest (unlike NER and
RE for instance). This means the output needs to be consistent in order to be parsed
and usable - to obtain a list of entities in the case of NER tasks, for example. For
that reason, it is important to provide in the prompt an instruction not only for the
task, but also for the format of the output expected. Some experiments were done
using the exact output format provided by the NER model, i.e.: with each occurrence
of an entity in the text along with its exact position indexes; however, the model was
not able to retrieve correctly indexes and generated random number instead. This is
a phenomenon called hallucination where the model, in the absence of proper under-
standing or by limitation, may make up some information and still provide it with
”confidence”. Instructions were given for the two tasks in the same input, one to iden-
tify the entities of drugs and reactions in the sentence (NER) and the other to assess
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
the potential causality of each possible pair found. The term ”causality relationship”
used in the prompt does not necessarily correspond to ADR. In fact the model may
consider causal any semantic association between a drug and a reaction which would
fall in the category of ADEs and correspond to what the other models extract. Em-
pirical testing showed that the model seemed to associate the notion of causality
with semantic relationship as expected. To avoid restricting or misleading the model,
the term was intentionally kept broad. Five hundred sentences were sampled from
the dataset and the corresponding prompts constructed as shown in Listing 4.1 were
sent to the OpenAI API. The temperature was kept at 0 to obtain a model as de-
terministic as possible and the maximum length kept at a level ensuring a full output.
Following the findings from [Bro+20], additional prompts were then constructed to as-
sess whether learning with few shots, the process of adding training examples directly
to the input at query time, could improve performance. The augmented prompts
were constructed by sampling the polarized ADE corpus dataset with two examples
containing positive relationships (provided as ”suspected pairs”) and two examples
with no positive relationships as shown in Listing B.2 in order to encourage the model
to also discriminate negative relationships.
Traditional performance metrics typically do not apply to generative models that
perform text-to-text tasks. To compare the results of GPT-3 with the other BERT-
like models, the same metrics (F1, precision and recall) needed to be generated after
parsing the output, by comparison with the ground truth of the dataset. Similarly
to the BioDEX corpus, the output from GPT-3 will not be all occurrences precisely
located in the sentence but a list of drugs and reactions found in the text (NER) and
a list of pairs forming a relationship out of the entities found (RE). For that reason,
the performance metrics were calculated by treating the parsed lists (drugs, reactions
and pairs in a relationship) as sets and comparing these sets to the equivalent ones
of the ground truth in the ADE Corpus.
Extract the drugs and adverse reactions entities in the text.
The output must be returned in this format :
Drug(s) : <Drug A>, <Drub B>
;
Reaction(s) : <Reaction C>, <Reaction D>
;
Then for each possible pair of drug/reaction, if there is a causality
relationship in the text between the reaction and the drug, output the
following :
Suspected pair(s) : <Drug A> / <Reaction C> ,
<Drug A> / <Reaction D>
;
Listing 4.1: Instruction prompt provided to GPT-3 for ADE NER and RE.
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Results: fine-tuning vs prompt-engineering
47
Example 1:
Text: Severe granulomatous inflammatory response induced by injection of
polyacrylamide gel into the facial tissue.
Drug(s) : polyacrylamide ;
Reaction(s) : Severe granulomatous inflammatory response ;
Suspected pair(s) : None ;
Example 2:
Text: Cardiac arrest associated with sulprostone use during caesarean
section.
Drug(s) : sulprostone ;
Reaction(s) : Cardiac arrest ;
Suspected pair(s) : sulprostone / Cardiac arrest ;
Listing 4.2: Example of augmentation of the original prompt with 2-shots learning.
For computational cost reasons, experiments with GPT-3 were only done using the
ADE corpus dataset.
With a pricing per token processed, running thousands of
prompts with full abstracts would add up to a few hundred dollars. Furthermore,
some preliminary tests showed that the model did not perform well on the BioDEX
dataset in single shots given the complexity of the language and the specificity of
the task (drugs ingested and reactions experienced). Adding a few shots example in
the prompt greatly increased the input and, as such, the computational cost for no
observed benefits.
The results obtained from these experiments are presented and discussed in the next
section. The training runs are added to the Appendix.
4.4
Results: fine-tuning vs prompt-engineering
ADE corpus: The results of the models trained on the ADE corpus dataset show
significant performance on all three selected NLP tasks (Table 4.3). All models per-
formed almost equally on the ADE classification task with a maximum F1 score of
0.94 shared with three models (Biomedical, PubMedBERT and BioBERT). For NER
and RE tasks, the biomedical Longformer and PubMedBERT performed equally
based on the F1 score (0.92 and 0.87 respectively for each task). The other models
also demonstrated good results, with non-specific domain model such as RoBERTa
slightly outperforming the domain-specific ones on NER precision metrics.
While
the results are almost identical for ADE classification and NER, domain-specific
models outperformed the other for RE (+0.03 in F1 score). The Longformer variant
did not bring any performance increase and was outperformed by PubMedBERT on
several metrics, which was expected since both models could process the full input,
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
but only the BERT-like had full complete attention mechanism. These results consti-
tute new state-of-the-art for this dataset, according to available information (Figure
4.11), with some reservations discussed in the last section of this chapter based on
the modifications applied to the dataset.
ADE
Classification
NER
RE
(+/-)
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
RoBERTa base
0.93
0.94
0.92
0.91
0.93
0.92
0.84
0.85
0.83
BERT base
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.91
0.91
0.92
0.84
0.85
0.83
BioBERT
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.91
0.91
0.92
0.86
0.88
0.85
PubMedBERT
0.94
0.93
0.95
0.92
0.91
0.94
0.87
0.88
0.87
Biomedial Lonformer
0.94
0.93
0.94
0.92
0.92
0.93
0.87
0.88
0.86
Table 4.3: Results for three NLP taks on ADE corpus (best over 8 epochs).
The metrics detailed for each entity in Table 4.4 indicate an overall higher perfor-
mance on drug entities compared to reaction entities for the best models (F1 score
0.96 vs 0.89). All models except BERT demonstrate the highest F1 score (0.96) for
drugs entities while PubMedBERT and Biomedical Longformer slightly outperformed
the other for reactions entities.
NER
(Drug)
NER
(Reaction)
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
RoBERTa base
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.88
0.91
0.88
BERT base
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.87
0.87
0.90
BioBERT
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.87
0.88
0.89
PubMedBERT
0.96
0.96
0.98
0.89
0.88
0.90
Biomedial Lonformer
0.96
0.96
0.98
0.89
0.89
0.90
Table 4.4: Result ADE Corpus NER per entity (best over 8 epochs).
BioDEX dataset: The results of the different training runs on the BioDEX dataset
reveal contrasting performance and dominance of the Longformer variant on all tasks
(Table 4.5). The Biomedical Longformer outperformed all other models on the seri-
ousness classification (F1 0.71). The BERT-like models were at best 0.4 points
below (F1 0.67 with PubMedBERT) and up to 0.7 points lower (F1 0.63 with
BioBERT). The Biomedical Longformer also outperformed the Clinical Longformer
(+0.3 F1).
For the patient sex classification, the performance gap was much
smaller and all models showed similar performance (F1 ∈[0.82, 0.83]) with the Clin-
ical Longformer and RoBERT leading. Finally, for the NER task, significant gaps
were observed again between Longformer models and BERT-like models. All other
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Results: fine-tuning vs prompt-engineering
49
Figure 4.11: Current state-of-the-art for ADE corpus according to PapersWithCode
submissions (NER on top, RE+ at the bottom).
BERT-like models, including non-specific domain demonstrated similar performance
(F1 ∈[0.72, 0.73]). In general, for the three selected NLP tasks, no performance
improvement was observed from the larger size of the BigBird Pegasus model.
The details of the performance for each entity (Table 4.6) revealed that the mod-
Seriousness
(classification)
Patient Sex
(classification)
NER
(Implicit RE)
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
BigBird pegasus large
0.67
0.66
0.68
0.83
0.83
0.82
0.69
0.72
0.67
RoBERTa base
0.65
0.66
0.65
0.83
0.86
0.83
0.73
0.73
0.73
BERT base
0.64
0.63
0.65
0.82
0.82
0.83
0.72
0.72
0.73
BioBERT
0.63
0.64
0.63
0.82
0.81
0.82
0.73
0.72
0.73
PubMedBERT
0.67
0.69
0.68
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.72
0.71
0.73
Clinical Longformer
0.68
0.70
0.66
0.83
0.86
0.83
0.72
0.73
0.72
Biomedial Lonformer
0.71
0.73
0.72
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.75
0.77
0.73
Table 4.5: Results for three NLP tasks on the BioDEX dataset (best over 3 epochs).
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
els were much better at identifying drugs taken than reactions experienced.
The
Biomedical Longformer demonstrated best performance on most metrics except for
lower recalls values compared to RoBERTa and PubMedBERT. The analysis of train-
ings runs and metrics at various evaluation steps showed diﬀiculty for the models
to find a balance between recall and precision especially for the reactions entities.
Toward the end of the runs, most models saw a drop in precision and gain in recall.
The domain-specific BERT-like models outperformed the other ones by a few points
for the reactions but were outperformed for the drugs entities. The observations with
BigBird not bringing increased performance were also confirmed when looking at the
details per entity.
Cross-comparison: To assess if the models generalized well on different datasets
and slight variation of the original tasks, an experiment was performed to evaluate
the best model trained from the ADE corpus on the BioDEX dataset and vice versa.
For the best BioDEX NER model, it was ran over the full ADE corpus dataset and
metrics were calculated by considering whether the sets of drugs taken and reactions
experienced were part of the pairs with positive relationship from the ADE corpus.
Similarly, the best ADE corpus model was ran over the BioDEX dataset and the
metrics calculated to evaluate how many of the entities extracted and in a positive
relationship were included in the sets of drugs taken and reactions experienced. The
results in Table 4.7 show poor performance in both set ups. The BioDEX best model
did not perform significantly better than a baseline for relationship extraction while
the ADE corpus model resulted in an F1 score under 0.5 to retrieve the entities
from the safety reports. These results showed that while the models perform well
on evaluation with new records with the same annotation strategy as the ones they
were trained on, they do not generalize well when applied to different formats even
though both target the identification of ADEs. This could be a consequence of the
conversion of the BioDEX dataset into a dataset with text-located entities without
the guarantee that each entity occurs in the same context justifying its inclusion as
drug ingested or reaction experienced.
NER
(Drug taken)
NER
(Reaction experienced)
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
BigBird pegasus large
0.82
0.78
0.86
0.43
0.55
0.35
RoBERTa base
0.84
0.76
0.94
0.46
0.63
0.37
BERT base
0.84
0.79
0.91
0.48
0.57
0.42
BioBERT
0.84
0.77
0.92
0.49
0.60
0.42
PubMedBERT
0.82
0.82
0.83
0.55
0.54
0.55
Clinical Longformer
0.83
0.81
0.84
0.53
0.56
0.50
Biomedial Lonformer
0.85
0.82
0.88
0.56
0.65
0.50
Table 4.6: Results BioDEX NER per entity (best over 3 epochs).
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Results: fine-tuning vs prompt-engineering
51
Tested on
ADE Corpus
Tested on
BioDex
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
BioDex best NER
0.53
0.59
0.48
-
-
-
ADE corpus best NER + RE
-
-
-
0.48
0.35
0.73
Relationship baseline
(mark all entities as related)
0.52
1.0
0.69
-
-
-
Table 4.7: Best models from a dataset tested on the other dataset.
GPT-3: The results from prompting GPT-3 are presented in Table 4.8. They show
a significant improvement of performance (F1, precision and recall) when providing
examples (4-shots) directly in the input prompt (+0.06, +0.09 and +0.03 in F1
score on the three tasks). This confirms that generative models such as GPT-3 are
few-shot learners ([Bro+20]).
Although the overall performance is reasonable on
the NER task (what ”reasonable” means for pharmacovigilance will be discussed in
the last section of this chapter), it is much lower for the RE task, and GPT-3 is
outperformed by all fine-tuned models including BERT on both NER and RE.
NER
(Drug)
NER
(Reaction)
RE
(+/-)
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
GPT-3 0-shot
0.75
0.71
0.78
0.69
0.66
0.73
0.59
0.45
0.87
GPT-3 4-shots
0.81
0.80
0.82
0.78
0.75
0.81
0.62
0.48
0.89
Table 4.8: Results of GPT-3 for the three NLP taks on ADE corpus .
Figure 4.12: Comparison of the performance obtained with fine-tuning and prompt-
engineering. The whiskers represent the range of F1 score obtained for
all fine-tuned models and the bar shows the best score.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Drug Safety
4.5
Discussion
These experiments have shown that is is possible to successfully use Transformer mod-
els to solve drug safety challenges in pharmacovigilance such as identifying ADEs in
text like medical abstracts. It was shown that models trained on the existing ADE
corpus dataset demonstrated strong performance on the task of classifying a sentence
as containing an ADE or not, extracting all drug and reaction entities from a text
and finding relationships between entities to detect specific ADEs. A new augmented
dataset was generated to improve the capability of a model to characterize the rela-
tionship between a drug and a reaction. While the results obtained constitute new
state-of-the-art for this dataset (as per available information), previous works trained
models on the positive relationship extraction only. However, adding these negative
example is expected to make the learning task for the model harder rather than easier.
The experiments found that generative models like GPT-3 are largely out-performed
by all fined-tune models, despite being a thousand times bigger for the selected phar-
macovigilance tasks. Furthermore, fined-tune models provide the benefit of easily
measuring performance with industry-standard metrics. In a highly regulated con-
text like the pharmaceutical industry, it is crucial for companies to formally assess any
potential system that would be added to a business process. In fact, most systems
used by pharmaceutical companies need to be GxP (for “good practice”) and vali-
dated as per regulatory guidelines established by authorities such as the FDA (United
States Food and Drug Administration) or EMA (European Medicines Agency). This
means they need to go through various procedure (testing, data controls, quality
assurance etc) to ensure that they are safe and meet their intended use. Systems
like GPT-3 which lives in third-party organization, do not provide transparency on
the models and require bringing data outside of organizations, are unlikely to meet
auditable standards for pharmaceutical companies. Fine-tuning models using open-
source Transformers on the other hand allows companies to be fully in control of the
system and to own the trained model as well as its usage.
Additionally, since both NER and RE are ultimately reduced to classification of to-
kens or pairs, a score can be derived from each prediction (coming from the soft max
layer) which can be used as confidence score and suggest potential human assessment
in case of low certainty. This is another major element that companies can leverage
to adjust the sensibility of predictions by taking lower or higher thresholds. This can
also be used when validating a system by ensuring its level of performance meets the
expectation and can be measured formally. On the other hand, models like GPT-3
only provide text outputs that need to be parsed and are at risks with phenomenon
such as model hallucinations. The experiments also found that larger fine-tuned mod-
els do not bring additional performance and that PubMedBERT, fine-tuned with 109
millions shows the best results on the ADE corpus dataset. This supports the use of
domain-specific models for pharmacovogilance related tasks.
However these good results were obtained on a dataset made of relatively small texts
==PAGE:63==
4.5 Discussion
53
(single sentences) which is not the case of abstracts, the original target of the phar-
macovigilance activity. Training over BioDEX, a new dataset made of safety reports
compiled in a set of relevant entities showed that an NER model can standalone iden-
tify relevant drugs and reactions but the performance may vary depending on the
entity. Furthermore, the modification done to the dataset did not guarantee that the
entities traced back in the abstracts occurred there in the same context of ADE and
as such that the model tried to learn the correct pattern. With overall performance
metrics above 0.70 for all three tasks of the ICSR processing, these results remain
encouraging and suggest that with proper annotations directly done on abstracts,
better performance could be obtained.
This raises the question of how such models can be used in a real context by pharma-
ceutical companies. These performance metrics may be perceived as good, but in a
safety reporting context, even relatively high scores could still mean missing impor-
tant cases and as a result not being made aware of new safety signals, potentially life
threatening, for a given drug. Systems used in the pharmaceutical industry always
need to be designed for the final goal of patient safety. In this context, precision
will measure how good the system is at filtering noise, which is sought by companies
but not critical from a safety perspective while recall will measure how much of the
relevant cases are identified. As such, AI systems should be designed to have higher
recall even if it is at the price of lower precision. Even with these precautions, AI
models cannot show guaranteed perfect performance which means these systems need
to be incorporated in processes that maintain some degree of human assessment and
mechanisms to ensure that no critical safety information will be missed. The use
of open-source models is also preferred when considering the existence of potential
bias, the problem of data privacy with third-party systems and fairness in healthcare
decision-making.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Applications in
Pharmacovigilance for Medical
Writing
5.1
Pharmacovigilance challenges with safety reports
As part of pharmacovigilance activities, pharmaceutical companies are required to
produce various periodic safety update reports (PSUR) or drug development safety
update reports (DSUR) to provide a continuous evaluation of the risk-benefit balance
of a medicinal product; whether it is in development or marketed. These reports are
typically product-specific and include various information and data analysis to sup-
port the benefit-risk assessment. Since they are regulatory requirements, each report
must adhere to specific regulatory guidelines, which can vary across different regions
and be submitted according to predefined timelines
These safety reports often require collaboration between various departments such
as clinical research, medical affairs, regulatory affairs or bio-statistics to provide dif-
ferent consolidated data, analysis, or product-specific information. This proves to be
a challenge for most companies to align the effort of each team with the different
priorities and timelines to meet regulatory requirements. PSUR or DSUR represent
a summary of all available information to establish that a given product is safe for
patients. As described in the first chapter, this is the consolidation and result of var-
ious data collection processes, including scientific literature screening, spontaneous
adverse event reporting systems, post-marketing surveillance, and other sources. Data
collection is followed by an in-depth analysis to identify potential new safety signals
or safety concerns and potentially characterize them as new risks. Any potential ac-
tions taken worldwide during the reporting period (for example, labeling changes or
risk minimization measures) must also be reported and described.
For all these reasons, writing a safety report is a long process that relies on multiple
parties in its coordination, but eventually on a few authors called medical writers,
who need to consolidate and synthesize a lot of this information and sometimes pro-
duce complete analysis themselves. Most pharmaceutical companies are estimated to
take up to six months to produce a complete safety report, reviewed, and approved.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Medical Writing
While some activities of medical writing require subject matter experts (SMEs) who
have solid analytical skills and domain knowledge, various tasks remain cumbersome
and repetitive. Some of these include formatting the content (a PSUR can easily go
beyond 100 pages), consolidating excel spreadsheets into tables or counts with high-
level description of the data, or summarizing various sources to be included in the
report. With the progress made in artificial intelligence and more recently generative
AI, various fields are being disrupted by the use of new innovative technologies that
can assist humans in generating language. Many platforms such as customer service
chat-bots or blog writing tools have already integrated generative AI to provide new
features to end users to increase creativity and reduce repetitive tasks. The pharma-
ceutical industry, due to its highly regulated environment, is often lagging behind in
the adoption of artificial intelligence. This chapter explores how the rapid progress
made in NLP and Transformer models specifically can contribute to medical writing.
Figure 5.1 shows the sections that are included in a type of PSUR, the Periodic
Benefit-Risk Evaluation Reporting (PBRER), which applies to marketed products
and must be submitted according to local regulations in each country. This report
includes different types of content as listed below with the corresponding 19 sections:
• Information regarding the product of interest (1,2,3,4)
• Data in summary tabulations with descriptions (5,6,7)
• Summaries of literature and other medical sources cited (7,8,9,10,12)
• Line listing consolidated into language providing counts and analysis (9,14,15,16)
• Medical analysis of signals and risks identified (sections 15,16,17)
• Evaluations of the current safety (17,18,19)
Given the nature of the content, there are several NLP tasks that are well-suited to
support medical writing:
• Summarization of long documents to generate an executive summary
• Summarization of literature articles to be used as citations or support a medical
analysis
• Question-answering over long documents to provide insights to medical writers
• Description and translation of tabular data into language
The next sections of this chapter will present some technical issues found when dealing
with transformer models and long documents such as safety reports. It will introduce
some new techniques used to augment language models with retrieval systems and
some experiments done on the NLP tasks described above.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 The problems of knowledge and context-window
57
Figure 5.1: Sections found in a PBRER safety report.
5.2
The problems of knowledge and context-window
In the previous chapter, the context window was introduced for Transformers as
the maximum input size that can be processed by the models. Due to the attention
mechanism and the nature of neural networks, the input size significantly impacts the
computational power required for training and restricts how much context a model
can leverage. Although some variant architectures, such as the Longformer, were de-
veloped to mitigate this issue, the current hardware available imposes technical limits,
and most open-source models do not exceed 4096 tokens in maximum context win-
dow. When it comes to medical writing, this is a crucial factor, as most of the NLP
tasks described above will require access to information that may be found in various
locations in a document or across multiple documents. Since transformer models rely
on the input context, this constitutes a significant constraint when working with long
documents. A PBRER of 100 pages could typically include 50,000 words, which is
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Medical Writing
many times higher than the the limits mentioned previously. Recently, OpenAI in-
troduced a new breakthrough version of its GPT-4 model capable of processing input
of up to 32,000 tokens. While this is a major improvement for their generative AI
model, a context window of this size is still smaller than most safety reports docu-
ments and comes with a pricing provided per token, which for a prompt of this size
would add up to a few dollars for a single output returned. This is assuming that
full documents are always provided in the input as context for tasks such as summa-
rization or question-answering. In fact, since AI models are precisely used to locate
information from a source (question-answering) or to provide compressed versions of
a text (summarization), suﬀicient information needs to be provided as context. For
that reason, it is easy to consider adding a full text as context. However, when it
comes to prompting a model over a document, the relevant information is typically
located in one or few different locations only, especially for question-answering, which
many tasks can be reduced to when using generative AI. As such, adding a processing
step to select relevant information and reduce the size of the context provided to a
model could significantly reduce the cost of each output while improving the results
by providing only relevant information to a model.
Beyond the concept of context window, language models do not have access to exter-
nal knowledge outside of what they have been trained on. The weights of a neural
network are static and do not change after training. This can become a challenge
when using generative AI models and asking questions about information that is more
recent than the model knowledge cutoff point. Some examples, illustrative of the lim-
its, include asking a language model the current age of a public figure to which the
models typically hallucinates by making up a number or explaining that it cannot
answer the question. While language models are not expected to be very useful for
that kind of use-cases, when it comes to medical matters, pharmaceutical companies
need the guarantee that such models will not make up any facts and instead based
its answers on facts, with sources or citations.
These two different issues, connected by the notion of available and truthful infor-
mation, inspired several researchers and companies to combine language models with
retrieval systems so that models were not constrained by the size of their context
window or the limit of their embedded knowledge.
5.3
Combining language models with retrieval systems
Some of the tasks outlined earlier, when applied to medical writing, fall into the cat-
egory of Open-domain Long-form Question Answering (LFQA). This field of study
in NLP involves the retrieval of pertinent documents related to a given question and
utilizing them to construct a comprehensive paragraph-length response based on a
question or instruction. Given a set of documents, including the safety report being
authored and contributions from other teams, a writer using such a system can give
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Combining language models with retrieval systems
59
various instructions, for instance, to write a summary of a given topic from a doc-
ument or analyze the data available for a certain area, and get the output from a
generative model based on relevant information extracted.
Python open source libraries such as Langchain or Haystack provide tools to im-
plement ideas from research works to combine language modal with retrieval systems.
In the case of LFQA, the goal is to index all documents of interest (from just a few
in a folder to hundreds or thousands in a database), translate them to a vector space
through embedding, and add them in a document store. The document store can
then be queried by a Retriever using similarity search and append relevant pieces as
context of a prompt which contains the instruction. This allows to greatly reduce the
input size (as opposed to using a full document) and extend the information space to
virtually any number of documents indexed.
Figure 5.2: Retrieval and generative process for LQFA. Source: Pinecone.io.
Figure 5.2 from the Pinecone website [Bri] illustrates the process.
First, a given
document (pdf, word, or even excel spreadsheet) goes through a file converter, which
extracts all the content and split it into chunks. The size of these chunks and the
splitting strategy are parameters that can be adjusted depending on the document
and use case. They then go through the embedding process, similar to what happens
in the Transformers architecture. In fact, the embedding mechanisms can leverage
Transformers models directly (OpenAI offers an embedding API, or any BERT-like
model can also be used) or some other sparse algorithm such as TF-IDF or BM25.
The key here is to obtain a set of vectors that represent the parts of a document
and that can be stored in a vector database. When a query (instruction or question
from the user) is provided, a second component, the Retriever, performs a document
retrieval and returns a set of candidates relevant to the query. This is possible by
embedding the query itself with the same model or algorithm and comparing it to
the documents stored using similarity measures and highly effective search algorithm
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Medical Writing
based on the type of document store used. This follows a top k strategy, where k
is how many most relevant pieces need to be returned to the retriever. Eventually,
this goes through a generative AI pipeline, which constructs a prompt made of the
user query and relevant pieces retrieved as context, and returns a new text output.
The success of this approach comes from using highly optimized vectors database
such as Elastic Search, FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search) or Open Search and
Transformer model embedding which allows to eﬀiciently match any user instruction
with relevant content.
5.4
Implementation and experiments
Experiments were performed using the OpenAI ”text-embedding-ada-002” model to
convert documents and queries into vectors and ”text-davinci-003” for the genera-
tive pipeline.
While there exist open-source generative Transformer models, very
few models have reached the quality of language generation and instruction following
capability that OpenAI provides. Some models such as Flan T5 (an improved ver-
sion of T5, Google’s latest open-source encoder-decoder model) appear to be good
candidates, but require large infrastructure that most single-GPU computers do not
meet. The XXL version, for instance, requires 50GB of GPU RAM and cloud com-
puting platforms. Experiments using smaller versions of the model that could run
on a computer did not return coherent language or output aligned with the instruc-
tion, suggesting that fine-tuning is required (and recommended by the designers of
the model for new tasks). The goal of these experiments was to generate executive
summaries for complete PBRER reports and some literature summaries following a
particular structure.
Executive summary: The executive summary needed to be structured in seven
topics corresponding to various information from the report and following the guide-
lines provided in a template currently used by medical writers. Since the final PBRER
documents were between 80 and 120 pages long, this proved well suited to apply the
LFQA approach. In order to align the model with each topic and guidance, the task
was split into seven sub-tasks corresponding to each section of the executive summary.
The PBRER document was indexed at the end of the authoring process with an op-
tion provided to re-index the document at query time in case of new edits. In fact,
indexing and storing documents in a document store requires repeating the process
every time one goes through edits. Various document processing parameters were
tested, such as split by paragraph, maximum number of sentences or count of words.
This setting turned out to be crucial, as in some test, key information from a section
ended up spread into different chunks causing the model to fail retrieving the right
information. As a consequence, on the question ”Where is DRUG currently autho-
rized to be marketed ?” the model ended-up making up some number even though
the information was explicitly available in one single sentence. It turned out that the
sentence was split into two different chunks and the model was not provided with the
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Implementation and experiments
61
right context even after increasing the number of retrieved top pieces. This, of course,
would be a major concern when used in a real setting by a pharmaceutical company.
Through empirical testing, ten different prompts were constructed by providing differ-
ent degrees of instructions to the model and adjusting the number of relevant chunks
to include in the input. Various temperatures parameters were tested to find a trade-
off between creativity expected from language generation and determinism expected
from summarization. 0.5 and 0.7 provided the best results depending on the prompt.
To avoid the bottleneck created by querying the OpenAI API ten times, a concurrent
mechanism was added to the Python code to send near-simultaneous requests. The
constructed queries are added in the Appendix. After finding the optimal setup, the
pipeline returned executive summaries of high quality, similar to the human target,
proving an eﬀicient information extraction capabilities even with over 120 pages of
content including tables. ROUGE and BLEU scores were calculated to evaluate the
performance and are reported in Table 5.2.
Pages
ROUGE
BLEU
n
R1
RL
B-1
B-4
PBRER Example 1
72
0.66
0.44
0.49
0.20
PBRER Example 2
120
0.50
0.25
0.42
0.25
PBRER Example 3
61
0.54
0.26
0.41
0.29
Table 5.1: Performance metrics on three PBRER executive summaries. Title are
confidential and have been replaced by generic names..
ROUGUE and BLEU scores are metrics used specifically for generative AI to eval-
uate machine-generated text and compare them with human-generated references.
ROUGE (Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) measures the overlap
between the model output and the reference by comparing the uni-grams (singles
words) with ROUGE-1 or the longest common subsequence with ROUGE-L. It is a
recall-oriented metric that captures the extent to which a model includes information
from the reference. On the other hand, BLEU (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy)
is a precision-oriented metrics that measures precision over n-grams (continuous se-
quences of n words). It evaluates how much of the generated text is relevant compared
to the reference with variant such as BLEU-1 for uni-grams or BLEU-4 for an aver-
age over 1,2,3 and 4-grams. As an example, ROUGE scores above 50 are considered
very good by the generative AI company OneAI, while Google considers BLEU scores
above 40 of high quality.
Structured literature summary: To generate literature summaries, two articles
were provided with the human generated target. The guideline was to generate sum-
maries structured into four parts: Objective, Method, Result, and Conclusion. This
meant classic Transformer models trained for summarization could not be used di-
rectly as the output would be a text summary that does not follow the instruction,
unless fine-tuned to do so. For that reason, and based on the same empirical observa-
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Applications in Pharmacovigilance for Medical Writing
tions as previously for models like Flan T5, experiments were once again done using
the models provided by OpenAI. Since both articles were longer than the context-
window limit, experiments were done first using the same indexing-retrieval approach
described above with four prompts constructed corresponding to each subsection of
the summary. The prompts are added in the Appendix. It was found that providing
only a few relevant parts of the article for each sub-task did not show as good results
as for the executive summary. In fact, the executive summary task is closer to a
question-answering task where information is well separated in a document while an
article summary requires as much information as possible to produce a good output.
With these observations, the articles were split into chunks as large as possible to
maximize the context window and provided directly as input with a single prompt
for each chunk instructing to provide a summary in the expected format of four sec-
tions. Depending on the size of the articles, two or three summaries were obtained
for each chunk, and they were appended into a final prompt requesting the model to
merge the sub-summaries into a single one without loss of information. Although not
as high as for the executive summary, the two generated article summaries showed
satisfactory ROUGE and BLEU-1 scores. The lower performance can be explained
as the target summaries provided were generated by humans with more paraphrasing
than the executive summaries, which tend to be more extractive (meaning sentences
of the report are reused in the summary).
Pages
ROUGE
BLEU
n
R1
RL
B-1
B-4
Medical article 1
7
0.60
0.32
0.42
0.18
Medical article 2
11
0.46
0.21
0.37
0.10
Table 5.2: Performance metrics on two summaries of medical articles.
Title are
confidential and have been replaced by generic names..
5.5
Discussion
These experiments have shown how the limitations of language models, including the
context window and knowledge boundaries, can be mitigated by using retrieval sys-
tems and embedding-driven searches. In the context of pharmacovigilance, this allows
to constitute a knowledge base with either a database of documents or a safety report
of interest. Medical writing systems can be designed with these components and pro-
vide a medical writer with capabilities including instructions-based summaries and
open-domain question answering. This approach was successfully experimented with
the generation of executive summaries from complete safety reports and formatted
summaries of literature articles. There are many other applications, such as generat-
ing table descriptions or providing data analysis over unstructured content, that can
be enabled by such an approach. The benefit of using generative AI in this context
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Discussion
63
is the flexibility in the input provided to the model. While this task typically falls
under the category of question-answering, any instruction can be provided as input,
to execute any task given some extracted information. Some additional experiments
even showed that models like GPT-3 were able to understand tabular data appended
to an input as plain text.
Generative models like GPT-3 are currently dominating the realm of generative AI
given the size of the model and the impressive language capabilities. Other Trans-
former models are either too massive to be run on most infrastructures directly avail-
able to companies or require further fine-tuning for the smaller ones to generate
human-like language and follow instructions.
In the absence of large datasets of
safety reports providing training examples, using APIs provided by AI companies,
such as OpenAI remains the best option for most companies, especially those for
which software design is not the core activity. However, in the pharmaceutical indus-
try, utilizing such models may prove diﬀicult given the highly regulated environment
in which companies operate. As discussed in the previous chapter, companies require
the transparency and various formal assessments of any system as part of validation
and GxP. While performance metrics such as BLEU and ROUGE have been devel-
oped to formally assess the capabilities of a given generative model, they remain
limited. Furthermore, the proprietary nature when using APIs allows companies like
OpenAI to update the model at any point in time or to depreciate certain versions.
This could also be problematic for a validated system that needs to ensure that it
meets its expected behavior at any point in time. For all that, the progress made
in natural language processing and the ability to generate human-like language, in
context as specific and formal as medical writing, shows promissing applications to
support tedious tasks that require analytical skills but not necessarily medical exper-
tise. In the context of pharmacovigilance, this could allow SMEs to spend more time
on medical analysis and tasks where human assessment remains mandatory while
being assisted by these new intelligent systems and, as a consequence, ultimately
guarantee better patient safety.
The findings align with those of the previous chapter, emphasizing the importance of
generating new public datasets or utilizing internal company safety databases. These
efforts enable the training and fine-tuning of models that offer full control and supe-
rior data privacy and integrity. To rival the capabilities of massive generative models
such as GPT-3, companies must leverage substantial amounts of data to develop their
own systems. However, until that point is reached, a balance must be found between
leveraging these user-friendly APIs for immediate benefits and ensuring compliance
with regulatory requirements.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This study showed that Transformer-models can successfully perform language task to
solve some of the challenges encountered in pharmacovigilance and in particular the
identification of adverse drug events. A new augmented ADE corpus was generated,
improving the best known performance on the task of Relation Extraction for this
dataset. In addition, it was found that relatively small models such as PubMedBERT,
trained on biomedical corpus, brought the best performance. These models can run
on most computer systems and be trained on accessible infrastructure making them
a top choice for companies who want to integrate NLP in their processes. On the
other hand, GPT-3, a generative AI model using a text-to-text NLP approach was
outperformed on the selected tasks despite being a thousand times bigger in num-
ber of parameters. This suggests that fine-tuning is still the preferred approach for
biomedical NLP tasks.
No publicly available dataset currently allow to train models on the specific task of
causality assessment to characterize adverse drug events as adverse drugs reactions.
This study suggests that assessing complex relationships between medical entities is
possible using Transformer models but it remains an open question whether such
model would successfully predict a medical causality. Similarly, additional datasets
containing fully processed articles with safety reports could benefit the development
of models capable of analyzing long text and identifying complex medical patterns.
The variant Longformer architecture, with domain-specific models showed promissing
results on the task of identifying relevant drugs and reactions for case processing but
requires datasets with more granular annotations to show its full capabilities
For the use of AI in medical writing, this work showed that Transformer models cou-
pled with retrieval systems could overcome limitations linked with knowledge cutoff
and context-window. Tasks such as Long Form Question-Answering and structured
topic-based summarization showed high-potential applications for assisting medical
writers when working with various documents as a knowledge base.
The positive
results were however obtained using GPT-3, the same model that did not perform as
well as other Transformers for ADE detection but demonstrated impressive generative
language capabilities. This work suggests continuing the development of pipelines in-
cluding language models and retrieval systems while testing open-source Transformer
models, smaller but fined-tuned on generative tasks with a history of reports for ex-
ample. With the right datasets, smaller models could show performance similar to
GPT-3 without the concerns raised by using such system in regulated environment.
==PAGE:76==
66
6 Conclusion
In fact, the use of AI and Transformer models in the pharmaceutical industry must
not come as a complete replacement of human assessments. While such systems can
prove eﬀicient to reduce noise, enhance analysis and support experts, they should
not be used standalone as they may miss critical information that could in turn have
consequence on drug and patient safety. When designing and training AI models, gen-
erating transparent performance metrics constitute a critical aspect for companies to
validate such systems as part of the GxP regulations imposed by health authorities.
Failure to ensure transparency, data privacy as well as consistency in the behavior
could represent significant obstacles to generalize the use of AI models for pharma-
covigilance activities.
In conclusion, Transformer-based models constitute today the foremost AI oppor-
tunity to support pharmacovigilance through various NLP applications and ongoing
research efforts should persist in exploring with different datasets and tasks to con-
tribute to better drug and patient safety globally.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Training runs
Figure A.1: Task: Named Entity Recognition ADE corpus (5 epochs).
==PAGE:78==
68
A Training runs
[paths]
train = "train.spacy"
dev = "test.spacy"
vectors = null
init_tok2vec = null
[system]
gpu_allocator = "pytorch"
seed = 0
[nlp]
lang = "en"
pipeline = ["transformer","ner"]
batch_size = 128
disabled = []
before_creation = null
after_creation = null
after_pipeline_creation = null
tokenizer = {"@tokenizers":"spacy.Tokenizer.v1"}
[components]
[components.ner]
factory = "ner"
incorrect_spans_key = null
moves = null
scorer = {"@scorers":"spacy.ner_scorer.v1"}
update_with_oracle_cut_size = 100
[components.ner.model]
@architectures = "spacy.TransitionBasedParser.v2"
state_type = "ner"
extra_state_tokens = false
hidden_width = 64
maxout_pieces = 2
use_upper = false
nO = null
[components.ner.model.tok2vec]
@architectures = "spacy-transformers.TransformerListener.v1"
grad_factor = 1.0
pooling = {"@layers":"reduce_mean.v1"}
upstream = "*"
[components.transformer]
factory = "transformer"
max_batch_items = 4096
set_extra_annotations = {"@annotation_setters":"spacy-transformers.
null_annotation_setter.v1"}
[components.transformer.model]
@architectures = "spacy-transformers.TransformerModel.v3"
name = "microsoft/BiomedNLP-PubMedBERT-base-uncased-abstract-fulltext"
mixed_precision = false
Listing A.1: Example of configuraton file used for NER training - Part 1.
==PAGE:79==
A Training runs
69
[components.transformer.model.get_spans]
@span_getters = "spacy-transformers.strided_spans.v1"
window = 128
stride = 128
[components.transformer.model.grad_scaler_config]
[components.transformer.model.tokenizer_config]
use_fast = true
[components.transformer.model.transformer_config]
[corpora]
[corpora.dev]
@readers = "spacy.Corpus.v1"
path = ${paths.dev}
max_length = 0
gold_preproc = false
limit = 0
augmenter = null
[corpora.train]
@readers = "spacy.Corpus.v1"
path = ${paths.train}
max_length = 0
gold_preproc = false
limit = 0
augmenter = null
[training]
accumulate_gradient = 3
dev_corpus = "corpora.dev"
train_corpus = "corpora.train"
seed = ${system.seed}
gpu_allocator = ${system.gpu_allocator}
dropout = 0.1
patience = 200000
max_epochs = 5
max_steps = 200000
eval_frequency = 200
frozen_components = []
annotating_components = []
before_to_disk = null
[training.batcher]
@batchers = "spacy.batch_by_padded.v1"
discard_oversize = true
size = 2000
buffer = 256
get_length = null
[training.logger]
@loggers = "spacy.WandbLogger.v3"
model_log_interval = 1000
Listing A.2: Example of configuraton file used for NER training - Part 2.
==PAGE:80==
70
A Training runs
Figure A.2: Task: Relationship extraction ADE corpus (8 epochs).
Figure A.3: Task: Seriousness classification BioDEX dataset (8 epochs).
==PAGE:81==
A Training runs
71
Figure A.4: Task: Patient sex classification BioDEX dataset (4 epochs).
Figure A.5: Task: NER with implied relationship BioDEX dataset (4 epochs).
==PAGE:82==
72
A Training runs
Figure A.6: Hyper-parameter search with Biomedical Longformer for NER on the
BioDEX datase: window, stride and batch size (2 epochs).
==PAGE:83==
A Training runs
73
[training.optimizer]
@optimizers = "Adam.v1"
beta1 = 0.9
beta2 = 0.999
L2_is_weight_decay = true
L2 = 0.01
grad_clip = 1.0
use_averages = false
eps = 0.00000001
[training.optimizer.learn_rate]
@schedules = "warmup_linear.v1"
warmup_steps = 250
total_steps = 20000
initial_rate = 0.00005
[training.score_weights]
ents_f = 1.0
ents_p = 0.0
ents_r = 0.0
ents_per_type = null
[pretraining]
[initialize]
vectors = ${paths.vectors}
init_tok2vec = ${paths.init_tok2vec}
vocab_data = null
lookups = null
before_init = null
after_init = null
[initialize.components]
[initialize.tokenizer]
Listing A.3: Example of configuraton file used for NER training - Part 3.
==PAGE:84==
74
A Training runs
method: grid
metric:
goal: maximize
name: ents_f
command:
- ${env}
- ${interpreter}
- sweeps_using_config.py
- config.cfg
- ./
parameters:
components.ner.model.hidden_width:
values:
- 128
- 64
- 32
components.transformer.model.get_spans.window:
values:
- 512
- 256
- 128
training.batcher.size:
values:
- 500
- 1000
- 2000
Listing A.4: Example of ”sweep” file for hyper-parameter search.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Prompt engineering
Prompt 1 executed several times :
Summarize this portion of article and output the result in this format :
Objective:
Methods: make sure to use detailed figures
Results: make sure to use detailed figures
Conclusion:
Prompt 2 with the generated sub-summaries:
Below are several summaries of different portions of the same
article. Merge them into a single summary without loosing
information and output the result strictly in this format :
Objective:
Methods: make sure to use detailed figures
Results: make sure to use detailed figures
Conclusion:
<Summary 1>
<Summary 2>
...
Listing B.1: Prompts constructed to generate a formatted summary of literature
article.
==PAGE:86==
76
B Prompt engineering
Prompt 1 - Introduction - Report reference
Replace the placeholders in this sentence according to the available
information in the report :
"This is the <N> th PBRER/PSUR for <Drug> <Generic Name or BAY No>.
It covers the reporting interval from <dd MMM yyyy> to <dd MMM yyyy>."
Prompt 2 -
Introduction - Dosage
Write a brief description of the formulations and dosages included
in this report for <Drug>
Prompt 3 - Introduction - Indications
Write a description of therapeutic class and mechanism of action of
<Drug> with the available information in this report
Prompt 4 - Introduction - Mechanism of action
Write a description of therapeutic class and mechanism of action of
<DRUG> with the available information in this report'
Prompt 5 - Cumulative exposure
Write a summary regarding the estimated cumulative exposure and
sales of <Drug> with figures available in this report
Propmt 6 - Marketing approvals
Where is <Drug> currently authorized to be marketed ? Your output
should strictly follow this format for each occurence: <Drug>
is currently authorized to be marketed in <N> countries worlwide
Prompt 9 - Changes to reference safety information
Summarize the changes made to the CCDS during the reporting period.
If no changes were reported then output : "No changes were made to
the CCDS during the reporting period."
Prompt 10 - Action taken during reporting interval
Write a summary of significant actions taken for safety reasons
during the period cover. If no actions then output strictly:
"No actions were taken for safety reasons during the reporting period.
Listing B.2: Prompts constructed to generate several pieces of the executive
summary.
Some prompts have been removed as they contain
confidential information from some PBRER templates guidelines..
==PAGE:87==
B Prompt engineering
77
Figure B.1: Executive summary fully generated with AI - Part 1 (Drug name re-
moved for confidentiality reason).
==PAGE:88==
78
B Prompt engineering
Figure B.2: Executive summary fully generated with AI - Part 2 (Drug name re-
moved for confidentiality reason).
==PAGE:89==
B Prompt engineering
79
Figure B.3: Structured summary of article fully generated with AI.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[AD18]
Dario Amodei and Hernandez Danny. AI and compute. 2018. url: https:
//openai.com/research/ai-and-compute (visited on May 16, 2018).
[Alv+15]
Nestor Alvaro et al. “Crowdsourcing Twitter annotations to identify
first-hand experiences of prescription drug use.” In: Journal of Biomed-
ical Informatics 58 (2015), pages 280–287. issn: 1532-0464. doi: https:
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbi . 2015 . 11 . 004. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046415002415.
[BCL19]
Iz Beltagy, Arman Cohan, and Kyle Lo. “SciBERT: Pretrained Con-
textualized Embeddings for Scientific Text.” In: CoRR abs/1903.10676
(2019). arXiv: 1903.10676. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.10676.
[Bis23]
Som Biswas. “ChatGPT and the Future of Medical Writing.” In: Home
Radiology 307.2 (2023). doi: 10.1148/radiol.223312. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1148/radiol.223312.
[BP22]
Robert Ball and Gerald Pan. ““Artificial Intelligence” for Pharmacovigi-
lance: Ready for Prime Time?” In: Drug Safety 45 (May 2022), pages 429–
438. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01157-4.
[BPC20]
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The
Long-Document Transformer. 2020. arXiv: 2004.05150 [cs.CL].
[Bri]
James Briggs. Long form question answering in Haystack. url: https:
//www.pinecone.io/learn/haystack-lfqa.
[Bro+20]
Tom B. Brown et al. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. 2020.
arXiv: 2005.14165 [cs.CL].
[Cho+22]
Aakanksha Chowdhery et al. PaLM: Scaling Language Modeling with
Pathways. 2022. arXiv: 2204.02311 [cs.CL].
[Chu+14]
Junyoung Chung et al. Empirical Evaluation of Gated Recurrent Neural
Networks on Sequence Modeling. 2014. arXiv: 1412.3555 [cs.NE].
[Dev+19]
Jacob Devlin et al. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transform-
ers for Language Understanding. 2019. arXiv: 1810.04805 [cs.CL].
[DOo+23]
Karel D’Oosterlinck et al. BioDEX: Large-Scale Biomedical Adverse
Drug Event Extraction for Real-World Pharmacovigilance. 2023. arXiv:
2305.13395 [cs.CL].
==PAGE:92==
82
Bibliography
[EU19]
Markus Eberts and Adrian Ulges. “Span-based Joint Entity and Relation
Extraction with Transformer Pre-training.” In: (September 2019).
[Fan+20]
Brandon Fan et al. “Adverse drug event detection and extraction from
open data: A deep learning approach.” In: Information Processing Man-
agement 57.1 (2020), page 102131. issn: 0306-4573. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ipm.2019.102131. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0306457319308623.
[FW23]
Abe Fingerhut and Desmond C Winter. “Artificial intelligence and med-
ical writing: where are we going?” In: British Journal of Surgery (June
2023). znad169. issn: 1365-2168. doi: 10.1093/bjs/znad169. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/bjs/advance-article-pdf/doi/10.
1093/bjs/znad169/50582889/znad169.pdf. url: https://doi.org/
10.1093/bjs/znad169.
[Gu+20]
Yu Gu et al. Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical
Natural Language Processing. 2020. eprint: arXiv:2007.15779.
[Gur+12]
Harsha Gurulingappa et al. “Development of a benchmark corpus to
support the automatic extraction of drug-related adverse effects from
medical case reports.” In: Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45.5 (2012).
Text Mining and Natural Language Processing in Pharmacogenomics,
pages 885–892. issn: 1532-0464. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbi.2012.04.008. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1532046412000615.
[HLL22]
Jhih-Yuan Huang, Wei-Po Lee, and King-Der Lee. “Predicting Adverse
Drug Reactions from Social Media Posts: Data Balance, Feature Selec-
tion and Deep Learning.” In: Healthcare 10.4 (2022). issn: 2227-9032. doi:
10.3390/healthcare10040618. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-
9032/10/4/618.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory.”
In: Neural Computation 9.8 (1997), pages 1735–1780. doi: 10.1162/
neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[Kit23]
Felipe C. Kitamura. “ChatGPT Is Shaping the Future of Medical Writ-
ing But Still Requires Human Judgment.” In: Home Radiology 307.2
(2023).
[Lam+16]
Guillaume Lample et al. “Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recog-
nition.” In: CoRR abs/1603.01360 (2016). arXiv: 1603.01360. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1603.01360.
[Lam+22]
Nathan Lambert et al. “Illustrating Reinforcement Learning from Hu-
man Feedback (RLHF).” In: Hugging Face Blog (2022). https://huggingface.co/blog/rlhf.
[LBH15]
Yan LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning.” In:
Nature 521 (2015), pages 436–444.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
83
[Lee+19]
Jinhyuk Lee et al. “BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language rep-
resentation model for biomedical text mining.” In: Bioinformatics 36.4
(September 2019), pages 1234–1240. issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btz682. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article-pdf/36/4/1234/48983216/bioinformatics\_36\_4\_1234.
pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz682.
[Lew+20]
Patrick Lewis et al. “Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-
Intensive NLP Tasks.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. Edited by H. Larochelle et al. Volume 33. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2020, pages 9459–9474. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper_files/paper/2020/file/6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-
Paper.pdf.
[Li+22]
Yikuan Li et al. Clinical-Longformer and Clinical-BigBird: Transformers
for long clinical sequences. 2022. arXiv: 2201.11838 [cs.CL].
[Mar+22]
Vincent Martenot et al. “LiSA: an assisted literature search pipeline
for detecting serious adverse drug events with deep learning.” In: BMC
Medical Informatics and Decision Making 22 (December 2022). doi: 10.
1186/s12911-022-02085-0.
[McM+21]
Christopher McMaster et al. “Developing A Deep Learning Natural Lan-
guage Processing Algorithm For Automated Reporting Of Adverse Drug
Reactions.” In: medRxiv (2021). doi: 10.1101/2021.12.11.21267504.
eprint: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2021/12/15/
2021.12.11.21267504.full.pdf. url: https://www.medrxiv.org/
content/early/2021/12/15/2021.12.11.21267504.
[MS99]
Christopher Manning and Hinrich Schutze. Foundations of statistical
natural language processing. MIT press, 1999.
[Org+02]
World Health Organization et al. “The importance of pharmacovigi-
lance.” In: (2002).
[Ouy+22]
Long Ouyang et al. Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. 2022. arXiv: 2203.02155 [cs.CL].
[Rad+18a]
Alec Radford et al. “Improving language understanding by generative
pre-training.” In: (2018).
[Rad+18b]
Alec Radford et al. “Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learn-
ers.” In: (2018). url: https://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/better-
language-models/language-models.pdf.
[Raf+20]
Colin Raffel et al. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a
Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. 2020. arXiv: 1910.10683 [cs.LG].
[Ram+23]
Ori Ram et al. In-Context Retrieval-Augmented Language Models. 2023.
arXiv: 2302.00083 [cs.CL].
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[RHW86a]
D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams. “Learning Internal
Representations by Error Propagation.” In: Parallel Distributed Process-
ing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, Vol. 1: Founda-
tions. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1986, pages 318–362. isbn:
026268053X.
[RHW86b]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. “Learn-
ing representations by back-propagating errors.” In: Nature 323.6088
(1986), pages 533–536. doi: 10.1038/323533a0. url: https://doi.
org/10.1038/323533a0.
[Ros58]
Frank Rosenblatt. “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for informa-
tion storage and organization in the brain.” In: Psychological Review
65.6 (1958), pages 386–408. doi: 10.1037/h0042519. url: https://
doi.org/10.1037/h0042519.
[Sal+22]
M. Salas et al. “The Use of Artificial Intelligence in Pharmacovigilance: A
Systematic Review of the Literature.” In: Pharmaceut Med 36.5 (October
2022). Epub 2022 Jul 29, pages 295–306. doi: 10.1007/s40290-022-
00441-z.
[Sch97]
R.R. Schaller. “Moore’s law: past, present and future.” In: IEEE Spec-
trum 34.6 (1997), pages 52–59. doi: 10.1109/6.591665.
[Sim]
Julien Simon. Large language models: A new moore’s law? url: https:
//huggingface.co/blog/large-language-models.
[Sun+19]
Chi Sun et al. “How to Fine-Tune BERT for Text Classification?” In:
Chinese Computational Linguistics. Edited by Maosong Sun et al. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2019, pages 194–206.
[SY19]
Cong Sun and Zhihao Yang. “Transfer Learning in Biomedical Named
Entity Recognition: An Evaluation of BERT in the PharmaCoNER
task.” In: Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on BioNLP Open Shared
Tasks. Hong Kong, China: Association for Computational Linguistics,
November 2019, pages 100–104. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19- 5715. url:
https://aclanthology.org/D19-5715.
[Tam21]
Yasuto Tamura. Multi-head attention mechanism: “queries”, “keys”, and
“values,” over and over again. Data Science Blog. April 2021. url:
https://data-science-blog.com/blog/2021/04/07/multi-head-
attention-mechanism/.
[Tao+23]
Rohan Taori et al. Stanford Alpaca: An Instruction-following LLaMA
model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca. 2023.
[Tho+22]
Romal Thoppilan et al. LaMDA: Language Models for Dialog Applica-
tions. 2022. arXiv: 2201.08239 [cs.CL].
[Tou+23]
Hugo Touvron et al. LLaMA: Open and Eﬀicient Foundation Language
Models. 2023. arXiv: 2302.13971 [cs.CL].
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
85
[Tur50]
A. M. Turing. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” English. In:
Mind. New Series 59.236 (1950), pages 433–460. issn: 00264423. url:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2251299.
[Vas+17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is All you Need.” In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. Edited by I. Guyon et al. Volume 30.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[Vin93]
Vernor Vinge. “Technological singularity.” In: VISION-21 Symposium
sponsored by NASA Lewis Research Center and the Ohio Aerospace In-
stitute. 1993, pages 30–31.
[Whi+23]
Jules White et al. A Prompt Pattern Catalog to Enhance Prompt Engi-
neering with ChatGPT. 2023. arXiv: 2302.11382 [cs.SE].
[Wol+20]
Thomas Wolf et al. “Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language
Processing.” In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations. Online: As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, October 2020, pages 38–45. doi:
10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-demos.6. url: https://aclanthology.
org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
[Zha+22]
Susan Zhang et al. OPT: Open Pre-trained Transformer Language Mod-
els. 2022. arXiv: 2205.01068 [cs.CL].
==PAGE:96==
