==PAGE:1==
Identifying attack­surfaces through web con­
tent and it’s related properties at web scale
Andreas Fogh Aagaard Larsen
Master Thesis
Supervised by Weizhi Meng
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathemathics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5 months at the Section for Cyber Security, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, by
Andreas Fogh Aagaard Larsen (s174250) under the guidance and supervision of Weizhi Meng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Cyber Security and Computer
Science.
Andreas Fogh Aagaard Larsen ­ s174250
Signature
Date
ii
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Cyberattacks are one of the most significant threats to modern society but many organizations
are ill­equipped to tackle the threat, lacking the resources and expertise to protect themselves
adequately. This thesis emphasizes the importance of identifying digital attack surfaces as an
essential first step for organizations to defend against opportunistic cyberattacks. It explores the
potential of publicly available internet data, with a focus on Certificate Transparency Logs (CTLs)
and CommonCrawl, in identifying potential security risks in systems connected to the internet.
It addresses the following research question: In what way can the Certificate Transparency Log
and CommonCrawl datasets be leveraged to map digital attack surfaces of domains connected
to the internet?
The research introduces a tool, ’WorldView’, designed to efficiently capture, parse, and analyze
data from CTLs and the CommonCrawl archive. The study combines both summary statistics
and selective case studies to evaluate the potential of these datasets in revealing extensive
attack surfaces.
Results indicate that CommonCrawl is effective in detecting related top­level domains within an
organization and confirming mutual ownership. It also proves valuable in identifying accidentally
exposed company secrets, such as API keys, and other sensitive data. In contrast, CTLs excel
at identifying subdomains crucial for operations like testing and administration. However, their
ability to group related domains is often compromised by the widespread use of open certificate
authorities, such as Lets Encrypt.
This research clearly demonstrates the value of publicly accessible internet data in exposing po­
tential attack vectors. However, considering the dynamic nature of the internet and the need for
tailored approaches to discover vulnerabilities, the study recommends a combined approach:
Passive data collection should work in tandem with active reconnaissance, with the former pro­
viding seed values for the latter.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Datasets
4
2.1
CommonCrawl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Certificate Transparency Logs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Background
9
3.1
Anatomy of a Web Presence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Research Design
14
4.1
Extraction and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Results
26
5.1
Identifying at risk assets at scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Identification of organizational Infrastructure & risks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Discussion
36
6.1
Shortcomings and Inefficiencies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Conclusion
40
Bibliography
42
A Regular Expressions Lists
46
A.1 Apikeys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.2 Trackers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.3 Artifacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.4 Risk words
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B Findings of organizational overview
50
B.1 Infrastructure overview of 23 domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B.2 Sensitive Airbnb Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.3 Sensitive Ikea Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
C Emails by TLD
55
iv
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Once a year, the Danish Centre for Military Studies conducts a survey of Danish security pro­
fessional’s opinions on contemporary security threats. Since the survey was first conducted
in 2014, cyberthreats have consistently and convincingly topped the list as the greatest per­
ceived threat to society, dwarfing the threats from terrorism, global warming, and other more
well­known risks[1].
The fear of cyber threats is not unfounded. Each day, companies of all shapes and sizes ex­
perience opportunistic cyberattacks from different types of threat actors. According to a survey
recently published by IBM, the average cost of a data breach is 4.45 million USD. Furthermore,
almost all of society’s critical functions – from healthcare, transportation, energy infrastructure,
to financial systems – rely heavily on digital systems and technologies which make them sus­
ceptible to cyberattacks. Given this reality, it makes sense why the US Department of Defence
considers cyberspace to be the battlefield of the 21st century[2].
Many models and frameworks aim to conceptualize the nature of cyberattacks, but none have
gained as widespread popularity as Lockheed Martin’s Cyber Kill Chain[3]. In seven chrono­
logically distinct steps, the model identifies what an adversaries must complete to achieve their
objective and be successful with a cyberattack.
The first stage in the Cyber Kill Chain is reconnaissance. In this initial stage, actors gather im­
portant information about their target and its attack surface: they identify IP addresses, domain
names, network infrastructure, e­mail addresses, usernames, leaked API keys, and personnel
details from social networks such as Facebook or LinkedIn. The aim in the reconnaissance
stage is to find vulnerabilities or avenues to exploit, similar to how a thief might surveil a build­
ing before breaking in. Since the gravity of the thesis revolves around the Cyber Kill Chain’s
Reconnaissance phase, the remaining 6 steps in the Kill Chain will only be described briefly.
Stage two in the Kill Chain is Weaponization. At this juncture, attackers use the gathered infor­
mation to create a malicious payload, specifically tailored to exploit the identified vulnerabilities.
This weapon is often a custom piece of malware, virus, or malicious commands to exploit spe­
cific vulnerabilities. The third step is Delivery. This is the process by which the “weapon” is sent
to the victim. Phishing emails laced with malicious attachments or links to malicious websites
remains the most popular delivering mechanism by far. Fourth comes Exploitation. Here, the
delivered payload is triggered, exploiting the weakness it was designed for, and paving the way
for a breach. The fifth step is Installation and sixths there’s Command and Control (C2). These
dictate that actors must establish a means of control over their delivered payload. Lastly, the
seventh step is Actions on Objectives. This is where attackers finalize their mission, whether
it’s stealing sensitive data, disrupting services, or any other malevolent goal they had in mind.
Every step in the Cyber Kill Chain is significant, but to defend against threats effectively, it’s
essential to understand the sequence in its entirety. Recognizing the initial stage, Reconnais­
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
1
==PAGE:6==
sance, is pivotal in stopping an attack from manifesting and advancing in the first. This thesis’
central argument is that organizations must understand their digital attack surfaces and how
they appear to adversaries during early stages of reconnaissance to effectively defend them­
selves from opportunistic cyberattacks. The logic is straightforward: organizations can’t protect
what they’re unaware of. Thus, proactive management of digital attack surfaces and main­
taining inventories of critical systems connected to the internet should be a top priority for any
organization aiming to minimize threats from cyberspace. More formally, the thesis sets out to
answer the following research question:
In what way can the Certificate Transparency Log and CommonCrawl datasets be leveraged to
map digital attack surfaces of domains connected to the internet?
In the 21st century, an online presence is essential for businesses to prosper and succeed, often
through the development and maintenance of one or more websites. However, while these
digital platforms aim to connect with a wide audience and provide important information, they
can unintentionally reveal data and present attack surfaces for attackers in the reconnaissance
stage.
For instance, many websites have ”about us” sections where they generously list internal e­
mails or usernames, making them potential targets for phishing and other forms of attacks.
Additionally, in the quest for visibility and outreach, businesses embed SEO (Search Engine
Optimization) content which can be leveraged to cluster different domains belonging to the same
organization. Furthermore, the details contained within TLS/SSL certificates, although crucial
for ensuring a secure communication between the user’s browser and the website, can provide
attackers with insights into the organization’s infrastructure. Finally, companies leverage the
DNS (Domain Name System) to map memorable domain names, such as admin.example.com
or dev.example.com, to hosts. While this makes it easier for system administrators to find and
access their desired platforms, it also offers hackers another avenue of privileged access.
In addition to posting sensitive information on websites, another practice that increases the po­
tential attack surface is ”shadow IT”. This refers to the introduction of new systems and the
continued use of outdated legacy systems. Consequently, an organization’s digital infrastruc­
ture becomes so decentralized that maintaining an inventory of all critical systems becomes an
overwhelming task.
Through analysis of two publicly available datasets, this thesis demonstrates how a study of
ordinary web content and website building can be (ab)used to unearth vast digital attack sur­
faces and help organizations keep inventory of their internet­connected digital assets. The first
of the two datasets is the CommonCrawl dataset, a collection of web crawl data from a large
portion on the open internet. The second is Certificate Transparency Logs, which are logs kept
by participating Certificate Authorities (CAs) to be used in the validation and monitoring of web­
site certificates by web browsers and companies. Where CommonCrawl gives us access to
the data present on websites, Certificate Transparency Logs gives us information about how
it’s encrypted, and sometimes by who. Using these datasets the thesis will try to answer the
2
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:7==
research question.
The thesis is structured as follows: First the CommonCrawl and Certificate Transparency Log
(CTL and CT Logs henceforth) datasets will be presented, along with their data formats and
primary functions. Following this, the thesis will explain the current research on attack surface
mapping, threat research and mitigation, as well as standards for web operations & infrastruc­
ture. Building on this, an approach to identifying attack surfaces and risk using CommonCrawl
and CTLs will be presented. Finally the thesis will conclude with a presentation of the results
of applying this approach in an attack surface mapping at scale, and in a target fashion ­ along
with a discussion of its benefits, use cases and shortcomings.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
3
==PAGE:8==
2
Datasets
With HTTPS becoming the norm, understanding which sites employ encryption and who en­
crypted it becomes crucial. Analyzing web data in isolation without this information shows only
one side of the coin. By combining the web content from CommonCrawl with the certifica­
tion information from CT Logs, you produce a multidimensional dataset. This enriched dataset
becomes a powerful tool for comprehensive web analysis. Together the two datasets form a
complete dataset of the web as it is accessed by average users, everyday.
2.1
CommonCrawl
CommonCrawl actively collects and archives web pages from across the internet, creating a
vast dataset spanning billions of pages. Every month, CommonCrawl updates the dataset,
ensuring that it remains current and representative of the evolving internet. The dataset is
broken into batches, each one containing 1­2 months worth of archival information, which is
further segmented into a 100 individual segments each containing 800 WARC archives. As the
basis for this thesis I have used a subset of batch CC­MAIN­2023­23 [4], which consists of data
collected from May to June, 2023. The subset makes up roughly 40% (31000 WARC archives)
of the total size of batch CC­MAIN­2023­23, and is distributed evenly across all segments. In
total 1,175,728,590 billion http responses have been analyzed totalling 180 TiB of data, across
4 million ips and 33 million domains.
2.1.1
Web Archive File Format
The WARC (Web ARChive) file format is the most raw format of web crawls offered by Com­
monCrawl. It is a standardized method for storing data about web content and its associated
metadata. A WARC file contains information about both the request and the response, allowing
for full insight into what was sent by the crawler to receive the following http response. Every
WARC response has an associated WARC header as seen below taken from Commoncrawl’s
Website[5].
WARC/1.0
WARC-Type: response
WARC-Date: 2014-08-02T09:52:13Z
WARC-Record-ID:
Content-Length: 43428
Content-Type: application/http; msgtype=response
WARC-Warcinfo-ID:
WARC-Concurrent-To:
WARC-IP-Address: 212.58.244.61
WARC-Target-URI: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/3414345.stm
WARC-Payload-Digest: sha1:M63W6MNGFDWXDSLTHF7GWUPCJUH4JK3J
WARC-Block-Digest: sha1:YHKQUSBOS4CLYFEKQDVGJ457OAPD6IJO
4
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:9==
WARC-Truncated: length
This is followed by the raw HTTP response and its associated body.
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: Apache
Vary: X-CDN
Cache-Control: max-age=0
Content-Type: text/html
Date: Sat, 02 Aug 2014 09:52:13 GMT
Expires: Sat, 02 Aug 2014 09:52:13 GMT
Connection: close
Set-Cookie: BBC-UID=...; expires=Sun, 02-Aug-15 09:52:13 GMT; path=/; domain=bbc.co.uk;
<!doctype html public "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html
<html>.....
Such records can be found for all 1.1 billion web responses contained within the May/June
subset of CommonCrawl used in this thesis. While the body of the HTTP response is subject
to change depending on the requested resource, the format of HTTP protocol and its headers
is not.
2.1.2
HyperText Transfer Protocol (Secure)
HTTP stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol. It’s a set of rules that governs how data on the
web is exchanged, and it’s not limited to web pages. HTTP facilitates data transfer for images,
videos, and even APIs which apps and other websites use to fetch information. Traditionally
HTTP operated in a request/response fashion, but has since evolved to support keep­alive
connections as of HTTP 2.0.
HTTP operates over the TCP (Transmission Control Protocol). When a website is requested,
a TCP connection gets established between your browser and the web server. Once the con­
nection is ready, the browser sends an HTTP request to the server. This request often includes
an action (method), such as GET to fetch data or POST to send data, the path to the resource
(URI), and other headers with additional information, which could include authentication tokens
or language information. The server then processes this request and sends back an HTTP re­
sponse. This response contains a status code, indicating if the request was successful(200) or
if there was an error(404). The server also sends the requested data ­ this could be an HTML
file, an image, a video, or any other type of content. Once the data transfer completes, the
TCP connection traditionally gets terminated, though newer versions like HTTP 2.0 can main­
tain the connection for multiple requests to improve performance. In CommonCrawl only HTTP
responses with a status code in the 200s are included.
A later addition to the web standard is HTTPS, which is an encrypted (secure) version of the
HTTP protocol, which uses TLS as its underlying encryption protocol. The primary purpose
of HTTPS is to protect data in transit from manipulation and theft, which is ensured through
cryptography and checksums. In addition to data protection, HTTPS enables authentications
through PKI, signatures, and trusted third parties in the form of Certificate Authorities, all con­
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
5
==PAGE:10==
tributing to the user being able to trust they are communicating with who they think they are.
2.2
Certificate Transparency Logs
Certificate Transparency (CT) logs aim to bring transparency and accountability to the issuance
of SSL/TLS certificates. They function as a public and verifiable record of all issued certifi­
cates, making it harder for certificate authorities (CAs) to issue malicious or mistaken certifi­
cates without getting noticed. These logs provide significant insight into the whole certificate
issuance ecosystem, allowing for better monitoring and visibility to the laymen, whilst also en­
abling browsers to protect against misissued certificates, or certificates that are in fact not au­
thorized by the organization, without having to revoke all certificates signed by the issuance
key.
Figure 2.1: Image describing CTL Flow taken from https://certificate.transparency.dev/howctworks/
Certificate Transparency Logs are generally broken up by year, with separate logs for testing,
pending inclusion, or miscellaneous purposes. In this thesis I have chosen to only include logs
that are actively being used by browsers and monitoring parties, following the list publicized by
transparency.dev [6]
6
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:11==
Log name
Size (number of certificates)
Google Argon 2023
1646013355
Google Argon 2024
175548146
Google Xenon 2023
1884603272
Google Xenon 2024
182657337
Cloudflare Nimbus 2022
805190085
Cloudflare Nimbus 2023
1164071343
Cloudflare Nimbus 2024
169438546
Digicert Nessie 2023
287166870
Digicert Nessie 2024
65738969
Digicert Yeti 2023
106052098
Digicert Yeti 2024
139471769
Log 2023
1516672
Log 2024
425934
Sabre
293959704
Let’s Encrypt Oak2022
494549333
Let’s Encrypt Oak2023
924164503
Let’s Encrypt Oak2024­h1
69977324
Let’s Encrypt Oak2024­h2
25861157
Table 2.1: Table show all CT logs and their respective sizing
All logs are merkel trees of base64 encoded X.509 certificates, usually pulled in batches of 32
or 256, with the exception of cloudflare which has a batch size of 1000.
2.2.1
X.509 Certificates
X.509 certificates are digital documents that bind a public key to an identity, typically the identity
of a server, a client, or even an individual. These certificates are essential for many security
protocols, such as SSL/TLS, which protects web traffic. In essence X.509 certificates serve as
digital ID cards, proving the authenticity of online entities and ensuring secure communication.
CAs act as the trusted entities or ”notaries” in this system, vouching for the authenticity of the
certificates they issue. The relationship between X.509 certificates and CAs is fundamental
to the trust model of the modern internet, allowing users to confidently and securely browse
websites, send emails, and perform other online activities.
Version: 3
Serial Number: 10:e6:fc:62:b7:41:8a:d5:00:5e:45:b6
Algorithm ID: sha256WithRSAEncryption
Issuer: C=BE, O=GlobalSign nv-sa, CN=GlobalSign Organization Validation CA - SHA256 - G2
Validity:
Not Before: Jan
1 00:00:00 2022 GMT
Not After : Dec 31 23:59:59 2022 GMT
Subject: CN=C=US, ST=California, L=San Francisco, O=Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., CN=*.example
Public Key: (A long string representing the public key)
Extensions:
Key Usage: Digital Signature, Key Encipherment
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
7
==PAGE:12==
Extended Key Usage: TLS Web Server Authentication, TLS Web Client Authentication
Subject Alternative Name: DNS:www.example.com, DNS:mail.example.com
Signature Algorithm: sha256WithRSAEncryption
Signature: (A long string representing the certificate's signature)
[7]
8
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:13==
3
Background
Attack Surface Mapping is the practice of identifying and categorizing all the different points
through which an attacker can exploit or extract data from an environment. This environment
could be a software application or a network. The objective of attack surface mapping is to
understand what the vulnerable areas of a system are, so that they can be fortified and moni­
tored for security breaches. A typical attack surface assessment is broken into 3 distinct steps:
Identification, Vulnerability and Risk Assessment, Remediation.
Identification is the process of discovering the various components that make up a given sys­
tem, software or network. For our purpose this could include, but is not limited to; Exposed IP
addresses (systems), domain names, software, APIs, endpoints, internal services, Third party
integrations, Files, Leaks, and Misconfigurations. Once all components have been identified,
a Risk and Vulnerability Assessment is made. Such an evaluation is based on the exposure
and function of any given component. Components are ranked based on their capacity to in­
flict damage on the business, its users, or its intellectual property. Remediation is the last step
and typically involves removing unnecessarily exposed items, hardening external services, and
taking steps to continually monitoring the landscape for any new areas of attack. This thesis
concerns itself only with the first two steps.
Attack surface mapping can be broken into two categories. Horizontal and Vertical attack sur­
face mapping. Horizontal mapping is the process of identifying a broad range of different com­
ponents with few if any direct relationships. Vertical mapping on the other hand is the act of
mapping In­depth information about a singular component, and identifying tightly coupled as­
sets thereof. As we will later see, the two datasets; CommonCrawl and Certificate Transparency
Logs each excel in their respective categories. A large part of academic research in regards
to web content has been focused on identifying phishing sites, malware, privacy and copyright
infringements, search, noise reduction, Natural Language Processing, and classifying sensi­
tive/harmful content. With little research on attack surfaces. The following will describe some
of the research in these areas relevant to this thesis’s objective, and how ideas from threat
research can be applied to attack surface mapping.
In the two papers: ”On the Ubiquity of Web Tracking: Insights from a Billion­Page Web Crawl[8]”
by Sebastian Schelter and ”Identifying Sensitive URLs at Web­Scale[9]” by Srdjan Matic —
we get insights into the intricacies of online tracking and data protection, shedding light on
overlapping concerns from two different perspectives. Schelter’s research delves deep into the
pervasive nature of third­party trackers across the web, by examining the prevalence of these
trackers. A particularly alarming insight was the discovery that even privacy­critical websites,
such as those pertaining to health and addiction, are not exempt from tracking, although they
tend to use trackers less frequently. Matic’s paper delves into the challenge of identifying URLs
that may contain sensitive content, touching on a critical aspect of data protection laws and
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
9
==PAGE:14==
attack surfaces. An unsettling revelation from Matic’s study is that a significant portion of these
sensitive URLs do not employ HTTPS, exposing them to potential security risks. Moreover,
the presence of persistent third­party cookies in a majority of sensitive web pages with third­
party cookies heightens the concerns about user data privacy. Both studies utilize the Common
Crawl dataset but approach the subject of web tracking and data protection from slightly different
angles. While Schelter focuses on the ubiquity of third­party trackers, providing a macroscopic
view of the tracking ecosystem, Matic delves into the granularity of sensitive URLs and Cookies.
Together the papers show that CommonCrawl not only proves an effective resource for data
mining, but also contain value metrics for identifying tracking campaigns, sensitive urls and
cookies across domains. All of which is valuable in attack surface mapping.
In “Can I Take Your Subdomain? Exploring Related­Domain Attacks in the Modern Web[10]”
Marco Squarcina adds to the subdomains and cookies research, by revealing the substantial
threats posed by adversaries controlling sibling domains of their target web applications. He
explores several dimensions, including cookies and domain relaxation; Highlighting the ease of
which we can connect domains but also the dangers. M. Squarcina did this by analyzing the
top 50K domains of the Tranco list.
Building on clustering and connections, in the paper ”A Domain is Only as Good as its Bud­
dies: Detecting Stealthy Malicious Domains via Graph Inference [11]” Khalil introduces novel
inference based techniques for pinpointing domains under the control of a singular entity. This
method delves deep into active DNS data, distinguishing public IPs from dedicated ones. This
distinction allows for the creation of accurate domain associations. The proposed method cir­
cumvents the shortcomings of existing approaches that overly rely on a simplistic “co­IP” rela­
tionship, where two domains resolve to an identical IP. While this approach was leveraged to
detect malicious domains, it can equally well find relations between ordinary domains. Herein
khalil introduces valuable heuristics in classifying IP addresses, which can equally well be ap­
plied to the data obtained from CommonCrawls WARC header, as will later be explored in the
method section.
Mizuno’s [12] work pivots towards the post­infection detection of malware­infected devices. By
examining HTTP headers, Mizuno seeks to discern between malicious and benign traffic, by
creating templates capable of distinguishing between the two. Such templates can equally well
be applied to legitimate domains. With HTTP headers being present in all CommonCrawl WARC
entries, this can in fact be done retroactively.
While the use of CommonCrawl and Certificate Transparency Logs is not unseen in security
related academia. It is not commonplace either. Their shared presence can however be seen
in open­source software. In attack surface mapping and identification two open­source tools
dominate the field, those being: Spiderfoot and Amass both integrating data from upwards of
200+ APIs. They both utilize the CommonCrawl URL index, which is an index of all URLs
crawled by CommonCrawl of a given domain. They also both utilize Certificate Transparency
Logs for organizational and subdomain lookups by drawing on 3rd party APIs. These methods
are very effective, if crude, lacking the nuances of content analysis as presented by the research.
10
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:15==
Building on the research presented above. This thesis will show how techniques from phish­
ing, tracking, malware detection, IP clustering and HTTP templating, can be applied on a web
scale, to identifying related domains and infrastructure. And how this is an effective method of
ascertaining attack­surfaces of an organization and a valuable tool in the defenders/attackers
toolbox.
3.1
Anatomy of a Web Presence
Websites have evolved over the years from static html pages and files to dynamic live updating
sites. This section will break down how websites in today’s world work, and the technologies
and ideas they are built upon. This is important for later understanding the effectiveness and
reasons for choosing and prioritizing certain features of a website over others, when clustering
domains, and mapping attack surfaces.
3.1.1
Domains and IPs
Domains are an integral component of the Domain Name System (DNS), which is designed
to translate human­readable names like ”example.com” into IP addresses, which are used by
network devices to locate web servers. Each domain corresponds to a specific IP address or
set thereof, enabling computers to locate one another over the internet. The process typically
begins when a user enters a domain into a web browser. This domain is then resolved through
a series of DNS servers, before finally returning the corresponding IP address.
DNS ensures that users can access websites using easily memorable domain names instead of
having to remember numerical IP addresses. Furthermore, domains are hierarchical, with the
TLDs (.com, .org) at the top, followed by second­level domains (”example” in ”example.com”),
and potentially further subdomains (“blog.example.com”). This hierarchy not only structures the
web but also facilitates domain management and delegation, allowing for scalability in address­
ing and routing.
Domains typically remain in control of the organization or individual owning it, resulting in them
controlling where traffic for a certain DNS query is directed, be it to their own servers or external
third party services such as content­delivery networks or caches. A typical approach when inter­
acting with third party services is to create subdomains pointing to their infrastructure, such as
cdn.example.com or files.example.com, having them handle parts of the traffic such as images.
3.1.2
Web Presentation
HTML (HyperText Markup Language) provides the structural backbone of a webpage, defining
content elements like headings, paragraphs, and multimedia embeddings through a series of
tags. Each of these elements can be uniquely identified and grouped, forming a hierarchical
document tree. HTML Describe how a page should be rendered by the web browser, and ulti­
mately defines what is shown to the user. It’s a structured format that is both human­readable
and machine­parsable, making it an excellent candidate for feature extraction in a security con­
text. The hierarchical nature of HTML, with its clearly defined tags and attributes, allows for easy
identification and extraction of key elements like hyperlinks, embedded resources, metadata,
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
11
==PAGE:16==
and script contents. Additionally these tags carry a lot of semantics about how they should be
used, and their function.
CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) complements this by determining the visual representation and
layout of these elements. It dictates properties like color, font, spacing, and positioning, en­
suring the content is displayed cohesively and attractively. JavaScript introduces dynamic in­
teractivity to the mix. It manipulates the html in real­time, enabling functionality such as form
validations, dynamic content updates, and interactions based on user events. Together, these
three technologies shape the structure, style, and functionality of the modern web, ensuring that
web content is organized, aesthetically pleasing, and interactive.
While the above remains the core technologies for use on the web, a recent shift has many
websites implementing most of their user interfaces in javascript alone, having it render the
associated html. This places much of the computational requirements of generating layouts
on the client rather than the backend, which then supplies data through APIs instead. Such
API typically require authentication of some kind, either through API keys or session cookies.
While these “new” frontends still compile down to HTML & CSS on the frontend, they do so in
bundles, which have a heavier upfront cost, but are more cache friendly. The bundles tend to
inline many of their resources (CSS and Javascript), causing fewer HTTP requests for fetching
dependencies.
3.1.3
Backend
HTTP/Web Servers are what everyone interacts with when browsing the internet. These servers
come with a default header format out of the box, which changes depending on configurations
made to its settings. A common approach in web development is using an HTTP server as a
reverse proxy, in charge of load balancing, caching, and SSL termination, before passing the
unencrypted request onwards to the backend (almost always over a private network). This setup
is sometimes modified to using an array of HTTP servers each with different responsibilities and
functions. Usually modification and usage of the HTTP headers are reserved for the servers
and the clients. The backend instead relays information through the body of the request, or
in the special case of using cookies. This is not a hard and fast rule, and with many backend
frameworks taking charge of HTTP server functioning as well, these lines become even more
blurred.
Unless the web­server only serves static files, it will usually be coupled with a server­side lan­
guage or a separate service for handling data processing,storage, application logic, and con­
ditional content delivery to clients. They generate HTML, CSS, JavaScript, JSON.. based on
various factors, such as user preferences, browser type, stored data, cookies and more. whilst
also handling tasks such as user authentication, database operations, data validation, and ses­
sion management. In essence the backend is where most of the logic behind function and
operations of a website lie.
The last operation typical of the backend is the operation of REST API. While the technical
structure and method of interaction is similar to regular web interaction, its purpose is entirely
12
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:17==
different. APIs, or Application Programming Interfaces, are sets of protocols and tools that
enable different software applications to communicate with each other. APIs define methods
and data formats that applications can use to request and exchange information. A distinctive
feature of REST APIs is that they communicate using structured formats such as JSON or
XML for effective machine parsing, and rarely if ever, contain any representational logic. Many
websites take advantage of third party APIs, for purposes such as retrieving maps, weather
forecasts, or stock trading prices. APIs generally allow people using them almost instantaneous
access to vast amounts of data without any of the storage or collection costs.
3.1.4
Performance
Improving load times is crucial for optimizing user experience and enhancing the overall perfor­
mance of web applications. To address this, caching and Content Delivery Networks (CDNs)
are commonly employed. Caching involves storing copies of frequently accessed data in high­
speed access areas, reducing the need to fetch the data from the original source repeatedly. For
instance, a web browser might cache static assets like images or scripts locally, so subsequent
page loads can retrieve them faster. On the backend, data that is computationally expensive to
generate can be cached to serve future requests more rapidly. CDNs take this concept glob­
ally. They are networks of distributed servers that store cached versions of static resources,
such as images, video, CSS, and JavaScript files. This concept has even been included in the
DNS protocol by the GeoDNS patch. This is done by resolving domains to IP’s closest to the
end user. This naturally requires the company to have multiple application servers in different
regions of the world, otherwise there is little benefit. As such repeatedly visiting the same site
will sometimes show the request terminating at different endpoints, which is most commonly
caused by load balancing on the caching or dns layer. At times CDNs will be combined with
Web Application Firewalls, these are typically employed in the form of a reverse proxy, autho­
rizing, checking and scanning the request before it is sent onwards to the target destination. A
popular provider of Web Application Firewalls, DDoS and CDN provider is cloudflare, in fact they
have become so popular, one will find most web traffic terminating at a cloudflare endpoint from
a client’s point of view. Such endpoints are also what is referred to as public endpoints/ip’s[11]
3.1.5
Analytics ans SEO
Both SEO (Search Engine Optimization) and analytics are critical components in increasing a
website’s visibility and understanding user interactions, respectively. SEO encompasses strate­
gies and techniques aimed at enhancing a website’s ranking on search engines such as Google
or Bing. On the other hand, analytics involves the collection, processing, and interpretation of
web data to discern user behavior and website performance. Tools like Google Analytics provide
insights into metrics such as the number of visitors, pages viewed, average session duration,
and bounce rate. This data assists owners and marketing departments in gauging the effec­
tiveness of content, user experience, and advertising campaigns. In other words, SEO draws
visitors to a site, while analytics offers the insights needed to know what keeps engaged and
drives conversions. The prevalence of tracking and analytics was most clearly illustrated by
Sebastian Schelter[8].
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
13
==PAGE:18==
4
Research Design
To reiterate, the key questions this thesis attempts to answer is: In what way can the Certificate
Transparency Log and CommonCrawl datasets be leveraged to map digital attack surfaces of
websites connected to the internet? In answering this question, the research and testing have
culminated in the creation of WorldView, a tool capable of processing, extracting, and analyzing
the data in the CommonCrawl dataset and Certificate Transparency Log datasets. This chapter
seeks to present the design of WorldView and how it aids in answering the research question.
First covering how and what data has been extracted from the two datasets. Followed by an
explanation of the grouping and post­processing, which answers the question on how related
infrastructure and domains are discovered. Lastly, It will cover how potentially sensitive assets
can be identified.
Figure 4.1: Worldview Flow
The overall function of WorldView can be broken into three main modes. The first mode is the
Extraction mode. Here all WARC archives from CommonCrawl are downloaded, broken up into
individual HTTP responses, and then processed in isolation. Meanwhile, all CT logs are crawled
and the extracted X.509 certificates parsed. From each singular item, be it a certificate or WARC
entry, a set of features are extracted. A feature is a piece of information describing an important
aspect of that entry, such as a hash value or an IP address. All features extracted from each
item are then written to various logs and data structures. The next stage is Feature Processing.
In this mode all logs are consolidated and data structures are read back, building sets of features
for each observed domain. Such a set could for instance contain all the ip addresses seen for
example.com. In this stage select indices are also built for quicker lookups. The last mode
is the Query Mode. Here, based on a query, all feature overlaps are found between domains
and clusters are formed based on the characteristics of each feature. Features have different
weights and biases based on heuristics resulting in only domains with significant overlap or
strong, and unique, features becoming related. Lastly the Query Mode also has an Evaluation
metric, in which all clusters are evaluated as a unit and potential risks are identified across
the entire cluster. The last phase can also be applied at scale. Where the entire dataset is
considered a single cluster, identifying possible sensitive domains across all domains in the
dataset.
14
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:19==
4.1
Extraction and Processing
The CommonCrawl dataset is an ungrouped dataset, consisting of 31000 files spread across
100 segments totalling 180 TiB in size. A page from a domain can appear in any of these
segments within any of the WARC files, and to get all pages of a domain, all WARC files need
to be read/processed. This makes storing them in a grouped data structure upfront very data
and compute intensive. Instead an approach was taken where each processed WARC file had
its features and meta­data extracted during processing written 13 different log files, which can
later be concatenated. This allows for selective preprocessing of results and easy distribution
of the extraction process across many different machines. CommonCrawl was processed by
110 virtual machines over a period of 2 weeks. All log files were compressed and uploaded to
an S3 bucket, and later concatenated into large segment sized log files on an analysis machine.
CT logs were processed by 10 virtual machines over the same time period.
Figure 4.2: Worldview Processing Routine
Feature extraction is at heart of effective clustering and grouping of related domains, IP ad­
dresses, and other network entities. By isolating crucial attributes, such as source and destina­
tion IP addresses, header names, and as well as content specific features devised from heuris­
tics one can organize extensive and ungrouped datasets into coherent, meaningful sets. These
sets are instrumental for later mapping out the relationships between different domains. This
process is called Clustering, and is the method of identifying affiliated domains that use over­
lapping resources or are of the same organization. Similarly, it can unveil connections between
seemingly unrelated domains. Through feature extraction, we are able to generate invaluable
insights into the relationships and affiliations between different network entities, thereby enhanc­
ing situational awareness and strengthening overall cybersecurity measures. In the following
section is a description of the 20 core relational features extracted from the WARC entries of
CommonCrawl and the X.509 certificates of the Certificate Transparency Logs. The 20 features
are based on ideas from research described in the Background section.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
15
==PAGE:20==
4.1.1
WARC
Each WARC record/entry consists of WARC headers containing meta­deta about a HTTP re­
quest and its associated HTTP response. The following fields of the WARC header are of special
interest: warc­target­uri, warc­date, warc­ip­address. With this information we can retroactively
re­create the DNS request made by the crawler and the DNS answer received, at the time the
page was crawled. This information is extracted and associated with each request as fields in
the logs http_misc and http_html. Using the DNS data derived from the WARC header, Com­
monCrawl clustering on IP addresses can be done using the same heuristics as Khalil[11] did
in their paper.
4.1.2
HTTP
Examining the HTTP headers we can start to say something about the server infrastructure in
place to handle the request made by the crawler. As the request progresses through the servers
to the backend and back to the client, the headers have been modified at each step. Forming
a very specific sequence of headers, unique to the settings of HTTP server(s) and the backend
processing it. Stated in RFC 7230: all HTTP header names are case­insensitive. Following
this, the headers are not normalized, as the casing itself becomes a fingerprint of the HTTP
servers.
Based on Mizuno[12]’s paper and Tobian Lewis Presentation[13], this thesis utilize their tech­
niques for creating quality templates of http headers, to construct noise free headers, which are
resistant to arbitrary routing and proxy headers and as a result stable across requests. This is
done by removing all variable fields from the headers, these include; Accept­Language, Date,
Expires, Content­Length, If­Modified­Since, Last­Modified, Set­Cookie, Proxy­*, X­Forward*. In
addition, high entropy strings are removed, as these likely define session or request ids. A Hash
(SHA256) of the HTTP header is then created by extracting all the headers, which are then con­
catenated in the order received and hashed. A Fingerprint in the form of a SHA256 hash is also
created, by only extracting the header names, which are then concatenated and hashed.
All Cookie names are extracted, the reason for not including values is these are generally high
entropy and random, varying greatly across requests. In addition to this, few cookies are valu­
able unless logged in or authenticated which the CommonCrawl Crawler is not. However, cookie
names are themselves sometimes unique, and as they are often set by the developer rather than
the http server, they give insight into the inner workings of the backend.
Lastly 2 fields are extracted from the HTTP headers if they are present, Server & Powered
By,. These might not always be present, and they can be set at will by the operator of the HTTP
server, however, if left at their default they can relay valuable information about the HTTP server
version and name, as well as the technology stack/backend behind it.
4.1.3
HTML
Traditionally websites are split into two sections the <head> and <body>. These sections have
different purposes. The head traditionally contains metadata, as well as information necessary
for the functioning and presentation of the page. The body contains all the visible elements.
16
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:21==
These are mostly organizational rules, and resources will occur in the body as well. Most web­
sites utilize the same set of resources throughout their pages, thus keeping the head identical
throughout the pages, with the exception of the title which is usually changed to reflect the cur­
rent page, whilst the body almost always changes. For thoroughness a SHA256 hash is created
from both of these sections respectively.
A Content Simhash is then generated from all the textual information on the page. That is
information contained with tags. Using techniques from (A. Saravanan), noise such as adverts
are removed from the page, also textual information from inline scripts and styles are excluded.
The remaining textual tokens of the webpage are then concatenated and a simhash is generated
over this string.
Hyperlinks, “links”, allow users to navigate to other pages or even different sections within the
same page. Except for the case of user generated content, these are elements put in place by
the developer / author of the page, and is the basis for referencing content elsewhere. Links are
the basis for algorithms such as PageRank which form the foundation for most search engines.
Due to the current SEO landscape, links, and especially backlinks, are very important for ranking
highly in search results, thus a lot of care is taken in placing a lot of links to other pages. As
a result we can find many instances of web sites linking to themselves or their sister sites. All
outgoing hyperlinks are extracted and grouped by domain. Forming a table of domain to domain
mappings. All relational links are rewritten according to the HTML specification[14].
External Resources are resources not present on the page, but loaded in, in rendering of the
page. In many cases these will be located on the same domain, or a third party CDN. The
only resources extracted are the ones related to the render and function of the page, these
are: scripts (javascript), styles, icons, link tags which are mis­attributed are also included for
thoroughness. These links are recorded in their completeness with urls and types, and grouped
on a domain basis.
Inline scripts are script tags located on pages with an associated string of code to be executed.
The element usually consists of minor pieces of code, handling singular functions, such as a
button press or form validation. Many popular content management systems allow for embed­
ding of code on pages through such tags. Their small size makes them a great target for copy
and pasting, sharing, and is one of the preferred ways to embed analytics and tracking into
pages. All Inline scripts are simhashed and stored together with the url of the page on which
they were found.
Inline Styles are similar to inline scripts, but rather than defining dynamic functionality, they de­
fine presentational rules, like their script counterparts they are usually small, and rarely consist
of more than a few rules. All Inline Styles are extracted and hashed using SHA256 and stored
together with the corresponding page.
4.1.4
ALL PAGES
The following are items extracted from all pages regardless of their mime type.
Files & File links are extracted by examining all hrefs, resources, and urls seen, they are run
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
17
==PAGE:22==
through a filter of possible dangerous names (see appendix), as well as sensitive file extension
(see appendix), any file triggering one of said rules will be logged, together with the trigger and
url. We log all urls seen, due to CommonCrawls crawling policy[15]. Relying on files that are
processed by commoncrawl will yield few files of interest, as these might be blocked by the
website’s policies. This method yields a list of files that can quickly be tested for their presence
by an external tool. This method also yields possibly new domains and subdomains which aren’t
actively crawled, but can be evaluated later on.
All HTTP Payloads are SHA256 hashed in their entirety. This allows for finding identical files
and resources across domains. These could be resource files for frameworks, images, pdfs
and more.
Api Keys are extracted from each page using regular expressions. A curated list of 27 types of
api keys (appendix A.1) have been created. These are chosen based on their uniqueness, low­
ering false­positives, and their usage and popularity. In addition to this they have been selected
due to their likelihood of being used across pages, thus being intimately tied to the owner/orga­
nization rather than an individual page. The following is a list of the regular expressions used,
and when it’s used
Artifacts are elements that carry with them uniqueness across contexts in the form of high en­
tropy strings. These usually come in the form of hashes, and are the basis for checksums and
hashed passwords. They are extracted using regular expressions (appendix A.3) from text and
code sections alike.
Keys are cryptographic private keys usually seen in PKI. Their representation on a page rarely
signifies a relation, but could be a clear vulnerability or leak. Four different private key formats
are extracted: RSA, OPENSSH, DSA, EC.
Trackers are snippets of code designed to track user behavior on a site, or group of sites. The
snippets require a tracking id to know which site to report the data to/on. Four large providers
of tracking across the web are Cloudflare, Facebook, Google, and Linkedin, varying in purpose
and function. The tracking ids are extracted from each page using various regular expressions
(appendix A.2) and stored with the domain they were found on.
The last item extracted from the HTTP responses are Emails. Emails are our personal mail­
boxes, and in business contexts are usually derived, or the same as, the internal username.
Emails are extracted using a singular regular expression, whereafter they are validated using
iana’s TLD list [16], to ensure they belong to valid domains.
4.1.5
X.509 CERTIFICATES
X.509 Certificates are all extracted from the Certificate Transparency Logs. This is done by
sequentially crawling the logs, extracting and decoding the certificates in batches of 32, 256,
1000 depending on the log. Three features are extracted from the logs: Organization, Orga­
nizational Unit, Domain. The domains are extracted from the Subject, Common Name, and
Alternate Names fields and validated before being logged. Commonly wildcards will appear
18
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:23==
in subject fields such as *.example.com, as part of the normalization this wildcard is removed.
These features are written to the ctl.log
4.1.6
LOGS
From the feature extraction the following logs are created with the associated feature contained
within.
Log Name
Features
http_html.log
timestamp, domain, ip, http fingerprint, payload hash, server, pow­
ered by, content type, head hash, body hash, content simhash, url
http_misc.log
timestamp, domain, ip, http fingerprint, payload hash, server, pow­
ered by, content type, url.
cookies.log
domain, cookie name,..., cookie name
html_link_outgoing.log
source domain, destination domain, number of links
resource_util.log
domain, url, type
resource_inline.log
simhash, domain, url
style_inline.log
hash, domain
interresting_files.log
domain, filename, category
keys.log
domain, key
emails.log
source domain, email domain, email
artifacts.log
domain, category, artifact value…, artifacts value
trackers.log
domain, provider, tracker id, …, tracker id
apikeys.log
domain, category, apikey value, …, apikey value
ctl.log
domain, organization, organizational unit
Once all logs have been written to S3, they are pulled to an analysis machine, where they
are concatenated into large segment sized logs. Whereafter, they are split into domain feature
sets. A Domain feature set is a collection of all features found for a select domain, this does
not include subdomains, which have their own sets. From table ?? it can be seen that all log
entries have an associated domain, this is the key used when forming the groupings. A Domain
Feature Set is created for all domains observed across the logs, even those not having any
records in CommonCrawl or CT Logs, as is the case for some hrefs. Such sets will be mostly
empty. When all Domain Feature Sets have been created, indexes are formed based on their
content, these indexes provide faster lookups as well as analytic capabilities. In total 7 indexes
are created.
Index name
Function
ip.index
An index mapping ip address to domains that resolve to it
file.index
An index of file, and file endings and the domains on which they were found
org.index
An index of organization to domain mappings
cookie.index
An index of cookie names and the domain on which they were observed
key.index
An index of Private keys and the domains on which they were seen
apikey.index
An index of apikeys and providers and the domains from which they were extracted
tracker.index
an index of trackers and providers and the domain on which they were extracted
Table 4.1: Table displaying the indices created and used
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
19
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Clustering
By clustering domains on extracted features and assigning a heuristic weight to each feature
type, we can piece together a list of domains, which we can say, with reasonable certainty, are
related. The clustering of domains is a 3­step recursive process, starting with a lookup in the
org.index. Using this index a domain can quickly be expanded to a set of related domains.
Should one or more of them be associated with an organization, potentially other domains
signed to that organization can be added to the cluster. Using these domains, their feature
sets are found, and a first run is made through the collective feature sets looking for related
ones ­ using the indices where applicable.
Figure 4.3: Worldview Clustering Routine
Any slightly related feature sets will be compared in its entirety against the origin feature set
evaluating similarities and relationships. Each domain triggering on multiple selectors, or a
single strong one, will be considered related, and added to the cluster. The processes can be
run recursively for each domain found forming a potentially large graph of tiered relationships.
4.2.1
Scoring
Scoring is the process of assigning a numerical value to a feature, which can be summed across
all matching features of a domain resulting in a “relational score”. This score is an efficient way
to quickly ascertain which domain merits further investigation and should be tasked for collection
in the next run, and which should be discarded.
All feature types are initialized with max value, describing the max score that matches of that
type can yield. If multiple items exist within that category, say multiple different HTTP Fin­
gerprints, a proportion based evaluation is made (for select features), such that each item is
evaluated according to the amount of times that selector has occurred in relation to the domain.
20
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.4: Selector Value Algorithm
This further reinforces a wish for multiple selectors to match, to significantly increase the score.
Figure 4.5: Selector Score Algorithm
The selector score for a group of matches can then be calculated using the Selector Score Algo­
rithm (above), this algorithm uses exponential decay, to punish many matches. A HALF_LIFE is
defined separately for each feature type. A score is calculated for each domain to domain fea­
ture match, which is then summed across all matches for that domain. If the resulting summed
score is above 2000 the domains are considered extremely correlated, above 1000 the domains
are considered significantly related. A score above 700 is considered strongly related, above
500 is considered related, and below that are weakly­related. Any domain resulting in an ex­
treme correlation (>2000 score), will have their organization and domains thereof correlated as
well.
As can be seen from the table 4.2 4 features are favored: organizational overlap, Apikey reuse
and Tracker reuse. These items are generally considered unique on a per domain / per or­
ganization basis, thus their overlap between different domains signifies an organizational and
operational overlap as well. The remainder of this section will explain how the selectors are
pre­processed and matched.
IP addresses serve as unique identifiers for devices on a network, much like how a street ad­
dress identifies a location. As such they form a basis for connecting domains and web pages by
their associated DNS answer. These relationships cannot be taken at face value, as highlighted
by Khalil [11] in their work on detecting malicious domains using DNS data. IPs can generally be
grouped into two categories: dedicated and shared. IPs address blocks allocated by IANA (In­
ternet Assigned Numbers Authority) to various organizations and governments based on need
and pricing. An IP address block is considered Dedicated if it’s used by the assignee for their
own infrastructure. Shared IP addresses are also owned by the assignee but are leased, bor­
rowed or used by third parties. VPS (Virtual Private Server), Cloud Hosting, Proxies, and are
examples of Shared IPs. By using lookup tables of SharedIPs belonging to cloud, dns, and
proxy providers, most such IPs are flagged, and a penalty applied to the max_selector_score.
This penalty prevents it from forming relations on its own (now less than 500). In addition to
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
21
==PAGE:26==
Selector Type
Half­life
Max Selector Value
Organization
INF (won’t decay)
2000
Domain
INF (won’t decay)
1000
VHost
40
400
TLD Domain
30
800
URI Occurrence
10
200
HTTP Fingerprint
10
600
HTTP Payload
15
100
HTML Head Hash
15
1000
HTML Body Hash
15
1000
HTML Content Simhash
15
1000
IP
20
(300/700)
Cookie
15
400
External Resource
15
500
Inline Resource
15
800
Inline Style
15
500
Artifact
10
200
Apikeys
30
1000
Trackers
20
1000
Email Links
10
200
Table 4.2: Table displaying the weights and half­lifes for each feature type
this, if any IP has too many relations (>1000), said IP will be flagged as a SharedIP and penal­
ized as well. With most pages in CommonCrawl having 1000s of responses, any DNS based
load balancing taking place should be reflected in the list of IP and occurrences in the Domain
Feature Set, usually with a somewhat even spread. All IPs are matched directly on the selector
IP using string based matching.
Where IP clusters are formed in the above step, this goes a few steps deeper, and profiles the
communication protocol, HTTP. The clustering favors HTTP fingerprints over cookies, as these
are much more unique. Cookies however, are not neglected completely, as unique tracking
cookies and naming does occur, therefore cookies have a rather high value, accompanied by a
low half­life. The HTTP fingerprints and Cookies are matched as is against the features.
APIKeys and Trackers are both operational fingerprints. They are used to access and use third
party resources. Benefits are often gained from using these across an organization’s sites,
such as improved insights, and resource management, which make them ideal selectors for
grouping otherwise unrelated sites. As such they both valued high in scoring. Pages can be
strongly related solely based on one of these alone.
Content based relations are formed based on a simhash of the textual content, which is then
compared to all simhashes of the target page, this is done by calculating the hamming distance
between the two hashes, a hamming distance of less than 7 constitutes a match. This is suffi­
ciently small to capture snippets where api keys or domains have been changed but will reject
most larger code / structural changes. HTML Body and Head hashes are compared for identi­
fying identical pages, but generally forms very few relations as these tend to be very dynamic.
22
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:27==
The source of all email for domains are also recorded for finding where an email was mentioned.
This catches relations between contact details for corporations and individuals reusing the same
email across different websites. They don’t rank highly on their own, as emails can typically be
found on forums or in blog posts not having any relations to the domain other than mentioning
them.
Inline styles are Resources rank highly due to a heuristic evaluation of them commonly being
reused by organization across sites, in addition to this, with purely javascript based frontends
becoming the norm, and such frontend being bundled together by tools such as webpack and
babel, many styles and javascripts will be inlined for efficiency in distribution process. If the
frontend is in fact packed, the scripts and styles final hash will be unique as a result of the
settings of the packer, making different hashes for two similar code/style snippets, unless the
same packer settings are used. The inherent uniqueness thereof, results in such matches
scoring highly, but with a sufficiently low half­life to filter off reusable and publicly shared scripts
and styles. Their counterparts, the loaded scripts and styles, provide the bulk of most rendering
code, are matched solely on occurrence and overlap.
Four groupings on domains are used: Domain, TLD Domain, Vhost, URI Occurrence. These
reflect various ways domain and organizational names are used in domains and URIs. The
Domain group is a collection of all subdomains of a given domain, these are considered owned
and operated by the website thus there is a high score, and no fall off associated with the scoring
of these. The TLD Domain group consists of all domains where the root of the domain is the
same but the TLD (Top Level Domain) differs. Examples of these are example.com, example.dk.
The Vhost group is where the root of the domain occurs in the subdomain(s) of other domains.
such as airbnb in airbnb.salesforce.com. Vhosts are great for finding 3rd party services used
by an organization or site. When a domain triggers on both a vhost and resources this is often
an indication of a 3rd party CDN, whereas when a vhost and tracking ids co­occur indicates a
remote hosted service, such as landing page or blog. Vhosts by themselves are not enough
to cause a relation, but still have enough weight such that if combined with other selectors will
cause a match. Similarly to Vhost, URI Occurence is a method of finding third party services.
URI Occurrences are matches where the root of a domain is present in some element of the
path ie. /example/airbnb/index.html.
Organizational relations are found by matching a domain’s certificates to the organization which
they are issued to. It is then possible to relate a domain with that of a cluster of others related
to the same organization.
4.3
Evaluation
Once clusters of related domains have been identified, one can look at what artifacts and infor­
mation might have been left behind, and what endpoints could be of value to a potential attacker.
It’s rare to find glaring security flaws by examining web content in isolation. However based on
naming, files and services at risk assets can be identified.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
23
==PAGE:28==
4.3.1
Content Leaks
Content leaks occur when a website inadvertently exposes crucial or sensitive information to
unauthorized individuals or entities. This unintentional exposure can result from various factors,
such as poor security measures, coding errors, oversights, misconfigurations and most often,
forgetfulness. In this context we will build on the grouping we did in the previous chapter, where
we used some of the same selectors as a grouping mechanism. Three of the most common
leaks in increasing order of severity are: emails, api keys and secrets ­ such as encryption keys
and passwords.
API Keys previously used for clustering, can themselves be exploited or misused by adversaries.
The most prevalent threat scenario is that of “Quota Hijacking”, where an API key is used by an
adversary to access resources and quotas paid for by the victim, who could quickly have their
quota exhausted or be imposed with significant additional bills, all depending on the scale of
the misuse. API keys from the above table will be considered a potential weakness.
An item of note is leaked cryptographic keys. These are rarely seen in web data, but when
they are, their presence warrants attention. Using tools such as driftwood[17] one can begin to
connect keys with domains and potential endpoints. This not only allows for some additional
clustering, but shows where a key might be used for login or which domains are vulnerable to
interception and decryption of their traffic.
4.3.2
Sensitive Files & Endpoints
Examining the subdomains and the URI paths, is valuable when trying to ascertain what ser­
vice a given endpoint / domain provides, and what the types of resources affiliated with that
service. Furthermore examining hrefs and files it is possible to start piecing together a view of
the hosted resources on the domain. By matching all URLs and domains seen against lookup
tables consisting of dangerous file endings and possibly unsafe endpoints. It’s possible to iden­
tify resources that have mistakenly been exposed, files that should have been kept private, or
endpoints usually associated with sensitive operations or internal use. During the processing
of CommonCrawl and CT Logs all links to websites and domains are run through such lookup
tables, such that possible interesting urls are saved for this evaluation. This is done even when
the commoncrawl crawler hasn’t actively crawled that url.
Figure 4.6: Domain Parts
The four parts of the url which are evaluated are the subdomain(s), path, filename and its as­
sociated extension, if any. The subdomains are matched against a wordlist of common vpn,
authentication, testing and development software names and its associated nomenclature. The
file extension is matched against a lookup table constructed from most mainstream extensions
24
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:29==
associated with files pertaining to backups, virtualization, compression, databases / storage,
emails, financial documents, malware and ransomware. Originally the lists retrieved from file­
extensions.org [18], all have been altered to a certain extent to remove mis­cataloged exten­
sions, duplicate entries across categories, and lessen false­positives (see appendix for full mod­
ified table). Lastly the Path and File name are evaluated both individually and together against a
wordlist of sensitive endpoints associated with authentication, file uploads, as well as malicious
resources such as malware and webshells.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
25
==PAGE:30==
5
Results
This chapter will present the results identified by applying the methodology above in an attack
surface mapping context to connect domains and identify at risk assets. The culmination of
it, has resulted in the creation of multiple datasets and indexes. Whose use cases will be ex­
plored below. It should however be noted that the possible utilization vectors for the resulting
datasets is manyfold, and expand beyond the ones mentioned in this chapter. Additional meth­
ods will be included in discussion, with ideas on how to use those as a staging point for further
investigations.
The first part of the chapter will explore the data at scale, by examining the holistic features of
the data collected from CommonCrawl and CT Logs. Building on this, the thesis will explore
clusters formed from single domains, what resources, organizations, domains and risks were
identified, before diving into key takeaways from their respective clusterings.
Overall, the chapter concludes that CommonCrawl is particularly effective in identifying related
top­level domains belonging to the same organization, such as example.dk and example.com,
and confirming their shared ownership. As well as being an excellent source of data for identi­
fying inadvertently leaked company secrets, such as API keys, and other sensitive information
such as files. CTLs excels in regards to identifying subdomains, including potentially sensitive
domains used for internal testing and administration. In some cases CTLs they can be used to
cluster related domains through organizations, but this is hampered by the prevalence of free
and widely­used certificate authorities, such as Lets Encrypt.
5.1
Identifying at risk assets at scale
The processes of identifying risks will focus on targeting features signifying an increased risk
of exploitation, or which are of a high value to a potential attacker. This information will then be
correlated to domains and organizations to get a view of the exposure of said feature.
In table 5.1 a list of groupings and indices made up of features from the joint commoncrawl
and CTL log datasets can be seen. They share that they are all grouped by domains or map
to domains, forming tables for querying and correlation. Going through their sizes we find that;
Through CommonCrawl a total of 1,175,728,590 HTTP responses were processed which had
links to 113,907,744 domains. Of these, 34,264,542 domains were part of the crawled Common­
Crawl subset, which produced the HTTP responses analyzed herein. The domains resolved to a
combined 4,250,253 different IP addresses between May and July 2023. From CT logs a total of
8,436,406,417 certificates were parsed across 18 CT logs. Resulting in a total of 1,047,538,545
unique domains belonging to 541,231 organizations.
26
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:31==
Identifier
CommonCrawl
CT Logs
Total
Domains
113,907,744
1,047,538,545
1,161,446,289
— Root Domains
33,014,376
213,170,941
246,185,317
— Sub Domains
80,891,368
834,367,604
915,258,972
Organizations
­
541,231
541,231
HTTP Fingerprints
2,179,870
­
2,179,870
IPs
4,250,253
­
4,250,253
Files of Interest
60,997,888
­
60,997,888
URLs
1.175.728.590
­
1.175.728.590
Cookies
6,615,341
­
6,615,341
Keys
2,974
­
2,974
Servers
60,970
­
60,970
Emails
49,508,205
­
49,508,205
Apikeys
826,287
­
826,287
Trackers
14,774,245
­
14,774,245
Table 5.1: Table showing key feature categories and their presence across the entire dataset
For organizational purposes many functions of a domain are placed on subdomains. As such
identifying these functions and ascertaining their risks is a prime goal of any attack surface map­
ping. From the domain groupings we see a general ratio of 3,71 subdomains per root domain.
This ratio is pushed up by CT logs, which have a much higher ratio of domains to subdomain
(3,91) than CommonCrawl (2,45). CommonCrawl prefers crawling www. domains. As a result
any domain following the convention of placing web resources on the www. subdomain, will
have a subdomain identified along with a root. This also means a large part of the subdomains
from CommonCrawl are www. domains. The ratio between domains and subdomains explains
the effectiveness in finding naming related resources of a given domain. In this regard CT logs
proved a more effective datasource. Which is not unexpected as CT logs include data related
to many aspects of web operations not directly involved in the handling of HTTPs.
Evaluating the subdomains against the risk_words list (appendix A.4) consisting of commonly
used development and system terms, we map out possible dangerous/sensitive subdomains,
across the entire dataset.
Category
#domains
#Domains belong to org
#Organizations
Administration & Authentication
31,171,978
2,387,043
20,329
Files & Backups
7,095,183
574,370
19,439
Development and Testing
9,868,979
536,617
14,472
Systems and Integrations
101,898,028
11,780,842
73,466
Total
143,072,273
15,240,278
92,956
Table 5.2: Table showing the global numbers of sensitive domain across categories
From table 5.5 we find 143,072,273 (12%) publicly linked/listed domains are of a sensitive na­
ture. Among these 15,240,278 could be directly linked to organizations. Showing that as a
minimum 92,956, or 17% of identified organizations have sensitive domains exposed to the
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
27
==PAGE:32==
public, or at least, known by the public. These are spread across four categories. Administra­
tion & Authentication (31,171,987 million domains) consists of subdomains related to account
management, system administration, and virtual private server administration. If compromised,
an organization can lose immense amounts of valuable and PPI information or complete control
of its infrastructure. Files & backups (7,095,183 million domains) make of log files, backup end­
points but also include file sharing resources and object storage. These often contain sensitive
and operational information. File Shares are especially susceptible to directory listing attacks.
Development & Testing (9,868,979 million domains) are domains used for testing, staging and
generally pre prediction environments. These generally contain code and resources not yet fit
for public use. Such systems generally don’t have the same monitoring, patching and security
measures as production systems, and have not undergone the same rigorous testing. Systems
and Integrations (101,898,028 million domains) are often 3rd party self hosted services, such
as gitlab, VPNs, email services. While not as vulnerable as the other 3 categories, these gen­
erally make up components critical to operations. A domain’s presence in one (or more) of the
above categories doesn’t mean it is vulnerable. Given the thesis’ emphasis on passive attack
surface identification, many of the domains haven’t been probed or interacted with directly, as
such their exact functions can only be guessed from the naming. But said naming does warrant
increased attention.
The 60,997,888 files found can be distributed across 7 categories see table 5.3. Most of them
haven’t been crawled directly, but rather are linked to from pages crawled. As such the au­
thenticity of the files is questionable unless verified outside of the datasets. File names seen
are matched against lists of sensitive files and file extensions[18], from which common and
ubiquitous filenames and extensions have been removed to reduce false­positives.
File endings are rarely a random add­on to a filename. For many applications the extension
serves a very specific purpose. By mapping out file endings and grouping them into categories
based on these purposes, it’s possible to deduce certain aspects of the system serving the
files, and their use case. This grouping can be seen in table 5.3. Observing the malware and
ransomware categories, there is a significant difference between the amount of files seen and
the number of domains on which they are observed, resulting in upwards of 371 malware related
links per domain. The same is true for ransomware related files which has a proportionality of
260. In both cases observing the overall ratio between files seen and domains on which they
are present, is an indicator of purpose and function of the system. As an example a domain
responding with many malware related files is likely to either be a compromised host used for
malware distribution of a C2 server.
28
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:33==
File Type
Count
Domains
Malware
1,229,425
3,308
Ransomware
2,192,588
8,410
Financial
5,347,448
22,044
Compressed
28,705,523
196,115
Virtualization
118,668
3,275
Backup
16,733,649 (csv is a heavy influence)
71,729
Database
6,670,587
30,852
Total
60,997,888
335,733
Table 5.3: Table showing files grouped by the file­extensions.org[18] categories
The above categories are rough groupings. In total across all 335,733 domains, 60,997,888
sensitive files were found. This number is not representative of actual vulnerability as there
are many false positives. Shared by them all is the possibility of them being dangerous to an
organization. The malware category is a grouping of files seen which have associations to
malware and malware distribution. A common approach amongst malware distributors and bad
actors is to use legitimate domains for hosting malware[19], especially when those domains
are on the clear net. As such the malware (1,229,425 files across 3,308 domains) category
of files signifies true danger to the associated domains/organizations. Ransomware files (on
8,410 domains) indicate domains, and especially file shares which have been compromised,
and encrypted by bad actors. Like their malware counterpart they likely signify victims rather
than perpetrators. A presence in either group indicates a risk. A total of 28,705,523 compressed
files across 196,115 domains were seen. Compressed files are common for storing large data
sets and dumps, and many backups are stored this way. While the presence of a compressed
file does not indicate danger by itself, omitting them would neglect their primary use, that of
optimizing storage and transportation for other classes of files, primarily large ones. Database
files are files typically involved in storing the schema of databases, or data contained therein,
they also represent the formats and files used for querying and interacting with databases.
Database and backup files reveal sensitive details of the inner workings of an operation, and
often contain business data. A total of 6,670,587 database files were found on 30852 domains
and 16,733,649 backup files on 71,729 domains. The backups file number is very high, which is
due to .csv being in the set. CSV files are used for many different purposes, from spreadsheets,
graph exports, to database imports. From the name analysis it’s not possible to determine if
any csv file by itself poses a risk, but like compressed files, any format used for transporting raw
data should be validated, and any left unseen/unchecked is a potential vector of attack. The
financial category consists of documents related to the storing and processing of financial data,
such as tax filing and business expenses. The virtualization category are files related to images
of virtual machines or hypervisor databases.
Api Keys are generally used for clustering. A few however can be exploited and used by a mali­
cious third party. Those are highlighted in bold in figure X. Little to no authentication is generally
required besides these keys, which not only makes them dangerous, but also incredibly easy
to take advantage of.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
29
==PAGE:34==
Key
#Keys
#Domains
#Domains belong to org
#Organizations
Shopify Access Token
526
500
9
8
Google FCM
271
346
10
10
Stripe Public Key
204001
307987
2293
1542
Stripe Secret Key
344
858
6
5
Facebook Access Token
24
26
0
0
Slack Webhook
96
151
9
8
Mailgun Key
49099
4933
737
183
Square App Secret
512
52088
108
87
Square Access Token
2
2
1
1
Twilio Key
193
204
17
15
Cloudinary Key
1
1
0
0
AWS SNS
317
184
14
12
AWS Access Key
41297
23638
1589
867
NUGet Key
3839
266
9
8
Facebook Secret Key
347799
9834
149
122
Google Cloud Key
147002
388140
9782
5266
Google Oauth Key
17612
148720
1520
915
Google Oauth Token
2245
2775
55
49
New Relic Insight Key
12
12
4
3
SendGrid Key
149
156
8
5
Square Oath Token
1
1
0
0
Bitly Token
10537
4931
157
89
Github PAT
232
233
34
23
Github Oauth
176
142
34
23
Table 5.4: Table showing all apikeys found across CommonCrawl
Across all domains 3902 API Keys were found spanning 4907 domains, all these can be mis­
used with very little effort. In addition to those 49099 Mailgun Api Keys we found across 4933
domains. Leaked mail keys can allow for spam campaigns to impersonate companies and
should generally be taken very seriously.
In total collecting all information across the tables, we can identify possible areas of attack
as well as information and authentication leakages of domains and organizations at scale. To
further ascertain risk, only select data will be included in this. Files will be from the categories
of malware, ransomware, backups and databases. Endpoints will be of Administration and
Authentication, Files and Backups, and Development and Testing. Apikeys will contain all bold
faced API Keys. The table includes only unique domains and organizations.
Category
#domains
#Domains belong to org
#Organizations
Files
106,051
8,319
4,308
Endpoints
47,341,757
3,480,705
38,181
Apikeys
9,747
873
270
Total (unique)
47,351,483
3,489,721
40,132
Table 5.5: Showing possible sensitive domains and organization across categories
30
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:35==
As per the results we find that of the 1,161,446,289 domains seen and 1,175,728,590 HTTP
responses processed, a total of 47,351,483 domains show signs of risks, of these 106,051
thousands are related to files, 47,341,757 related to sensitive naming, and 9,747 shows signs of
leaking API keys not fit for public usage. In total these domains can be tied to 40,132 thousands
organizations through CT Logs, but with a shadow number of 43,861,762 unattributed domains.
5.2
Identification of organizational Infrastructure & risks
Using the clustering and vulnerability assessment methods described in the Research Design
chapter, this section will outline the effectiveness of grouping by related resources to significantly
lower the noise, and get a view of an entire organization or domain’s attack surface as it’s
presented in the datasets. Where the first section in this chapter looked at all domains and
organizations and narrowed the number down by filtering on sensitive resources, this section
takes the reverse approach by looking at domains and organizations filtering away all unrelated
resources to then find sensitive resources. The approach for risk identification is the same
however, and as such focus will be on the clustering.
A total of 25 domains were analyzed, for brevity this section will cover only two: ikea.com
and airbnb.com. The core finding for the remaining 23 can be found in appendix B.1. The
domains have been chosen due to them being owned by organizations of a fair size which are
multinational and among the most visited websites nationally or globally. While being in different
industries, to limit the effect of single selector being advantageous.
When clustering, two selectors types are especially favored. Api Keys, mentioned in the previ­
ous chapter, and Trackers. In table 5.6 a list of statistics for all trackers seen can be found. Of
the 33 million pages in CommonCrawl, google trackers were found on 36% of them. Facebook
trackers were found on 0.5% of domains or 1̃.5 million. Lastly linkedin and Cloudflare were
present on a little less than 100 thousand domains each.
Provider
#trackers
#domains
#Domains belong to org
#Organizations
%Pages
Google
13389879
12449910
220739
95950
36,3
Facebook
1305392
1561093
29234
18300
0.45
Cloudflare
5454
40815
197
115
0.0
LinkedIn
73520
91913
5543
3596
0.0
Table 5.6: Table showing all trackers found across domains
The relationship between the number of trackers and domains on which they are found, is
vital to their usage as a clustering metric. Cloudflare is especially good, seen on average on
7.4 domains per tracking id. Its representation in the data is however much smaller than its
counterparts. Linkedin and Cloudflare have ratios of 1.25 and 1.19 respectively. Google is
0.92, which is partly affected by false positives (angular tags and html category tags), and by
the prevalence of using many google trackers on a single domain for tracking various campaigns
and elements. False positives are removed by the scoring algorithm as their footprint is easily
discernible through sheer relation count. As such google trackers remain a good clustering
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: Illustration of clustering on APIKEYs belonging to airbnb
metrics. One off trackers, as seen a lot in the case of google trackers, have little to no relations
to foreign domains, and do not affect the relationships but will show as elevated numbers.
AIRBNB.COM
IKEA.COM
Domains (tlds and roots)
159
64
Subdomains
2316
1358
Related Organizations
1
16
IP address
1862
307
3rd Party Services
128
167
Sensitive files
(10)
1
Secrets
0
0
Sensitive Endpoints
75 (+13)
60 (+13)
Emails
3096
301
Apikeys
28
0
Trackers
2093
387
HTTP Servers
6
10
Table 5.7: Table showing findings for the airbnb and ikea clusters respectively
In figure 5.7 we see a breakdown of the features found for ikea and airbnb. The results have
been collected by a recursive search going 2 levels deep. Anything with a relational score higher
than 500 is reflected in the table above. In the case of airbnb, Api Keys proved to be a very
effective way to cluster domains. Logically companies tend to consolidate resources across
their subsidiaries to ease operations and cut costs. This is very clearly illustrated in the case of
airbnb.
32
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.2: Diagram showing the 25 relational trackers of ikea domains
Across the domains found to be related to airbnb, a total of 28 api keys were found forming re­
lations to 186 domains, of these a single key AIzaSyAytC_TusuhG7kpNQ19hMrCzXDIUjd307o
formed relations to 168 airbnb domains & subdomains all of which were correctly identified, and
validated to be in fact airbnb domains. Out of the 28 keys 10 proved to be false­positives, all
of which were extracted from a third party domain airbnb. Combined these 10 keys formed a
single erroneous relation to the (sub)domain aleweb.ncl.edu.tw.
0 API Keys were identified as belonging to ikea. Instead they had 387 trackers identified across
domains, of these 362 one off google trackers directly relating to ikea.com and had no other
relations (campaign trackers). Of the remaining 25: 1 was a misidentified tag, 17 were third
party trackers related to their magazines (all of which related to the same domains), and 7 were
IKEA’s own trackers. Of these 6 were google trackers and 1 was a Linkedin tracker. Across
confirmed ikea trackers a total of 37 domains were discovered. The third party trackers and
misidentified tracker resulted in no relations being formed due to their high relational count to
other domains, which the scoring algorithm actively punishes. Airbnb also reported a plenitude
of trackers, but all were related to already seen ones (improving their relational strength) or had
no relations to foreign domains.
Organizations are found, by taking all domains across the cluster with a strong correlation to
the origin and then doing a reverse search against the organization index. By doing so we can
expand our current view of the domains, into one associated with organizations. Any organi­
zation operating strongly related domains will through relation be considered first class citizens
in the cluster, forming new ground to relate / associate domains, and the organizations related
domains.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
33
==PAGE:38==
Organization
Domains
Subdomains
dfi home furnishings taiwan limited (IKEA TAIWAN MANAGER)
1
5
ikea industry ab ( IKEA )
3
9
ikea it ab ( IKEA )
16
287
mapa mobilya ve aksesuar pazarlama a.ş. ( IKEA TURKEY)
3
14
pt rumah mebel nusantara ( IKEA INDONESIA )
1
1
inter ikea systems b.v ( IKEA )
6
30
inter ikea systems b.v (with space) ( IKEA )
43
1039
ghassan ahmed al sulaiman furniture trading co ( IKEA Bahrain )
2
5
h.m. house market (cyprus) ltd ( IKEA CYPRUS MANAGER )
1
1
the dairy farm company, limited ( IKEA HONGKONG DISTRIBUTOR )
2
5
al­homaizi limited gen. trad. & cont. co. wll. ( IKEA Kuwait)
1
1
Total
64
1358
Weakly Related By Vhost (not included)
khoros, llc
515
1204
adobe systems incorporated
7020
10847
microsoft corporation
60371
86812921
salesforce.com, inc.
16284
131606
ikano bank ab (publ)
59
421
Table 5.9: Table showing all organizations related to ikea.com and its related domains
Organization
Domains
Subdomains
Airbnb, Inc.
122
2228
Table 5.8: Table showing all organizations related to airbnb.com and its related domains
In table 5.8 and table 5.9 we see the organization related to the two domains. A single orga­
nization was identified for airbnb; airbnb, inc. which has a listed 122 domains as well as 2228
subdomains. Ikea on the other hand had a reported 16 organizations, 11 of which are strongly
related. Upon manual verification all 11 turned out to be ikea affiliated, either as being ikea
storefront or ikea distributors. In all 64 domains and 1358 domains were found through those
organizations.
Once all related domains have been found for a given domain through relational or organiza­
tional means, all selectors for the respective domains are grouped. If the domains are present
in CommonCrawl they will have associated IP addresses. These ip addresses only map to do­
mains found through relations in features from CommonCrawl, as no ip data can be found in
CT logs. Together the domains and IP give a view of functions and purpose together with the
physical infrastructure of a cluster.
In total for Airbnb the attack surfaces consist of: 159 domains and 2316 subdomains which
mapped to 1862 IP addresses. Across these domains 10 sensitive files where found on the
3rd party website databarn.cow.net which included: 2 backups files (pbb, gho) 3 financial files
(cht, 210, des), 1 sys file as well as 4 database files (nfo, his, log). From the 2316 subdomains
34
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:39==
75 were deemed sensitive, primarily consisting of development and staging domains, with an
additional 13 Systems & Infrastructure domains, among these were gitlab and vps’ (appendix
B.2). All http responses from airbnb domains came from one of 6 different http server servers:
cloudflare, ALEPH/5.20, Apache, Vercel,openresty, and nginx.
For Ikea the attack surface consists of: 64 domains and 1358 subdomains spanning 307 IP
addresses. On ikea related domains a single sensitive file in the form of a dll was found on
TSEELM­NT4305.ikea.com. The purpose of this is unknown as these are generally not shared
in this way, but could be a potential danger. 60 sensitive domains were identified, which like
airbnb were mainly development and staging environments. Notably there were quite a few
related to checkouts, which could be dangerous. 13 System and Integrations domains were
found, mostly related to email handling (appendix B.3) . 10 Http servers were seen respond­
ing: Kestrel, Apache, IHP3 Server, cloudflare, Microsoft­HTTPAPI/2.0 Microsoft­HTTPAPI/2.0
INGKA Server, nginx, IKEA Server, InteriorVista Server, AkamaiNetStorage Lastly 3096 emails
were found for airbnb and 307 for ikea. They’ve been included in the results of all categories so
far, with almost 50 million being found in total in CommonCrawl. Emails are notoriously hard to
ascertain dangers of. They generally only work if shared, which means their mere presence is
often on purpose. On the other hand they are a vital part of an organization’s attack surface as
they can be used for spear phishing and impersonations, and organizational mapping. Ascer­
taining their danger is therefore difficult without using third party services, ideas on which will
be mentioned in the discussion.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
35
==PAGE:40==
6
Discussion
The results illustrate that analysis, feature extraction, and heuristic clustering of CommonCrawl
and CT logs, is an effective way to map out infrastructure and risks. First domains were evalu­
ated at scale by looking at naming, files and api keys to ascertain risks. The same risk model
was then applied to clusters of domains formed from airbnb and ikea. Which highlighted the ef­
fectiveness of using the two datasets in combination, and how organizational and web relational
content complemented each other in expanding the identified attack surface.
This clustering was achieved using a uniform scoring algorithm; Which made it possible with
reasonable certainty to deduce whether two domains had sufficient overlap to be considered
related. Doing this across all domains, resulted in the identification of the origin domains related
domains, and by consequence, its attack surface. The algorithm performed really well in two
cases: First, In identifying new domains having small or non­discernable overlap with the origin
domain. Secondly In discerning whether domains with similar names were in fact related. This
was most clearly seen in the case of airbnb which has 186 domains clustered on an APIKey
first, which was backed up with resource overlaps and naming overlaps. The goal was to create
an algorithm that could find relations between a diverse set of domains. To combat excessive
amounts of false­positives certain features were favored and conservative defaults were set for
the remaining features. For some sites these defaults proved too harsh. Organizations, such as
marketing agencies that administer many different sites using the same tracker / api key could
have said feature “invalidated” purely by the number of relations found on that selector. This
was a conscious trade off, as the main purpose was to find relations to organizations owning
the domain and not between 3rd parties.
From the 20 Relational features originally chosen only 10 proved to be effective in clustering
metrics. Those being; HTTP Fingerprint, IP, Inline Script and External Resources, Api Keys,
Trackers, Email Source, Naming and Organizations. Most surprising was Email Source which
was especially prevalent in the clustering of ikea domains. HTML Head Hash, HTML Body
Hash, Payload Hash, and the two simhash based selectors; inline scripts and content simhash
performed especially poorly. This is most likely a combination of the proportionality penalty
applied to those selector values, and all domains analyzed being of a significant size (many
thousand pages) resulting in their selector scores becoming completely diluted. This was known
as a possible shortcoming. However, not applying a penalty could make a few duplicate pages
between otherwise unrelated sites cause them to be viewed as strongly related, and as a result,
cause massive amount of false­positives.
6.1
Shortcomings and Inefficiencies
When using datasets such as Commoncrawl and CT logs we are limited by the data therein and
the policies under which it was collected. It allows us to map attack surfaces in a completely
36
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:41==
passive manner. While offering significant advantages in the initial data gathering(speed) and
analysis(scale), however, implementations solely based on such datasets come with tradeoffs.
Two restrictions on CommonCrawl and its collection policy affects its efficiency as a datasource
for clustering and a risk assessment. The first is that the CCBot (commoncrawl crawler) is a
“nice” crawler, strictly adhering to the rules of a domains /robots.txt file. While this has little
effect on our method for relating pages, it greatly influences our way to spot risks, as these
can be present in the pages the website owner doesn’t want crawled ­ these happen to be the
ones most likely being sensitive and most valuable to an attacker. It also affects fingerprinting
of sensitive endpoints as these are almost always disallowed in the robots files, especially in
mainstream content management systems. The second is CommonCrawl exclusively consists
of HTTP responses and a status code of 200­299. Resulting in redirects from one domain to
another (status code 301/2) not being part of the main dataset. This is itself a valuable relational
metric which is not represented in the data shown in this thesis, especially in the context of threat
intelligence where host redirects are a common method of avoiding AVs.
Worldview’s goal is first and foremost to connect and evaluate “regular” sites through features
extracted from these. As such it assumes features, headers, data and relationships found to
be authentic and not placed maliciously or for the purpose of obfuscation. Few safeguards
exist to prevent a site from being considered related if the site is purposefully reusing content
/ resources, names, and/or apikeys and trackers. From an organizational perspective this can
be considered a feature, as people with knowledge of the true attack surface, will be able to use
it to find sites and mirrors reusing their content.
Closer inspection of the data in the results sections reveal that there is a large gap between
the number of domains seen and the number of domains belonging to organizations, this is due
to an increased usage of pseudo anonymous CAs which either obfuscates the client details or
don’t require them at all. A big player in this space is Let’s Encrypt whose mission is to provide
encryption to the web at scale. To do so effectively they require very little information given
besides proving ownership of the domain. The benefits of Let’s Encrypts approach far outweighs
any downsides listed here. But it does pose a significant challenge to linking certificates to
physical entities, an issue that will only become more prevalent as Let’s encrypt becomes the
de facto CA.
HTTP headers were initially tried and used as a vulnerability metric, with the idea of version in­
formation being compared to CVE/CPEs. This idea was later discarded, as HTTP headers are
completely under the HTTP server operators control, and with the exception of a few headers
which are used for routing or data presentation, they can be altered at will. Such manipulation
is in fact quite common[20]. This makes them a poor target for significant large scale research.
While they are good for fingerprinting, which itself can be defeated if the fingerprinting tech­
nique is known, vulnerability assessment based thereon is lacking at best. Should they how­
ever provide true information, the server name and powered by headers can be converted to
CPE identifiers, following the CPE (Common Platform Enumeration) format version 2.3. These
CPE[21] identifiers can then be queried against a CVE ( Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
37
==PAGE:42==
) database[22], which is a database of all reported software vulnerabilities. Which would allow
for finding known vulnerabilities in the stack of the HTTP server ­ should the server report said
version information
6.2
Improvements
Passive approaches, as the ones used in this thesis rely on data that is publicly available or has
been previously indexed. They don’t have the capability to probe for real­time vulnerabilities
or configurations that haven’t been indexed or mentioned in public datasets. Additionally, the
dynamic nature of the web means that assets are constantly added, removed, or modified,
which can result in false positives and negatives in passive attack surface discovery.
Without direct interaction, it’s impossible to detect certain vulnerabilities and systems, especially
those that require specific inputs or conditions to show. For instance, a service might only reveal
its function when it receives a particular type of request. While passive methods might identify
a domain or service, they might not provide in­depth insights into its versions, configurations,
or the intricate details that can be exploited. In addition to this, without active approaches
verification of the finding will be impossible.
For a truly comprehensive attack surface mapping, active reconnaissance methods, which in­
volve direct interaction with the target systems, are essential. They fill the gaps left by passive
reconnaissance by offering real­time, in­depth, and behavioral insights. While passive methods
lay the foundation, active methods build upon it to provide a complete picture of the potential
vulnerabilities and exposures. A balanced combination of both ensures accuracy, depth, and
breadth in attack surface mapping. As such, for improving WorldView an active approach should
be considered for the future.
The following is a list of additional ideas for future improvements to WorldView and related
Projects:
Jarm and ja3 hashes are fingerprints of https servers created by analyzing the exchange of
certificate details and the negotiation of versions and protocols. These hashes have been used
with great success in threat intelligence, and could be a valuable asset and relational metrics
to add to the HTTP Fingerprint used in this thesis. They cannot be calculated without active
collection, but could easily be created as a bi product of active crawling.
Datasets. More data is of course always better in this type of research. But a few datasets could
greatly aid WorldView in its current state. As it stands no IP information is connected to the CT
Log domains, and thus they cannot be used in the clustering of IP addresses. A dataset provid­
ing DNS resolutions, such as a passive DNS dataset could solve this problem. In addition to this
WHOIS datasets tying organizations to domains, or WHOIS datasets connecting organizations
to IP ranges would also greatly affect the scope and accuracy of the organizational clusterings
done so far. This would also present a more future proof solution for organizational relations,
now that Let’s Encrypt starts to dominate the SSL certificate landscape. Lastly, utilizing Indica­
tor of Compromises datasets, would add dimensionality to the output, by correlating ips, urls,
38
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:43==
hashes and domains seen to threat intelligence, thus being able to find malicious parties and
victims across the data.
Active crawling of CT Logs. active crawling was mentioned earlier, but targeted, impolite
crawling of CT domains, especially those deemed sensitive, would be invaluable. By taking
a broad look at all resources used by a domain, and the structure of the URI of pages pro­
cessed, its web platforms can be guessed. Many Content management Systems will have
the same page structure, and have standardized paths for loading in resources and linking to
various pages, by running these through Nikto and Nmap probe sets, one can guess possible
underlying frameworks. This information by itself does not ascertain vulnerabilities, but some
frameworks are inherently more sensitive to misconfigurations, or are generally plagued by
more vulnerabilities than others. As such this information can be used to direct initial efforts.
Emails being communication mediums have a valid presence on websites and user profiles.
However, when company employee emails are shared, a passive leakage of information occurs
exposing potential company structures and employees accounts. This is due to most employee
accounts being auto generated upon hiring, with email accounts being generated as part of
this process. It is in fact not upcoming for the user account name to be the same name as
the email name, thus exposing internal user account names. Furthermore, email serves as
usernames for most user facing applications, and are often a part of the authentication process
for accessing these. By monitoring the internet for data breaches and leaks, and combining that
information with emails gathered for each organization through CommonCrawl, it is possible to
create a target list of emails with potentially leaked or insecure passwords, which can serve as
entry points into an organization. A Third party service called “Have i Been Pwned”, which is
renowned for their commitment to finding and archiving every data breach, while also making
metadata about these available for lookups, can be used as a basis for this investigation.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
39
==PAGE:44==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has set out to ask in what way passively collected internet data, namely certificate
transparency logs (CTLs) and CommonCrawl, can be leveraged to map digital attack surfaces
of domains connected to the internet.
By collecting and analyzing CT Logs and the CommonCrawl web archive, the thesis has demon­
strated that vast attack surfaces can be identified using datasets freely available on the internet.
The thesis is built on the premise that organizations cannot defend systems they do not know
exist. To defend against cyberattacks effectively and proactively, organizations must under­
stand their online exposure and how it appears from the perspective of opportunistic attackers.
As this thesis demonstrates, structured analysis of CTLs and web archive data is one method
to gain this perspective, and the thesis has introduced a tool, WorldView, that automates this
task of uncovering attack surfaces on an internet­wide scale.
In terms of specific attack surfaces and overall organizational internet exposure, the analysis
showed that CommonCrawl was particularly effective in identifying related top­level domains
belonging to the same organization, such as example.dk and example.com, and confirming
their shared ownership. From an attacker’s perspective, the ability to map an organization’s
adjacent domains expands the number of potential attack vectors for gaining initial foothold[3]
The analysis has also shown that CommonCrawl is an excellent source of data for identifying
inadvertently leaked company secrets, such as API keys, and other sensitive information such
as files. Since CommonCrawl indexes both raw HTML, DOM­objects, and HTTP request in­
formation, it is unsurprising that it outperforms CTLs in this regard as it only indexes SSL/TLS
certificate metadata.
CTLs, on the other hand, proved to be a highly effective resource for identifying subdomains,
including potentially sensitive domains used for internal testing and administration. This hap­
pens when organizations sign individual SSL/TLS certificates for specific hosts, such as ad­
min.example.com, instead of using signed wildcard certificates, such as *.example.com. As a
result of this practice, organizations inadvertently leak potentially sensitive names of internal
systems and contact details in the fields that are required to sign digital encryption certificates.
Similar to CommonCrawl, CTLs can be employed to identify and group various domains asso­
ciated within the same organization. However, this method is less reliable and is effective only
when the certificate’s ”Issuer Organization” field consistently uses a unique name to sign cer­
tificates across multiple domains. Moreover, as free and user­friendly certificate authorities like
Let’s Encrypt become more prevalent, the capability to cluster domains based on ”Issuer Orga­
nization” names is diminishing. In summary, when considering how to identify attack surfaces,
both CommonCrawl and CTLs play distinct, but complementary roles.
CommonCrawl excels at what can be termed ”horizontal” attack surface identification. This
40
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:45==
means it is particularly effective at clustering and identifying different top­level domains that
might be related or interconnected. Through its wide­ranging data on web content, it can scan
and discern patterns or similarities that might indicate a shared origin or ownership between
domains.
On the other hand, CTLs are more suited for ”vertical” attack surface identification. This involves
diving deep into the intricacies of a single domain or host. For instance, within the domain
example.com, CTLs might reveal subdomains or associated services. This in­depth exploration
offers insights into risks that might be present within a particular domain, as opposed to the
broader clustering provided by CommonCrawl.
Therefore, for a comprehensive understanding of an organization’s potential vulnerabilities, both
the wide­reaching lens of CommonCrawl and the detailed probing of CTLs are invaluable. Each
offers a unique perspective, and together, they provide a holistic view of both the breadth and
depth of potential attack surfaces.
This thesis adopted a strictly passive approach to reconnaissance for reasons outlined in the
Introduction. While passive methods offer invaluable insights and allow for extensive data gath­
ering without alerting the target, they inherently come with some limitations, as discussed above.
Future research can build upon this work by enriching the passively identified attack surfaces
with active tools and techniques. When combined, these methods should provide a clearer,
more detailed map of potential vulnerabilities and attack surfaces.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
41
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
Sikkerhedspolitisk_Barometer_­_CMS_Survey_2023.pdf, page 6. https://cms.polsci.ku.dk/publikationer/
barometer/SikkerhedspolitiskBarometer−CMSSurvey2023.pdf. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[2]
Worldwide Threat Scope, Complexity on the Rise. https://www.defense.gov/News/News­
Stories/Article/Article/604040/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[3]
Cyber Kill Chain. https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en­us/capabilities/cyber/cyber­kill­chain.html.
Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[4]
CommonCrawl May­June Batch. https://commoncrawl.org/2023/06/may­june­2023­crawl­
archive­now­available/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[5]
WARC Format. https://commoncrawl.org/blog/navigating­the­warc­file­format. Accessed:
2023­09­05.
[6]
CT Logs. https://certificate.transparency.dev/logs/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[7]
Example of certificate. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X.509. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[8]
Sebastian Schelter and Jérôme Kunegis. “On the Ubiquity of Web Tracking: Insights from
a Billion­Page Web Crawl”. und. In: (2016).
[9]
Srdjan Matic et al. “Identifying Sensitive URLs at Web­Scale”. eng. In: Proceedings of
the Acm Sigcomm Internet Measurement Conference, Imc (2020), pp. 619–633. DOI:
10.1145/3419394.3423653.
[10]
Marco Squarcina et al. “Can I Take Your Subdomain? Exploring Related­Domain Attacks
in the Modern Web”. und. In: (2020).
[11]
Issa M. Khalil et al. “A domain is only as good as its buddies: Detecting stealthy malicious
domains via graph inference”. eng. In: Codaspy 2018 ­ Proceedings of the 8th Acm Con­
ference on Data and Application Security and Privacy 2018­ (2018), pp. 330–341. DOI:
10.1145/3176258.3176329.
[12]
Sho Mizuno et al. “Detecting malware­infected devices using the HTTP header patterns”.
eng. In: Ieice Transactions on Information and Systems E101D.5 (2018), pp. 1370–1379.
ISSN: 17451361, 09168532. DOI: 10.1587/transinf.2017EDP7294.
[13]
Tobias Lewis. HTTP header heuristics for malware detection. 2013. URL: https://www.
giac.org/paper/gcia/9220/http-header-heuristics-malware-detection/132360.
[14]
HTML5 Specification. https://html.spec.whatwg.org/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[15]
CommonCrawl Crawling Policy. https://commoncrawl.org/faq. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[16]
IANA TLDs. https://data.iana.org/TLD/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[17]
Driftwood Cert Checker. https://trufflesecurity.com/blog/driftwood/. Accessed: 2023­09­
05.
[18]
Dangerous File Extensions. https://www.file­extensions.org/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[19]
Malware and domains. https://cofense.com/blog/compromised­abused­domains­in­malware­
phishing­campaigns/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
42
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:47==
[20]
Gareth Tyson et al. “Exploring HTTP Header Manipulation In­The­Wild”. In: Proceedings
of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web. WWW ’17. Perth, Australia: In­
ternational World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2017, pp. 451–458. ISBN:
9781450349130. DOI: 10.1145/3038912.3052571. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/
10.1145/3038912.3052571.
[21]
CPE Format Declartion. https://nvd.nist.gov/products/cpe. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[22]
CVE Database. https://cve.mitre.org/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[23]
Philipp Lehman et al. Biblatex – Sophisticated Bibliographies in LaTeX. 2018. URL: https:
//www.ctan.org/pkg/biblatex.
[24]
J. Prasanna Kumar and P. Govindarajulu. “Near­Duplicate Web Page Detection: An Ef­
ficient Approach Using Clustering, Sentence Feature and Fingerprinting”. eng. In: In­
ternational Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems 6.1 (2013), pp. 1–13. ISSN:
18756883, 18756891. DOI: 10.1080/18756891.2013.752657.
[25]
Chun Wei et al. “Clustering Spam Domains and Destination Websites: Digital Forensics
with Data Mining”. und. In: Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law (2010). ISSN:
15587223, 15587215. DOI: 10.15394/jdfsl.2010.1070.
[26]
Tanguy Urvoy et al. “Tracking Web spam with HTML style similarities”. eng. In: Acm Trans­
actions on the Web 2.1 (2008), p. 3. ISSN: 1559114x, 15591131. DOI: 10.1145/1326561.
1326564.
[27]
Junyan Li. “Threats and data trading detection methods in the dark web”. eng. In: Citisia
2021 ­ Ieee Conference on Innovative Technologies in Intelligent System and Industrial
Application, Proceedings (2021), 9 pp. DOI: 10.1109/CITISIA53721.2021.9719947.
[28]
A. Saravanan and S. Sathya Bama. “Extraction of core web content from web pages using
noise elimination”. eng. In: Journal of Engineering Science and Technology Review 13.4
(2020), pp. 173–187. ISSN: 17919320, 17912377. DOI: 10.25103/jestr.134.17.
[29]
Mehmet Korkmaz et al. “A Hybrid Phishing Detection System Using Deep Learning­based
URL and Content Analysis”. eng. In: Elektronika Ir Elektrotechnika 28.5 (2022), pp. 80–
89. ISSN: 20295731, 13921215. DOI: 10.5755/j02.eie.31197.
[30]
Michael Völske et al. “28. September ­ 2. Oktober 2020”. en. In: (2021). DOI: 10.18420/
INF2020_05. URL: http://dl.gi.de/handle/20.500.12116/34759.
[31]
Charu C. Aggarwal. “A framework for clustering massive­domain data streams”. eng. In:
Proceedings ­ International Conference on Data Engineering (2009), pp. 102–113. ISSN:
23750286, 10844627. DOI: 10.1109/ICDE.2009.13.
[32]
IEEE, George Manis, and Roberto Sassi. “A Python Library with Fast Algorithms for Pop­
ular Entropy Definitions”. eng. In: 2021 Computing in Cardiology (cinc) (2021). ISSN:
2325887x, 23258861. DOI: 10.22489/CinC.2021.222.
[33]
Asadullah Safi and Satwinder Singh. “A systematic literature review on phishing website
detection techniques”. eng. In: Journal of King Saud University ­ Computer and Informa­
tion Sciences 35.2 (2023), pp. 590–611. ISSN: 22131248, 13191578. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jksuci.2023.01.004.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
43
==PAGE:48==
[34]
Emily Maemura. “All WARC and no playback: The materialities of data­centered web
archives research”. eng. In: Big Data and Society 10.1 (2023). ISSN: 20539517. DOI:
10.1177/20539517231163172.
[35]
Guangxuan Chen et al. “An improved Simhash algorithm based malicious mirror web­
site detection method”. eng. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1971.1 (2021),
p. 012067. ISSN: 17426596, 17426588. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1971/1/012067.
[36]
Mohamed Abdelkarim Remmide et al. “Detection of Phishing URLs Using Temporal Con­
volutional Network”. eng. In: Procedia Computer Science 212.C (2022), pp. 74–82. ISSN:
18770509. DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2022.10.209.
[37]
Anshumali Shrivastava and Ping Li. “In Defense of MinHash Over SimHash”. und. In:
(2014).
[38]
Mirjana Pejic Bach, Tanja Kamenjarska, and Bersilav Žmuk. “Targets of phishing attacks:
The bigger fish to fry”. eng. In: Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022), pp. 448–455.
ISSN: 18770509. DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2022.08.055.
[39]
Todor Markov et al. “A Holistic Approach to Undesired Content Detection in the Real
World”. und. In: (2023).
[40]
Alexandra Luccioni and Joseph D. Viviano. “What’s in the Box? A Preliminary Analysis of
Undesirable Content in the Common Crawl Corpus”. eng. In: Acl­ijcnlp 2021 ­ 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing, Proceedings of the Conference 2 (2021),
pp. 182–189.
[41]
Xiaojing Liao et al. “Cloud repository as a malicious service: challenge, identification and
implication”. eng. In: Cybersecurity 1.1 (2018), p. 14. ISSN: 25233246, 20964862. DOI:
10.1186/s42400-018-0015-6.
[42]
Ethan M. Rudd, Richard Harang, and Joshua Saxe. “MEADE: Towards a Malicious Email
Attachment Detection Engine”. eng. In: 2018 Ieee International Symposium on Technolo­
gies for Homeland Security, Hst 2018 (2018), p. 8574202. DOI: 10 . 1109 / THS . 2018 .
8574202.
[43]
Mathieu Nassif, Christoph Treude, and Martin P. Robillard. “Automatically Categorizing
Software Technologies”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Software Engineering 46.1 (2020),
pp. 20–32. ISSN: 19393520, 00985589, 23263881. DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2018.2836450.
[44]
Yan Ding et al. “A keyword­based combination approach for detecting phishing web­
pages”. eng. In: Computers and Security 84 (2019), pp. 256–275. ISSN: 18726208, 01674048.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2019.03.018.
[45]
Routhu Srinivasa Rao, Tatti Vaishnavi, and Alwyn Roshan Pais. “CatchPhish: detection
of phishing websites by inspecting URLs”. eng. In: Journal of Ambient Intelligence and
Humanized Computing 11.2 (2020), pp. 813–825. ISSN: 18685145, 18685137. DOI: 10.
1007/s12652-019-01311-4.
[46]
Sajjad Arshad et al. “Large­scale analysis of style injection by relative path overwrite”.
eng. In: Web Conference 2018 ­ Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference, Www
2018 (2018), pp. 237–246. DOI: 10.1145/3178876.3186090.
44
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:49==
[47]
Jian Feng et al. “Detecting phishing webpages via homology analysis of webpage struc­
ture”. eng. In: Peerj Computer Science 8 (2022). Ed. by Xiaolong Li, e868. ISSN: 23765992.
DOI: 10.7717/PEERJ-CS.868.
[48]
Piotr Białczak and Wojciech Mazurczyk. “Hfinger: Malware http request fingerprinting”.
eng. In: Entropy 23.5 (2021). Ed. by Amelia Carolina Sparavigna, p. 507. ISSN: 10994300.
DOI: 10.3390/e23050507.
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
45
==PAGE:50==
A
Regular Expressions Lists
A.1
Apikeys
Name
Regex
AWS Access Key ID
(A3T[A­Z0­9]|AKIA|AGPA|AROA|AIPA|ANPA|ANVA|ASIA)[A­
Z0­9]{16}
Facebook Access Token
EAACEdEose0cBA[0­9A­Za­z]+
Stripe API Key
(?:r|s)k_(live|test)_[0­9a­zA­Z]{24}
Stripe Public API Key
pk_(live|test)_[0­9a­zA­Z]{24}
Google OAUTH ID
[0­9]+­[0­9A­Za­z_]{32}\.apps\.googleusercontent\.com‘
Google Cloud Key
AIza[0­9A­Za­z\\­_]{35}
Google OAUTH Token
ya29\.[0­9A­Za­z\\­_]+
Twilio API Key
SK[0­9a­fA­F]{32}
Sendgrid API Key
SG\.[0­9A­Za­z\­_]{22}\.[0­9A­Za­z\­_]{43}
Mailgun API Key
key­[0­9a­zA­Z]{32}
Square Access Token
sq0atp­[0­9A­Za­z\\­_]{22}
Square Oauth Token
sq0csp­[0­9A­Za­z\\­_]{43}
Square App Secret
sandbox­?sq0csp­[0­9A­Za­z­_]{43}|sq0[a­z]{3}­[0­9A­
Za­z­_]{22,43}
Slack Webhook
https://hooks.slack.com/services/T[a­zA­Z0­9_]{8}/B[a­
zA­Z0­9_]{8}/[a­zA­Z0­9_]{24}
NUGet Api key
oy2[a­z0­9]{43}
Facebook Secret Key
\b(facebook|fb)(.{0,20})?(?­i)[’\”][0­9a­f]{32}[’\”]
Github PAT
ghp_[0­9a­zA­Z]{36}
Github OAuth
gho_[0­9a­zA­Z]{36}
New Relic Admin Key
NRAA­[a­f0­9]{27}
New Relic Insights Key
NRI(?:I|Q)­[A­Za­z0­9\\­_]{32}
New Relic Rest Key
NRRA­[a­f0­9]{42}
New Relic Local Key
NRSP­[a­z]{2}[0­9]{2}[a­f0­9]{31}
Google FCM
AAAA[a­zA­Z0­9_­]{7}:[a­zA­Z0­9_­]{140}
Cloudinary
cloudinary://[0­9]+:[A­Za­z0­9­_.]+@[A­Za­z0­9­_.]+
Bitly API Key
R_[0­9a­f]{32}
AWS SNS
arn:aws:sns:[a­z0­9­]+:[0­9]+:[A­Za­z0­9­_]+
Shopify Access Token
shpat_[a­fA­F0­9]{32}
PyPI Api key
pypi­AgEIcHlwaS5vcmc[A­Za­z0­9­_]{50,1000}
Shopify Private App Token
shppa_[a­fA­F0­9]{32}
Shopify Custom App Token
shpca_[a­fA­F0­9]{32}
Shopify Shared Secret
shpss_[a­fA­F0­9]{32}
Dynatrace Token
dt0[a­zA­Z]{1}[0­9]{2}\.[A­Z0­9]{24}\.[A­Z0­9]{64}
Ansible Vault
$ANSIBLE_VAULT;[0­9]\.[0­9];AES256
46
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:51==
A.2
Trackers
Provider
Regex
Cloudflare
https:\/\/static.cloudflareinsights.com\/beacon.min.js\?(?:[a­z]+=[a­
zA­Z0­9%]+&?)*?token=([a­z0­9A­Z]*)
Cloudflare
data­cf­beacon=\s*?(?:\”|\’)\s*?[{}\”\”a­zA­Z0­
9:\s,]*?(?:\”|\’)token(?:\”|\’):\s*?(?:\”|\’)([a­z0­9A­Z]*)(?:\”|\’)
Google
UA­\d{4,10}­\d{1,4}
Google
G­[A­Z0­9]{5,30}
Facebook
fbq\s*?\((?:\”|\’)\s*?init(?:\”|\’),\s*?(?:\”|\’)(\d*)(?:\”|\’)
Faceboook
https:\/\/(?:www.)?facebook.com\/tr\?(?:[a­z]+=[a­zA­Z0­
9%]+&?)*?id=([0­9]*)
LinkedIn
_linkedin_partner_id\s*?=\s*?(?:\”|\’)(\d*)(?:\”|\’)
LinkedIn
https:\/\/px.ads.linkedin.com\/collect\/\?(?:[a­z]+=[a­zA­Z0­
9%]+&?)*?pid=([0­9]*)
A.3
Artifacts
Name
Regex
Email
([a­zA­Z0­9._­]+@[a­zA­Z0­9_­]+\.+[a­zA­Z0­9_­]+)
Bitcoin Wallet
([13][a­km­zA­HJ­NP­Z1­9]{25,34})
Ethereum Wallet
(0x[a­fA­F0­9]{40})
Dash Wallet
(X[1­9A­HJ­NP­Za­km­z]{33})
Monero Wallet
(4[0­9AB][1­9A­HJ­NP­Za­km­z]{93})
SHA256
\b([a­f0­9]{40})\b
SHA1
\b([a­f0­9]{40})\b
MD5
([a­f\d]{32}|[A­F\d]{32})
BCRYPT
$2[ayb]$.{56}
A.4
Risk words
Administration & Autentication
---------------------------------
account
adm
admin
admins
administration
administrator
auth
authentication
backend
internal
user
system
sysadmin
systemadmin
systemadministrator
cms
control
cp
cpanel
critical
cruisecontrol
sso
secure
security
uat
status
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
47
==PAGE:52==
Files & Backups
---------------------------------
archive
asset
assets
backup
backups
upload
dev
developer
development
devlab
sharepoint
storage
file
files
filesupload
fileupload
sfb
sip
log
logfile
login
logs
directory
Development and Testing
---------------------------------
alpha
asa
beta
preprod
pre
lite
v1
v2
v3
staging
setup
devops
test
teamcity
sql
sandbox
labdev
labs
local
localhost
Systems and Integrations
---------------------------------
atlassian
autodiscover
autorabbit
azure
bamboo
vpn
watchguard
webex
webmail
wercker
mail
urbancode
circleci
cisco
citrix
bitdefender
bitrise
bucket
buddy
buildkite
data
databucket
datalake
dataupload
destroy
skype
48
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:53==
slack
sonicwall
strider
firewall
fortigate
fortinet
freebsd
ftp
github
gitlab
glasswire
gocd
hidden
hipchat
honeypot
drupal
e-mail
email
exchange
finalbuilder
imap
huddle
irc
integrity
jenkins
jira
lyncdiscover
lyncweb
mail
meet
moderator
netgate
network
o365
old
owa
panel
perl
pfsense
pop3
portal
printerserver
printserver
printsrv
probe
proxy
python
remote
root
s3
scada
dialin
dialup
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
49
==PAGE:54==
B
Findings of organizational overview
B.1
Infrastructure overview of 23 domains
50
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:55==
Domain
Subdomains
Domains
Organizations
IP addresses
3rd Party Services
(across all domains)
Sensitive Files
Secrets
Sensitive Endpoints
Emails
Apikeys
Trackers
gamepedia.com
521
3
1
0
6
0
0
23
0
0
0
gamespot.com
99
15
6
9
19
0
0
5
17
0
10
lenta.ru
127
3
3
11
431
0
0
3
435
0
18
sberbank.ru
472
1
2
3
24
0
0
139
272
0
0
lifehacker.com
75
51
6
63
21
0
0
23
358
54
187
roblox.com
85
1
3
50
80
0
0
20
76
0
22
snapdeal.com
43
1
3
27
1
0
0
6
23
1
64
telegram.com
41
14
3
24
273
0
0
4
34
1
19
urbandictionary.com
40
6
4
16
5
0
0
2
5
0
5
accuweather.com
222
1
5
41
13
0
0
92
32
0
12
version2.dk
11
12
0
7
38
0
0
3
15
0
2
dr.dk
64
41
29
222
1105
0
0
15
2362
11
2862
stripchat.com
27
16
0
2
3
0
0
0
9
2
10
expedia.com
78
42
8
380
119
0
0
0
161
284
2001
wetransfer.com
136
13
3
26
16
0
0
8
16
1
7
trello.com
24
15
3
11
97
0
0
9
629
0
4
gamersky.com
44
5
0
20
4
0
0
1
3
0
2
pandora.com
78
1
16
9
230
0
0
23
31
1
317
mega.nz
20
1
7
6
309
0
0
12
16
0
0
sankei.com
18
5
3
86
41
0
0
1
0
15
13
panda.tv
14
1
14
0
1001
0
0
1
6
0
0
youporn.com
15
1
1
1
72
0
0
1
6
0
2
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
51
==PAGE:56==
B.2
Sensitive Airbnb Domains
auth.cn-northwest-1.cnprod.musta.ch
esv1-s-dc01.dev.airbnb.biz
preprod.airbnb.com
admin.dev.staging.airbnb.com
api.dev.staging.airbnb.com
zusa-s-dc02.dev.airbnb.biz
d.dev.musta.ch
zusa-s-dc01.test.airbnb.biz
gvp-rs.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
zusa-s-dc01.dev.airbnb.biz
dev.staging.airbnb.com
grat.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
d.us-east-1.dev.musta.ch
gir-rps.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
assets.airbnbchina.cn
d.staging.musta.ch
wfm.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
gks-ws.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
assets.github-dev.airbnb.biz
ldap.dev.airbnb.biz
sm.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
ucs.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
gax.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
gdpr.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
auth.ap-southeast-1.cneng.musta.ch
auth.cn-northwest-1.cnprod.musta.net.cn
d.internal.us-east-1.staging.musta.ch
d.internal.cn-northwest-1.cnprod.musta.net.cn
d.internal.musta.ch
edn1-s-dc01.test.airbnb.biz
pulse.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
assets.airbnb.cn
d.us-east-1.staging.musta.ch
gms.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
lfmt.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
esg3-s-dc01.test.airbnb.biz
urs.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
ga.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
d.internal.ap-southeast-1.cneng.musta.ch
auth.musta.ch
gre.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
wfm-reports.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
d.internal.cnprod.musta.net.cn
staging.airbnb.com
admin.airbnb.com
d.internal.us-east-1.prod.musta.ch
gms-ext.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
edn1-s-dc01.dev.airbnb.biz
d.internal.cnprod.musta.ch
esv1-cvt-lfmt.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
lite.airbnb.tools
gks.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
gws.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
gir-rcs.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
sl.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
one.dev.staging.airbnb.com
gir-rws.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
internal.airbnb.com
esv1-s-dc01.test.airbnb.biz
ad.test.airbnb.biz
artifactory-staging.dev.musta.ch
wb.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
artifactory.dev.musta.ch
d.internal.cn-northwest-1.cnprod.musta.ch
zusa-s-dc02.test.airbnb.biz
vm.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
ldap.test.airbnb.biz
ws.staging.airbnb.com
ors.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
d.internal.us-east-1.dev.musta.ch
was.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
gir-webdav.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
gi2.dev.genesys.airbnb.biz
esg3-s-dc01.dev.airbnb.biz
gems-staging.d.us-east-1.dev.musta.ch
SYSTEMS
pages.mail.airbnb.com
vpn.airbnb.biz
www.jenkins.airbnb.biz
jira.airbnb.biz
52
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:57==
click.mail.airbnb.com
www.jenkins.musta.ch
image.mail.airbnb.com
gitlab.airbnb.biz
jenkins.airbnb.biz
cloud.mail.airbnb.com
github.airbnb.biz
jenkins.musta.ch
view.mail.airbnb.com
B.3
Sensitive Ikea Domains
checkout.staging.ikea.com
dev.equipment.ikea.com
www.checkout.ae.dev.ikea.com
www.test.about.ikea.com
www.id.test.about.ikea.com
www.developer.ikea.com
test.about.ikea.com
www.sso.qa.journeys.ikea.com
checkout.ma.staging.ikea.com
admin.dev.journeys.ikea.com
checkout.kw.staging.ikea.com
test.equipment.ikea.com
secure.ar.ikea.com
www.developer.inter.ikea.com
secure.eu.ikea.com
www.hrz.test.about.ikea.com
preview.developer.ikea.com
cm.test.about.ikea.com
sidekick.staging.coworker.ikea.com
id.test.about.ikea.com
checkout.th.staging.ikea.com
checkout.om.test.ikea.com
secure.fr.ikea.com
checkout.ae.dev.ikea.com
www.preview.developer.ikea.com
cms.inter.ikea.com
dev.smaland.ikea.com
dev.arassetimages.ikea.com
cms.acc.inter.ikea.com
secure.ikea.com
checkout.my.staging.ikea.com
dev.accounts.ikea.com
checkout.dev.ikea.com
test.partner.ikea.com
checkout.sg.staging.ikea.com
checkout.qa.staging.ikea.com
checkout.jo.staging.ikea.com
www.admin.dev.journeys.ikea.com
www.cm.test.about.ikea.com
checkout.eg.staging.ikea.com
account.dexf.ikea.com
checkout.om.staging.ikea.com
knowledge.dev.api.inter.ikea.com
developer.ikea.com
secure.compass.ikea.com
sso.qa.journeys.ikea.com
secure.ca.ikea.com
sandbox.accounts.ikea.com
developer.inter.ikea.com
www.sso.dev.journeys.ikea.com
sso.dev.journeys.ikea.com
dev.journeys.ikea.com
www.secure.compass.ikea.com
www.dev.journeys.ikea.com
checkout.test.ikea.com
secure.iows.ikea.com
app.dev.coworker.ikea.com
checkout.ae.staging.ikea.com
hrz.test.about.ikea.com
staging.coworker.ikea.com
SYSTEMS
view.news.email.ikea.com
meet.ikea.com
autodiscover.ikea.com
www.meet.ikea.com
info.email.ikea.com
links.info.email.ikea.com
click.news.email.ikea.com
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
53
==PAGE:58==
image.news.email.ikea.com
www.info.email.ikea.com
jira.build.ingka.ikea.com
cloud.news.email.ikea.com
email.ikea.com
autodiscover.ingka.ikea.com
54
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:59==
C
Emails by TLD
total 49508205
com 22340609
de 3266315
org 2813672
edu 1881170
progressive 1712734
ru 1596691
net 1432569
it 1194472
fr 1127642
nl 963464
co 719534
cz 623229
pl 620331
ca 589667
gov 576556
ch 558250
se 515949
ac 499257
es 414890
at 398079
be 375886
dk 348385
no 304761
fi 267396
eu 237403
hu 172744
sk 163819
gr 134803
jp 130308
gmail 126611
in 114770
ro 109532
ie 107924
info 102339
pt 100911
cl 98303
ee 89137
us 77521
lt 77025
si 70317
bg 67729
io 67501
hr 61813
cn 57206
cat 56309
lv 50987
vn 43003
is 42199
bet 41979
biz 41587
br 39112
rs 35511
mx 35235
me 33819
lu 33704
by 33397
office 31361
ir 31214
ne 29809
ua 28004
kz 26613
nu 26438
uk 25309
social 25165
fm 24555
ae 24314
citadel 23624
cc 23567
tv 22968
online 19714
pro 18054
su 17303
kr 17105
ai 15951
mil 15320
xyz 15174
ma 14778
school 13910
hk 13285
sc 13283
au 12742
ibm 12614
nyc 12230
site 12221
shop 11858
ba 11791
pe 11658
eus 11446
re 11387
sg 11251
google 10875
uz 10858
ge 10764
id 10277
tech 10267
top 10139
coop 9953
club 9728
int 9605
am 9513
md 9207
my 9115
bayern 8845
mn 8722
li 8683
app 8449
lk 8337
berlin 8130
nrw 8098
nz 7974
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
55
==PAGE:60==
az 7792
church 7502
tn 7479
sa 7410
store 7259
pr 6842
art 6826
group 6686
agency 6676
ph 6481
dev 6465
mg 6392
dz 6388
men 6263
cam 6182
law 6157
ml 6096
ms 6024
to 6009
studio 5942
ag 5939
email 5779
house 5777
ad 5768
asia 5681
pk 5569
af 5555
aero 5532
fo 5488
space 5474
as 5372
nc 5324
mk 5313
media 5289
life 5233
bz 5065
design 5029
world 5014
global 4770
mit 4763
digital 4736
one 4725
im 4710
kg 4685
scot 4632
np 4630
mt 4597
tw 4485
sd 4477
mo 4364
la 4341
cu 4327
ga 4274
bzh 4218
catholic 4212
gal 4160
hamburg 4135
gl 4093
ng 4018
mu 3985
ws 3973
brussels 3875
gg 3822
al 3777
vc 3775
tk 3756
med 3756
om 3743
swiss 3681
travel 3653
army 3576
na 3569
sh 3543
gu 3495
cloud 3429
bank 3386
bo 3359
live 3270
ec 3262
cr 3251
gt 3238
cf 3206
ky 3184
news 3166
ar 3157
education 3104
health 3103
ci 3072
sn 3066
tokyo 3050
xxx 3012
legal 2996
qa 2978
pa 2968
name 2922
st 2921
ve 2910
academy 2904
mc 2862
bio 2836
sv 2777
je 2766
team 2698
sm 2678
cm 2669
do 2645
solutions 2638
win 2628
tj 2628
gq 2626
madrid 2578
city 2577
bm 2551
dm 2529
ltd 2521
ug 2469
schule 2468
sr 2452
pn 2450
ly 2442
network 2425
softbank 2418
so 2394
56
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:61==
il 2390
pf 2360
hn 2352
work 2346
immo 2334
ax 2317
mp 2316
bid 2311
vu 2298
gmbh 2292
pw 2288
jo 2284
tm 2283
care 2273
yahoo 2267
pm 2201
london 2198
company 2195
uy 2186
blog 2163
oracle 2122
plus 2093
ni 2067
gi 2056
et 2018
cd 2012
zip 2007
tc 1995
fujitsu 1958
vg 1918
energy 1880
bs 1879
sakura 1873
rw 1845
arpa 1825
vi 1823
ht 1821
th 1813
er 1807
tirol 1804
navy 1804
sina 1793
alibaba 1749
dj 1744
click 1739
wien 1738
bi 1718
ps 1696
ck 1693
services 1678
microsoft 1658
africa 1658
paris 1645
mw 1645
jll 1634
bh 1631
center 1618
fun 1614
wales 1611
nf 1595
exchange 1594
gm 1589
eco 1575
cg 1566
ke 1549
tr 1548
tt 1525
za 1522
eg 1521
cafe 1515
rocks 1509
ls 1501
consulting 1493
zm 1486
bw 1479
pg 1472
stream 1458
today 1457
works 1437
va 1434
vlaanderen 1432
trade 1427
events 1410
bd 1409
jm 1402
nr 1395
py 1394
fj 1392
pub 1378
cv 1375
website 1370
cx 1363
earth 1354
coffee 1346
sb 1340
bosch 1329
yandex 1306
jobs 1306
guru 1278
bt 1277
miami 1261
zone 1250
saarland 1234
finance 1232
stockholm 1229
games 1226
capital 1210
download 1199
expert 1197
fit 1193
pwc 1190
systems 1184
bike 1182
mobi 1180
archi 1174
foundation 1169
community 1169
cy 1164
realty 1153
marketing 1141
ngo 1140
cymru 1140
goo 1135
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
57
==PAGE:62==
koeln 1129
gent 1117
bb 1113
bf 1111
bj 1108
gs 1107
vip 1098
ki 1075
moscow 1070
amsterdam 1066
ntt 1065
prod 1059
abb 1029
quebec 1008
sy 991
link 983
bar 974
jnj 972
host 970
coach 964
kh 951
kn 914
tg 907
yokohama 899
iq 896
sony 885
ruhr 885
toyota 878
partners 878
clinic 875
icu 870
ao 862
cern 857
moe 855
lc 852
wine 842
photography 836
beer 836
mq 835
international 835
km 834
ist 827
blue 824
gp 822
love 818
ink 815
bn 814
mv 809
farm 800
town 796
institute 793
band 786
lol 784
land 782
gd 778
srl 776
samsung 771
aw 770
university 768
camp 764
cw 758
gn 754
tax 749
technology 748
cpa 748
market 746
photo 738
frl 731
science 729
press 725
inc 724
museum 719
green 719
sz 708
mr 708
vet 699
lgbt 688
film 685
training 672
tf 672
aq 672
sl 668
business 666
ventures 660
golf 658
party 649
hm 644
gallery 644
mm 639
gb 634
jetzt 632
audi 631
mh 630
td 625
run 620
tl 619
yoga 616
gf 605
software 603
casa 597
uno 594
chat 593
homes 592
ss 583
wf 575
gh 574
ovh 570
lb 570
dental 570
ooo 567
fk 563
realtor 562
vision 560
red 553
fitness 550
support 549
kp 549
corsica 548
wiki 547
lr 546
beauty 543
llc 532
sj 529
58
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:63==
sydney 523
gmx 523
sx 522
mz 519
yt 516
aol 515
family 511
pics 510
gy 505
free 505
page 500
rogers 494
kiwi 483
dog 483
fund 480
monash 473
bmw 461
style 459
apple 458
panasonic 455
video 451
best 451
dot 448
taipei 443
solar 438
android 424
sport 415
gw 414
aaa 414
contact 413
cool 412
makeup 409
bnpparibas 409
bv 403
pet 401
kw 399
build 399
audio 399
tools 397
tours 396
dance 393
restaurant 391
tel 390
help 386
show 371
ninja 369
ski 366
helsinki 366
boston 366
xn--p1ai 364
sbs 361
tz 359
ye 349
auto 348
express 342
zw 340
cisco 336
money 335
lat 335
productions 331
ericsson 329
management 328
immobilien 328
radio 327
ong 327
box 327
buzz 326
comcast 321
realestate 319
kyoto 313
guide 309
loan 306
barcelona 305
place 303
estate 300
direct 300
codes 296
alsace 296
college 293
wtf 287
ping 286
engineering 282
okinawa 279
nfl 274
tips 272
canon 271
man 269
insure 269
fyi 269
rent 266
haus 263
photos 260
fashion 257
kitchen 255
xerox 252
boutique 251
properties 246
taxi 241
java 238
tattoo 235
rest 233
construction 233
garden 231
lincoln 228
skin 227
healthcare 227
cash 227
mobile 226
basketball 226
pizza 216
fish 214
physio 210
ing 209
amazon 209
post 208
osaka 208
sas 201
careers 200
melbourne 198
graphics 196
cba 191
rentals 190
horse 190
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
59
==PAGE:64==
gold 190
forum 190
edeka 190
sohu 189
cologne 189
cfd 187
kpmg 186
sale 183
toshiba 182
mortgage 182
wedding 181
bot 181
sca 177
directory 176
salon 174
quest 171
abc 171
vin 167
reisen 167
financial 167
lighting 166
delivery 166
fan 164
cyou 164
sap 163
kim 162
casino 162
monster 160
vegas 159
gives 159
rio 158
racing 158
istanbul 158
limited 156
ieee 155
game 154
foo 154
rugby 151
sncf 150
onl 150
industries 150
nagoya 149
orange 147
leclerc 147
date 147
watch 146
mom 146
lasalle 145
hotmail 145
pictures 144
computer 143
gop 141
shoes 140
hitachi 140
surf 139
parts 139
holiday 139
skype 137
investments 136
clothing 135
cards 135
glass 134
hair 133
icbc 132
toys 131
honda 131
associates 130
catering 129
ott 128
lawyer 128
hyundai 128
fans 128
seat 126
nec 126
dupont 125
property 124
repair 123
zuerich 122
uol 121
loans 121
mov 120
total 119
ice 117
supply 116
builders 116
faith 115
booking 114
here 113
security 112
pink 112
lancaster 112
cab 111
versicherung 110
crs 109
auction 108
hosting 105
football 105
axa 104
wang 103
moda 103
study 102
ril 102
ricoh 102
domains 101
vote 100
menu 100
enterprises 100
hsbc 99
black 99
contractors 98
weber 97
tatar 97
now 97
holdings 96
gifts 95
deals 95
krd 93
epson 93
theater 92
gift 92
autos 92
zero 91
sfr 91
60
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:65==
engineer 91
report 90
jewelry 90
deloitte 90
data 90
cleaning 90
airtel 90
mlb 89
azure 89
music 88
moi 88
reviews 87
rip 86
alstom 86
talk 85
nra 85
gay 85
new 84
hockey 84
ren 82
charity 81
cbs 81
baby 81
you 80
mba 80
virgin 79
how 79
bbc 79
pharmacy 78
lexus 78
gdn 77
credit 77
promo 76
hot 75
doctor 75
open 74
latrobe 73
msd 72
car 72
tienda 71
politie 71
furniture 71
komatsu 70
cal 70
ads 70
sky 69
rehab 69
capetown 69
limo 68
xin 67
voyage 67
shopping 67
day 67
organic 66
accountants 66
creditcard 65
courses 65
cheap 65
cars 65
apartments 65
ups 63
review 63
camera 63
youtube 62
cfa 62
aws 62
villas 61
globo 61
tdk 60
ceo 60
attorney 60
dating 59
soccer 58
dabur 58
tennis 56
philips 55
kaufen 55
tube 54
toray 54
schwarz 53
fail 53
shell 52
protection 52
diamonds 52
bond 51
bcn 51
insurance 50
mini 49
florist 49
volkswagen 48
broker 48
nissan 47
hospital 47
flickr 47
dds 47
boats 47
xfinity 46
luxury 46
flowers 46
claims 46
boo 46
nokia 45
sarl 44
country 44
norton 43
maison 43
dnp 43
dell 43
cooking 43
supplies 42
spa 42
praxi 42
omega 42
lpl 42
gratis 42
vacations 41
phone 41
trading 40
mckinsey 40
godaddy 40
abudhabi 40
plumbing 39
jeep 39
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
61
==PAGE:66==
dentist 39
surgery 38
prime 38
playstation 38
nico 38
nhk 38
movie 38
map 38
gucci 38
suzuki 37
poker 37
delta 37
volvo 36
vivo 36
storage 36
markets 36
jcb 36
flights 36
fishing 36
bible 36
bentley 36
soy 35
actor 35
viajes 34
pioneer 34
kindle 34
gmo 34
fido 34
equipment 34
accountant 34
star 33
rodeo 33
mtr 33
kia 33
joburg 33
fox 33
clinique 33
sbi 32
got 32
yachts 31
food 31
exposed 31
wow 30
stc 30
bom 30
target 29
fedex 29
dhl 29
cruises 29
search 28
pay 28
lilly 28
futbol 28
weir 27
sexy 27
pin 27
able 27
ubs 26
nexus 26
lease 26
forsale 26
mma 25
dubai 25
bbt 25
arte 25
tui 24
jot 24
buy 24
tci 23
gap 23
durban 23
dealer 23
dad 23
case 23
sex 22
pru 22
neustar 22
nba 22
jpmorgan 22
hotels 22
discount 22
aig 22
abbott 22
trust 21
smart 21
pfizer 21
kids 21
jio 21
fast 21
eat 21
diet 21
citi 21
staples 20
reise 20
meet 20
docs 20
bms 20
abogado 20
visa 19
sew 19
schmidt 19
luxe 19
lds 19
jmp 19
esq 19
tab 18
reit 18
obi 18
juniper 18
irish 18
hughes 18
hermes 18
fire 18
cricket 18
anz 18
safe 17
recipes 17
phd 17
mtn 17
mint 17
hiv 17
condos 17
cbn 17
62
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:67==
career 17
sandvik 16
room 16
pid 16
nikon 16
mls 16
memorial 16
living 16
kpn 16
joy 16
hkt 16
guitars 16
gle 16
gea 16
ftr 16
dvr 16
desi 16
bcg 16
author 16
aeg 16
sharp 15
select 15
rwe 15
play 15
meme 15
jaguar 15
intuit 15
fly 15
diy 15
bingo 15
vodka 14
tvs 14
trv 14
thd 14
tatamotors 14
smile 14
hbo 14
chase 14
book 14
wme 13
windows 13
ryukyu 13
observer 13
llp 13
kfh 13
itv 13
aco 13
xn--90ae 12
weibo 12
wed 12
redstone 12
pnc 12
ifm 12
dtv 12
christmas 12
channel 12
call 12
baidu 12
tickets 11
silk 11
read 11
next 11
lego 11
lacaixa 11
kddi 11
hyatt 11
george 11
coupons 11
alipay 11
webcam 10
walmart 10
vig 10
theatre 10
sucks 10
scb 10
nike 10
nab 10
like 10
landrover 10
hiphop 10
gallup 10
discover 10
americanexpress 10
xn--y9a3aq 9
wtc 9
tjx 9
spot 9
secure 9
save 9
otsuka 9
netflix 9
ltda 9
forex 9
brother 9
bing 9
airbus 9
afl 9
xn--6frz82g 8
tires 8
singles 8
porn 8
motorcycles 8
grainger 8
fage 8
degree 8
citic 8
ally 8
xn--p1acf 7
weather 7
walter 7
shaw 7
rich 7
origins 7
moto 7
lifestyle 7
itau 7
goog 7
ford 7
ferrari 7
deal 7
bloomberg 7
auspost 7
yun 6
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
63
==PAGE:68==
tiffany 6
song 6
marriott 6
mango 6
lidl 6
guardian 6
etisalat 6
erni 6
democrat 6
circle 6
bestbuy 6
accenture 6
zappos 5
xn--80adxhks 5
viva 5
taobao 5
shiksha 5
seven 5
sener 5
safety 5
juegos 5
ferrero 5
comsec 5
chrome 5
beats 5
bbva 5
analytics 5
xn--q9jyb4c 4
xn--90ais 4
xn--80asehdb 4
voting 4
vanguard 4
unicom 4
tmall 4
tiaa 4
teva 4
qpon 4
prof 4
lotto 4
lamborghini 4
drive 4
cruise 4
bridgestone 4
bargains 4
aramco 4
airforce 4
aarp 4
xn--j1amh 3
xn--d1acj3b 3
xn--80aswg 3
wolterskluwer 3
watches 3
voto 3
verisign 3
vana 3
travelers 3
statefarm 3
sling 3
sanofi 3
rsvp 3
rocher 3
republican 3
prudential 3
pars 3
maif 3
locus 3
lamer 3
kinder 3
ikano 3
homedepot 3
hdfcbank 3
gripe 3
goodyear 3
giving 3
frontier 3
frontdoor 3
flir 3
final 3
dvag 3
crown 3
coupon 3
caravan 3
capitalone 3
bofa 3
bauhaus 3
baseball 3
barclays 3
audible 3
aetna 3
adult 3
zara 2
yodobashi 2
xn--tckwe 2
xn--mk1bu44c 2
xn--h2brj9c 2
xn--fiqs8s 2
xn--9dbq2a 2
whoswho 2
tunes 2
travelersinsurance 2
temasek 2
showtime 2
seek 2
reliance 2
pccw 2
natura 2
mattel 2
lotte 2
latino 2
kred 2
jprs 2
ismaili 2
ipiranga 2
imdb 2
homegoods 2
hangout 2
ggee 2
firestone 2
feedback 2
farmers 2
dish 2
creditunion 2
compare 2
64
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
==PAGE:69==
cbre 2
broadway 2
bradesco 2
boehringer 2
athleta 2
asda 2
arab 2
amex 2
allstate 2
tld.count 0
Identifying attack­surfaces through web content and it’s related properties at web scale
65
