==PAGE:1==
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Ma­
chine Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science Visual Computing
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Xinyi Liu (s212620)
Supervisor: Marco Pizzolato
Assistant Professor, DTU Compute
Co­Supervisor: Tim Bjørn Dyrby
Professor, DTU Compute
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study leverages machine learning methodologies to estimate axonal diffusivities in
axial (parallel) and radial (perpendicular) directions. In strongly Diffusion­Weighted MRI
(DW­MRI), it is possible to calculate the axonal diffusivities without modelling the full di­
rectional signals expanded by spherical harmonics. Instead, by using kernel zonal mod­
eling and spherical harmonics square root l­band power spectra, we are able to obtain
zonal ratios that eliminates the need for modeling the orientation distribution function of
axons within a voxel. Various machine learning regression methods were implemented
and trained on synthetic data to solve the regression problem and thus find the axonal
diffusivities.
We simulated two estimators, one is biased considering the residual presence of isotropic
compartments and the unbiased one excluding the impacts of spherical mean. The Ran­
dom Forests model proved to be the more robust amongst the tested methods, showcas­
ing versatility across both synthetic and real datasets.
Results showed differences between estimated diffusivities obtained with biased and un­
biased estimator on real data. This suggests that there is a significant presence of cellular
isotropic diffusion in the white matter of the Human brain.
The estimation of axonal diffusivities, which is the goal of this work, additionally enables
the downstream estimation of additional features of the diffusion MRI signal that are rele­
vant from a biological perspective. The most important one is the axonal signal fraction,
which is proportional to the volume of each voxel that is occupied by axons.
Keywords: Diffusion MRI; Axonal Diffusivity; Spherical harmonics; Machine Learning;
Spherical mean
ii
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Current problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
7
2.1
Diffusion­Weighted Axonal Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Expansion of Sphere Harmonics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Calculation of Axonal Diffusivities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
11
3.1
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Machine Learning­based Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Results
19
4.1
Model Evaluation: Synthetic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Validation: Human Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Discussion
27
5.1
Limitation of Random Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
The Bias of Isotropic Diffusivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Possibility of Calculating Axonal Signal Fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Assumption on the Extreme Estimation on λ∥. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Conclusion
29
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Bibliography
32
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Fundamental of Diffusion­MRI
Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Diffusion MRI) is a widely recognized method
to research brain microstructure. This non­invasive modality supports the acquisition of
information about neural architecture in vivo based on identifying the neural pathways.
Particularly, the diffusive properties are essential for investigating and characterizing tu­
mors and cerebral ischemia in brain’s white matter (WM), which is made of microscopic
fiber, glial cells, axons, and neurons (Assaf and Pasternak [1]). The foundational theory
is predicated on the Brownian movement of water molecules, which is employed to de­
scribe the diffusive characteristics of tissue constituents. Within the WM, water diffusion
is often impeded by biological barriers such as axons and cell membranes (Conturo et al.
[2]), therefore, water molecules primarily diffuse along the axis of axons. Water molecules
are able to move less restricted in grey matter (GM) (Shehab [3]). Finally, mobility of wa­
ter molecules is characterized by directionality: we then have isotropic diffusion (same
mobility along all directions) or anisotropic.
Fig. 1.1 merged the background fundamentals and the work that will be researched in this
project. In the strongly diffusion­weighted MR imaging, we will employ machine learning
to estimate the axonal diffusivity based on two single diffusion encoding PGSE shells.
Figure 1.1: Overview
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1.2
b­Values
Compared to conventional MRI, diffusion­weighted MR imaging (DW­MRI) has the capa­
bility of measuring the random motion of water molecules, namely diffusivity. In DW­MRI,
the factor ”b­value” is critical which measures how strongly we want to attenuate the signal
coming from diffusing particles. It reflects the strength and timing of the gradients used
to generate DW­MRI. At a strong b­value, it allows to approximate the signal in WM as
the sum of the contributions from only axons (Pizzolato et al. [4]). In fact, signals associ­
ated to areas with less restricted diffusion, e.g. extra­axonal water is very low and can be
expected to be negligible. Hence, in our scope of discussion, we consider that at strong
DW­MRI, signals are mainly contributed by compartments from intra­axonal space. It is
a common assumption that as the increasing of b­values, the most restricted microstruc­
tural constituents that are visible with DWI are axons, thus, the selectivity of the images
to axonal diffusion also intensifies. The signal attenuation by b­value is illustrated as Fig.
1.2. In prior research, Ramanna et al. [5] found that b­value ≥4000s/m2 is fairly ”high
enough”, while McKinnon and Jensen [6] proposed that b­value ≥5000s/m2 is reasonably
high in vivo.
Figure 1.2: Signal intensity and b­value
At low b­values the estimation of various parameters regarding signal can be biased by
extra­axonal compartments. Additionally, the challenge is further compounded by noise
in the physical environment, which can interfere with precise model parameter estimation
(Jelescu et al. [7]). A potential solution is to streamline the modelling process by relying
on data from high b­value diffusion­weighted imaging (Jensen, Glenn, and Helpern [8],
Veraart, Fieremans, and Novikov [9], Özarslan et al. [10], Andersson et al. [11]). These
high b­values ensure that the signals primarily reflect intra­axonal water. In Pizzolato
et al. [12] and Pizzolato et al. [4], based on histological evidence from Andersson et al.
[13], it was suggested that also water trapped within cells contributes to the signal at high
b­value, as illustrated in Fig. 1.1.
2
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:9==
1.1.3
Axonal Diffusivities
The signal of axons can be modelled as that arising from diffusion within cylinders. The
diffusion within axons in relation to their directions can be categorized into two discernible
types (Kaden, Kruggel, and Alexander [14]): the parallel diffusivity, denoted as λ∥, which is
aligned along the primary axonal axis and is high (e.g. 3e­9 mm2/s), and the perpendicular
diffusivity, denoted as λ⊥, which is oriented perpendicularly to the cylindrical axis of the
axon and has a low value due to the restriction caused by the presence of the axonal
(cylindrical) wall. (Stanisz et al. [15]). As specified in section 1.1.2, at high b­value, signals
mainly contributed by intra­axonal space. When diffusion occurs in a specific direction, it
leads to a reduction in the signal intensity. Within the axon, the dominant signal originates
from the perpendicular diffusivity. The overall axonal signal is then modulated by the fact
that axons follow an orientation distribution function (ODF). Therefore, along the axon,
where there is a strongly marked parallel diffusivity, the signal is notably low. Despite that
high diffusivity along the axon results in a low signal, Pizzolato et al. [4] demonstrated that
it is feasible to detect the axonal diffusivity for both parallel and perpendicular directions.
Figure 1.3: Axonal Diffusivity
Due to the unknown distribution of axonal orientations (ODF), both the parallel and per­
pendicular diffusivities remain undetermined. In order to observe the diffusivities in WM,
our goal is to estimate the λ∥and λ⊥based on the representation of diffusion­weighted
signals which will be detailed illustrated in Chapter 2.
1.1.4
Spherical Harmonics
From a physical perspective, diffusivity in cells can be modelled as diffusion within spheres,
which is a special type of isotropic diffusion. Modelling axons is different, as diffusion is
anisotropic, meaning that more diffusivity along the axis of the cylinder than perpendicu­
larly. Furthermore, the different axon configurations (e.g. fanning, bending, crossing, etc.)
can also lead to a more complex directional distributions. This orientational information,
as said, is defined by the orientation distribution function (ODF) which is the probability
density of finding an axon aligned along a specific directions.
In order to model the direction of axons, Anderson [16] proposed to employ Spherical
Harmonics (SH) for the expansion of Axonal ODF. This approach is a convenient basis
decomposition to represent signals on the spherical domain.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Current problem
1.2.1
Prior Work
In order to gain insights into the per­axon diffusivities (parallel and perpendicular), Pizzo­
lato et al. [4] proposed to use full directional signals from two single diffusion encoding
pulsed gradient spin echo (PGSE) shells at high b­values.
In previous work, the estimation of axonal diffusivities was derived from the ratio of two
spherically­averaged signal shells at strongly diffusion­weightings. With full directional
signals from PGSE shells, spherical harmonics expansions were exploited for the kernel
zonal modelling. Since the SH coefficients representing the ODF c′
lm were unknown in
this context, they were eliminated due to the calculation of signal ratios.
Pizzolato et al. [4] managed to estimate parallel and perpendicular diffusivities by using
ratios of signals measured at b­value = 5000 s/m2 and at b­value = 10000 s/m2, because
these ratios do not depend on the unknown ODF’s coefficients. These ratios were then
expressed algebraically based on the unknown parallel and perpendicular diffusivities (λ∥
and λ⊥). Then, it was possible to estimate these diffusivities using non­linear regression.
The experiment was validated on synthetic data and tested on data from 34 subjects of
the MGH Adult Diffusion Human Connectome dataset, which we will follow by using the
same data for testing in this thesis project.
According to the prior work, the estimations of λ∥and λ⊥were obtained with the L­BFGS­
B algorithm (Byrd et al. [17]) with the computation time varied between 50 min and 70
min per subject on the human brain data obtained from the Human Connectome Project
(HCP). To utilize the computational advantages of machine learning, our methodology in
this project will primarily focus on machine learning based approaches.
1.2.2
Machine Learning­based approaches
In prior research, non­linear mathematical methods were employed to estimate axonal
diffusivities (parallel and perpendicular). While complexities of non­linear methods may
still exist, we propose to utilize machine learning regression for the estimation in combina­
tion with a mathematical reformulation of the problem. By leveraging data­driven models,
the estimation can possibly enhance accuracy and hence provide a diffusivity map that
can bring more valuable insights.
In our work, various machine learning methods will be employed and discussed. In order
to compare the performances of different machine learning algorithms to find the model
that is fit for the task of estimating axonal diffusivities, we utilized Random Forest (RF),
Gradient Boosting Tree (GB), k­Nearest Neighbor Regression (kNN) and Multilayer Per­
ceptron (MLP) for experiment and research. Based on the algorithm characteristics of
different models, further analysis and discussion will be conducted.
1.3
Thesis Outline
As the structure of this thesis, background regarding brain microstructure, diffusion­weighted
MRI and machine learning are introduced in Chapter 1, followed by the current problem
statement of the limitation of methods that has been used for estimating axonal diffu­
sivities. In Chapter 2, the theories behind the method of using only two single diffusion
encoding PGSE shells for the estimation are documented, including the key methods of
spherical harmonics expansion and squared root l­band power spectra. Data generat­
ing methods and various machine learning algorithms are introduced in Chapter 3, where
relevant results are demonstrated and analysed in Chapter 4. Finally, we proceed with
4
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:11==
discussions based on the experience of this project in Chapter 5, and wrap up the thesis
by the Conclusion.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:12==
6
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
In diffusion­weighted MRI, signals collected from nuclear magnetic resonance machine
(NMR) in each voxel (volumetric pixel) can be expressed as the sum of microstructure
compartments (microscopic physicochemical environments) (Alexander et al. [18]). Diffusion­
weighted signals are acquired along different directions, where the b­value is a factor
expressing how much we want to attenuate the signal when diffusion occurs. In a single­
encoding Pulsed (magnetic field) Gradient Spin Echo sequence (PGSE), the b­value de­
pends on the pulse duration δ, separation ∆, and gradient strength g.
The ensemble of signals measured with same b­value but with different directions are
referred to as a diffusion ”shell”. In our study, we focus on looking into high b­values:
these are b­value = 5000 s/m2 and b­value = 10000 s/m2 with the assumption that the
signals mainly come from intra­axonal and/or intra­cellular space, i.e., water within axons
and/or cells. Fig. 2.1 shows the constitution of signals per­voxel.
Figure 2.1: Diffusion weighted signals on each voxel
2.1
Diffusion­Weighted Axonal Signals
Based on Behrens et al. [19], an axonal signal at a certain b­value can be expressed as:
Sa(b, u) =
∫
n∈S2 p(n)Ka
(
b, u | n, λ∥, λ⊥
)
dn
(2.1)
where u represents for the diffusion gradient direction, while λ∥and λ⊥are the parallel
and perpendicular diffusivities respectively as mentioned in Chapter 1. S2 stands for the
surface of the unit sphere, and p(n) is the axonal orientation distribution function (ODF).
Given an axonal kernel (Pizzolato et al. [4]) by
Ka
(
b, u | n, λ∥, λ⊥
)
= e−buT D(n,λ∥,λ⊥)u
(2.2)
where D is a tensor that axisymmetric on the axonal compartment, which can be repre­
sents by
D
(
n, λ∥, λ⊥
)
=
(
λ∥−λ⊥
) (
nnT )
+ λ⊥I
(2.3)
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:14==
the representation of D is based on the assumption that the exchange between compart­
ments in WM can be ignored, and the axonal compartment is designed with cylindrical
symmetry to resemble neurites (Stanisz et al. [15], Assaf et al. [20], Kroenke, Ackerman,
and Yablonskiy [21]).
2.2
Expansion of Sphere Harmonics
Figure 2.2: Spherical Harmonics
According to the capability to modeling anisotropic diffusivity in signals, we therefore can
utilize the expansion (Anderson [16]) of spherical harmonics Y m
l
to express the axonal
signal from Eq. 2.1 to:
Sa(b, u) = C
L
∑
l=0,even
l
∑
m=−l
c′
lm2πe−bλ⊥Ψl
(
b
[
λ∥−λ⊥
])
Y m
l (u)
(2.4)
here C is a constant which factors in both the relaxation and the proportion of the voxel
volume taken up by axons, known as the volume fraction of the axonal compartment. The
coefficients c′
lm comes from the expansion in spherical harmonics that is relevant to the
ODF:
p(u) =
L
∑
l=0, even
l
∑
m=−l
c′
lmY m
l (u)
(2.5)
In spherical harmonics Y m
l , l is the degree and m represents the order as the conceptual
picture demonstrated in Fig. 2.2.
Note that we follow the definition of spherical harmonics in Descoteaux et al. [22] and
fix the l­degree to 12. That is because in Pizzolato et al. [4], higher order l gives more
sensitivity to both parallel and perpendicular diffusivity. Since diffusion signals have the
property of antipodal symmetry, we thereby chose l−degree with even values. Utilizing
spherical harmonics to expand the full directional signals with even degrees, an l = 12
corresponds to 91 coefficients. For an overdetermined system of equations, axonal di­
rection data exceeding 91 is required. This is the case of the data we use where for both
shells we have more than 91 unique directions.
8
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Calculation of Axonal Diffusivities
2.3.1
Kernel Zonal Modeling
In the representation of full directional signals expanded with spherical harmonics as Eq.
2.4, Pizzolato et al. [4] proposed to obtain the parallel and perpendicular diffusivities from
two shells by calculating the signal ratios. This method can eliminate the presence of
constant C as well as the spherical harmonics coefficients of the orientational distribution
function, which in practice skipped the modelling of the whole directional signal.
2.3.2
Square Root l­band Power Spectra
In strongly diffusion­weighted regime, given that b1 > b2 and b2 >> 0, signal along direc­
tion u after expansion of spherical harmonics can be expressed as:
S (b1, u) =
L
∑
l=0, even
l
∑
m=−l
clm (b1) Y m
l (u)
(2.6)
and
S (b2, u) =
L
∑
l=0, even
l
∑
m=−l
clm (b2) Y m
l (u)
(2.7)
where clm(b1) and clm(b2) can be identifies as
clm(b1) = c′
lmC2πe−b1λ⊥Ψl(b1[λ∥−λ⊥])
and
clm(b2) = c′
lmC2πe−b2λ⊥Ψl(b2[λ∥−λ⊥])
(2.8)
Since clm(b) contains the unknown coefficient c′
lm and constant C, we thereby define the
l­band power spectrum at a given b­value as
Θl(b) =
l
∑
m=−l
c2
lm(b)
(2.9)
By substituting Eq. 2.8 and Eq. 2.9, we can get the full representation of Θl(b) regarding
b1 and b2 as such:
Θl (b1) =
{
C2πe−b1λ⊥Ψl
(
b1
[
λ∥−λ⊥
])}2
l
∑
m=−l
(
c′
lm
)2
(2.10)
and
Θl (b2) =
{
C2πe−b2λ⊥Ψl
(
b2
[
λ∥−λ⊥
])}2
l
∑
m=−l
(
c′
lm
)2
(2.11)
then we obtain the l­band power spectral ratio as
Θl(b1)
Θl(b2) =
{
C2πe−b1λ⊥Ψl
(
b1
[
λ∥−λ⊥
])}2 ∑l
m=−l (c′
lm)2
{
C2πe−b2λ⊥Ψl
(
b2
[
λ∥−λ⊥
])}2 ∑l
m=−l
(
c′
lm
)2
(2.12)
By root squaring the l­band power spectral ratio, we then can define the root squared
l­band power spectral zonal ratio of signals on b1 and b2 as
αl
(
b1, b2, λ∥, λ⊥
)
:=
√
Θl (b1)
Θl (b2) = e(b2−b1)λ⊥Ψl
(
b1
[
λ∥−λ⊥
])
Ψl
(
b2
[
λ∥−λ⊥
])
(2.13)
Therefore, we now are able to estimate the axonal diffusivities λ∥and λ⊥without the need
of knowing the spherical harmonic coefficients of the ODF or the factor C.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:16==
2.3.3
Diffusion Sensitivity on l=0
When considering the spherical harmonics degree l = 0, the diffusivity λ∥tends to show
insensitivity at high b­values. Given that the coefficient for l = 0 also corresponds to
m = 0 in spherical harmonics, as outlined in Section 2.2, we know that l = 0, m = 0
stands for the spherical­like components that contribute to the signal: these include the
isotropic part of the axonal signal plus any contribution from cells (which yield isotropic
contributions only). Thus, we consider that any isotropic diffusion influence, such as the
diffusion signal from the presence of cells, would affect the value of the coefficient at l = 0,
m = 0. Therefore, the assumption that the coefficient with l = 0, m = 0 (and thus α0)
is exclusively influenced by axonal (anisotropic) diffusion, as presented in Eq. 2.4, might
not be entirely correct (Pizzolato et al. [4]).
Yet, when l ≥2, the spherical harmonic coefficients only represent the anisotropic part of
the signal, which is solely due to the presence of axons. This allows us to use the zonal
ratios for l ≥2 to exclusively capture information about axons, omitting influences due to
the presence of cells.
In our research, we will evaluate the performance of machine learning models in esti­
mating diffusivity, considering potential biases. Specifically, we will compare two model
types: one trained on data that incorporates l = 0, where diffusivity might be influenced
by cellular presence, and another trained on data that omits the presence of cells, i.e.
excluding zonal degree l = 0.
10
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:17==
3
Methods
As illustrated in the previous chapters, we find it feasible and efficient to employ machine
learning techniques for the estimation of axonal diffusivities, i.e. λ∥and λ⊥. The accurate
estimation of parameters from DWI data hinges upon not just the deployment of sophis­
ticated computational methods, but also on the meticulous processing of data.
In this chapter, we will provide the process of data preparation, and discuss our motivation
and rationale behind the selection of specific machine learning models.
The experiments we conducted were using a Intel© Xeon© Gold 6226R CPU with 2.90
GHz × 16 cores.
3.1
Data Preparation
3.1.1
Synthetic data
Given the task of training different models to estimate the axonal diffusivities, we started
by feeding the models with synthetic data. The synthetic data simulates the zonal ratios
which were based on randomly generated parallel and perpendicular diffusivities. Based
on the theory of using l­band squared root spectral ratios, we can effortlessly model the
zonal ratios according to Eq.2.13 without the need of modelling the full directional signals
on each voxel and capture all the coefficients.
Consider the λ∥and λ⊥are two targets which the models should make the prediction
based on, we followed the admitted range of λ∥between 0.1e−9m2/s to 3.0e−9m2/s, and
λ⊥in between 0.0e−11m2/s and 5.0e−11m2/s. We’ve settled on a sample size of 2 million
zonal ratios to strike a balance between model accuracy and efficiency. In our experi­
ments, we used this consistent data size to train various models, balancing computational
time and interpretability of results.
The input features for machine learning models correspond to αl where l was defined from
0 to 12. Note that we only consider the even degrees in spherical harmonics, hence for a
full zonal ratio of b1 and b2, the input features are 7 zonal ratios with l = [0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12].
Accordingly, in section 2.3.3 we mentioned that the presence of cells which corresponds
to spherical harmonics degree l = 0 and order m = 0 could bias the diffusion sig­
nal. Therefore, for the synthetic data we also excluded α0 (i.e. spherical mean) when
considering the unbiased estimator. To simulate the intra­axonal environment without
sphere­like compartments in WM, the input features for the only involve 6 ratios with
l = [2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12]. For the simulations of the αl ratios we used the same b­values
as the real data: b1 = 10000s/m2 and b2 = 5000s/m2, which aligns with b1 > b2 defined in
section 2.3.2 and are high enough for the research.
For training data, we simulated 2 millions sets of zonal ratios (αl) with noise. In diffusion
MRI, the presence of noise can make negative impacts to our estimation. Noise could
be sourced from physiological origins such as cardiac pulsation and equipment factors
like scanner imperfections (Veraart et al. [23]). We add noise to the synthetic data during
training based on the attempt to regularize the estimation to deal with the presence of
noise.
The selection of the noise level should be defined from signal­to­ratio (SNR) on b­value
= 0 and the standard deviation of the additive complex Gaussian noise. However, our
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:18==
simulation of the l­band squared­root spectral ratios does not allow us to access the b­
value=0 signal. In fact, we only simulate the numerator and the denominator of Eq. 2.13
and add noise to each of these according to a Gaussian distribution. We assume that
Gaussian noise makes sense in our study because the spherical harmonics, from which
the numerator and denominator derive, are an orthogonal basis that preserves the noise
distribution. For this reason, we actually add noise on numerators and denominators
separately and then calculate the ratios.
Nevertheless, the precise magnitude of noise required for the simulation remains an area
of ambiguity. Oversaturating the synthetic data with noise could degrade the interpretabil­
ity of the results, therefore, we should carefully set the amount of noise. If the noise level
is exceedingly high, machine learning models may misidentify these noisy patterns as
genuine features, leading to inaccurate interpretations and low performance. This mis­
characterization would then translate into models that are biased towards the center of the
simulated ranges for the diffusivities. Therefore, to deal with finding an ideal noise sim­
ulation, we tried different noise levels, as we did not know what value of noise standard
deviation should we use. Consequently, we embarked on an exploratory analysis, vary­
ing the noise levels from low to high, and monitored the diffusivity distribution to ascertain
an optimal threshold.
Figure 3.1: Synthetic data generating pipeline
Given that the noise variables are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), the noise
was added for sample of the training data individually. We first generated λ∥and λ⊥which
are uniformly distributed within the assigned ranges, and then calculated the terms for
12
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:19==
numerator and denominator based on two b­values (5000 s/m2 and 10000 s/m2) respec­
tively. The noise was added for each term at the two b­values, and was squared­rooted
together with the terms, as illustrated in Fig. 3.1. Then, as said, we calculated the ratios
αl.
For test set, we applied the same pipeline of generating synthetic data, with the choice of
noise standard deviation ranging from 0 to 0.01. The ground truth diffusivities of the test
set will be used to evaluate the performances of different models.
3.1.2
Human data
We used one dataset from the Human Connectome Project (HCP) Adult Diffusion database
collected at the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) (Setsompop et al. [24]), which
aligns with the study of Pizzolato et al. [4].
The real human data is a single encoding diffusion­weighted image that acquired using
a monopolar pulse spin­echo EPI sequence and is organized into 40 b = 0 volunmes as
well as four shells: 64 directions for b = 1000s/m2 and for b = 3000s/m2, 128 directions
for b = 5000s/m2, and 256 directions for b = 10000s/m2 as depicted in Fig.2.1. The
acquisition matrix is 140×140 voxels with 96 slices, for the sake of training and predicting
time, we choose 2 of the slices of number 55 and 56 for validation in our experiments.
3.2
Machine Learning­based Models
Considering the objectives of obtaining parallel and perpendicular diffusivities within es­
tablished ranges, we had simulated the zonal ratios added by noise stated in section 3.1.1.
To enhance the precision of the diffusivity estimations, we subsequently utilized statistical
modeling through machine learning methodologies to capture the relationship presented
in Eq. 2.13. In the subsequent sections, we introduce various machine learning models
we considered to approximate both parallel and perpendicular diffusivities.
In the work of Pizzolato et al. [4], L­BFGS­B algorithm was utilized for the estimation.
However, as per the advancements in machine learning algorithms, we have the option of
translating the problem into a regression problem. The approach would leverage machine
learning methodologies to estimate the desired variable λ∥and λ⊥.
There are several machine learning methods we can use for our regression task:
• Tree­based models
Tree models are inherently non­linear, allowing them to capture complex relation­
ships in the data. Meanwhile, the nature behind tree­based model regression is
splitting nodes and voting for proceeding. Accordingly, we have the opportunity of
investigate on the feature importance based on the voting results. Tree­based algo­
rithms, such as Decision Trees (DT), Random Forests (RF), and Gradient Boosting
Trees (GB), are frequently employed in various applications. Nonetheless, individ­
ual DTs exhibit sensitivity to training data, potentially compromising reliability with
the introduction of varying noise levels. Consequently, we elected to deploy Ran­
dom Forests and Gradient Boosting Trees for our specific endeavor.
• k­Nearest Neighbours
k­Nearest Neighbors (kNN) is a versatile algorithm that can be used for both clas­
sification and regression tasks. For regression, kNN can use weighted averaging
where closer neighbors have a more significant influence on the prediction than
those further away. This can help in reducing the impact of noise in the data.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:20==
• Support Vector Machine
Similar to kNN, Support Vector Machine (SVM) as a method that was designed for
classification, but can also be used for regression, with the capability of handling
non­linear relationships. However, SVM regressor is known for time­costly for large
datasets, with a complexity of tuning hyperparameters. In the course of our re­
search, 2 million samples were inputted into the models. Such a volume presents
challenges for the SVM regressor to process efficiently.
• Multilayer Perceptron
Multilayer perceptron (MLP) as a supervised learning method, is a classic feed­
forward artificial neural netwrok that can be easily adapted to support multi­output
for regression. Unlike the binary voting strategy for tree models, MLP is able to
backpropagate for optimizing the weights and bias in order to estimate the optimal
non­linear relationship.
According to the preliminary assessment of the relative merits and limitations of various
models, we have chosen to employ Random Forest, Gradient Boosting Trees, kNN re­
gressor and Multilayer Perceptron for the regression analysis presented in this chapter.
In the experiments of our study, regression modeling and analysis were conducted utilizing
the scikit-learn library in Python, as well as Pytorch, which are renowned tools for
constructing machine learning models and building neural networks.
3.2.1
Random Forest
Random Forest is the ensemble learning method of creating a ’forest’ of decision trees,
with the randomness of choosing subsets of features for proceeding to the next splitting.
In the algorithm, a random data point was picked from the training set, and an individual
decision tree was built for recursively searching for an expected prediction. Number of
estimators n was defined for building the forest, therefore, n trees are built to compose a
forest concurrently. As shown in Fig. 3.2, the average of all predictions from all decision
trees will be used as the representation of random forest prediction.
Figure 3.2: Random Forest Structure, source: https://levelup.gitconnected.com/random-forest-
regression-209c0f354c84
In our regression endeavor, given our task to precisely estimate the axonal diffusivities,
our aim is to achieve a model fit that closely adheres to the training dataset. Note that
14
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:21==
random forest supports multiple outputs, considering that λ∥and λ⊥might have correla­
tions in between which we still cannot determine, using random forest model can implicitly
learn and leverage correlations between the output variables, potentially leading to better
generalization on unseen data.
For the implementation of random forest, we trained the models using the parameters
listed as Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Training Parameters: Random Forest
Parameter
Random Forest
criterion
MSE
max_depth
20
n_estimators
200
bootstrap
True
3.2.2
Gradient Boosting
Gradient Boosting Trees builds trees sequentially. Unlike random forest, where trees are
grown independently, gradient boosting trees try to correct the residuals of each prede­
cessor and minimizes the difference between the predicted and actual values by using
gradient descent. By focusing on the residuals, gradient boosting tree often converges to
a solution that minimizes prediction errors.
Based on the sequential process, it is computationally intensive for gradient boosting trees
especially when handling large datasets. Therefore, in our experiment, we used XGBoost
(Extreme Gradient Boosting), which is an optimized and highly efficient implementation
of the gradient boosting algorithm. It leverages parallel processing during tree building by
distributing features across multiple CPU cores, making it faster than many other gradient
boosting implementations.
For our implementation of XGBoost, we trained the models using the parameters listed
as Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Training Parameters: XGBoost
Parameter
XGBoost
objective
reg:squaredlogerror
max_depth
20
n_round
100
eta
0.8
3.2.3
k­Nearest Neighbors Regression
k­Nearest Neighbors Regression (kNN Regression) is an instance­based learning algo­
rithm.
The fundamental idea behind kNN for regression is similar to its classification
counterpart. Given a new, unknown observation, kNN first computes the distance be­
tween this observation and every other observation in the dataset. Common distance
measures include Euclidean (Guo et al. [25]), Manhattan (Gao and Li [26]), Minkowski
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:22==
(Mailagaha Kumbure and Luukka [27]), etc. The algorithm then selects the k observa­
tions in the dataset that are closest to the unknown observation. For regression, the
predicted response for the unknown observation is the average (or sometimes median)
of the responses of the k nearest neighbors.
In scikit-learn, two different neighbors regressors are implemented: KNeighborsRe­
gressor and RadiusNeighborsRegressor. We selected the KNeighborsRegressor for our
experiment, leveraging its capabilities as a representative model of kNN regression.
During the experiment, the parameters regarding KNeighborsRegressor are used as listed
in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Training Parameters: K­Neighbors Regressor
Parameter
Description
n_neighbors
50
weights
distance
metric
euclidean
n_jobs
­1
3.2.4
Multilayer Perceptron
The Multi­Layer Perceptron (MLP) is a feedforward artificial neural network designed to
predict the dependent variable based on provided input variables (Murtagh [28]). For the
regression tasks, it is capable to model any continuous functions by adjusting the number
of hidden layers and the number of neurons in these layers to fit the complexity of the
problem. In the case of estimating 2 targets (λ∥and λ⊥) from the inputs of zonal ratios,
we can define our MLP neural network as shown in Fig. 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Neural Network of MLP
In the neural network architecture, the input layer can be configured in two distinct ways:
one with 7 neurons, specifically representing signal ratios inclusive of the zonal order
degree l = 0 effects, synonymous with spherical mean; and another with 6 neurons,
16
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:23==
which represent signal ratios excluding the influence of spherical mean, thereby negating
the effects of bias from isotropic compartments, e.g. cells.
The output layer corresponds to two estimated targets λ∥and λ⊥. For the structural prop­
erties of MLP, we configured the intrinsic parameters as listed in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Training Parameters: MLP structure
Parameter
MLP Configuration
Full Network Size
10
Hidden Layer Sizes
8
Activation Function
tanh
Dropout
0.2
criterion
MSE
Optimizer
Adam
While the hyperparameters are controlled as listed in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Training Parameters: MLP hyperparameters
Hyperparameter
Value
Learning rate
0.001
Batch size
512
Number of epochs
25
Shuffle
True
Weight_decay
1e−5
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:24==
18
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:25==
4
Results
4.1
Model Evaluation: Synthetic Data
4.1.1
Comparison of all models
Through attempting on different noise levels, we discovered that random noise ∈[0.003, 0.018]
is ideal for adding into training data. The specified noise range was determined in rela­
tion to the test data settings, predicated on the assertion that models ought to be capable
of processing data exhibiting higher noise levels than those present in the test dataset.
Noise with a higher ranges can potentially lead machine learning models to misconstrue
noisy patterns as authentic features. Conversely, insufficient noise may not adequately
train a model to resist such disturbances.
As stated in section 3.1.1, we used synthetic data generated with random noise range
[0.0, 0.01] as the test set. By comparing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) as shown in Fig.
4.1, for four models on the predictions of biased and unbiased parallel and perpendicular
diffusivities respectively, we observed that kNN in general has large errors in predicting
λ∥and λ⊥. Random forest shows the robustness on estimating λ∥and λ⊥whether the
diffusion signals are biased by the presence of spherical components or not. However,
MSE penalizes large errors more severely (since errors are squared) than smaller ones.
This implies that the model will be very sensitive to outliers, which may not reflect the
actual performance of each model.
Figure 4.1: MSE Evaluation ­ all models
To obtain a more accurate representation of the discrepancies between ground truth val­
ues and predictions, we employed the Relative Errors metric for a comprehensive analy­
sis.
The metric of relative errors is used to understand how large an error is in comparison to
the true value, and is derived from the absolute error divided by the ground truth value.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:26==
In our case, the relative errors were calculated for λ∥and λ⊥respectively to measure the
the magnitude of the absolute error from ˆλ∥, ˆ
λ⊥and ground truth in relation to the size of
the exact ground truth.
Upon an examination of the relative errors, we presented the relative errors stemming
from both biased and unbiased estimations. We divided the ground truth range of λ∥and
λ⊥into 5 intervals respectively, in order to observe the relative errors from ground truth
to estimated diffusivities based on different thresholds.
In the assessment of λ∥, both tree­based algorithms, RF and XGBoost, demonstrate mini­
mal residuals across the lower value spectrum. Within the median range, the performance
of unbiased estimators for RF and XGBoost is observed to be inferior compared to their
biased estimator. In contrast, kNN and MLP maintain a steady predictive efficacy, irre­
spective of estimator bias.
But in general, when comparing to the results for λ⊥estimation, these four algorithms
showed reliability in predicting λ∥. Evaluating the estimation of λ⊥under both biased and
unbiased conditions, all models — excluding kNN — depict acceptable performance if
we take the consideration of the bias due to non­axonal compartments. However if we
remove the impact for the potential existence of the compartments with isotropic diffusivity
(e.g. cells), each model yields estimations plagued by considerable errors, suggesting the
inherent sensitivity of λ⊥.
Figure 4.2: Relative Errors Evaluation ­ all models
Based on the comparison of the biased and unbiased estimators, larger variance is ob­
served on the unbiased one.
In order to deep dive into a comprehensive evaluation of each model’s accuracy in pre­
dicting λ∥and λ⊥, Fig. 4.3 presents the performance of the RF, XGBoost, kNN, and MLP
algorithms in relation to their target predictions.
When considering estimates that use the spherical mean (biased, i.e. including α0), it is
more likely to overestimate the λ∥while λ⊥is prone to be underestimates, if we look at
the data points around the regression line in Fig. 4.3. Additionally, the estimated λ⊥in the
20
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:27==
condition of trained by unbiased data exhibit significant dispersion around the regression
line, failing to conform to a coherent linear relationship.
In estimating λ∥, the four models showed accuracy on both biased and unbiased input
data. For all models, the estimation tends to predict higher λ∥than the ground truth at
the lower threshold (i.e. 0.0e−9m2/s to 1.5e−9m2/s), while kNN and MLP performs in a
similar regression pattern that both for lower and higher thresholds, the predictions ex­
hibit approximately equivalent inaccuracies. XGBoost suggested a good linearity between
prediction and ground truth values, and RF has a moderate performance.
(a) Prediction vs. Ground Truth, λ∥
(b) Prediction vs. Ground Truth, λ⊥
Figure 4.3: (a) Scatter plot of the regression results for 4 models on predicting λ∥. (b) Scatter plot
of the regression results for 4 models on predicting λ⊥. Results were tested for both biased and
unbiased models.
For λ⊥, all the predictions based on unbiased input data did not follow the regression
line well, which again indicates that the estimation of perpendicular diffusivity can be less
robust.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:28==
While model accuracy is pivotal in machine learning, the computational time cost for train­
ing and predicting is equally significant. In the prior work, Pizzolato et al. [4] examinated
on L­BFGS­B algorithm which cost 50 mins to 70 mins per subject for the human data,
while we see a computational time improvement on using machine learning methods.
We recorded the computational time cost for both training and predicting phases for each
model, which listed in table 4.1. It is apparent that XGBoost is more time­costly, since
the algorithm of boosting was designed to be sequentially computing. This is expected
as we also learned from Bentéjac, Csörgő, and Martı́ nez­Muñoz [29] that XGBoosting
was focuses on reducing the computational complexity for finding the best split, which is
time­consuming.
Significantly, kNN as a lazy learning algorithm, it does not really ”learn” a model in the
same way as a neural network or a gradient boosting. There is no iterative training or com­
putations involved for kNN regressor, instead, it simply stores the entire training dataset in
memory. When the prediction happens, kNN algorithm searches for the k points that we
specified in the training data that are the closest to the target. This is also the reason that
kNN regressor took the most time for predicting targets among these models. In general,
RF and MLP have lower training time (using 2 million samples).
Table 4.1: Computational Time Cost on 2M Samples
Model
RF
XGBoost
kNN
MLP
biased
unbiased
biased
unbiased
biased
unbiased
biased
unbiased
Fitting time
17mins
15mins
51mins
44mins
0.07min
0.07min
15mins
12mins
Predicting time
15s
13s
67s
52s
11min
10min
0.4s
0.4s
For predicting on the real human data that mentioned in Section 3.1.2 on two slices, the
time costs relations among these four models aligned with the predicting time on synthetic
data.
By evaluating the residuals, regression scatters as well as the computational time costs,
we can have a preliminary conclusion that random forests showed the most robustness
among the four evaluated methods, and kNN is the least reliable on the accuracy of the
estimation of λ∥and λ⊥on the synthetic data.
In the following, we analyse the performance of distinct machine learning algorithms. This
assessment is based on models trained on synthetic data with noise levels within the
range ∈[0.003, 0.018] and tested on synthetic data characterized by noise levels in the
range ∈[0.00, 0.01].
4.1.2
Random Forest
By analyzing both biased and unbiased models, the assessment of random forest feature
importance provides insight into the extent to which specific features influence the models’
predictions of the axonal diffusivities.
22
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.4: Random Forest: Feature Importance
Given the input features are 7 zonal ratios calculated based on even spherical harmonics
degrees ranging from 0 to 12 for the biased model, and 6 for unbiased model, we have the
outcome that l = 0 contributed most for the biased model to estimate the targets. This
fact means that when coping with the signal data with the biased of presence of cells,
the estimation of axonal diffusivities is mostly influenced by spherical mean of the signal.
When we remove the effect of the presence of cells (by removing the spherical mean on
l = 0 in the training data), we found that l = 2 dominates the estimation of axonal diffusiv­
ities as shown in Fig. 4.4, which aligned with the biased model that l = 2 contributes to
the second place. According to the observation that zonal ratios on spherical harmonics
degree l = 2 contributes to most importance of voting to the estimated diffusivites.
4.1.3
Gradient Boosting
Indicated in Fig. 4.3, we can observe that XGBoost had overfitted the data comparing
to RF. RF is by designed less prone to overfitting, as it is the ensemble of bagging and
boostrapping strategy, while XGBoost might easily focus on some outliers that includes
noise. At this point, XGBoost is trying hard to correct the misclassifications from previous
boosting rounds. Furthermore, by evaluating the feature importance in both biased and
unbiased estimations, the outcomes are consistent with the feature importance as delin­
eated by RF. This fact again proved that the intensity of signal is largely influenced by
isotropic diffusivity.
Despite that XGBoost has the advantage of finding a more complex patterns in the data,
namely can be more generalized to new datasets. However, selecting XGBoost for es­
timating axonal diffusivities is not optimal, given the inherent instability arising from its
pronounced reliance on hyperparameter tuning and the extensive computational duration
it necessitates.
4.1.4
kNN
In our experimental framework, kNN regression served as a foundational reference model.
Remarkably, it exhibited a better performance than XGBoost in estimating λ∥and λ⊥. Not
like RF, both kNN and XGBoost possess the capability to assimilate data points previously
unencountered during the training phase. The different is, kNN works on the principle of
local similarity. If the dataset has strong local patterns, where data points close in the fea­
ture space have similar outputs, kNN can capture these patterns better. XGBoost, being
a tree­based model, might not capture these intricate local patterns as effectively. The
pattern of generating synthetic data had establishes a discernible distance relationship
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:30==
amongst data points, which explains why kNN performs better than XGBoost in estimat­
ing on synthetic datasets. XGBoost, however, is more likely to need to depend on tuning
hyperparameters to achieve a better model performance.
4.1.5
MLP
We utilized a 10­layer feedforward neural network with 8 hidden layers as the architecture
of MLP. As λ∥and λ⊥are in different scale, we need to normalize the data for the numerical
stability of vanishing gradients, and therefore ensure a smoother convergence.
After several attempts, we chose Tanh as the activation function because it has a stronger
characterization to nonlinear regression comparing to ReLu and sigmoid, while it also gave
better performance for multi­layer neural networks. Using ReLu as the activation function
during our attempting, the loss was converged less stably, due to the fact that using ReLu
can cause some ”dying ReLU units” that never been activated and updated weights, and
therefore, degrade model performance (Schmidt­Hieber [30]).
Figure 4.5: MLP: training loss
By comparing the training loss for biased and unbiased of MLP models as shown in Fig.
4.5, we found that both models converged with the same pace, which indicates that the
weights and biases of the MLP are adjusting in such a way that the predictions are getting
closer to the actual values. However, loss of unbiased model is always higher than biased
model. The observation of λ⊥estimation is less robust is also proved by the results of
MLP.
4.2
Validation: Human Data
4.2.1
Searching noise boundaries
During the experimentation of identifying appropriate levels of noise, we also utilized real
data for validation purposes. When the model is trained using data that is marked by
elevated levels of noise, the subsequent performance when applied to actual data might
experience compromise. This is notably reflected in the diffusivity map, which we also
used for searching the proper noise boundaries.
24
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:31==
(a) Noise ∈[0.0007, 0.005]
(b) Noise ∈[0.005, 0.06]
Figure 4.6: Impact of noise on diffusivity map
As the example of Fig. 4.6 by using random forest for the estimation task. On the diffusivity
maps for both biased and unbiased estimators with the noise range in [0.0007, 0.005],
it shown that insufficient inclusion of noise will render the model less resilient to noise,
thereby causing the resultant diffusivity map to exhibit an excessive level of detail and
sharpness.
Conversely, if we put the noise in range [0.005, 0.06], which has a higher boundary, a
tendency towards smoother representations is observed due to the fact that the estimator
has effectively assimilated the noisier data as the target. In this case, we will lose certain
details of the distribution of diffusivity values on the map.
4.2.2
Validation
Obtaining four machine learning models for both biased and unbiased estimators from
the previous experiments, we evaluated their performance on actual data to gain deeper
insights into their effectiveness in estimating real­world datasets. Through the comparison
of the diffusivity maps as shown in Fig. 4.7, the estimation of λ⊥on biased estimators is
less sensitive compared to the unbiased estimator, where we removed the ratio α0 that
the diffusion signal may be biased by the presence of partial with isotropic compartments
(such as cells).
Based on this observation, it can be inferred that the components that contribute to the
signal occupy a proportionate part in the axonal space. This observation again verified the
explaination that there is a shifted mode in the biased estimators relative to the ground­
truth, while in the unbiased estimators the impact of spherical mean was removed, and
the map showed a different intensity distribution of the perpendicular diffusivity.
In the estimation of λ∥, RF and MLP exhibited slight better performance compared to the
other two models, particularly when subjected to increased noise levels, their predictions
persist within a coherent range. However, due to the adaptability in fine­tuning param­
eters and hyperparameters across various models, there remains potential for further
refinement of estimations to attain the desired axonal diffusivity outcomes.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: Test on real data: Diffisivity map
26
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:33==
5
Discussion
Based on the kernel zonal modeling and spherical harmonics squared root l­band power
spectra, combined by different machine learning­based methods, it is possible to estimate
both parallel and perpendicular diffusivities by training and testing on synthetic data to
evaluate the results from different models, and validate on the real human data. Through
the assessment presented in Chapter 4, we consider that the Random Forests algorithm
demonstrated notable robustness in estimating axonal diffusivities parallel and perpen­
dicularly.
5.1
Limitation of Random Forests
Random Forests, however, posed a major challenge that it can’t extrapolate outside un­
seen data. This pointed out that for estimating the axonal diffusivities on the real data
that contains more noise than how we put in the training, the model’s performance might
deviate from anticipated outcomes.
When utilizing a training set of two million samples, the computational time is reasonably
acceptable. However, as the scale of the dataset increases or when a greater number of
decision trees are defined, time cost will be increased according to the complexity, and
another important cost to be considered is memory space, exponential in the depth of the
tree. In the context of practical application scenarios, this might not represent an efficient
choice.
5.2
The Bias of Isotropic Diffusivity
As our primary research objective is to investigate on the axonal diffusivities, it is nec­
essary to remove the impact from the signals that are associated with non­axonal­like
components. Physically we know that estimates without zonal ratio α0 that indicates the
signals contributed from isotropic compartments, are more accurate because they do not
contain bias from isotropic compartments like cells. However, we also saw that the ma­
chine learning regressors show lower performance when not including α0. Therefore, we
need to be aware of this trade­off and investigate it further in future studies.
5.3
Possibility of Calculating Axonal Signal Fraction
Since we are able to estimate the parallel and perpendicular diffusivities, when we look
back to Eq. 2.4, it is feasible to utilize the estimated λ∥and λ⊥for the calculation of
constant C, as C accounts for the relaxation and the volume fraction of the axonal com­
partment, i.e., the volume of the voxel occupied by axons. However, this calculation would
be meaningful if we neglect the presence of bias, which stems from residual partial volume
effects involving the isotropic compartments, such as cells.
5.4
Assumption on the Extreme Estimation on λ∥
In our experimentation with diffusion MRI, a noteworthy situation arose during the testing
phase. Specifically, all of our machine learning models produced predictions of exception­
ally elevated values for parallel diffusivity. Typically, occurrences of such nature should
be exceptionally uncommon. However, we have formulated an assumption to explain this
phenomenon.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:34==
Our primary objective in the process of estimating diffusivity is to observe the movement
patterns of water molecules within axons. To achieve an unbiased estimation, it is crucial
that the signals we analyze originate exclusively from axons and remain unaffected by wa­
ter molecules present within cells. In a theoretical extreme scenario, all water molecules
could exhibit movement in perfect alignment, all following the same direction. Even a
slight deviation from this precise alignment could result in a dramatic reduction in diffusiv­
ity along that particular direction.
The foundation of our diffusivity estimation relies on the utilization of spherical harmonics
squared root l­band power spectra which resulted the zonal ratios, as defined in Equa­
tion 2.13, which itself is based on the principles outlined in Equation 2.12. At a b­value
of 5000, the coefficients associated with higher order l terms are minuscule, practically
negligible. Conversely, at b­value=10000, the coefficients corresponding to higher l terms
experience a substantial increase, causing their ratio to oscillate between extremely low
and extremely high values. This disparity in coefficient values at varying b­values con­
tributes to the phenomenon we encountered, and is due to the fact that at higher b­value
the directional diffusion signal contains higher angular frequencies compared to the signal
at lower b­values. If this situation manifests frequently, the training data becomes popu­
lated with a multitude of exceptionally high/low values. Consequently, this abundance of
extreme values can hinder the proper learning of machine learning models. Their ability
to discern meaningful patterns and relationships from the data is compromised due to the
prevalence of such outliers, and therefore the model fail to learn from the training data.
Our observation of abnormally high parallel diffusivity predictions from machine learn­
ing models is potentially rooted in the intricate interplay between the alignment of water
molecules, the chosen b­value, and the ensuing impact on the zonal signal ratios. The
emergence of frequent extreme values in the training dataset may impede the effective
training of machine learning models, ultimately affecting their ability to learn and general­
ize from the data.
28
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:35==
6
Conclusion
In this project, we applied machine learning techniques to estimate axonal diffusivities (λ∥
and λ⊥) in DW­MRI at high b­values, using two PGSE shells based on Pizzolato et al. [4].
We generated synthetic data according to the zonal ratios obtained from the spherical
harmonics square root l­band power spectra in zonal kernel modeling, and analysed the
results on synthetic data. In order to simulate the presence of noise, we randomly add
noise into the synthetic data and observe the diffusivity map with the data based on the
acquisition protocol of in vivo brain slice data from the human real data. Through training
different machine learning models to estimate the axonal diffusivities, and compare the
performances in the conditions of with and without the bias contributed by the isotropic
compartments, we evaluated these models and analyzed their ability to handle the data
while including/excluding the spherical mean at degree l = 0.
Our experiments indicated that Random Forests, XGBoosting, kNN, and MLP, can be
effectively used to estimate axonal diffusivities in strongly diffusion­weighted MRI, while
Random Forests showed more robustness for handling both the synthetic and real data.
The models showed relatively efficient performance in estimating the parallel diffusivity
(λ∥) for both biased and unbiased input data. However, the estimation of perpendicular
diffusivity (λ⊥) was found to be less robust, particularly for unbiased input data.
Despite the evaluation of the estimation results for axonal diffusivities, we also analysed
the feasibility and ideas of calculating the constant C, which can be identified as a signif­
icant work in the future.
Overall, the study highlights the potential of machine learning in improving the estimation
of axonal diffusivities in diffusion MRI.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:36==
30
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:37==
Acknowledgements
Marco Pizzolato, Assistant Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com­
puter Science, DTU
I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Marco, whose dedicate guid­
ance and expertise have been indispensable throughout the journey of composing this
thesis. Even when faced with my limited background in diffusion MRI study, he never
hesitated to delve deep, explaining the complex theories with utmost clarity. His atten­
tion to detail and genuine care for my understanding has made every challenge seem
surmountable. I’m incredibly grateful for all the times he’s gone above and beyond, in­
vesting his valuable time to ensure I grasp the concepts fully, his kindness, guidance, and
unwavering support have been instrumental in shaping this work.
Tim Bjørn Dyrby, Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
DTU
I also sincerely appreciate my co­supervisor Tim for the invaluable guidance provided at
the onset of this project, and the time dedicated to reviewing this work. Additionally, I
would like to acknowledge the insightful articles and works authored by Tim, that have
been an invaluable resource during my study.
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:38==
Bibliography
[1]
Yaniv Assaf and Ofer Pasternak. “Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)­based white mat­
ter mapping in brain research: a review”. In: Journal of molecular neuroscience 34
(2008), pp. 51–61.
[2]
Thomas E Conturo et al. “Diffusion MRI: precision, accuracy and flow effects”. In:
NMR in Biomedicine 8.7 (1995), pp. 307–332.
[3]
Mohammad Shehab. Artificial Intelligence in Diffusion MRI. Springer, 2020.
[4]
Marco Pizzolato et al. “Axial and radial axonal diffusivities and radii from single
encoding strongly diffusion­weighted MRI”. In: Medical Image Analysis 86 (2023),
p. 102767.
[5]
Sudhir Ramanna et al. “Triple diffusion encoding MRI predicts intra­axonal and
extra­axonal diffusion tensors in white matter”. In: Magnetic resonance in medicine
83.6 (2020), pp. 2209–2220.
[6]
Emilie T McKinnon and Jens H Jensen. “Measuring intra­axonal T2 in white matter
with direction­averaged diffusion MRI”. In: Magnetic resonance in medicine 81.5
(2019), pp. 2985–2994.
[7]
Ileana O Jelescu et al. “Challenges for biophysical modeling of microstructure”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 344 (2020), p. 108861.
[8]
Jens H Jensen, G Russell Glenn, and Joseph A Helpern. “Fiber ball imaging”. In:
Neuroimage 124 (2016), pp. 824–833.
[9]
Jelle Veraart, Els Fieremans, and Dmitry S Novikov. “On the scaling behavior of
water diffusion in human brain white matter”. In: NeuroImage 185 (2019), pp. 379–
387.
[10]
Evren Özarslan et al. “Influence of the size and curvedness of neural projections on
the orientationally averaged diffusion MR signal”. In: Frontiers in physics 6 (2018),
p. 17.
[11]
Mariam Andersson et al. “Does powder averaging remove dispersion bias in diffu­
sion MRI diameter estimates within real 3D axonal architectures?” In: NeuroImage
248 (2022), p. 118718.
[12]
Marco Pizzolato et al. “Axonal T2 estimation using the spherical variance of the
strongly diffusion­weighted MRI signal”. In: Magnetic resonance imaging 86 (2022),
pp. 118–134.
[13]
Mariam Andersson et al. “Axon morphology is modulated by the local environment
and impacts the noninvasive investigation of its structure–function relationship”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117.52 (2020), pp. 33649–33659.
[14]
Enrico Kaden, Frithjof Kruggel, and Daniel C Alexander. “Quantitative mapping of
the per­axon diffusion coefficients in brain white matter”. In: Magnetic resonance in
medicine 75.4 (2016), pp. 1752–1763.
[15]
Greg J Stanisz et al. “An analytical model of restricted diffusion in bovine optic
nerve”. In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 37.1 (1997), pp. 103–111.
[16]
Adam W Anderson. “Measurement of fiber orientation distributions using high an­
gular resolution diffusion imaging”. In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An Offi­
cial Journal of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 54.5
(2005), pp. 1194–1206.
[17]
Richard H Byrd et al. “A limited memory algorithm for bound constrained optimiza­
tion”. In: SIAM Journal on scientific computing 16.5 (1995), pp. 1190–1208.
32
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:39==
[18]
Daniel C Alexander et al. “Imaging brain microstructure with diffusion MRI: practi­
cality and applications”. In: NMR in Biomedicine 32.4 (2019), e3841.
[19]
Timothy EJ Behrens et al. “Characterization and propagation of uncertainty in diffusion­
weighted MR imaging”. In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An Official Journal of
the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 50.5 (2003), pp. 1077–
1088.
[20]
Yaniv Assaf et al. “New modeling and experimental framework to characterize hin­
dered and restricted water diffusion in brain white matter”. In: Magnetic Resonance
in Medicine: An Official Journal of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance
in Medicine 52.5 (2004), pp. 965–978.
[21]
Christopher D Kroenke, Joseph JH Ackerman, and Dmitriy A Yablonskiy. “On the
nature of the NAA diffusion attenuated MR signal in the central nervous system”.
In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An Official Journal of the International Society
for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 52.5 (2004), pp. 1052–1059.
[22]
Maxime Descoteaux et al. “Regularized, fast, and robust analytical Q­ball imaging”.
In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An Official Journal of the International Society
for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 58.3 (2007), pp. 497–510.
[23]
Jelle Veraart et al. “Denoising of diffusion MRI using random matrix theory”. In:
Neuroimage 142 (2016), pp. 394–406.
[24]
Kawin Setsompop et al. “Pushing the limits of in vivo diffusion MRI for the Human
Connectome Project”. In: Neuroimage 80 (2013), pp. 220–233.
[25]
Gongde Guo et al. “KNN model­based approach in classification”. In: On The Move
to Meaningful Internet Systems 2003: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE: OTM Confeder­
ated International Conferences, CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE 2003, Catania, Sicily,
Italy, November 3­7, 2003. Proceedings. Springer. 2003, pp. 986–996.
[26]
Xing Gao and Guilin Li. “A KNN model based on manhattan distance to identify the
SNARE proteins”. In: Ieee Access 8 (2020), pp. 112922–112931.
[27]
Mahinda Mailagaha Kumbure and Pasi Luukka. “A generalized fuzzy k­nearest
neighbor regression model based on Minkowski distance”. In: Granular Comput­
ing 7.3 (2022), pp. 657–671.
[28]
Fionn Murtagh. “Multilayer perceptrons for classification and regression”. In: Neu­
rocomputing 2.5 (1991), pp. 183–197. ISSN: 0925­2312. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0925-2312(91)90023-5. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0925231291900235.
[29]
Candice Bentéjac, Anna Csörgő, and Gonzalo Martı́nez­Muñoz. “A comparative
analysis of gradient boosting algorithms”. In: Artificial Intelligence Review 54 (2021),
pp. 1937–1967.
[30]
Johannes Schmidt­Hieber. “Nonparametric regression using deep neural networks
with ReLU activation function”. In: (2020).
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:40==
34
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
==PAGE:41==
Brain Microstructure Diffusion MRI with Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:42==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
