==PAGE:1==
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition,
sleep and exercise
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
Master Thesis
31st August, 2023
By
Gaurav Dang
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build-
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Gaurav Dang - s134692
Signature
Date
ii
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Gaurav Dang, MSc Eng, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
DTU
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor, PhD, MSc EE & Head of Study, Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence, Cognitive Systems Section Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
4
2.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Application Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Final Problem Statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Methodology
15
4
Analysis
17
4.1
Scoping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
User Story Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Requirements Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Use Case Specification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Design
26
5.1
Sprint 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2
Sprint 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Sprint 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.4
Prototype Link
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
Application Technical Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Implementation
40
6.1
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.3
LogMeal API
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.4
Sprint 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.5
Sprint 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.6
Sprint 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7
Experiments
55
7.1
Usability Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.2
LogMeal API Accuracy Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
8
Results
60
8.1
Usability Testing Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
8.2
LogMeal API Accuracy Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
9
Discussion
69
9.1
Reflection on Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
9.2
Reflection on Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
9.3
Reflection on User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
9.4
Limitations of this Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
iv
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:6==
9.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
10 Conclusion
77
Bibliography
78
A Appendix
82
A.1 User Story Map - Version 1.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
A.2 Landing Page . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.3 Survey 3: Usability Testing - ’freefromdiabetes’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.4 Survey 2: freefromdiabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.5 Sketches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.6 Survey 1: Understanding Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
A.7 Custom Figma Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The global burden of diabetes, a chronic metabolic condition marked by elevated blood
sugar levels, has reached epidemic levels, presenting formidable obstacles to public
health systems worldwide [1]. The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) estimates that
537 million people, between the ages of 20 and 79, have diabetes. It is anticipated that
this number would increase to 643 million by 2030 and 783 million by 2045 [2]. Under-
standing diabetes is crucial. According to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), diabetes is a condition that disrupts the normal process of converting food into
energy in the body [3]. When blood sugar levels increase, the pancreas releases insulin,
which acts as a key to allow glucose from food to enter cells and generate energy. How-
ever, in diabetes, there may be inadequate insulin production or utilization, resulting in
high blood sugar levels that can lead to significant health complications, including heart
disease, impaired vision, and kidney disease. There are four main types of diabetes [4]:
1. Type 1 Diabetes (T1D): It may develop at any age, however it is most frequently
diagnosed in children and teenagers. In type 1 diabetes, the body generates little
or no insulin, requiring daily insulin injections to keep blood glucose levels stable.
2. Type 2 Diabetes (T2D): Type 2 diabetes , on the other hand, is more common in
adults and accounts for over 90% of all diabetes cases. In type 2 diabetes, the body
fails to efficiently use the insulin that it generates.
3. Gestational diabetes (GDM): GDM is a form of diabetes characterized by elevated
blood glucose levels during pregnancy. Although GDM typically resolves after preg-
nancy, women who have had GDM and their offspring are at a heightened risk of
developing type 2 diabetes in the future.
4. Prediabetes: Prediabetes is a medical condition which often occurs before type 2
diabetes. It is marked by elevated blood sugar levels that are greater than usual but
not high enough to be recognized as diabetes. People with prediabetes are more
likely to develop type 2 diabetes if they do not make lifestyle changes to improve
their health.
Considering that gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) usually resolves after pregnancy
but may increase the risk of developing type 2 diabetes (T2D) in the future, diabetes can
be broadly categorized into two types: type 1 and type 2. As mentioned above, T1D
and T2D are two distinct forms of diabetes. T1D is typically diagnosed in childhood or
adolescence and is characterized by the body’s inability to produce insulin. On the other
hand, T2D is more common in adults and is marked by the body’s reduced ability to use
insulin effectively.
In recent years, research and clinical studies have shown significant progress in under-
standing and managing type 2 diabetes. Advances in treatment options, lifestyle inter-
ventions, and improved understanding of the underlying risk factors have propelled the
field of diabetes research forward, with a focus on type 2 diabetes.
Therefore, the thesis will have narrow focus on Type 2 diabetes (T2D), which accounts
for over 90% of all diabetes cases globally and examining the latest research findings,
treatment modalities, and interventions aimed at managing this prevalent form of diabetes.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
1
==PAGE:8==
Furthermore, Type 2 diabetes can be prevented or delayed with healthy lifestyle changes,
such as: Losing weight. Eating healthy food. Being active.
1.1
Background
Diabetes is a prevalent health issue in Denmark, with a significant number of people af-
fected by both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. In 2022, there were at least 349,000 individuals
diagnosed with diabetes 1, accounting for 6.2% of the population[5]. Additionally, it is esti-
mated that 98,000 Danes are unaware that they have type 2 diabetes, and approximately
465,000 individuals have a preliminary stage of type 2 diabetes or prediabetes. Further-
more, the number of people with type 2 diabetes is projected to increase significantly in
the coming years, with an estimated 467,000 individuals expected to have diabetes by
2030, with at least 420,000 of them having type 2 diabetes.
Various risk factors are associated with type 2 diabetes, including overweight/obesity,
physical inactivity, age, family history of diabetes, history of gestational diabetes, cardio-
vascular disease, and its risk factors. Prediabetes, which is a precursor to type 2 diabetes,
is also prevalent in Denmark, with calculations showing that the number of individuals with
prediabetes is 150% of the number of those diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, currently es-
timated to be around 465,000 individuals.
Diabetes can have severe consequences on the health and quality of life of individu-
als, as it can cause damage to organs such as the heart, kidneys, eyes, and nerves,
leading to secondary diseases. Managing blood sugar levels is crucial in preventing the
development of secondary diseases, and a series of cost-effective interventions, such
as blood glucose control through diet, physical activity, and medication, control of blood
pressure and lipids, and regular screenings for complications, can greatly improve patient
outcomes.
Prevention plays a crucial role in managing diabetes, and lifestyle changes are highlighted
as the best way to prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes. These include maintain-
ing a healthy body weight, engaging in regular physical activity, following a healthy diet
while avoiding excessive sugar and saturated fat intake, and avoiding tobacco use. Early
diagnosis through affordable blood glucose testing is essential, especially for individuals
with type 1 diabetes who require insulin injections for survival. Emphasizing a healthy
lifestyle is a vital approach to managing diabetes effectively.
1.2
Problem Statement
Diabetes, a rapidly growing global health problem, poses a multitude of challenges for in-
dividuals affected by the condition. Of particular concern are the challenges encountered
by individuals who are prediabetic or have type 2 diabetes, as they frequently encounter
difficulties in effectively managing the complexities associated with their condition. Un-
healthy behaviors, such as leading a sedentary lifestyle, having irregular sleep patterns,
and maintaining inadequate nutritional practices, are commonly observed among younger
age groups. These harmful behaviors not only increase the likelihood of developing dia-
betes but also worsen the condition in individuals who are already diagnosed.
The problem becomes even worse by the prevailing lack of knowledge regarding the sig-
nificant consequences associated with these behaviors. Young individuals, frequently
displaying a lack of awareness regarding the potential enduring consequences of their
lifestyle decisions, may inadvertently be laying the groundwork for the development of
chronic health conditions. Unfavorable dietary patterns, characterized by the excessive
2
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:9==
consumption of foods that are high in calories, especially through high intake of carbohy-
drates but low in nutrients, play a significant role in the development of obesity and insulin
resistance. Likewise, insufficient levels of physical activity and changes in sleep patterns
contribute to an increased vulnerability to type 2 diabetes and its associated complica-
tions.
Managing diabetes requires regular check-ups and monitoring, but extended waiting pe-
riods can be physically and emotionally taxing for patients with diabetes or prediabetes.
Moreover, these patients often need personalized attention, but the time constraints faced
by doctors can limit their ability to thoroughly address individual concerns during appoint-
ments. Additionally, resource constraints in certain medical facilities might hinder doctors
from conducting comprehensive check-ups, leading to potential gaps in patient care. As a
result, both patients and doctors are affected by this complicated balance between man-
aging waiting times for patients and ensuring doctors have sufficient time and resources
to provide optimal diabetes care.
The purpose of this thesis is to emphasize the significance of immediate behavioral and
cognitive changes in people with prediabetes and young people with type 2 diabetes.
By making it easier to understand how bad unhealthy habits are, it hopes to encourage
people to make a conscious switch to better ones. An important part of this research is
figuring out how diet, sleep, and physical exercise all work together and how they have a
big effect on how diabetes is managed.
Furthermore, the thesis endeavors to equip those at risk or affected with the knowledge
and tools necessary for effective health monitoring and improvement. The key objective is
to ensure comprehensive understanding of the importance of balanced nutrition, regular
physical activity, particularly step-based exercises, and quality sleep. Lastly, it strives to
equip these individuals with the tools required to break the chain of unhealthy habits and
embark on a journey towards a healthier lifestyle.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Related Work
To provide context and direction for this project on type 2 diabetes self-management, it is
important to review existing research. Analyzing previous studies in this area will reveal
insights into what approaches have been successful and limitations that still need to be
addressed.
This chapter summarizes and discusses examples of relevant prior work. The focus is
on research related to use of mobile applications for patients to track diet, sleep, exercise
and other lifestyle factors to manage blood glucose.
By understanding the current landscape of knowledge and technology, we can formulate
meaningful research questions to explore through the course of this project. The goal
is to build on progress made while also identifying opportunities for novel contributions.
The research questions will guide the project direction and focus efforts on producing
new findings that move the field forward in empowering diabetes patients with effective
self-management tools.
2.1
Literature Review
A systematic literature review following the PRISMA model [6] was conducted to identify
existing research related to the thesis topic of managing diabetes through tracking food
nutrition, sleep, and exercise. Initial keyword searches such as “mobile app to track food
and exercise to prevent type-2 diabetes” and “diabetes management application to track
food habits” were performed in Google Scholar. This initial search returned approximately
48,300 results. To narrow down the results, filters were applied to only include papers
published in the last 5 years from 2018-2023. This reduced the results to 17,300 papers.
4
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:11==
Records Identified
Records Removed 
(> 5 years old)
Records Removed
after screening by Title
after screening by Abstract
Records Excluded
Records Excluded
Remaining Records
by Title for first 16 pages
Records Screened
for eligibility
Records Assessed
Studies Included
(n = 48,300)
(n = 31,000)
(n = 17,140)
(n = 101)
 Unable to access = 3
 No relevance = 43
(n = 17,300)
(n = 160)
(n = 59)
(n = 13)
Identification of studies via Google Scholar
Identification
Screening
Included
Figure 2.1: Prisma flow diagram for literature review
Further screening was done by carefully reading the titles of the first 16 pages of Google
Scholar results. Each page had 10 papers, for a total of 160 articles. Pages 17 and 18
were excluded from review because their content was irrelevant to the search and lacked
relevant keywords.. After reviewing titles of these 160 papers, 101 papers were excluded
for lack of clear relevance. This left 59 candidate papers whose abstracts and conclusions
were then reviewed in detail. Based on the abstracts and conclusions, 43 more papers
were excluded for not suitably addressing the topic of interest. The remaining 16 papers
were selected for full review, but 3 could not be accessed to get more details, so were
also excluded.
In summary, a systematic process was followed to screen and filter a large initial set of
literature search results using publication date, manual title review, abstract review, con-
clusion review, and full text accessibility filters in order to identify the most relevant papers
on mobile applications to track food and exercise to prevent diabetes. This process re-
sulted in 13 papers to form the core relevant literature review and provide a focused base
on which to situate the present research within current knowledge and identify opportuni-
ties to address gaps.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
5
==PAGE:12==
Title of Research
Article
Author
Highlights/ Conclusion
A Mobile App for Di-
abetes
Management:
Impact on Self-Efficacy
Among
Patients
with
Type 2 Diabetes at a
Community Hospital [7]
Zhai
&
Yu, 2020
The objective of this study was to assess whether the diabetic
management app could improve glycemic control and diabetes
self-efficacy in a Chinese community hospital. In conclusion, on
the basis of routine clinical visits, the diabetes app intervention
has helped patients with type 2 diabetes to improve clinical treat-
ment and self-management behavior. As a result, mobile app in-
terventions in community hospitals might be applied to improve
the control of other chronic diseases.
A systematic review of
the
behaviour
change
techniques
and
digital
features in technology-
driven type 2 diabetes
prevention interventions
[8]
Van
Rhoon et
al. 2020
In summary, the review identified effective technology tools and
behavior change strategies for diabetes prevention, highlighting
the importance of tracking, goal setting, and human interaction.
The integration of specific behaviour change techniques and dig-
ital features may optimise digital diabetes prevention interven-
tions to achieve clinically significant weight loss, but more re-
search is needed on their mechanisms and tailored implementa-
tion.
Requirements
of
an
Application
to
Monitor
Diet,
Physical
Activity
and Glucose Values in
Patients with Type 2 Di-
abetes: The Diameter[9]
Braber et
al. 2019
The study aims to develop a mobile app called ’Diameter’ to im-
prove lifestyle management for type 2 diabetes patients. App will
integrate tracking of diet, physical activity, glucose levels to pro-
vide insights into lifestyle behaviors and effects on blood glucose.
App plans to use mixed methods to define requirements: cohort
study, literature review, pilot studies, expert input. This study de-
scribes the development of the requirements for the first version
of the Diameter. Overall, the requirements represent key func-
tional and design needs to create an app to effectively promote
diabetes self-management through integrated lifestyle monitor-
ing and data-driven insights.
A Digital Diabetes Pre-
vention Program (Trans-
form)
for
Adults
With
Prediabetes: Secondary
Analysis [10]
Alwashmi
et
al.
2019
The study aimed to examine the effectiveness of a novel digital
DPP (Transform) on weight, BMI, exercise frequency, and work
absenteeism in a sample of adults with prediabetes. In addi-
tion to a wearable tracking device and a digital scale, a photo-
enabled food diary facilitates tracking of eating behaviors. Par-
ticipants were asked to track their food intake by taking a pic-
ture of each meal, snack, or drink and uploading it to the app.
Participants in the Transform digital DPP had significant reduc-
tions in BMI (-1.9 kg/m2), weight (-13.3 lbs), and work absen-
teeism (-0.4 days/month) after 4 months. Exercise frequency
increased significantly (+1.7 days/week) with the transform pro-
gram. The Transform digital DPP was effective at driving positive
lifestyle changes associated with diabetes prevention through
weight loss and increased physical activity. The study suggests
the Transform digital DPP is an effective tool for diabetes pre-
vention, but larger controlled trials are warranted to validate the
findings.
Development and Fea-
sibility
of
an
App
to
Decrease Risk Factors
for Type 2 Diabetes in
Hispanic Women With
Recent
Gestational
Diabetes
(Hola
Bebé,
Adiós Diabetes):
Pilot
Pre-Post Study [11]
Seely
et
al. 2020
Lifestyle interventions focused on healthy eating and physical
activity can help prevent T2DM in women with prior GDM in
Hispanic women. The app providds education, tools for track-
ing, motivational messages, recipes, and social support to tar-
get lifestyle changes. In the 8-week pilot study (n=21), the app
significantly increased self-efficacy for healthy eating and physi-
cal activity. Weight decreased but not significantly over the short
study period. Results indicate the mHealth app shows poten-
tial for reducing T2DM risk factors in Hispanic women with prior
GDM. Larger randomized controlled trials are needed to validate
the effectiveness of app.
Table 2.1: Studies included for literature review (1 of 3)
6
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:13==
Title of Research
Article
Author
Highlights/ Conclusion
A
Behavioral
Lifestyle
Intervention
Enhanced
With
Multiple-Behavior
Self-Monitoring
Using
Mobile and Connected
Tools for Underserved
Individuals With Type 2
Diabetes and Comorbid
Overweight or Obesity:
Pilot Comparative Effec-
tiveness Trial [12]
Wang
et
al. 2018
The aim of this study was to examine the feasibility of and com-
pare preliminary efficacy of a behavioral lifestyle intervention us-
ing smartphone- or paper-based self-monitoring of multiple be-
haviors on weight loss and glycemic control in a sample of over-
weight or obese adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus living in un-
derserved communities. The results showed delivering behav-
ioral lifestyle interventions with mobile self-monitoring tools in un-
derserved communities is feasible and acceptable. Mobile tools
increased engagement in self-monitoring behaviors compared to
paper diaries. Using mobile apps and connected devices shows
potential for improving diabetes and weight outcomes.
A
digital
lifestyle
be-
haviour
change
inter-
vention for the preven-
tion of type 2 diabetes: a
qualitative study explor-
ing intuitive engagement
with
real-time
glucose
and
physical
activity
feedback [13]
Whelan
et
al.
2021
Self-monitoring of diet, physical activity and glucose can support
diabetes prevention and management. This qualitative study ex-
plored how 26 adults at risk of diabetes engaged with a glucose
sensor and activity tracker. Some recognized links between their
behavior and glucose levels, leading to changes in diet and ac-
tivity. But many found the data lacked meaning, unsure how to
interpret and act upon the feedback. Accessing feedback on be-
havior and physiology raised awareness of lifestyle impact on
health for some people. A proportion noticed relationships and
made positive changes to diet and activity.
A Personalized Mobile
Health Program for Type
2 Diabetes During the
COVID-19
Pandemic:
Single-Group
Pre–Post
Study[14]
Ang et al.
2020
During the COVID-19 restrictions in Singapore, a 3-month mo-
bile health (mHealth) program was conducted, combining apps
and wearables, with dietitian counseling, doctor oversight, and
continuous glucose monitoring for diabetes prevention and man-
agement. The study involved 21 patients who completed the pro-
gram and saw positive outcomes, with an average decrease in
HbA1c levels from 7.6% to 7.0% and an average weight loss of
3.5%. Patient feedback showed high satisfaction with the pro-
gram, as they perceived significant benefits from its implemen-
tation. It was concluded that, the mHealth program was feasi-
ble to implement during COVID-19 and acceptable to patients.
The program produced significant improvements in HbA1c and
weight over 3 months.
Mobile phone applica-
tions and their use in
the self-management of
Type 2 Diabetes Melli-
tus: a qualitative study
among app users and
non-app users [15]
Jeffrey et
al. 2019
Mobile apps can support self-management behaviors for type 2
diabetes (T2DM). Interviews were conducted with 30 adults with
T2DM, including 17 app users and 13 non-app users. App users
found visual representations of trends, convenience, and user-
friendly designs were useful. Barriers included lack of awareness
of apps for diabetes, technology literacy, rural internet access.
Healthcare professionals rarely recommended apps, but involve-
ment improved satisfaction with apps. Apps have potential to im-
prove T2DM self-management through encouraging behaviors.
It concluded that involving healthcare professionals in app use
could improve outcomes and patient education. Tailoring apps
to be user-friendly and match user needs and preferences can
improve adoption.
Health
behaviour
change
considerations
for weight loss and type
2
diabetes:
nutrition,
physical
activity
and
sedentary
behaviour
[16]
Chater et
al. 2020
Behavior change is essential for the prevention, management,
and treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2DM), but simply telling
people what to do is often not enough for effective long-term
change. For self-management of T2DM, individuals need ca-
pability (knowledge and skills), opportunity (social and environ-
mental support), and motivation to perform healthy behaviors like
good nutrition, physical activity, and reducing sedentary time.
Mobile apps have potential to support behavior change and
T2DM self-management on a wide scale.
Table 2.2: Studies included for literature review (2 of 3)
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
7
==PAGE:14==
Title of Research
Article
Author
Highlights/ Conclusion
Evaluating
Glycemic
Control in Patients of
South Asian Origin With
Type 2 Diabetes Using
a
Digital
Therapeutic
Platform:
Analysis
of
Real-World Data [17]
Krishnakumar
et
al.
2021
This was a retrospective analysis of 102 patients with type 2 dia-
betes (T2D) from India who used the Wellthy CARE mobile app
for 16 weeks. The app provides lessons on diabetes self-care,
allows logging of blood glucose, diet, activity etc., and gives feed-
back via an AI chatbot and interactions with health coaches. Af-
ter 16 weeks, average HbA1c decreased by 0.49% and 63.7% of
patients had improved HbA1c. Those with highest app engage-
ment had 0.84% HbA1c reduction.
Fasting and postprandial
blood glucose also decreased significantly. Average weight loss
was 1.32kg. The digital therapeutic app showed significant im-
provements in glycemic control and weight among South Asian
T2D patients. Higher engagement gave better outcomes.
Use of Mobile Phone
App
Interventions
to
Promote Weight Loss:
Meta-Analysis [18]
Islam
et
al. 2020
This meta-analysis evaluated 12 studies on effectiveness of mo-
bile apps for weight loss. Total 1714 participants were included.
The mobile app interventions resulted in significant reduction in
body weight (-1.07 kg) and BMI (-0.45 kg/m2) compared to con-
trol groups. Apps provided weight loss goals, calorie tracking,
activity monitoring, feedback, education, reminders etc. Dura-
tion of interventions ranged from 6 weeks to 9 months. Partic-
ipants were mostly females. Sensitivity analysis showed apps
used for >3 months had more weight loss (-1.63 kg) than ≤3
months (-0.004 kg). The study suggests mobile apps have po-
tential for weight loss, but larger and longer trials are required.
Sleep Tracking and Ex-
ercise in Patients With
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
(Step-D): Pilot Study to
Determine
Correlations
Between
Fitbit
Data
and
Patient-Reported
Outcomes [19]
Weatherall
et
al.
2018
The aim of this study was to determine the direction and mag-
nitude of associations between patient-generated health data
(from the Fitbit Charge HR) and patient-reported outcomes for
sleep patterns and physical activity in patients with type 2 di-
abetes mellitus (T2DM) for 86 patients.
Patients wore Fitbit
Charge HR for 2 weeks and completed 3 online surveys on ex-
ercise and sleep patterns. Fitbit data showed patients walked
4955 steps/day and slept 6.7 hours/day on average. Self-reports
indicated 2 exercise days/week and 2.3 nights of sleep prob-
lems/week. Fitbit steps and patient-reported exercise days were
strongly correlated (r=0.60, p<0.001). Correlation between Fit-
bit sleep data and patient-reported sleep problems was weaker
(r=0.28, p=0.02). The findings support potential use of wear-
ables like Fitbit to collect patient activity and sleep data in dia-
betes management.
Table 2.3: Studies included for literature review (3 of 3)
2.1.1
Discussion
The examination of the 13 scholarly articles unveiled a number of prevailing themes that
highlight crucial elements of diabetes care and management:
• In the analysis of 13 studies, it was found that 10 of them focused on the topic of diet,
specifically providing recommendations, emphasizing the importance of control, and
suggesting appropriate food intake. This statement points to the significant impact
that nutrition has on the management of diabetes.
• In the context of diabetes, a significant majority of 11 out of 13 research studies
showed the significance of engaging in exercise. This demonstrates the importance
of prioritizing exercise.
• The topic of education was explored in 10 research studies that focused on the
8
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:15==
sharing of knowledge to patients with diabetes. These papers collectively stated
the imperative for patient education in this context.
• A total of 8 scholarly studies were dedicated to examining the topic of weight loss
and tracking specifically in the context of individuals with diabetes. These papers
collectively highlight the significance of weight control as a crucial objective in man-
aging diabetes.
• Other less frequent but relevant themes were medications, the impact of sleep pat-
terns, water intake, the use of wearable technology, and the significance of social
support systems such as community assistance.
11
10
10
8
3
2
1
1
3
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Exercise
Diet
Education
Weight
Medication
Wearable
Water Intake
Sleep
Social
Total number of studies included - 13
Common features across papers reviewed
Research focus area for diabetes management
Figure 2.2: Informative findings from the papers reviewed
2.2
Application Review
The process of application search commenced with an extensive search for smartphone
applications related to diabetes. The focus of the study primarily revolves around the
prevention of diabetes and the examination of food habits. The objective of this study is
to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of diabetic applications that are accessible on the
Google Play store based on an analysis of the features offered by these applications, as
well as an assessment of user ratings, reviews, and the quality of information provided.
The search was initiated using phrases such as ’Prevent Diabetes,’ resulting in 23 app
matches. Another set of keywords, ’Food Habits,’ produced an additional 12 app matches.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
9
==PAGE:16==
A total of 35 applications were identified and subsequently subjected to further analysis.
It is worth noting that a significant number of diabetes-related applications primarily focus
on keywords related to diabetes. Conversely, applications centered around food habits
focused on calorie management and food intake.
Applications Identified
Applications Screened
Applications Removed 
Applications Excluded 
(< 1000 reviews)
(< 4.2 rating)
Applications Included
(n = 23)
(n = 9)
(n = 5)
(n = 12)
(n = 10)
(n = 8)
Keywords: “Prevent Diabetes”
Keywords: “Prevent Diabetes”
Keywords: “Prevent Diabetes”
Keywords: “Food Habits”
Keywords: “Food Habits”
Keywords: “Food Habits”
(n = 16)
© Educative = 4 
© No relevance = 2
Identification of mobile application via Google Play Store
Identification
Screening
Included
Figure 2.3: Prisma flow diagram for application review
In an attempt to further narrow the research results, only apps with over 1,000 reviews and
a rating of 4.2 or higher on the Google Play Store were included. This criterion reduced the
search results to 9 for diabetes-related apps and 10 for food habits-related apps, resulting
in a total of 19 apps chosen for further testing.
2.2.1
Analysis of apps with keywords: Prevent Diabetes
In our initial analysis, we evaluated 9 applications using ’Prevent diabetes’ as a keyword.
The key findings revealed that out of these, 4 applications primarily offered educational
features like tips, articles, exercise suggestions, and recipes. While these apps were ex-
cluded from further research due to their singular focus, they pointed to the importance
of importance of educating people with diabetes in diabetes self-management. The re-
maining 5 applications all included Blood Glucose Monitoring (BGM), suggesting this is
a core feature in health tracking. Among these 5, 4 offered reporting capabilities, which
indicates users’ inclination towards analyzing trends and drawing insights from their data.
10
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:17==
Further, 3 out of these 5 applications included tracking for Blood Pressure (BP) and weight
tracking, showing these are also important health metrics people want to monitor.
Among the analyzed applications, ’Diabetes:M - Blood Sugar Diary’ emerged as the most
comprehensive one, tracking a wide range of health factors, including intricate details
related to nutrition. This suggests that the app caters to individuals who are closely man-
aging their diet. ’Glucose Tracker - Diabetic Diary’ covered a broad array of factors, with a
particular emphasis on medication and insulin tracking, indicating its usefulness for man-
aging specific health conditions such as diabetes.
In contrast, ’mySugr - Diabetes Tracker Log’ stood out with its unique feature of chal-
lenges, introducing an element of motivation and gamification. This approach promotes
active user engagement, as users aren’t just passively tracking their data, but actively
working towards fitness and health goals. Interestingly, only ’Diabetes:M - Blood Sugar
Diary’ offered an API and a comprehensive food database, facilitating easy meal logging
and powerful nutritional intake analysis.
In summary, these apps cater to different user needs. ’Diabetes:M’ is the most com-
prehensive; ’Glucose Tracker’ specializes in medication; ’mySugr’ offers motivation and
convenience, while the remaining apps provide simple tracking. Understanding these
user preferences can guide us in identifying the functionalities users would like to see in
an app. Such understanding can aid in creating an application that caters effectively to
everyone’s needs, providing significant value.
2.2.2
Analysis of apps with keywords: Food Habits
After reviewing 10 applications, a number of interesting trends concerning their character-
istics became evident. 2 of the 10 apps were removed from consideration since they were
deemed unrelated to the current study, leaving us with only 8 apps to analyze further.
All 8 apps include a meal diary for tracking diet, highlighting the importance of this for users
managing food intake. Additionally, 7 out of 8 apps provide water tracking, emphasizing a
focus on monitoring hydration. Macronutrient tracking is offered in 5 apps, enabling users
to balance their protein, fat, and carb intake. 4 apps include exercise tracking, catering to
those wanting to balance diet and activity. 4 apps also offer premium versions, suggesting
a business model providing additional features for a cost. Weight tracking is present in 5
apps as well, helping users monitor progress on weight goals.
Further into the analysis, 6 apps provide calorie tracking, a crucial aspect of weight and
diet management. 4 apps also include extensive food databases, giving users detailed
nutritional information. Interestingly, only 3 apps offer community features, indicating an
area for potential improvement. Building a supportive community could further engage
users.
In summary, these 8 apps offer varying combinations of features that appeal to diverse
needs of users. Identifying these key features provides insights into what users likely want
in similar diet and health tracking apps. This understanding can guide the design of an
app that effectively caters to target users’ requirements while delivering significant value.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
11
==PAGE:18==
2.2.3
Discussion
Feature
Diabetes Apps
Food Habits Apps
Blood Glucose Tracking
All
Calories Tracking
Diabetes:M
MyFitnessPal,
Lifesum,
MyPlate, Lose It!, Nutrilio,
MyNetDiary
Macronutrients Tracking
Diabetes:M, mySugr
MyFitnessPal,
Lifesum,
MyPlate, Lose It!, MyNet-
Diary
Exercise Logging
MyFitnessPal,
Lifesum,
Lose It!, MyNetDiary
Weight Tracking
Glucose Tracker
MyFitnessPal,
Lifesum,
Lose It!, Nutrilio, MyNetDi-
ary
Blood Pressure Tracking
Diabetes:M,
Glucose
Tracker, Diabetes diary
Cholesterol Tracking
Diabetes:M
Meal Logging
Diabetes:M
All
Water Logging
How You Eat App,
My-
FitnessPal, Lifesum, My-
Plate,
Lose It!,
Nutrilio,
MyNetDiary
Reminders
Diabetes:M
How You Eat App, MyFit-
nessPal, Lifesum, Food Di-
ary, Nutrilio
Reports
All Diabetes Apps
Challenges
mySugr
Recipes
MyFitnessPal,
Lifesum,
MyNetDiary
Community Features
MyFitnessPal, MyNetDiary
Premium Options
Food Diary, MyFitnessPal,
Lifesum, MyNetDiary
Food Database / API
Diabetes:M
How You Eat App, MyFit-
nessPal, Lifesum, MyNet-
Diary, Food Diary
Device Integration
Diabetes:M, mySugr
Table 2.4: Comparison of Features in Diabetes and Food Apps
The diabetes management apps and food diary apps offer some overlapping features but
overall have different focuses based on their primary use cases.
Looking at the diabetes apps, their core focus is on blood glucose tracking and reporting.
All 5 of the diabetes apps provide features to log and monitor blood glucose levels, gener-
ate reports, and some even integrate with devices for automatic logging. This aligns with
their primary purpose of helping diabetes patients manage their blood sugar. Beyond glu-
cose tracking, some of the apps like Diabetes:M also allow users to log nutrition data like
calories and carbs. However, comprehensive nutrition tracking capabilities are limited in
most diabetes apps.
12
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:19==
In contrast, the main value proposition of the food diary apps is around nutrition logging
and monitoring. The 8 food diary apps examined all enable meal logging along with track-
ing calories, macronutrients, and water intake and 1 even track steps for monitoring the
physical activity. They emphasize helping users monitor their diet and caloric intake for
health or weight management. Additional features like social communities, challenges,
recipes, etc. further differentiate the food diary apps. However, blood glucose tracking
and reporting feature is notably absent from these apps.
Looking at overlapping capabilities, Diabetes:M offers the most cross-over with food diary
apps by including calorie tracking and a food database along with core glucose monitoring.
On the device integration side, 2 out of 5 diabetes apps support syncing with devices
versus none of the food diary apps. Overall, while there is some feature overlap, the
diabetes apps are tailored more for blood glucose management while the food diary apps
are designed for diet and nutrition tracking. The two sets cater to related but distinct use
cases.
2.3
Final Problem Statement
The aim of the research was to review existing academic literature on diabetes manage-
ment in order to inform the development of a diabetes management app. The goal was to
identify patterns, commonalities, or discrepancies that could provide insights into the key
features and services needed in such an app. By thoroughly examining the literature, the
most important elements for effective diabetes management based on current evidence
could be determined and incorporated into the app design.
The findings as indicated 2.2 several common areas of focus in diabetes management
research. Exercise, diet and education were the most frequently studied topics across
the papers, suggesting their significant role in diabetes management. Additionally, weight
management emerged as another important theme, highlighting the need to include weight
tracking features in the app.
While existing diabetes apps focus heavily on blood glucose monitoring and data report-
ing, apps centered on food habits tend to offer more diet and weight tracking tools. How-
ever, these food habit apps often lack reporting features necessary for reflective data
analysis.
This pattern is further backed by table 2.4, which illustrates that food habit apps possess
a wide array of features potentially beneficial for diabetes management but do not fully
address the needs of people with diabetes. Apps like ’Diabetes:M’ consist of a variety
of food habit app features yet still lack certain capabilities that would optimally support
diabetes users.
Since the focus of this thesis is primarily diabetes rather than general food habit apps,
the research will aim to develop an app that better manages diabetes by integrating these
missing elements.
While numerous studies as mentioned in table 2.3 demonstrate mHealth apps can signif-
icantly improve diabetes outcomes, many focus narrowly on blood glucose tracking and
lack support for diet and physical activity management. This limits their potential for pa-
tient education and pattern identification that could enable better disease management.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
13
==PAGE:20==
To address this gap, the objective of this thesis project is to develop a more comprehensive
app that combines blood glucose monitoring with diet and physical activity management
tools to raise diabetes education and awareness. The proposed approach is novel and
has not been attempted before, according to the articles reviewed.
This thesis will focus on conducting research utilizing modern technological advances and
experimental methods to explore the feasibility of developing an effective and user-friendly
application for young individuals with prediabetes and adults with type 2 diabetes. The
primary issues that will be investigated and addressed in this project are as follows:
• How can a digital intervention combine features of blood glucose monitoring, diet,
sleep, and exercise management to increase diabetes awareness, encourage healthy
lifestyle changes, and improve user well-being
• What strategies can be used to simplify meal logging in diabetes apps, thereby
minimizing the need for manual typing?
• How can people with diabetes be helped in making informed food choices in order
to reduce their risk of diabetic complications?
• How can individuals diagnosed with diabetes be effectively assisted in understand-
ing the correlation between their blood glucose levels, dietary choices, and engage-
ment in physical activity?
14
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
This master’s thesis used a combination of design and research techniques to develop
a diabetes management app, covering the entire process from identifying the problem to
implementing the solution.
The research and design process of this thesis closely follows a UX design framework, as
illustrated in figure 3.1. This model sets the methodological approach, ensuring a user-
centric and iterative process from start to finish. It paves the way for a smooth transition
from the discovery stage to the research stage, then to the design stage, and lastly to
the implementation stage. The cycle of ideation, prototyping, testing, and refining is the
foundation for the creation of a flexible, yet effective solution. The Build-Measure-Learn
(BML) feedback loop was only added to the process after the Design stage, but not after
the Implementation. However, this is essential for real-world use of the proposed solution
and should be performed as it enhances the effectiveness of the developed solution. This
Lean Startup principle focuses on building a Minimum Viable Product (MVP), measuring
its impact in the real world, learning from it, and iterating the process. These iterative
cycles ensure that the design not only solves the initial problem but also evolves with
user feedback and changing requirements [20].
The first step in the Discover stage involved developing an understanding of the prob-
lem domain and defining the project’s scope. A Lean Canvas was created to establish
the objectives, potential challenges, and unique value proposition. This guided the focus
on pre-diabetes and Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) as areas needing targeted digital interven-
tion. To gain a comprehensive understanding of these conditions and the issues faced by
at-risk or diagnosed individuals, a survey was conducted (can be seen in Appendix A.6.
The survey aimed to assess the public’s knowledge of pre-diabetes and T2D and identify
needs and preferences for a health app. The results provided insights into public aware-
ness and understanding of the conditions, along with potential features and functionalities
to maximize value for users. This user-centric data was vital in understanding the main
objectives and requirements of the users. With this foundational knowledge established,
the next step was brainstorming. The goal was generating innovative ideas to address
the identified issues and meet user needs.
Build
Learn
Measure
Build
Learn
Measure
Discover
Lean Canvas
Survey
Brainstorming
Implementation
Agile Development
SCRUM
Research & Analysis
Literature Review
Gantt Chart
Application Review
User Story Map
User Stories
Design
Sketches
Concept Testing
Prototyping
Usability Testing
Guerrilla Testing
Figure 3.1: UX Design Process
Figure motivation source [21]
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
15
==PAGE:22==
During the Research & Analysis stage, an extensive review of both academic literature
and current applications available on the Google Play Store related to diabetes manage-
ment was conducted. The aim of this stage was to gain insights into existing knowl-
edge, technologies, and solutions in the field of diabetes. To undertake the literature
review, I used the PRISMA model, a recognized systematic approach. This enabled me
to accurately identify, evaluate, and interpret all available research related to the subject.
Themes and patterns were recognized within the research, providing valuable insights
and a clearer understanding of the current state of knowledge regarding diabetes man-
agement. In parallel to the literature review, I conducted an analysis of diabetes-related
applications on the Google Play Store. This analysis was crucial in understanding the
practical implementations of the theoretical findings and identifying potential gaps that
our solution could fill. The app review also offered a practical perspective on user in-
terface designs, functionalities, and features popular within existing applications. The
insights gathered from the literature and app reviews were instrumental in creating User
Stories and a User Story Map. This activity was essential to understand the needs, de-
sires, and behaviors of potential users and how these could translate into features of our
application. The project management aspect was facilitated by creating a Gantt chart on-
line. The chart was particularly useful during the initial stages of the project, helping to
establish milestones and manage different tasks across the project timeline.
An iterative process of designing, prototyping, testing, and refining the application concept
was adopted during the Design stage. In the earliest stage, several hand-made sketches
were generated to visualize and brainstorm potential solutions. These sketches facilitated
discussions and provided a clear vision (can be seen in Appendix A.5). The sketches
were then transformed into interactive prototypes using digital tools. Prototyping allowed
experimentation with different concepts and layouts to ensure an intuitive design meeting
needs identified in Research & Analysis. Prototyping spanned multiple sprints, with each
iteration incorporating insights from continuous testing and feedback.
Two primary testing methods were used - Concept Testing and Usability Testing. Con-
cept Testing employed early prototypes to gather initial feedback on the concept, design,
and features, ensuring alignment with user expectations and needs. Usability Testing as-
sessed functionality, ease of use, and overall user experience. This provided invaluable
insights into user interactions and highlighted areas for improvement. In follow-up stages,
Guerilla Testing was also conducted to gather feedback from users in public space due to
lack of users for testing and further refining design and usability. Testing feedback fueled
several design iterations. Throughout the design stage, the project followed the SCRUM
framework [22], adopting a 1-week SPRINT cycle followed by 1 week of testing. In to-
tal, 3 SPRINT iterations were conducted during the Design stage, with a 1-week period
dedicated completely for usability testing.
Once the design was refined and confirmed based on feedback, implementation began.
During the Implementation stage, the final design iteration was turned into a working ap-
plication with the help of an Agile development framework [23]. The project management
tool Trello was a good way to see how things were going and keep track of tasks. Even
though the development journey was carefully planned, there were still some problems.
Some tasks were harder than imagined, which made them take longer to finish. It became
clear that not putting the most important features at the top of the list early on, which is a
core concept of Agile development, caused delays and extra work that was not expected.
Even though these challenges surfaced, they provided invaluable insights into effective
project management and the crucial role of prioritization.
16
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:23==
4
Analysis
Now that we have an understanding of the relevant literature, we move into an analyti-
cal space where these ideas are used and broken down in the context of the research
question and its supporting hypotheses. This chapter sets the stage for the design and
development of our app, by identifying the primary challenges to address, understanding
the target user base, and outlining how the app will assist these users. The analysis is
an iterative process, with each subsection undergoing revisions throughout the project’s
lifecycle.
4.1
Scoping
Scoping plays a pivotal role in setting boundaries, focusing the research objectives, and
providing a clearer view of what needs to be achieved. In the context of this project, scop-
ing has been crucial in identifying the specific challenges and opportunities in the field of
digital health solutions. One of the key tools used is the Lean Canvas. The Lean Canvas
[24] is a one-page business model framework proposed by Ash Maurya that enables star-
tups to brainstorm and describe key elements of their ideas on a single page. It is adapted
from the Business Model Canvas but optimized for lean startups. The Lean Canvas al-
lows teams to identify their target customers, articulate the problem, propose solutions,
pinpoint key metrics, delineate unfair advantages, and map out their go-to-market strat-
egy. This simplified, structured approach assists startups in rapidly validating and iterating
on their ideas.
Problem: The problem section identified three core issues the app intends to address.
To begin, there is a general lack of understanding regarding the dangers of diabetes and
unhealthy eating habits. The second issue is related to the time-consuming nature of meal
logging and the challenging task of monitoring blood glucose and other health parameters.
This combination makes identifying underlying patterns difficult and prevents managing
health. Finally, there is a need for personalized, actionable feedback in order to encourage
individuals to make healthier food choices.
Customer Segment: The target customer segment is people between the ages of 40 and
65 who have prediabetes or type 2 diabetes and are seeking for ways to improve their
condition through food. Additionally, the app appeals to individuals seeking a convenient
way to track health metrics. Early adopters would be health-conscious users aiming to
develop and maintain healthy eating habits.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
17
==PAGE:24==
PROBLEM
EXISTING ALTERNATIVES
COST STRUCTURE
REVENUE STREAMS
SOLUTION
KEY METRICS
CHANNELS
EARLY ADOPTERS
UNFAIR ADVANTAGE
CUSTOMER SEGMENT
UNIQUE VALUE PROPOSITION
1. Lack of awareness about the risks of 
diabetes and unhealthy eating habits.
2. The tedious process of meal logging, 
coupled with the complexity of tracking 
blood glucose and other health metrics, 
makes identifying underlying patterns 
difficult and prevents managing health.
3. Need for personalized and actionable 
feedback on food choices to promote 
healthy eating habits.
1. Publishing and in-app fee for App 
Store and Google Store.
3. Marketing and advertising expenses 
for app promotion.
4. Salaries for app development and 
customer support teams and other staff.
2. Image recognition and data analysis 
costs.
1. Mobile app that uses image recognition 
technology to capture and analyze food 
intake. 
2. Provides feedback on unhealthy food 
choices based on a timeline of food data.
3. Integrates major features of diabetes 
and food diary apps for holistic health 
monitoring, including glucose, food, steps, 
sleep, hydration, and exercise.
4. Provides personalized suggestions for 
healthier food and drink alternatives.
1. Number of downloads and active 
user base. 

2. User engagements metrics, such as 
daily log entries and food images 
captured.

3. Conversion rate from free to 
premium users.
1. Enabling users to fully understand the 
correlation between blood glucose, food 
intake, and physical activity, helping users 
reflect on their food choices and lifestyle.

2. Empowers individuals with prediabetes, 
type-2 diabetes, or those seeking to 
maintain healthy habits with actionable 
insights on their food choices.

3. Simplifies food tracking through image 
recognition, making it easy and 
convenient for users.

4. Provides comprehensive health 
monitoring in one app, helping users take 
control of their health and lifestyle.
1. Mobile app stores (e.g., Apple App Store, 
Google Play Store) for app downloads.
2. Social media platforms and online 
communities for awareness and marketing 
campaigns.
3. Healthcare providers and diabetes 
organizations for partnerships and 
referrals.
4. Content marketing, blogs and 
influencers in the health and wellness 
space for promoting the app.
1. Freemium model with basic features 
available for free and premium features 
offered through a paid subscription.
2. In-app advertisements and 
sponsored content from relevant food 
and wellness brands.
3. Potential partnerships with 
healthcare providers or health 
insurance companies for premium 
access to app features.
1. People between the ages 40-65 with 
prediabetes or type 2 diabetes seeking 
to manage their condition through 
healthy eating.

2. Individuals looking for a convenient 
and user-friendly app to track their 
health parameters.
1. Proprietary image recognition 
technology for accurate and convenient 
food tracking.
2. Comprehensive health monitoring 
features in one app, providing a holistic 
approach to diabetes management.
3. Potential partnerships with 
healthcare providers or insurance 
companies for credibility and referrals.
1. Health-conscious individuals who 
want to develop and maintain healthy 
eating habits.
Version 1 (No symbol)
Revised
Version 2 
LEGEND
Figure 4.1: Lean Canvas
Unique Value Proposition (UVP): The Unique Value Proposition (UVP) aims to enable
users to understand the correlation between blood glucose, food intake, and physical
activity. This allows for more in-depth reflection of eating habits and lifestyle choices. The
app simplifies the process of tracking food by using image recognition to make it more
user-friendly for users to capture food ingredients. Users are better able to take charge
of their health when they have access to complete monitoring of their health in one app
that combines the best of the features from diabetes and food diary apps.
Solution: A mobile app that captures and analyzes food intake using picture recognition
is the solution. It offers feedback on unhealthy choices based on the data gathered over
time. For comprehensive tracking of blood glucose, food, activity, sleep, water intake,
and exercise, the app combines features often associated with diabetes management
with food diary apps. In addition to that, it offer personalized recommendations for foods
and drinks that are healthier options.
In conclusion, the sections of the Lean Canvas offer a succinct summary of the primary
problem, the users who are the primary focus of the app’s solution, the value that differ-
entiates the app from its competitors, and the suggested solution.
4.2
User Story Map
User Story Mapping (USM) is a valuable technique in User Experience (UX) design. It
helps in visualizing the user’s journey within a product and is instrumental in agile and
iterative development. This technique was developed by Jeff Patton and has been widely
used in the software industry. User Story Mapping is a graphical representation that tells
a story of the user’s interaction with the system. It is organized around the user’s journey,
highlighting the various activities and tasks performed by the user [25].
18
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:25==
Enter Gender
Go to ‘Overview’ 
screen
Tap the icon of 
selected category to 
view data
Go to ‘Home’ screen
View all activities 
listed under tab 
‘Activity-Glucose’
Toggle one or more 
activity to overlay on 
blood glucose graph
View details on 
graph
View details on 
graph
Toggle between 
‘Day-Week-Month-
Year’
View details on 
graph
Tap event to view as 
blinking dot on blood 
glucose graph.
Go to ‘Home’ screen
Tap ‘View Events’ tab
View all recorded 
events in descending 
order
Tap '+' to record
Position camera over 
meal to record 
ingredients using 
image recognition
Tap ‘Food’ icon
Tap ‘Blood Glucose’ 
icon
Tap '+' to record
Go to ‘Targets’ screen 
Tap '+' to record
Tap 'Save' to confirm 
image
Tap the category to 
record
View remaining daily 
targets
View last recorded 
blood glucose reading
Select measurement 
type 
Add note or 
comments
Fill details of the form 
and fields pertaining 
to category chosen
Fill details of the form 
and fields pertaining 
to category chosen
Go to ‘Settings’ 
screen
Tap on the ‘Profile 
picture’
View list of all 
notifications
OR
Get insightful data 
notifications when 
recording
Tap the ‘Bell’ icon
Start the application
Tap ‘Save’ to exit
Tap ‘Save’ to exit
Tap ‘Save’ to exit
Tap ‘Goal Settings’
Tap ‘App Doctor’
Set notification mode 
by tapping on relevant 
bell icon
Input login 
information
Create account
Edit or View targets 
set
Select category icon
Manage frequency of 
reminders
Tap ‘Skip’ to skip 
initial preferences
Save changes
Go through 
recommendations
Go through 
onboarding screens
Go through 
onboarding screens
Give permissions access
Enter level of physical 
activity
Enter age
Enter target information 
of health metrics
Confirm chosen unit 
settings
Set preferences
View/ Edit set 
Targets
View personalized 
recommendations
View notifications & 
manage reminders
Create account
View all measured 
data
View all ‘activities’ 
data on the graph
View all ‘events’ 
data on the graph
Simplify meal 
logging
Record new 
activity/ event
View daily targets 
progress
Record blood 
glucose
Individuals with 
prediabetes or type 2 
diabetes
Account based on 
personal preferences
Understand 
connections between 
glucose levels and 
influencing variables
Target Group
Goals
Activities
Tasks
Record & track 
health data
Figure 4.2: User Story Map
Personas, goals, activities, and tasks are the main elements of User Story Mapping. Per-
sonas are fictitious representations of the individuals who will use the product, defining
who the users are and how they might interact with it [26]. Goals describe the desired
end outcome the user wants to achieve through use of the product. Activities break down
the goal into a high-level sequence of user stories that demonstrate the required steps to
achieve the goal. Tasks further define the small stories focused on required functional-
ity, devoid of specific user interface elements, that must be completed to accomplish an
activity [27].
Within the context of creating an Minimum Viable Product (MVP), USM serves as a strate-
gic tool. It allows exploring the system, organizing the features into different levels of pri-
ority. The tasks in the first slice represent an initial minimum viable product, focusing on
the core features that fulfill basic customer needs so they will start using the product. The
final User Story Map in Figure 3 is the result of multiple iterations, with previous version
can be found in Appendix A.1. The three main goals that have been identified using User
Story Map are as follows:
• Account based on personal preferences: To create an account based on per-
sonal preferences, the user must do two major things: create an account and set
preferences. In the first activity, which is creating an account, the user must start the
app, create an account, enter the required login information, and tap ’Skip’ if they
want to skip the initial preferences. During this time, the user is also led through
screens that help them get started. In the second step, setting preferences, the
user has to put in specific information like their gender, age, and level of physi-
cal exercise. Also, the user must enter target information about health metrics like
height, weight, steps and sleep target, confirm the settings for the chosen unit, and
give access to the required permissions. Again, this process involves going through
the onboarding screens to make sure that the user’s preferences match their per-
sonal needs and goals. This creates an account that is tailored to each person’s
needs and goals.
• Record & track health data: To meet the goal of recording and tracking health data,
the user must engage in following activities: record blood sugar, make it easier to log
meals, and record new activity or event. To record blood glucose, the user must first
tap the ’+’ sign, then tap the ’Blood Glucose’ icon, choose the measurement type
they want, add any notes or comments, and then tap ’Save’ to finish. To make meal
logging quicker and simpler, the user must tap the ’+’ symbol and then the ’Food’
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
19
==PAGE:26==
icon, place the camera over the meal so that it can recognize the ingredients and
thus save the user from the hassle of manual typing, tap ’Save’ to confirm the image,
and then fill out the form and fields that apply to the selected category. Finally, the
user must tap ’Save’ to leave the form. To record a new action or an event, the user
must tap the ’+’ sign, then tap the category icon that matches the record, then fill out
the form and fields for the chosen category, and then tap ’Save’ to finish. By doing
these things, the user can record and keep track of important health information in
a way that meets their needs and preferences.
• Understand connections between glucose levels and influencing variables: In
order to understand the correlation between glucose levels and factors that affect
them, the user must go through a number of activites. Each of these activities helps
the user get a full picture of the correlation and understand their blood glucose levels
better. First, to see all ’activities’ data on a graph, the user must go to the ’Home’
screen, look at all activities under the tab ’Activity-Glucose,’ set one or more activi-
ties to overlay on the blood glucose graph, and view the details. Second, to see all
’events’ data on the graph, go to the ’Home’ screen, tap the ’View Events’ tab, view
all recorded events in descending order, tap an event to see it as a blinking dot on
the blood glucose graph, and view details. The user can also tap on the blinking
dot on the graph to view the event just saved. The third action, viewing all mea-
sured data, requires going to the ’Overview’ screen, tapping the icon of the selected
category, looking at the details on the graph, and switching between ’Day-Week-
Month-Year’. In another activity, the user can check on the progress of daily goals
by going to the ’Targets’ screen and looking at the number of remaining daily goals
and the last recorded blood glucose reading. The fifth activity gives personalized
recommendations. You can get them by tapping on the ’Profile picture’ choosing
’App Doctor’ tapping on the category icon, and reading through the suggestions,
or by getting helpful data notifications when you record. This feature analyzes the
user’s data and based on the that gives the insights that must help user understand
how the things they do affect their glucose levels and what can be done to mitigate
it. The sixth activity is to look at notifications and manage reminders. To do this, the
user must tap the ’Bell’ icon, look at all notifications, set the notification mode by tap-
ping the appropriate ’Bell’ icon, and change the frequency of reminders, which could
be anything from every 30 mins. as minimum to every 4 hours to the max. Lastly,
the user must go to the ’Settings’ screen, tap ’Goal Settings’ view or change the set
goals, and then save the changes. Together, all these activities make it possible to
learn more about the link between glucose levels and other factors that affect them.
This gives users personalized feedback and more control over their own health and
ultimately manage diabetes better.
4.3
Requirements Specification
The Lean Canvas was used at the start of the thesis project to get a comprehensive
understanding of the problems individuals with prediabetes or T2D face. This provided a
comprehensive perspective of the surroundings and indicated important areas that could
potentially help in solving these problems. With LC in place, User Story Map (USM) was
used to create a picture of the goals and the steps needed to reach them. The big goals
were then split up into smaller tasks. This careful division of the problem into smaller taks
made the way forward clear and allowed focus on specific parts of the problem. After
making a strategic plan, detailed user stories were made to connect the big ideas to the
real solutions. The user stories for the project are as listed below:
20
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:27==
4.3.1
Functional Requirements:
• As a user with aim to reflect on my health habits, I want to create a personal account
with my health details so the app can provide tailored feedback to improve my habits.
• As a user with prediabetes or T2D concerned about my health, I want to record my
blood glucose readings so I can track them.
• As a user to simplify my meal logging, I want the app to automatically log the iden-
tified ingredients so I do not have to type it manually.
• As a user looking to visualize my data, I want to view all health metrics on interactive
graphs so I can spot trends and insights.
• As a user with health goals, I want to view my remaining daily target status so I can
track my progress.
• As a user who needs updates, I want to get relevant notifications so I am informed
about my health data.
4.3.2
Non-Functional Requirements:
• Usability Requirement: The app’s user interface designed in Figma, shall provide
an intuitive, user-friendly experience with clear navigation and consistent design.
• Compatibility Requirement: The app shall be developed only for Android APK in
Flutter.
• Reliability Requirement: The app shall reliably provide accurate blood glucose read-
ings, meal logging, and data visualizations without unexpected failure.
• Collaboration Requirements: For work and collating information, tools like Microsoft
Excel, Miro, sketches, Otter for meetings.
4.4
Use Case Specification
Use case diagrams are a good way to show how a system works from the user’s point of
view. They show how different use cases and how users interact with the system to reach
a goal. Use case diagrams show how the system interacts with high-level user goals by
showing the actors, relationships, and system boundaries [28].
Use case diagrams are a good way to show how a system works from the user’s point of
view. They show how different use cases (how the system works from a user’s point of
view) and how users interact with the system to reach a goal. Use case diagrams show
how the system interacts with high-level user goals by showing the actors, relationships,
and system boundaries.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
21
==PAGE:28==
Create account
Record blood glucose
USER with 
prediabetes/T2D
Log Meal
View data on graph
View goals progress
Get notifications
Figure 4.3: Use Case diagram
Use case diagrams were used for this project to show the main components of the system
being developed as well as the primary actors involved. They serve as a good way to get
a general idea of how different people would interact with the system. They are a very
important point of reference for mapping out the design and features of the system. Below
are the use cases for all six user stories:
Table 4.1: Use Case 1: Create Account
Attribute
Description
Use Case ID
UC1
Use Case Name
Create Account
Actor
User with prediabetes or T2D
Description
User creates a account with health details to receive tailored
feedback.
Precondition
App is already installed and Started.
Postcondition
1. Account with personal details created.
2. Health parameters and targets have been set
Main Flow
1. Start the app.
2. Input personal details.
3. Confirm account creation.
4. Complete onboarding screens.
Alternative Flow
Skip initial preferences
22
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:29==
Table 4.2: Use Case 2: Record Blood Glucose
Attribute
Description
Use Case ID
UC2
Use Case Name
Record Blood Glucose
Actor
User with prediabetes or T2D
Description
User records blood glucose to track health
Precondition
Account with personal details is created.
Postcondition
Blood glucose reading is recorded.
Main Flow
1. Tap ’+’ to record.
2. Tap ‘Blood Glucose’ icon.
3. Select glucose type.
4. Add note or comments.
5. Tap ‘Save’ to exit.
Alternative Flow
None
Table 4.3: Use Case 3: Log Meal
Attribute
Description
Use Case ID
UC3
Use Case Name
Log Meal
Actor
User with prediabetes or T2D
Description
User simplifies meal logging through image recognition and
automatic input of ingredients thereby reducing the manual
work of typing.
Precondition
User is logged-in and on the meal logging screen.
Postcondition
Meal has been logged with identified ingredients and other
details filled.
Main Flow
1. Tap ’+’ to record.
2. Tap ’Food’ icon.
3. Position camera over meal for image recognition.
4. Confirm image.
5. Fill details of the form and fields.
6. Tap ‘Save’ to exit.
Alternative Flow
Manually enter ingredients if image recognition fails.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
23
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.4: Use Case 4: View data on graph
Attribute
Description
Use Case ID
UC4
Use Case Name
View data on graph
Actor
User with prediabetes or T2D
Description
User views all health metrics on interactive graphs to spot
trends and insights.
Precondition
User is logged-in and has previously recorded health data.
Postcondition
User has accessed and viewed desired graphs and other
health parameters.
Main Flow
1. Go to ‘Overview’ screen.
2. Tap the icon of the selected category to view data.
3. View details on graph.
4. Toggle between ‘Day-Week-Month-Year’.
Alternative Flow
None
Table 4.5: Use Case 5: View goals progress
Attribute
Description
Use Case ID
UC5
Use Case Name
View goals progress
Actor
User with prediabetes or T2D
Description
User views remaining daily targets and the last recorded
blood glucose to track progress.
Precondition
User is logged-in and has set daily targets while setting up
the app.
Postcondition
User has viewed and could see daily targets and last
recorded blood glucose.
Main Flow
1. Go to ‘Targets’ screen.
2. View remaining daily targets.
3. View last recorded blood glucose.
Alternative Flow
None
24
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.6: Use Case 6: Get notifications
Attribute
Description
Use Case ID
UC6
Use Case Name
Get notifications
Actor
User with prediabetes or T2D
Description
User receives relevant notifications and can manage fre-
quency of reminders to stay informed about health data.
Precondition
User is logged-in and has notifications and reminders en-
abled.
Postcondition
User has viewed notifications and set desired reminder fre-
quency.
Main Flow
1. Tap the ‘Bell’ icon.
2. View list of all notifications.
3. Set notification mode by tapping on the relevant bell icon.
4. Manage frequency of reminders.
Alternative Flow
None
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
25
==PAGE:32==
5
Design
The research and analysis conducted at the beginning of the project was very important
to how the ’freefromDiabetes’ app was conceptualized and designed. By pointing out the
key elements and features, it helped set the stage for a planned and structured approach.
This process of planning from beginning to end is similar to the top-down approach, in
which the whole system is thought of as a whole before it is broken down into smaller, more
manageable parts [29]. The approach ensures that the app is aligned with the main goals,
providing users with an intuitive and smooth user experience. The design process of the
’freefromDiabetes’ app was carried out with a focus on iterative improvement through
user-centered testing.
The project followed the SCRUM framework [22], adopting a 1-week SPRINT cycle fol-
lowed by 1 week of testing. In total, 3 SPRINT iterations were conducted during the
design process, with a 1-week period for testing and validating the designs. The following
methods have been used in the evaluation of UX design [30][31] and are explained as
follows:
• Survey: Surveys are tools that can be used to quickly measure both number-based
(quantitative) and opinion-based (qualitative) feedback.
• Concept Testing: In this method, a UX researcher presents a basic version of a
product to understand if it meets the needs of the target audience. It can be done
with one person or many, and either in person or online.
• Usability Testing: This involves observing how users interact with a product. Test-
ing can concentrate on a single aspect or cover multiple features of the product.
• A/B testing: This involves offering different versions of a product to different users
and comparing the results to see which one performs better. This method is useful
for improving specific parts of a website or application.
• Guerrilla Testing: This simple and low-cost method involves asking people in public
places, such as coffee shops or train stations, about a product or prototype. It can
be conducted in various locations where a relevant audience might be found.
Each of the above methods will be examined in detail throughout the following iterations,
focusing on three main aspects: WHAT, HOW, and OUTCOME.
• WHAT: What exactly we wanted to find out or what was validated.
• HOW: The steps that were taken to conduct the evaluation.
• OUTCOME: The results, summarizing what we learnt from the evaluation.
5.1
Sprint 1
The design of the app was guided by the concept of Minimum Viable Product (MVP),
a method aimed at creating a product with enough features to satisfy early users, while
allowing for improvement based on feedback [20]. This method promotes focus on the es-
sential components that form the unique value proposition within the lean canvas. These
elements were then translated into core functionalities for the app and subsequently bro-
ken down into small, manageable tasks within a user story map.
26
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:33==
The first version as seen in figure 1, includes the most important features that focused on
the core needs of the users is as follows:
• Being able to record and track health parameters like blood glucose
• Analyze recorded health data on blood glucose graph for daily/monthly history
• Record events like food etc. things that people plan to do at specific times
• View progress to see the remaining goals for the day
• View all recorded data with respect to glucose levels as well as individual at a glance
for day/week
Figure 5.1: First version of ’freefromdiabetes’
WHAT: The first step was to verify the concept of the app, specifically concerning its
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
27
==PAGE:34==
relevance to users. It was important at this point to understand if the created design made
any sense to potential app users and to know how well they perceive the idea. After the
concept validation, the test was designed to validate how easily users could access key
functions like recording glucose and meals.. By further allowing users to freely explore
the app prototype, the aim was to test whether there were any usability or design issues
present, that could be uncovered through observation of their interactions.
HOW: To evaluate if the app’s purpose was clear to potential users, a landing page (see
Figure 5.5) was created. The landing page included two distinct screens, a tagline, and
a description articulating the app’s functionality. The central theme revolved around the
app’s value proposition, enabling users to understand the correlation between blood glu-
cose, diet, and physical activity. This was aimed at assisting users to reflect on their food
and lifestyle choices
A qualitative approach was adopted, involving one-on-one interviews. A total of 6 par-
ticipants were selected, of which, 4 interviews were conducted face-to-face and 2 were
conducted via Zoom, which allowed viewing and being able to follow the participant’s
screen. The participants were then shown the landing page and, without any additional
explanation, were asked to provide feedback on their understanding of the app’s purpose.
The interviews were conducted in a controlled environment, allowing for open-ended re-
sponses to encourage honest feedback. Post-interviews, usability testing was conducted
to observe the participants’ interactions with the app.
A structured survey was then sent out to the different set of participants all over the world.
The survey was sent out to 19 people and was answered by mere 8 people. Each re-
cipient of the survey was given a set of 3 tasks to complete within the app. This time,
the participants learnt about the app while interacting with the tasks, and they were asked
what they think the app’s main purpose is. The survey fetched not only qualitative but also
quantitative data. To obtain quantitative data, ’Likert scale’ [32] questions were included,
with 1 representing ’Strongly Disagree’ and 5 representing ’Strongly Agree’. The detailed
survey with responses can be found in Appendix A.4.
OUTCOME: The concept validation provided an in-depth analysis of the participants’ per-
ceptions of the app idea. The majority of participants were able to understand the app’s
core objective of illustrating the relationship between blood glucose, food intake, and phys-
ical activity. They acknowledged the importance of this correlation in making informed
food choices and lifestyle changes, which could greatly benefit individuals with predia-
betes or type 2 diabetes. Most importantly, the testing helped understand how intuitive
the design was and whether the core concepts were conveyed effectively without needing
additional guidance. The findings from the usability testing were generally positive, with
users praising both the clarity of the landing page and the significance of the problem
being addressed and the intuitiveness of the prototype.
The survey participants found the tasks straightforward and the visualizations effective in
revealing clear patterns and relationships from the graphs. However, there was negative
feedback concerning the lack of understanding related to the ’Progress’ and ’Dashboard’
screens in the app. Recommendations were made to incorporate more descriptive labels
or introductory text to differentiate these screens. While the primary objective appeared to
have been met—with users recognizing the app’s core purpose to aid diabetes patients in
understanding how behaviors affect blood glucose levels and make informed lifestyle de-
cisions, there were minor suggestions to enhance certain aspects, such as color choices,
visibility issues with pop-up features, and completing interactions for specific functions
like the ’Sleep score’.
28
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Sprint 2
The first iteration had the core features, but the prototype needed to be extended to align
with other goals from the user story map. To cater specifically to individuals with pre-
diabetes or type 2 diabetes, the app was expanded to include features like login and
account creation. Personal information such as Gender, Age, Level of physical activity,
height, weight was considered to calculate daily Calorie and water intake, providing tai-
lored feedback. The second iteration of the app design was based on the feedback and
insights gathered from the first round of evaluation. The core focus was to improve visual
aspects, including the pop-ups, color scheme, navigation bar, and user understanding of
certain features like the ’progress,’ ’dashboard,’ and ’sleep score’ basis.
Figure 5.2: Changes made based on feedback from 1st iteration
WHAT: The goal was to validate the usability of the app, including recently implemented
changes and new features added to the prototype, in order to optimize the user experi-
ence. Specifically, the aim was to evaluate how users interacted with the updated proto-
type to ensure the flow and experience met expectations for seamless user experience
and navigation.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.3: Addition of new features: ’freefromdiabetes’
HOW: As part of the evaluation, one-on-one interviews were conducted with users, who
were asked to navigate through the full app prototype start to finish.By closely observ-
ing mouse movements and overall interaction, a deep understanding of user behavior,
their preferences, and the possible challenges was gained in real-time. This personal-
ized method gave detailed insights and showed how to improve in small ways.
The evaluation also included the use of A/B testing to make important design decisions.
More specifically, this method was used to choose the preferred ’bottom navigation bar’
by displaying two distinct versions to users on the same set of screens. Showing users
two options side-by-side allowed finding the one they preferred and could use most easily.
While the A/B tests looked at only specific features, usability testing on the other hand,
provided a holistic approach to evaluate the full user experience. This test method focused
on all the changes and new additions implemented in the app. Observing users as they
explored various features and functions enabled the identification of areas of confusion
or difficulties in the prototype.
OUTCOME: The second iteration allowed users to connect more deeply with the app, as
they felt they were inputting their own information and engaging with new, user-friendly
features. However, there were some areas identified for improvement. Users expressed
a sense of something missing on the ’Splash Screen’, leading to suggestions for a mean-
ingful tagline that could relate to the app’s purpose. Additionally, during the onboarding
experience, participants felt a need for more informational guidance, suggesting the need
for a visually appealing and informative introduction. The ’Skip’ button on the intro screen
became a source of debate for most participants. This simple feature got participants
interacting in an engaging way. Some people wanted to keep the button because they
thought that taking it away would make it harder for people to look around the app without
entering personal information. This might involve ’dark pattern’ of UX design, which are
30
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:37==
sometimes debatable. But some worried that skipping this step would stop personalized
experience and take away from the app it’s core value.
The reasoning showed that users need to fully understand the implications and benefits of
not giving personal information. The process of onboarding also came into question, with
some users feeling a disconnect in the experience. They found the information collection
screen vague, suggesting that a title reflecting ’Personal Goals’ or a similar label could
personalize and clarify the process. This enhanced identification would not only make the
process feel more intuitive but also assure users of the purpose behind the information
collection, build trust and alignment with the app’s objectives. Some users also wanted
more visibility into the reminder frequency used by the app, as they did not manage to do
so in the prototype.
In the A/B test, the users preferred one design, selecting the ’bottom navigation bar’ with
text labels under the icons. However, the majority still felt the names were very con-
fusing. Users candidly stated the ’Progress’ label was hard to understand, thinking it
related to their overall diabetes management rather than how far they have progressed to
achieve their goals they set for the day. They also added, that they had not clue and did
not follow what ’Graphs’ could be or may be it was related to report generation or some-
thing. Users recommended ’Progress’ be changed to ’Target’ or ’Goals’, since that screen
tracks progress towards daily goals set by users. They suggested ’Graphs’ be changed
to ’Overview’, as the screens provide a high-level overview of user’s health parameters.
While A/B testing was used to simply choose one thing over other, the aim was to verify
that the design provided true utility and usability, going beyond simply attractive aesthet-
ics. The usability testing method gave detailed insights and showed incremental improve-
ments across many aspects of the user experience.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.4: Second version of ’freefromdiabetes’
5.3
Sprint 3
Based on feedback from the second iteration, the splash screen was edited and updated
with a new tagline inspired by the landing page. Next, it was important to address the
issue of the ’Skip’ button. If a user pressed skip, they would be routed to a welcome
carousel introducing the app’s functionality and how it aims to help users manage dia-
betes. However, some previous feedback indicated skipping would prevent experiencing
the app’s tailored capabilities. Removing the button could be seen as a ’dark pattern’ in
UX design by forcing user actions.
The solution was that if a user pressed SKIP and finished the welcome screens, a pop-
up would appear explaining they would miss personalization and give the option to ei-
ther go back or continue. This kept the design ethics by not hiding information. The
screens collecting user targets were also labeled for clarity. Based on the last feedback,
the bottom navigation bar was updated again with the icon and label changes that users
suggested. The reminders frequency was added to the prototype by modifying the notifi-
cations screen.
32
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.5: Updated Splash Screen VS Landing Page
Figure 5.6: Changes made based on feedback from 2nd iteration
The goal of these changes was to make the design more user-centered and ethical by
taking into account different user decisions while keeping the interface intuitive and trans-
parent.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
33
==PAGE:40==
WHAT: Based on the feedback and insights from testing the second prototype, the main
goal of the third iteration was to evaluate the overall user experience after implement-
ing several updates and additions This includes not only the reaction to the modifications
made from the previous iteration but also an evaluation of the newly introduced elements.
Most importantly, the hypothesis was set for the bottom navigation bar - that with incorpo-
rating changes this time, it would be intuitive for users to predict what each screen would
show.
The validation process seeks to determine how the adjusted design works with the tar-
get users, how effectively the new features fit into the existing design, and whether the
prototype is succeeding in delivering a more intuitive and engaging user experience.
HOW: The evaluation process for iteration 3 was conducted through guerrilla testing, an
agile and unconventional usability testing method [33]. The testing was conducted at a
Children’s amusement center in Ballerup, with the aim to seek a fresh set of users who had
not been previously introduced to the prototype. This venue provided access to people
from a wide range of backgrounds. Guerrilla testing involves conducting impromptu and
informal usability tests with people in public places [34]. Inspired by a video link [35],
that emphasized the importance of obtaining fresh insights, this method was deemed
appropriate for capturing authentic reactions to the updated prototype.
A total of 7 participants were met, and they were requested to engage with the proto-
type, thinking aloud as they navigated through the features of prototype. This think-aloud
method allowed for a real-time insight into the participants’ thoughts and reactions as they
interacted with the design. Specifically for the ’bottom navigation bar’, users were asked
to predict what they thought the rest of the tabs on the navigation bar would show on the
screens after they reached the ’home’ screen.
OUTCOME: The evaluation process led to several important new insights, as well as
existing insights that had already been tested, and decisions that contributed to the im-
provement of the app. Firstly, the user interaction with the graph area was found to be
unclear, resulting in the addition of the text ”Tap the blinking dot on the graph” under the
’View Events’ list. This change was deemed necessary as 50% of users were unaware
that they were supposed to interact further with this screen, beyond simply understanding
the correlation between food and glucose levels. Additionally, users expressed confusion
about specific labels such as ’F BM AM R’ on the ’Add Blood Glucose’ screen. They felt
hard to navigate this part of the interface, leading to a decision to move the UNITS to the
top and placing tabs for the measurement type below that. Since glucose tracking is a
core feature in any diabetic app, the users’ feedback helped shape the design changes
that were needed to improve usability. Approximately 86% of users were able to iden-
tify the purpose of each tab on the ’bottom navigation bar’ very confidently. Hence, the
hypothesis that the design this time was intuitive proved to be correct.
Moreover, users appreciated the app but felt it lacked an essential element. They ex-
pressed that the app is designed to provide a tailored experience, but there were not able
to fully experience that. The prototype was considered beneficial only for understanding
the correlation between various health parameters and blood glucose levels. About 43%
of people said that they wanted to know what they were doing wrong and what they could
do instead.. Furthermore, 29% of users indicated that they would like to see features such
as accessibility and dark mode, suggestions that were noted for future development.
34
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.7: Addition of new features: App Doctor:’freefromdiabetes’
Another significant outcome was the introduction of the ’App Doctor’ feature. A/B testing
led to the identification of five suitable locations where this feature could be incorporated.
Approximately 72% of users preferred the navigation drawer for a clean look, leading to
updation in the existing navigation drawer to accommodate this new feature. Users were
given five different choices for putting the App Doctor icon in 4 different places on the app
bar and 1 place for putting it in the navigation drawer.
Lastly, the ’App Doctor’ feature with suggestions was the only new element implemented
after all three iterations of the prototype were validated. Recognizing the need for further
development, it was decided that additional testing could not be conducted for ’App doctor’
feature alone at this stage.
So, the findings of this evaluation process gave important information about the users’
needs, preferences, and problems, which led to a number of important changes and ad-
ditions to the prototype. It set the stage for the next steps in development, ensuring that
the app’s design remained aligned with the objective of delivering a personalized and
user-friendly experience.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.8: Third & Final version of ’freefromdiabetes’
5.4
Prototype Link
Prototype Link
(Basic Prototype)
Iteration 1: https://tinyurl.com/FREEDIABETES30
Note: This prototype is best viewed on a PC in a modern web
browser. Make sure to check for any updates if functionality seems off.
Prototype Link
(Beta Version)
Iteration 2: https://tinyurl.com/FROMDIABETES30
Note: This prototype is best viewed on a PC in a modern web
browser. Make sure to check for any updates if functionality seems off.
36
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:43==
Prototype Link
(Final version)
Iteration 3: https://tinyurl.com/FREEFROMDIABETES30
Note: This prototype is best viewed on a PC in a modern web
browser. Make sure to check for any updates if functionality seems off.
5.5
Application Technical Insights
The central focus of this thesis study is the key objective of diabetes management, with a
focus on key areas like blood glucose tracking, water, sleep, weight, food, exercise and
other everyday events. The selection of these particular areas of attention were selected
through an in-depth analysis of existing literature and application review. The literature
review revealed that most research studies were mainly focused four main topics: ex-
ercise, diet, education, and weight. At the same time, the application review uncovered
that almost all diabetes-related applications majorly focused on Blood Glucose tracking
& Reporting, while Meal logging & Water were the most prominent features in nearly all
Food habits applications. This study showed a clear trend in which existing apps were set
up more like food diaries. The resulted information led the project to the creative idea of
designing an app called ’freefromdiabetes’ with many combined features from both app
categories.
The user information is collected at the beginning after login, including gender, age, phys-
ical activity level, height, weight. This data is gathered because these factors commonly
affect or cause risk of type 2 diabetes or prediabetes.
Gender is included because some studies show that diabetes affects men and women
differently. Studies suggest men have higher diabetes risk than women with similar factors
[36]. As per CDC, men are more likely diagnosed with diabetes than women. However,
research indicates women with diabetes may experience more complications than men
[37] [38] [39]. Age is also key since diabetes risk increases significantly over age 45 [40].
The ideal daily water intake depends on various factors like gender, age, weight, level of
physical activity. However, a general guideline is to drink a minimum of 30 ml per kg of
body weight per day [41]. For example, someone weighing 60 kg should drink at least
1800 ml (1.8 liters) of water daily, in addition to liquid from foods, excluding caffeine and
alcohol. In general, the total fluid intake from food and beverages should be around 2.7
liters per day for women and 3.7 liters per day for men.
Furthermore, knowing how many calories a person needs each day helps them keep their
weight in check, which can help prevent diabetes. To figure out these demands, one can
use the Harris-Benedict formula, which was made to figure out a person’s basal metabolic
rate (BMR). BMR, which is affected by things like gender, age, height and weight, gives
an estimate of how many calories are burned at rest and during daily tasks. The Harris-
Benedict formula gives a number representation of BMR [42], but it’s important to point out
that it can be used in many different ways. The formula has been changed many times,
and different organizations use it in different ways. However, according to the Academy
of Nutrition and Dietetics, despite its adaptability, the formula is roughly 90% accurate
around 60% of the time [43]. Below are the formulas to calculate the BMR and AMR [43]:
1. Calculate - Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR)
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
37
==PAGE:44==
• For women, BMR = 65.51 + (9.563 × weight in kg) + (1.850 × height in cm) −
(4.676 × age in years)
• For men, BMR = 66.47 + (13.75 × weight in kg) + (5.003 × height in cm) −
(6.755 × age in years)
2. Calculate - Activity Metabolic Rate (AMR)
• Sedentary (little or no exercise, desk job): AMR = BMR × 1.2
• Lightly active (exercise or sports 1–3 days/week): AMR = BMR × 1.375
• Moderately active (exercise or sports 3–5 days/week): AMR = BMR × 1.55
• Active (exercise or sports 6–7 days/week): AMR = BMR × 1.725
• Very active (exercise, physical training twice a day): AMR = BMR × 1.9
Additionally, the app integrates glucose level values based on different measurement
types, abbreviated as F for Fasting (F), BM for Before Meal (BM), AM for After Meal (AM),
and R for Random (R). These glucose values were taken from different sources and col-
lated to ensure users receive accurate results to monitor their health effectively [44] [45]
[46]. The blood glucose levels are typically measured in millimoles per liter (mmol/L) in
many countries. Below are values for blood sugar levels:
• Normal Blood Sugar Levels (Fasting):
– Normal: 3.9 to 5.5 mmol/L (70 to 99 mg/dL)
• Average Blood Sugar Levels (Non-Fasting):
– Before a meal (preprandial): 4.0 to 7.8 mmol/L (70 to 140 mg/dL)
– After a meal (postprandial): Below 9.0 mmol/L (below 160 mg/dL)
• High Blood Sugar Levels (Hyperglycemia):
– Hyperglycemia (diabetes range):
* 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) or higher on fasting tests
* 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) or higher on random tests with symptoms.
Since the app collects the user’s targeted sleep duration, the user need to be educated on
the optimal amount of sleep needed to reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes and
associated complications. Various studies demonstrate a direct link between insufficient
sleep duration and increased risk for diabetes as well as other cardiovascular diseases.
Research shows that sleep duration outside the normal range of 7-8 hours per night is
associated with increased health risks. Cappuccio et al. 2010 [47] found that short sleep
(<5-6 hrs) and long sleep (>8-9 hrs) were linked to greater risk of coronary heart dis-
ease and stroke. Gangwisch et al. 2007 [48] reported that short sleep (<7 hrs) over 9
years predicted obesity, with <5 hrs linked to a 52% increased obesity risk versus 7-8
38
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:45==
hrs. Chandola et al. 2010 [49] found both short sleep (≤5 hrs) and sleep disturbances
increased coronary heart disease risk independently. Shan et al. 2015 [50] showed that
≤7 hrs and both short (≤6 hrs) and long (≥9 hrs) sleep increased ischemic stroke risk, with
each 1-hr decrease below 7 hrs associated with a 1.1% higher stroke risk. Finally, Beihl
et al. 2009 [51] reported that short (≤5 hrs) and long (≥9 hrs) sleep increased diabetes
risk twofold compared to normal (6-8 hr) sleep. In summary, multiple studies associate
abnormal sleep duration with higher risks of obesity, cardiovascular disease, stroke, and
diabetes.
Based on the findings from the studies discussed above, an attempt was made to develop
sleep scores that align with the evidence showing associations between abnormal sleep
duration and increased health risks. The goal was to create sleep scores that reflect
the data indicating both short and long sleep durations outside the normal range of 7-8
hours per night are linked to higher likelihood of obesity, cardiovascular disease, stroke,
and diabetes. As mentioned previously, the sleep scores implemented in the prototype
were based on findings from various studies. The glucose values and sleep scores as
implemented in ’freefromdiabetes’ are shown below:
The blood sugar levels are typically measured in millimoles per 
liter (mmol/L) in many countries. Here are general guidelines for 
blood sugar levels
6& Normal Blood Sugar Levels (Fasting)
+ Normal: 3.9 to 5.5 mmol/L (70 to 99 mg/dL

& Average Blood Sugar Levels (Non-Fasting)
+ Before a meal (preprandial): 4.0 to 7.8 mmol/L (70 to 140 
mg/dL
+ After a meal (postprandial): Below 9.0 mmol/L (below 160 
mg/dL
& High Blood Sugar Levels (Hyperglycemia):
           Hyperglycemia (diabetes range):2
+ 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) or higher on fasting tests,2
+ or 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) or higher on random tests with 
symptoms.

It's important to note that specific target ranges may vary 
depending on factors such as age, individual health conditions, 
and guidelines provided by healthcare professionals. It's always 
best to consult with a healthcare provider to determine target 
ranges tailored to your specific situation.
Glucose Metabolism and Sleep Duration:

Less Than 4 Hours (25%): Sleeping less than 4 hours per night 
can cause problems with blood glucose levels. Lack of sleep can 
cause insulin resistance, which raises blood glucose levels.

4-5 Hours (50%):
Most adults need more sleep than this. Sleeping 4-5 hours may 
make it harder to control blood sugar, which might lead to 
various health issues.

5-6 Hours (75%): Below the required sleep length for optimal 
health. Diabetes may be more likely in people who sleep 5-6 
hours every night.

7-8 hours (100%): Oversleeping and undersleeping are 
hazardous. Maintaining blood sugar and metabolic health 
requires 7-8 hours of sleep per night.

Understanding Glucose Metabolism: The body uses glucose for 
energy. The body converts carbs into glucose. Insulin helps 
glucose enter cells for energy. If you don't get enough sleep, this 
process can malfunction and raise blood glucose levels, which 
can lead to diabetes.

These guidelines explain how sleep impacts glucose regulation. 
Age, lifestyle, and health needs affect this. To determine your 
optimal sleep length, consult a doctor.
100
100
100
25
25
25
75
75
75
50
50
50
Glucose Values
Sleep Score
Figure 5.9: Glucose Values & Sleep Scores: ’freefromdiabetes’
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
39
==PAGE:46==
6
Implementation
After the design stage, which followed the SCRUM framework that used an iterative pro-
cess across three sprints, the focus shifted to the implementation stage. This next stage
involved transforming the final design into a functional application. The Flutter framework
was selected to develop the app, mainly because of its simplicity. The Dart programming
language is easy to learn and start creating with, especially since it is an object oriented
programming language. Lastly, with a single codebase, it is easy to deploy the app on
both Android and iOS, making it more useful. However, it should be noted that for the
scope of this project, the implementation will be done only for Android.
The Trello tool was initially used to organize tasks and track progress. However, after
getting stuck on a particular task for an extended period of time, it bacame challenging to
maintain the Trello board and was eventually stopped. As some tasks took longer than
planned, it caused some delays. But eventually a workaround was made to clear those
challenges and proceed with other features of the app. The app has many screens and
lots of tiny features. Completing all of this within the thesis deadline will be a challenge.
Therefore, it was decided to do only a minimal amount of features that are core to the
application. The chosen features are as follows:
• Login: This lets each user have their own personalized account.
• Add Blood Glucose & Graph: This feature is very important for managing diabetes
and is considered the core of the app. Users can record glucose levels and the graph
shows the data in an easy way.
• Add Food: This feature uses image recognition to easily log meals.
• Add Steps: The easiest way to measure the physical activity is to record the number
of steps a person takes in a day. The feature uses Google’s physical activity access
and the steps permission, in order to get the number of steps recorded on the user’s
smartphone.
By developing the app with only the core features listed above, it can be evaluated whether
users find value in it, thereby testing the value proposition of the app. The core features
convey the main idea of the app and if users like these important features, they will prob-
ably like the full app too. Also, starting with these features would let the app test the
third-party APIs like LogMeal and Google physical activity access. It’s very important that
these services work smoothly as these are the most important parts of the user experi-
ence, so it’s important to make sure they work well.
40
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:47==
6.1
System Architecture
Figure 6.1: System Architecture
The system architecture of this Flutter project mixes elements from two popular approaches:
Model-View-Controller (MVC) and Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM). The architecture is a
hybrid that mixes elements of MVC and MVVM. It does not strictly follow either pattern,
but instead combines aspects of both to create a flexible structure optimized for Flutter’s
capabilities.
Model The Model component consists of data structures that define the shape and type
of data used within the application. Examples include user_model, food_model, glucose-
Model, which serve as templates for creating instances of user, food and glucose data,
respectively.
View The View component is responsible for displaying the user interface and is built using
Flutter’s widget system. This includes stateful widgets such as SplashScreenWidget and
AddbgformsMmol1Widget.
Controller In the absence of explicit controllers, the stateful widgets themselves perform
the role of controllers to an extent. These widgets, represented by their accompanying
_State classes, contain logic for user interactions, state management, and data flow.
ViewModel In a pure MVVM design, the ViewModel handles business logic, data pro-
cessing, and communication between the Model and View. This project has classes like
SplashScreenModel and BGlucoseProvider that serve a similar role to ViewModels but
are not implemented exactly the same. Particularly, SplashScreenModel exhibits lim-
ited ViewModel-like qualities as it contains some focus node management and lifecycle
methods, but lacks significant business logic commonly found in standard ViewModels.
Therefore, while it has some ViewModel attributes, its capabilities are too limited to fully
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
41
==PAGE:48==
satisfy the ViewModel criteria.
Provider The Provider pattern handles state management and data flow, similar to a
ViewModel in MVVM. Providers like BGlucoseProvider and HomeProvider connect the
View and Model. In Flutter, Provider also enables dependency injection for more testable
code.
In summary, the architecture is a hybrid adapted for Flutter. It mixes MVC and MVVM pat-
terns by using stateful widgets as controllers and Providers as ViewModels. This creates
a flexible, scalable, and maintainable structure.
6.2
Database
During the development of the ’freefromdiabetes’ app, the choice of database was one
of the most important decisions and it was decided to use Firebase. Firebase is a set
of backend cloud computing services and application development platforms provided
by Google. It hosts databases, services, authentication, and integration for a variety of
applications, including Android, iOS, and JavaScript [52]. A key benefit of Firebase is its
seamless integration and real-time syncing capabilities across different platforms, thus
providing a uniform experience.
The ’freefromdiabetes’ app used Firebase’s Cloud Firestore because it is flexible and
can scale when needed. Cloud Firestore, a Firebase service, is a NoSQL document
database that lets developers easily store, sync, and query data at global scale for mobile
and web applications [53]. Because of this, it was especially good for syncing info in real
time. Another benefit of using Firestore was that it can also work well with other Firebase
services, for example, the app’s images are stored in Firebase’s Cloud Storage, but the
URLs of these images are saved in the Cloud Firestore database. This makes sure that
data flows smoothly and continuously through the app. Unlike normal databases that
use tables and rows, Firestore use a document-oriented structure where data is stored
within documents, and these documents are organized into collections. Storing data in
key-value pairs within documents gives Firestore flexibility and because of this structure
also allows them to scale up easily when needed.
If using Firebase’s other services alongside Firestore, such as Firebase Authentication
or Firebase Storage, in this case, it is required to initialize Firebase with the following
command:
1
Firebase.initializeApp();
Listing 6.1: Inialize database
Within the app, data is organized into three main documents: users, glucose and food.
The food document has details about foods, including it’s ingredient components. The
glucose document stores blood glucose values data entered by users. The users doc-
ument, on the other hand, stores information that is unique to each user, such as their
personal profiles and app preferences. Organizing information into specific categories,
such as users, glucose and food makes it easier to store and find information.
1
if (_formKey.currentState!.validate()) {
2
Map<String , dynamic > data = {
3
"name": _model.nameController.text,
4
"email": _model.emailController.text,
5
"password": _model.passwordController.text,
42
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:49==
6
"gender": "",
7
"age": "",
8
....
9
'steps ':"",
10
};
11
context
12
.read<AuthProvider >()
13
.setEmail(_model.emailController.text.trim()
);
14
if (_model.nameController.text.isNotEmpty &&
15
_model.emailController.text.isNotEmpty &&
16
_model.passwordController.text.isNotEmpty) {
17
BotToast.showLoading();
18
await context.read<AuthProvider >().createUser(
19
_model.emailController.text.trim(),
data, context)
20
.then((value) {
21
if (value != null) {
22
BotToast.closeAllLoading();
23
Navigator.push(context , MaterialPageRoute(
24
builder: (context) =>
OnboardingWidget()));
25
}
Firebase Storage is used by the app to store images of food. To set this up, first a reference
to the Firebase Storage service is made. The storage reference can then be used to add
the pictures to Firebase Storage.
1
final storageRef = FirebaseStorage.instance.ref();
2
File file = File(context.read<FoodProvider >().imagePath);
6.3
LogMeal API
Various nutrition APIs were explored to find the best fit for simplifying meal logging in the
app. LogMeal was ultimately chosen due to its advanced image recognition capabilities
that provide detailed ingredient breakdowns with high accuracy and the API that can de-
tect over 1300 different dishes using the biggest food image dataset in the world [54].
Integrating LogMeal fit well with the aim of the app, which was to make logging faster,
easier, simpler, and also to enhance the user experience.
The app makes requests to the API using an authorization token for each user who has
signed up. There are two API endpoints that are used to get info about meal ingredients.
Initially, the user’s meal image is handled, which serves as the input to the API for meal
identification. This process starts with the imageApi() method as can be seen below in
Listing 6.2. An instance of Dio (a Dart package to interact with RESTful APIs), is created
for making HTTP requests. The user’s image stored in imagePath, is then transformed
into a FormData object so it can be sent as a multi-part file to the API. The header of
the Dio request contains an Authorization token. The endpooint for the API request does
its part of image segmentation. Once the image is segmented, it generates an imageId,
which serves as a unique identifier for the
1
Future imageApi() async {
2
Dio dio = Dio();
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
43
==PAGE:50==
3
try {
4
BotToast.showLoading();
5
print(imagePath);
6
File file = File(imagePath);
7
print(file.path);
8
// file = await testCompressAndGetFile(file, 'imageFile.jpg');
9
FormData formData = FormData.fromMap({
10
"image":
11
await MultipartFile.fromFile(file.path, filename: 'image.jpeg '),
12
});
13
dio.options.headers['Authorization '] =
14
'Bearer 1851ae353d6709f5b1b884b84ba96c5e76f3e878 ';
15
// dio.options.headers['Authorization '] = '
eb0c4fca90f4c3d880a4a07d53b61615d5f62bfa ';
16
dio.options.contentType = 'multipart/form-data ';
17
dio.options.connectTimeout = (Duration(seconds: 60));
18
final response = await dio.post(
19
"https://api.logmeal.es/v2/image/segmentation/complete/v1.0?language
=eng",
20
data: formData);
21
print(response.data['imageId ']);
22
imageId = response.data['imageId '];
23
//1557255
24
} catch (e) {
25
print(e);
26
BotToast.closeAllLoading();
27
}
28
}
Listing 6.2: API Logic : Image Segmenation
The endpoint (as seen in Listing 6.3), is specifically designed for complete image seg-
mentation. The API processes the image and responds with an imageId only to be used
in the next endpoint to fetch the ingredients of the meal.
1
https://api.logmeal.es/v2/image/segmentation/complete/
Listing 6.3: Endpoint 1: Image Segmentation
After getting the imageId response, the next step uses the imageApi2() as seen in Listing
6.4 method. This reaches out to a different API endpoint (as seen in Listing 6.5) that
provides full ingredients details linked to the imageId given by endpooint 1. The API
returns a list of ingredients: foodName, that corresponds to the image. This ingredient list
is then saved so the app can access it as needed.
1
Future imageApi2() async {
2
Dio dio = Dio();
3
try {
4
foodName.clear();
5
BotToast.showLoading();
6
dio.options.headers['Authorization '] =
7
'Bearer 1851ae353d6709f5b1b884b84ba96c5e76f3e878 ';
8
// dio.options.headers['Authorization '] = '
eb0c4fca90f4c3d880a4a07d53b61615d5f62bfa ';
9
dio.options.contentType = 'application/json ';
10
dio.options.connectTimeout = (Duration(seconds: 60));
11
final response = await dio.post(
12
"https://api.logmeal.es/v2/nutrition/recipe/ingredients/v1.0?
language=eng",
13
data: {"imageId": imageId});
44
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:51==
14
print(response.data['foodName ']);
15
foodName.addAll(response.data['foodName ']);
16
print(foodName);
17
notifyListeners();
18
print('foods recipes id above ');
19
BotToast.closeAllLoading();
20
} catch (e) {
21
print(e);
22
BotToast.closeAllLoading();
23
}
24
}
Listing 6.4: API Logic : Recipe Ingredients
Before the image is uploaded, it needs to be compressed so that the process happens
faster and less data is used. This is because the images will be stored in the Firestore
database. The FlutterImageCompress library is used by the app to reduce the size of
images. The pictures are compressed by the testCompressAndGetFile() method. It keeps
the quality of the pictures high while reducing their file sizes so they can be uploaded
faster. Lastly, throughout the entire process, a BotToast was used to show a loading
screen while waiting for API responses. This made sure that users were aware that the
process was still going on for a better user experience.
1
https://api.logmeal.es/v2/image/segmentation/complete/
Listing 6.5: Endpoint for Recipe Ingredients
Finally, by combining Firestore for data storage and LogMeal for food identification by
images, the app enables easy way for users to record their meals, thus simplifying meal-
logging process.
6.4
Sprint 1
In the first sprint, the focus was on the user story 1 (As a user with aim to reflect on my
health habits, I want to create a personal account with my health details so the app can
provide tailored feedback to improve my habits). Before starting on this story, the frontend
was done for the app. Since the UI was already validated by the users in previous design
iterations, so the approach was to provide the closest look and feel of the UI. Once the UI
was done, the work on the actual user story 1 began, which included the Splash screen.
The splash screen displays for 3 seconds before navigating to either the login screen or
the dashboard, based on the user’s authentication status.
1
@override
2
void initState() {
3
super.initState();
4
_model = createModel(context , () => SplashScreenModel());
5
appStateNotifier = AppStateNotifier.instance;
6
appStateNotifier.getUserEmail();
The AppStateNotifier is a class which also uses the instance of the model class: User-
Model. The UserModel class is a data model that maps to a document in the Firestore
database. The main purpose of the model class is to handle the serialization and dese-
rialization of the user’s datta to and from the database. The fields shown in the snippet
below, maps directly to the keys in the Firestore document ’users’. The fromJson method
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
45
==PAGE:52==
takes a map as an argument. This map is a JSON structure and initializes all the fields
based on the key-value in the map and is used for deserialization (get data from database
and convert it to object). Similarly, the toJson method is the opposite of this and used for
serialization, that is, when user want the current state of the object and wants to store it
in database.
1
class UserModel {
2
final String? name;
3
final String? email;
4
final String? password;
5
final String? gender;
6
...
7
UserModel(
8
{this.password ,
9
this.foodPlan ,
10
this.steps,
11
...
12
UserModel.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic > json)
13
: name = json['name'],
14
email = json['email '],
15
password = json['password '],
16
gender = json['gender '],
17
...
18
Map<String, dynamic > toJson() => {
19
'name': name,
20
'email ': email,
21
'password ': password ,
22
'gender ': gender,
23
...
24
};
25
}
AppStateNotifier is the state management class and it notifies its listeners about changes
to a shared state. This allows the UI to rebuild and reflect those changes.
1
...
2
appStateNotifier = AppStateNotifier.instance;
3
appStateNotifier.getUserEmail();
4
5
getUserEmail() {
6
email = PreferenceUtils.instance.getString('email ');
7
print(email);
8
}
So, if the user does not have the an account or the email is not found, the splash screen
navigates to login screen. The user has the option to either input credentials and login or
can tap create account. Here the user can enter the credentials and can login:
1
final QuerySnapshot <Map<String, dynamic >>? data = await context.read<
AuthProvider >().login(_model.emailController.text.trim());
Here, the AuthProvider class instance from the Flutter context is using the context.read<AuthProvider>().
AuthProvider is a provider class used in Flutter using provider package.
46
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:53==
1
pubspec.yaml:
2
provider: 6.0.4
It then calls the login method on the AuthProvider instance, passing in the trimmed email
address retrieved from _model.emailController.text.trim().
1
Future<QuerySnapshot <Map<String, dynamic >>?> login(String email) async {
2
try {
3
return await AuthRepo.instance.login(email);
4
} catch (e) {
5
FlutterToast.toast(e.toString());
6
}
7
return null;
8
}
Here the AuthProvider is delegating the call in turn to AuthRepo to fetch the data from the
database.
1
Future<QuerySnapshot <Map<String, dynamic >>> login(String email) async {
2
try {
3
return await _firebaseInstance.collection('users ').where('email',
isEqualTo: email)
4
.get();
5
} catch (e) {
6
rethrow;
7
}
8
}
This method performs a query on a Firestore database collection named ’users’, searching
for document where the email field matches the provided email. If the email is incorrect,
it will give the toast message to the user. On the other hand if the user credentials are
valid, it will send the user to home screen.
If the user wants to create a new account, the user can tap the ’create new account’ which
is wrapped in an ’InkWell’ widget that makes it clickable and takes the user to the SignUp
screen. It should be noted that throuhout the app, in case of any screens which use a
form, a form key is used. The form key is a global key that gives the access to everything
happing in the form container.
1
final _formKey = GlobalKey <FormState >();
Here on the SignUp screen, when the user taps the ’Creat Account’ button,
1
onPressed: () async {
2
if (_formKey.currentState!.validate()) {
3
Map<String, dynamic > data = {
4
"name": _model.nameController.text,
5
"email": _model.emailController.text,
6
"password": _model.passwordController.text,
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
47
==PAGE:54==
7
"gender": "",
8
"age": "",
9
....
10
'steps ':"",
11
};
12
context
13
.read<AuthProvider >()
14
.setEmail(_model.emailController.text.trim()
);
15
if (_model.nameController.text.isNotEmpty &&
16
_model.emailController.text.isNotEmpty &&
17
_model.passwordController.text.isNotEmpty) {
18
BotToast.showLoading();
19
await context.read<AuthProvider >().createUser(
20
_model.emailController.text.trim(),
data, context)
21
.then((value) {
22
if (value != null) {
23
BotToast.closeAllLoading();
24
Navigator.push(context , MaterialPageRoute(
25
builder: (context) =>
OnboardingWidget()));
26
}
27
});
28
}
29
}
30
},
The above code snippet validates the form and checks for only name, email and pass-
word are not empty and builds a map called data with default key-values and calls the
AuthProvider’s createUser method and passes the email and the data object and sends
it to AuthRepo. Here, the code is checked for if the email already exists and if it does not,
it creates a document with the name ’users’. If everything goes well, the user is finally
sent to the first onbaording screen. Here the same process is checked against the user’s
keyed input. Data, such as, Gender, Age and Level of physical activity is recorded on this
screen. If all checks are validated, the user moves the the next onboarding screen. The
next screen is where the user is asked for further information regarding other parameters
and set goals that the user wants to achieve. Once the user is finally finished with the
onboarding process, the next screen welcomes the user and updates the user with the
calorie and water intake for the day which is calculated by the data that user entered on
the previous screen and is shown in the snippet below. It uses the calculations that have
been defined in the section 5.5:
1
void calculateBMR() async {
2
final gender = await FirebaseFirestore.instance
3
.collection('users ')
4
.where('email', isEqualTo: AppStateNotifier.instance.email)
5
.get();
6
String gende = gender.docs.first['gender '];
7
if (gende == "Male") {
8
BMR = 66.47 +
9
(13.75 * double.tryParse(weight)!) +
10
(5.003 * double.tryParse(height)!) -
11
(6.755 * int.tryParse(age)!);
12
BMR = BMR * phyPoints;
13
} else {
14
BMR = 65.51 +
48
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:55==
15
(9.563 * double.tryParse(weight)!) +
16
(1.850 * double.tryParse(height)!) -
17
(4.676 * int.tryParse(age)!);
18
BMR = BMR * phyPoints;
19
}
20
notifyListeners();
21
}
The last thing to be done was to get the Steps permission, so that user would be able to
see the total number of steps taken in the day getting recorded though their phone. The
user has to put check to all the options and if all the checkbox values are selected, it calls
the following code for the permission requesting from the Android activity, for the physical
activity.
1
Map<Permission , PermissionStatus > statuses = await [
2
Permission.activityRecognition ,
3
].request();
It calls the getSteps() from the AuthProvider and logic there executes the steps using
Pedometer library. It first declares the variables to record the steps as streams, as these
will be used to continuously update the steps data
1
late Stream<StepCount > _stepCountStream;
2
late Stream<PedestrianStatus > _pedestrianStatusStream;
3
int steps = 0;
The getSteps() method initializes the step count stream and continuously listens for new
step data and triggers the onStepCount method whenever new data is available:
1
getSteps() {
2
print('get steps called ');
3
getPreviousSteps();
4
_stepCountStream = Pedometer.stepCountStream;
5
_stepCountStream.listen((event) {
6
onStepCount(event);
7
notifyListeners();
8
}).onError(onStepCountError);
9
}
The onStepCount method handles the new step data based on the time slots and send
this data to Firestore using the createBoarding method. The user finally navigates to the
Dashboard screen and the previos all routes below the stack are removed and makes the
Dashboard screen as the root in the stack.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.2: Sprint 1: Create Account
6.5
Sprint 2
User story 2 was taken next, for recording and tracking the blood glucose. This user
story in particular took a very long time to complete. Blood glucose monitoring is a critical
feature for this diabetes app. Without implementing blood glucose monitoring, the app
would have no utility since it is intended for diabetes management. Once the user is on
the Dashboard screen, the app incorporates several other screens into a single dashboard
using the bottom navigation bar. Additionally, the Dashboard screen is a StatefulWidget,
which means it can build the UI dynamically at runtime.
Figure 6.3: Sprint 2: Record and Track Blood Glucose
The UI rendering is facilitated by the build method. It has a List which contains all the main
content widgets that gets displayed based on the selection from the BottomNavigationBar.
Since the Scaffold body is set to the widget at the current index in the list, the screens
change its content based on the selected index. The default is the home screen widget.
Thus, DashboardScreen acts as a central hub for the app, using a BottomNavigationBar to
switch between key features like Home, Targets, Overview, and Settings. A BottomSheet
is used to add the categories such as Blood Glucose and Food. The two icons for the
cateogries are set in the bottom sheet and wrapped with the GestureDetector and on tap
it takes to the blood glucose icon to AddbgformsMmol1Widget. It should be noted that
throughtout the project the StatefulWidgets are using the same three methods, that is,
init(), dispose() and build(). The init()is called when the state class object is to be create
with initialization logic. The dispose() is used to free the streams and other controllers from
any resources they are using and lastly, build() is used to render the UI or draw-redraw
the widgets. The form widget is like any other form widget as explained in previous sprint
50
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:57==
and works with their respective version of classes. Figure ?? is a screenshot of the Add
blood glucose form widget.
Additionally the save button on the form takes the user to do the following:
1
onPressed: () async {
2
if (_currentIndex == -1) {
3
FlutterToast.toast('Select Glucose Type ');
4
.....
5
BotToast.showLoading();
6
Map<String, dynamic > data = {
7
"email": AppStateNotifier.instance.email,
8
'foodPlan ': foodList[_currentIndex],
9
'bGlucose ': _controller.text.trim(),
10
'unit': mmolSelected ? 'mmol/L' : 'mg/L',
11
"colorRing": bGlucoseProvider.Colorss ,
12
'timeStampGlucose ': DateTime.now().toLocal(),
13
'letter ':
14
foodList[_currentIndex].substring(0, 1),
15
'privateNote ': textController.text.trim()
16
};
17
print(data);
18
print('before inserting ');
19
await context.read<AuthProvider >().
createBoarding(
20
AppStateNotifier.instance.email!, 'users
', data)
21
.then((value) {
22
if (value != null) {
23
BotToast.closeAllLoading();
24
Navigator.pop(context);
25
BotToast.showText(text: 'Glucose saved!');
26
context.read<HomeProvider >().getGlucoseData
();
27
}
28
});
29
print(data);
30
await bGlucoseProvider
31
.insertGlucose(data)
32
.then((value) {
33
print(value);
34
if (value != null) {
35
// BotToast.closeAllLoading();
36
// Navigator.pop(context);
37
}
38
});
39
}
40
},
41
text: 'SAVE',
If all the conditions are met in the form , the data which is in the map is sent to the database
using the AuthProvider’s createBoarding() method in the ’users’ document. Upon suc-
cessful completion of the transaction, the loading indicator is closed and navigates back
to the previous sceen from where the BottomSheet was initiated from to add the blood
glucose with a toast message. Also it reloads the glucose data for HomeProvider UI and
at the same time the last piece of the code here is to make sure that it inserts the glucose
data in the another table with the map data in ’glucose’ document in the database. On
the HomeDayWidget, a library called FL_chart is imported. Their github repository has
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
51
==PAGE:58==
the code already available for the different types of charts. The one used in the project is
the line chart [55]. It has the methods to set left titles and bottom titles for the graph and a
method called generateFLSpots. This method generates a list of FlSpot, which shows up
as dots on the line chart, using glucoseValues and glucoseTimeStamp. Finally the build
method uses the widget for the line chart to create the chart.
1
Consumer <HomeProvider >(builder: (_, con, __) {
2
return LineChartSample4(
3
glucoseTimeStamp: con.glucoseTimeStamp ,
4
glucoseValues: con.glucoseValues ,
5
model: _model ,
6
);
7
})
Since, the data keeps changing on this stack, the Consumer widget builds the part of tree
whenever there are data changes. In the code snippet above, here the consumer is listen-
ing to the changes in the HomeProvider object. Therefore, when the HomeProvider has
changes in the data, the consumer widget will rebuild this part of the stack only, that is, not
the widgets above it. The prevents the entire tree from rebuilding. The LineChartSample4
is the class that handles and builds chart and is discussed above.
6.6
Sprint 3
The user story 3 and 5 are covered in this sprint. Since, the logic part of LogMeal API has
already been covered in section 6.3, this sprint will cover only the part of the user story
3 for food form where after the API has detected the ingredients, opens a Food form to
save the details of the meal, which could later be viewed by the user under the ’View-
Events’ tab. From the Dashboard screen, when the user press the ’+’ icon, it opens the
the BottomSheet with two add category icons, Blood Glucose and Food. When the user
taps the Food icon, it causes the Camera to open and user can then click the image of
the food that they want to record and find the ingredients about. Here the logic for the
LogMeal API has already been discussed in the secion ??. Once the user has confirmed
the image, the form opens to save the details of the meal with already prefilled field, that
is, Ingredients. The user thus have to fill all other information and then press ’save’ button
and the code checks to see if all the details have been filled. This is done with the help
of a form key as discussed already in Sprint 1 as well, the form key is a global key that
gives the access to everything happing in the form container.
1
if (_model.dateController.text.isEmpty) {
2
FlutterToast.toast('select date ');
3
} else if (_model.timeController.text.isEmpty) {
4
FlutterToast.toast('select time ');
5
}
6
....
7
...
8
BotToast.showLoading();
9
// Create a storage reference from our app
10
final storageRef = FirebaseStorage.instance.ref();
11
File file = File(context.read<FoodProvider >().imagePath);
12
Random random = Random();
13
final mountainsRef = storageRef.child("image${random.nextInt(10)}.jpg");
14
await mountainsRef.putFile(file!);
15
final imageUrl = await mountainsRef.getDownloadURL();
52
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:59==
In this process, an image file is uploaded to the Firebase Storage. After the upload com-
pletes, the download URL for the image is retrieved from storage. Then, a map data is
created with all the required fields and is inserted into the database using
1
Random random = Random();
2
final mountainsRef = storageRef.child("image${random.nextInt(10)}.jpg");
3
await mountainsRef.putFile(file!);
4
final imageUrl = await mountainsRef.getDownloadURL();
The code above generates a random integer between 0 and 9. This integer is then used
to construct the filename for the image that will be stored in the Storage. This is to ensure
that each file will have a unique name so as to have less likely chance of a file getting
overridden. The image file is uploaded to the Storage and gets a download URL for the
image. A map data is created with all the required fields and this map data is then inserted
into the database using the snippet below:
1
await context
2
.read<FoodProvider >().insertFood(data).then((value) {
3
print(value);
4
context.read<FoodProvider >().getFood();
The reason for the map data to first insert data into the ’food’ document and later retrieving
it is primarily because it has to reflect changes of the food just inserted under the ’View-
Events’ tab.
Figure 6.4: Sprint 3: User Stories 3 and 5
The user story 5 is also covered in this sprint. The Targets screen displays progress
toward daily goals. It contains four expandable cards in two rows, with two cards per row.
The cards automatically size to fit the available space. This screen fetches data from the
database to populate each card’s static image layout with dynamic content. The main task
was implementing the logic to extract the relevant goal data and display it in the correct
card. The TargetsWidget is a stateful widget and is meant to display the information of
the current user’s health targets, particularyly, Blood Glucose, Food and Steps.
1
context.read<AuthProvider >().currentUser = UserModel();
2
context.read<AuthProvider >().getUser();
3
context.read<AuthProvider >().getSteps();
4
context.read<FoodProvider >().getFood();
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
53
==PAGE:60==
The code above is set in the initState() so as to initialize various providers to set and
get the user information and relevant data. Like explained in the previous sprint, the
consumers here listens to any changes in the AuthProvider and read data from it, causing
the consumer widget to rebuild. This is the optimization and is done to avoid large piece
of code to rebuild again, instead only the consumer widget that observers changes will
rebuild itself.
1
Consumer <AuthProvider >(builder: (co, consumer , child) {...
Throughout the UI widget, the data is pulled from the providers using string interpolation
with the ternary conditional expression as shown below:
1
${consumer.currentUser.unit!.isEmpty ? "mmol/L" : consumer.currentUser.unit},
2
...
3
${consumer.currentUser.bGlucose!.isEmpty ? 0.0 : consumer.currentUser.bGlucose
},
4
...
5
${consumer.currentUser.foodPlan!.isEmpty ? "Fasting" : consumer.currentUser.
foodPlan},
54
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:61==
7
Experiments
The ’Experiments’ chapter focuses on evaluating a recently developed application ’freefrom-
diabetes’ intended to assist individuals with diabetes management. The primary aim of
this chapter is to look closely into the app’s usability and its effectiveness in assisting
users with their diabetes management. The methodology used includes both qualitative
and quantitative approaches.
7.1
Usability Testing
Usability testing is an important way to make sure that the app does what it’s supposed
to do and that its intended users can use it easily. It includes a thorough review of the
app by the people for whom the app is actually made for [56]. Usability testing can be
broken down into two main types: moderated and unmoderated. In moderated tests, the
researcher observes and guides the participants in real time, while in unmoderated tests,
the participants use the product on their own.
Testing the app with users is helpful in many ways as it is important to test the app early
and multiple times. When users try the app designs, it reveals what parts work well and
what needs improvement. Iterative testing is critical for ensuring the application has a high
degree of usability and an optimal user experience [57]. This was done throughout the
design stage and only once after the design was implemented, due to the thesis project’s
time constraints. The thesis employs a systematic four-step process discussed below to
conduct usability testing in order to evaluate the usability of the final application.
Analyze & Report
Conduct Sessions
Select Participants
Identify Goals
Figure 7.1: Usability Testing Steps
Figure motivation source [57]
• Identify Goals: The aim of the study is defined by identifying clear goals for the
usability testing experiments. This study has two primary objectives.
– The first primary objective is to assess the overall usability of the application
and determine the overall level of satisfaction it provides to its users.
– The second objective is to assess the effectiveness of the ’freefromdiabetes’
app in facilitating diabetes management among users. This evaluation primar-
ily aims to concentrate on its functionalities pertaining to monitoring glucose
levels, meal-logging and physical activity such as Steps.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
55
==PAGE:62==
These goals will help understand the app’s impact and identify any areas for im-
provement.
• Select test participants: An important part of conducting usability tests is working
with test participants who closely represent the key user personas that have been
defined for the product. By choosing testers whose lifestyles, behaviors, needs, and
goals are similar to those of the target users, it can be made sure that the feedback
they give will be useful.
The majority of participants in the study were recruited through personal social net-
works due to challenge faced in accessing real users with existing condition from
medical facilities such as hospitals or clinics. Two separate attempts were made
to establish contact with the ’diabetes department’ at ’Herlev hospital’, resulting in
a conversation with an employee at the reception. According to the information
provided by the employee, it was communicated that direct walk-in access to the
diabetes department for researchers to test their app prototypes was not available
and should not be tried. Instead, researchers were advised to contact the Team
Leader from the Education Wing in order to make appropriate arrangements. Due
of the inability to establish communication with the leader via telephone on multiple
occasions, the plan to recruit users from there was dropped.
It should be noted that the inability to recruit real users to test the final application
version significantly impacts the second goal, as it is difficult to fully evaluate effec-
tiveness without tangible results that could demonstrate whether users were able
to make any positive changes and identify correlations between physical activity,
glucose levels.
• Conduct test sessions: The execution step began with making sure that all par-
ticipants were familiar with the app’s purpose. They were given a short briefing
and overview of the application. The testing process involved two distinct methods
moderated and unmoderated. First, one-on-one interviews were conducted with
three participants. Each participant was individually briefed and then introduced to
the pre-installed app on an Android phone. During these sessions, observations
were made based on the participants’ interactions with the app, the time spent on
each screen, facial expressions, success rate of assigned tasks. Then participants
were then asked to respond to survey questions, since the SUS scores also had
to be collected. After the hands-on test, an informal conversational style interview
was held and taking some feedback questions from the survey, emphasizing open-
ended questions to draw out detailed feedback.
In an attempt to reach a larger user base, an online survey along with APK instal-
lation file and clear instructions for installing on Android devices, were distributed
as part of the unmoderated testing approach. The last section of the survey was
made mandatory, only for those users, who were requested to use the app for at
least 2-3 days. Using both interviews and a survey was helpful as survey allowed
more people to give their opinions while the interviews provided detailed feedback.
Together both test types gave good insights.
• Analyze and report: Two main methods were used to analyze the results. First,
a quantitative approach involved using statistical tests to examine SUS (System
Usability Scale) scores and showed the average scores. It also looked for links
56
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:63==
between how often people used the app and how much it helped them manage
their diabetes. Next, the feedback and comments were reviewed which provided
details about what users liked and had problems with. Combining statistics and
feedback gave a complete picture of what improvements users want to see in the
app.
The second method used qualitative approach. The individual discussions were
documented, and a method called ’thematic analysis’ was used to find the most
common themes. A consistent positive feedback related to the app’s color scheme
and theme was given by the moderated users. However, issues with readability
also emerged as a major concern. Many people found the fonts were hard to read
in some parts of the app, especially the font under the ’View Events’ tab’s list (as
shown in figure 7.2) view was really difficult to read for some users was observed.
Figure 7.2: Usability Test: View-Event (Left) & Read-Info Pop-Up (Right)
Similarly, feedback on the glucose levels info pop-up (as shown in figure 7.2) sug-
gested font changes for better readability. Other than that, a desire for more in-
tuitive navigation was a recurring theme. Despite clear instructions given to users
before the test about the app’s limited capabilities and the modifications made to
some screens, most participants expressed confusion regarding the functionalities
present in the ’Overview’ and ’Settings’ tabs on the bottom navigation bar. Also,
a number of users were concerned about the design alignment among ’Unit’ tabs
on the blood glucose screen. They pointed out things that did not match visually
and seemed to belong. Users also suggested to add more functionality and provide
more tailored experience. These findings show that the app’s user interface needs
to be improved, both in terms of its functionality and appearance.
The results of the experiments carried out in this section can be found in the Section 8.1.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
57
==PAGE:64==
7.2
LogMeal API Accuracy Test
The main goal of this test is to find out how well the LogMeal API can identify ingredients
from images of different meals. LogMeal API is a cutting-edge tool that uses image anal-
ysis to make it easier to recognize meals, nutrients and figure out how many calories they
have. Using deep learning models, the API claims to be able to recognize a wide range
of meals from different cultures [54].
The participants from the initial one-on-one interviews were requested to participate in
the test to assess the API’s accuracy, since anyone who enjoys eating a wide variety of
cuisines and is familiar with various meals, was deemed suitable candidate to visually
analyze what ingredients were present in the meal.
A total of 12 different meal images were gathered for this test. Each participant was then
shown a customized set of 4 images out of these 12 images. Since these 3 people took
part in the usability test, they had already used the feature where they were able to see
the algorithm in the backend of the app analyze an image of a dish and determine the
ingredients present in it. The set of dishes and their images along with their ingredients
have been captured from the 3 different sources and randomly mixed together [58] [59]
[60].
SET 1 (for participant 1)
Name
Ingredients
Smørrebrød
Dill, Onion, Pickled Herring, Butter, Rye Bread
Red Velvet Cake
Flour, Eggs, Buttermilk, Sugar, Cacoa Powder, Baking So-
dam Vanilla, Salt
Broccoli Cranberry Salad
Red Onion, Broccoli, Dried Cranberries, Cashews, Apple
Cider Vinegar, Sugar, Mayonnaise
Tandoori Chicken Salad
Chicken, Onion, Cashews, Mint, Lettuce, Cucumber,
Dressing, Lime
SET 2 (for participant 2)
Name
Ingredients
Kaisendon
Uruchimai, Tuna, Shrimps, Salmon
Brunsviger
Flour, Butter, Milk, Sugar, Yeast, Brown Sugar, Heavy
Cream
Pizza Margherita
Flour, Tomato, Mozzarella, Basil
Chicken Club Sandwich
White Bread, Chicken, Tomato, Cheese, Lettuce, Mayon-
naise
SET 3 (for participant 3)
Name
Ingredients
Negitoro Maki (Sushi)
Uruchimai, Tuna, Nori, Scallions
Chocolate Chip Cookie
Flour, Chocolate Chips, Butter, Sugar, Eggs, Brown Sugar,
Vanilla, Baking Soda
Butter_Chicken
Chicken, Tomato, Butter, Red Chillies, Garlic, Ginger, Fenu-
greek Seeds, Cream
Chicken Fried Rice
Chicken, Rice, Eggs, Onion, Garlic, Black Pepper, Soy
Sauce, Scallions, Tomato, Cucumber, Lime
58
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:65==
The images chosen for the test were deliberately of different categories of food items:
• A dish with mostly seafood.
• A baked food item, either a dessert or snack.
• A meal which looked like it had fewer visible ingredients.
• An dish with many ingredients that could be seen.
There were two main reasons for choosing the above category of images: First, dishes
were selected ranging from those with few visible ingredients to those with many. Second,
to include meals where some key ingredients were used but were not visible explicitly.
Having the participants look at these different food types was good for checking the API’s
accuracy, as it let the test see what kinds of meals the API could analyze and not just what
people could see.
Participants were reminded that the goal was to improve the system using their feedback,
not to test their knowledge. Participants then viewed one image at a time and shared
their answers. After reviewing all images, the API’s answers for the same images were
presented. Both sets of answers, from the participants and the API, were then compared
side by side.
To measure the accuracy of the LogMeal API in identifying ingredients from images, a
scoring system was implemented. For each ingredient that both the participant and the
API correctly identified, 2 points were given. However, if an ingredient was noted by the
participant but missed by the API or the other way around, a point was taken away. Also,
if an ingredient was incorrectly identified by either the participant or the API, a point was
deducted. Below in 7.1 is the simplified version of points distribution:
Scenario
Points Distribution
Both Participant & API correctly identify an ingredient
+2 points each
Either Participant or API identifies an ingredient incorrectly
-1 from their points
Participant notes an ingredient that is missed by the API
-1 from API
API notes an ingredient that is missed by the Participant
-1 from Participant
Table 7.1: Simplified Scoring Rules for API Accuracy Test
Accuracy Percentage =
(Total Points Scored by API
Maximum Possible Points
)
× 100
The accuracy percentage is calculated by taking the total points scored by the API, dividing
it by the total maximum possible points across all images, and then multiplying the result
by 100, as can be seen in equation above.
The results of the experiments carried out in this section can be found in the Section 8.2
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
59
==PAGE:66==
8
Results
This section of the report presents significant data that was gathered throughout the pe-
riod of the thesis. It includes quantitative and qualitative information from activities such as
usability testing, participant interviews, surveys. The data is summarized through visual
aids like graphs, and tables for clear presentation of notable patterns, and conclusions.
Both high-level insights and detailed statistical analyses are included to provide a com-
prehensive overview of the experimental outcomes.
8.1
Usability Testing Results
The usability testing conducted for the ’freefromdiabetes’ app aimed to assess the real-
world user experience and effectiveness of the application. Rather than solely relying on
quantitative System Usability Scale scores, the testing also took a qualitative approach
to gain insights into how actual users interacted and felt about the app’s user interface
and features. The goal was to see if the design and features of the app made sense for
the goals and needs of the user, when it comes to tracking and managing diabetes in real
world use. Feedback from users is essential for improving an app so that it works best
for its purpose. The testing provides an effective motive for making important changes to
the appearance, features, and ease of use. Ultimately, the user feedback helps ensure
the app delivers on its promise to be an efficient, user-friendly tool that empowers people
to effectively manage their diabetes on a daily basis.
To evaluate the app’s usability, two complementary methods were employed using the
survey. The complete survey along with results and comments can be seen in Appendix
A.3. First, a quantitative analysis was performed to determine the SUS scores, showing
the average SUS score and its effectiveness in assessing the app’s usability for managing
diabetes. While the numerical scores provided helpful data, the written feedback from
users offered more detailed insights from the additional comments section of the survey
resulting in qualitative feedback. Their comments showed what they liked about the app
and also pointed out problem areas. The results showed that the main
The user testing provided invaluable insights into the prototype’s strengths and areas
needing improvement. Participants responded positively to the core capabilities of the
app for health tracking and data visualization, citing the ease of photo-based meal log-
ging, the clarity of the graphs, and the knowledgeable information provided about blood
glucose levels as standout features. The ability to conveniently monitor multiple parame-
ters in one place on the ’Targets’ screen provided a streamlined experience that users felt
would benefit diabetes management. However, feedback also highlighted opportunities
to enhance aspects like enabling users to increase font sizes and customize visualiza-
tions, adding more detailed nutrition tracking beyond just extracting ingredients for meals,
and tailoring the experience to meet individual user needs and capabilities. For exam-
ple, users suggested that providing a daily goal summary at the end of each day could
help motivate achievement of targets for the next day. While limited in sample size, these
user perspectives will guide continued iterative development to ensure the app delivers
the most effective, accessible, and engaging experience possible for the target audience.
Additional rigorous testing will remain essential as features expand.
The System Usability Scale (SUS) provides a reliable tool for measuring the usability [61].
60
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:67==
Originally created by John Brooke in 1986, it allows to evaluate a wide variety of products
and services, including hardware, software, mobile devices, websites and applications.
It consists of a 10 item questionnaire with five response options for respondents; from
’Strongly Disagree’ to ’Strongly Agree’ which are then given the points, as shown below:
Calculating System Usability Scale (SUS) Score: The following set of steps have been
taken from [62]
Step 1: Convert the scale into numbers
Response
Points
Strongly Disagree
1
Disagree
2
Neutral
3
Agree
4
Strongly Agree
5
Each question carries a weight of 10 points, with a total maximum score of 100.
• Odd-numbered questions had positive phrasing. If the response was ’Strongly
Agree’, the maximum of 10 points was awarded for that question. By subtracting 1
from each of these questions’ scores, the minimum was ensured to be 0. Then, by
multiplying the result by 2.5, the maximum became 10 for each question.
• Even-numbered questions had negative phrasing. Here, if the response was
’Strongly Agree’, no points were given for that question. By subtracting the score of
these questions from 5, the minimum was once again ensured to be 0. Multiplying
the result by 2.5 ensured the maximum was 10 for each question.
Step 2: Calculate
X = Sum of the points for all odd-numbered questions −5
Y = 25 −Sum of the points for all even-numbered questions
SUS Score = (X + Y ) × 2.5
The above adjustments ensure that each question has a score between 0 and 10, with 0
being the minimum and 10 the maximum.
Participants were asked 10 questions to determine the System Usability Scale (SUS)
score. Below are two questions (as can be seen in figure 8.1) from the SUS where partic-
ipants had varied opinions. These areas highlight potential areas for improvement in the
design.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure 8.1: System Usability Scale: [Left - Questions 6], [Right - Questions 8]
The results from the survey questionnaire were collated and put together, with calculations
made in the table below:
USERS
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
(X - 1)
(5 - Y)
(X + Y)
* 2,5
U_1
4
2
5
1
4
2
4
1
4
2
16
17
82,5
Scores
3
3
4
4
3
3
3
4
3
3
U_2
5
2
4
1
5
3
5
3
4
2
18
14
80
Scores
4
3
3
4
4
2
4
2
3
3
U_3
5
2
5
1
5
2
5
2
4
1
19
17
90
Scores
4
3
4
4
4
3
4
3
3
4
U_4
5
1
5
1
5
4
4
3
5
1
19
15
85
Scores
4
4
4
4
4
1
3
2
4
4
U_5
5
1
5
1
5
4
5
5
5
1
20
13
82,5
Scores
4
4
4
4
4
1
4
0
4
4
U_6
4
1
4
2
4
1
4
1
4
1
15
19
85
Scores
3
4
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
4
U_7
4
2
4
2
5
5
5
3
4
2
17
11
70
Scores
3
3
3
3
4
0
4
2
3
3
U_8
5
1
5
1
5
2
5
2
5
1
20
18
95
Scores
4
4
4
4
4
3
4
3
4
4
U_9
4
4
4
2
3
1
3
4
4
2
13
12
62,5
Scores
3
1
3
3
2
4
2
1
3
3
U_10
4
1
5
1
3
1
4
4
5
1
16
17
82,5
Scores
3
4
4
4
2
4
3
1
4
4
U_11
5
1
5
1
5
1
5
1
5
1
20
20
100
Scores
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Table 8.1: SUS scores for each participant
Since the total number of participants is 11, therefore:
Average SUS Score = 82.5 + 80 + 90 + 85 + 82.5 + 85 + 70 + 95 + 62.5 + 82.5 + 100
11
Average SUS Score = 915
11
Average SUS Score = 83.18
Hence, the the average SUS score for the given users is 83.18.
Interpreting Scores: The table below provides a reference for interpreting System Us-
ability Scale (SUS) scores by mapping score ranges to subjective usability rating
62
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:69==
SUS Score
Grade
Adjective Rating
> 80.3
A
Excellent
68 −80.3
B
Good
68
C
Okay
51 −68
D
Poor
< 51
F
Awful
Table 8.2: SUS Score Grading System
As can be seen from table 8.2, any SUS score above 68 is considered above average.
The SUS score above should not be interpreted as a percentage. Rather, it indicates that
among the 11 users, they rated the usability as quite good.
In conclusion, the usability testing provided valuable insights into the experience and sat-
isfaction levels of real-world users when interacting with the ’freefromdiabetes’ app. An
average SUS score of 83.18 is considered ’excellent’ on the usability scale, indicating
that the majority of participants found the app user-friendly and efficient in helping them
manage their diabetes.
8.2
LogMeal API Accuracy Results
The purpose of the LogMeal API accuracy test was to evaluate how well LogMeal identi-
fied ingredients in images of food. The API’s results for identifying ingredients were com-
pared against human participants analysis of ingredients from same images. This tested
if LogMeal is as accurate as humans, with real food images. The information learned
from this test is important for refining and improving the system, to make sure it meets
the needs of the intended users. These findings will lay the groundwork for future work
in the field of automated food image analysis. Most importantly, the results will serve as
a decisive factor in determining whether it would be viable to keep using LogMeal API or
explore new tools, especially if its accuracy proves lacking.
To measure the accuracy of the LogMeal API in identifying ingredients from images, a
scoring system was implemented as can be seen in Table 7.1. The scoring system went
through several changes and had to be altered accordingly. A challenge arose when a
participant could not distinguish a specific type of fish and simply identified it as ’fish’, while
the ingredient list specified it as ’Herring’. Similarly, when an image was captured with
the app, the API identified the ingredient as ’chicken (w/ bones)’ instead of just ’chicken’.
These discrepancies highlighted the need for adjustments in the evaluation criteria and
the addition of this factor ensured that neither the participant not API, gets unfairly marked
down. Instead both would get full points for reasonable assessment of the same ingredi-
ent.
The results from the accuracy test of the LogMeal API are shown below along with the
order of ingredients and answers from the particpant and API in alphabetical order:
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
63
==PAGE:70==
Figure 8.2: Set 1
Image
Ingredients
User 1
API
Smørrebrød
Butter,
Dill,
Onion,
Pickled Herring,
Rye
Bread
Butter,
Dill,
Fish,
Onion, Rye Bread
Butter, Onion, Bread
Red Velvet Cake
Baking Soda, Butter-
milk, Eggs, Flour, Salt,
Strawberry,
Sugar,
Vanilla
Flour,
Cream,
Rasp-
berry, Sugar
Butter,
Cream,
Egg,
Flour,
Salt,
Sugar,
Vanilla
Figure 8.3: Set 1
Image
Ingredients
User 1
API
Broccoli Cranberry Salad
Apple Cider Vine-
gar,
Broccoli,
Cashews,
Dried
Cranberries,
May-
onnaise,
Red
Onion, Sugar
Broccoli, Cashews,
Dressing,
Onion,
Raisins
Broccoli, Cashews,
Egg,
Lettuce,
Yo-
ghurt
Tandoori Chicken Salad
Capsicum, Chicken,
Coriander, Cucum-
ber, Dressing, Let-
tuce, Lime, Onion,
Cashews
Capsicum, Chicken,
Coriander, Cucum-
ber,
Dressing,
Lime, Onion, Salad,
Cashews
Cabbage,
Carrot,
Chicken (w/ bones),
Lemon, Lettuce
64
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:71==
Figure 8.4: Set 2
Image
Ingredients
User 2
API
Kaisendon
Caviar,
Salmon,
Shrimps, Tuna, Uruchi-
mai
Caviar,
Rice,
Salmon,
Shrimps
Lemon,
Rice,
Salmon,
Shrimp (w/ shell), Tuna
Brunsviger
Brown
Sugar,
Butter,
Flour,
Heavy
Cream,
Milk, Sugar, Yeast
Caramel, Flour, Sugar
Apple,
Cinnamon,
Pie
crust, Salt, Sugar, Vanilla
Figure 8.5: Set 2
Image
Ingredients
User 2
API
Pizza Margherita
Basil,
Flour,
Moz-
zarella,
Olive
oil,
Salt, Tomato, Yeast
Basil,
Flour,
Moz-
zarella,
Tomato
Sauce
Basil,
Flour,
Moz-
zarella
Cheese,
Olive
oil,
Salt,
Tomato
Sauce,
Yeast
Chicken Club Sandwich
Bacon,
Cheese,
Chicken,
Let-
tuce,
Mayonnaise,
Tomato,
White
Bread
Bacon,
Chicken,
Salad,
Tomato,
White Bread
Bacon,
Bread,
Cheese,
Let-
tuce,
Mayonnaise,
Tomato, Turkey
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
65
==PAGE:72==
Figure 8.6: Set 3
Image
Ingredients
User 3
API
Negitoro Gunkan Maki
Nori,
Scallions,
Tuna, Uruchimai
Fish, Spring Onion,
Sushi
Scallions,
Sushi,
Tuna
Chocolate Chip Cookie
Baking Soda, Brown
Sugar,
Butter,
Chocolate
Chips,
Eggs, Flour, Sugar,
Vanilla
Butter,
Chocolate
chips, Flour, Sugar
Chocolate
Chip
Cookie
Figure 8.7: Set 3
Image
Ingredients
User 3
API
Butter_Chicken
Butter, Cream, Fenu-
greek Seeds, Garlic,
Ginger,
Oil,
Onion,
Red
Chillies,
Salt,
Tomato
Butter, Chicken, Co-
riander
Black
Pepper,
Car-
rot,
Garlic,
Onion,
Parsley, Potato, Salt,
Squid, Tomato, Olive
Oil
Chicken Fried Rice
Black
Pepper,
Chicken,
Cucum-
ber,
Eggs,
Garlic,
Lime,
Onion,
Rice,
Scallions, Soy Sauce,
Tomato
Chicken,
Cucumber,
Egg,
Lime,
Rice,
Spring Onion, Tomato
Celery,
Chicken
Stock,
Cucumber,
Lemon,
Oil,
Onion,
Rice, Salt, Tomato
Evaluating the API after adjusted criteria, following are the scores for each set presented to the
participants. Following are the total number of ingredients present in each set:
66
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:73==
8.2.1
Set 1 (User 1) Ingredients:
No.
Ingredients
Count
1
Butter, Dill, Onion, Pickled Herring (or Fish), Rye Bread (or Bread)
5
2
Baking Soda, Buttermilk (or Milk), Eggs, Flour, Salt, Strawberry (or
Raspberry), Sugar, Vanilla
8
3
Apple Cider Vinegar, Broccoli (or Cabbage), Cashews, Dried Cranber-
ries (or Raisins), Mayonnaise (or Dressing or Yoghurt), Red Onion
6
4
Capsicum, Chicken, Coriander, Cucumber, Dressing, Lettuce, Lime,
Onion, Cashews
9
Table 8.3: List of Ingredients: SET 1:USER 1
8.2.2
Set 2 (User 2) Ingredients:
No.
Ingredients
Count
1
Caviar, Salmon, Shrimps (or Shrimp w/ shell), Tuna, Uruchimai (or Rice)
5
2
Brown Sugar (or Sugar), Butter, Heavy Cream, Milk, Yeast, Flour
6
3
Basil, Mozzarella (or Mozzarella Cheese), Olive Oil (or Oil), Tomato (or
Tomato Sauce)
4
4
Bacon, Cheese, Mayonnaise, White Bread (or Bread)
4
Table 8.4: List of Ingredients: SET 2: USER 2
8.2.3
Set 3 (User 3) Ingredients:
No.
Ingredients
Count
1
Nori, Scallions (or Spring Onion or Onion), Tuna, Uruchimai (or Rice)
4
2
Baking Soda, Brown Sugar, Butter, Chocolate Chips, Eggs, Flour,
Sugar, Vanilla
8
3
Butter, Cream, Fenugreek Seeds, Garlic, Ginger, Oil (or Olive Oil),
Onion, Red Chillies (or Black Pepper), Salt, Tomato
10
4
Black Pepper, Chicken, Cucumber, Eggs, Garlic, Lime (or Lemon),
Onion, Rice, Scallions, Soy Sauce, Tomato
11
Table 8.5: List of Ingredients: SET 3: USER 3
Formula for calculating the accuracy of the API:
Accuracy Percentage =
(Total Points Scored by API
Maximum Possible Points
)
× 100
(8.1)
Calculating the total number of ingredients from the three tables above:
Total number of Ingredients = 5 + 8 + 6 + 9 + 5 + 6 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 8 + 10 + 11 = 80
Since each ingredient weighs 2 points, the maximum possible points is:
80 × 2 = 160
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
67
==PAGE:74==
From the Set 1, 2 and 3 above, total points scored by the API:
18 + 31 + 17 = 66
Using the formula for accuracy percentage from Equation 8.1 and substituting the values:
Accuracy Percentage =
( 66
160
)
× 100
Accuracy Percentage ≈41.25%
Hence, the accuracy of the API is approximately 41.25%.
68
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:75==
9
Discussion
The usability testing of the ’freefromdiabetes’ app showed that its true value is determined by
how well it works when put to use. The testing demonstrated the app’s performance in real-world
conditions, revealing both its strengths and areas needing further improvement. Even though
the insights from the usability test are very helpful, the study has some limitations, especially in
recruiting real users with diabetes. Because the app has not been tested on the target user group,
it is difficult to fully assess the success of the project. However, the initial results from the small
set of users, are still promising.
To further evaluate the app’s value, it would be useful to compare it directly to current popular dia-
betes apps. In contrast to the usability test findings for this app, the top existing diabetes apps have
their own challenges. These apps require manual entry of each dish or ingredient to log meals.
This process is inefficient and difficult to navigate. The app’s user interface is poorly designed
and cluttered. As a result, the app experience is hard and frustrating for individuals with diabetes.
They struggle to use the app smoothly due to complexity involved. The ’freefromdiabetes’ app,
on the other hand seamlessly integrates the LogMeal API to enable easier and improved meal
logging. This method simplifies meal logging by making it more user-friendly and efficient, as well
as improving the entire user experience.
Moreover, besides meal logging, the current release version of the app aims to improve lives of
indivduals with prediabetes or T2D, by recording other health parameters such as blood glucose
and step count. Users can input their blood glucose values within the app, which are then visu-
alized on a graph. This empowers users to spot trends and understand how their glucose levels
fluctuate in relation to meals, activity, and other factors. However, the step count feature was
tested on an old Android phone with battery drainage issues. Therefore, it is not yet clear whether
users will be able to get insights and find underlying trends in relation to their blood glucose levels.
In conclusion, the usability testing of the ’freefromdiabetes’ app has shown that it has the potential
to be a valuable tool for individuals with prediabetes or T2D. However, further evaluation is needed
to confirm these findings and to identify any areas that need to be improved.
9.1
Reflection on Results
The usability testing of the ’freefromdiabetes’ app gathered valuable user insights regarding the
real-world experience and satisfaction levels of users, when interacting with the application. The
qualitative feedback from users highlighted what is working well along with areas for improvement
in terms of features, functionality, aesthetics, and overall user experience. The key features of the
app, such as the ability to record blood glucose, meals, steps, and daily goals, were well-received
by users. Despite the blood glucose graph aesthetics not as pleasing as of the prototype, users
praised the app for its clear, understandable data visualizations and easy-to-use photo-based meal
logging. These features simplified health tracking and management for conditions like diabetes.
Even though users responded positively to the core features, the testing revealed opportunities
to improve the user interface and experience. To make the app more accessible and easy to
use, problems with font sizes and readability need to be fixed in places like the ’View Events’ tab.
Despite clear instructions provided, participants in the unmoderated user testing were confused by
certain intentionally empty screens such as ’Overview’ and ’Settings’. Leaving these tabs on the
bottom navigation bar empty made it difficult for few users to understand the intended functionality
of the system. In future iterations, adding more content or text description to these screens could
improve user understanding.
Moreover, the System Usability Scale (SUS) scores were collected from users during usability
testing to provide an overall measure of the app’s usability. SUS scores evaluate key factors like
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction to calculate the perceived usability of the system. High
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
69
==PAGE:76==
SUS scores indicate that users found the system more usable. The app received a SUS score
of 83.18, which shows users found it very usable and pleasant to use. In summary, the usability
testing indicates the ’freefromdiabetes’ app has a good usability score but can still benefit from
addressing the identified problem areas.
Based on the above analyses, several suggestions have emerged. First, there were opportuni-
ties found to increase the app’s usefulness and ease of use by making suggested user-interface
improvements. The research also indicated potential for adding new features or modules that
were not added yet, to further help users give a holistic app to manage diabetes. Considering
how quickly health tech sector is changing, integrating the app with wearable devices could be a
good idea for the future work. This would allow real-time glucose tracking and give users a more
comprehensive tool for managing health.
Further, reflecting on the accuracy of the LogMeal API in Section 8.2, it is evident that the accuracy,
after assessing various images, is approximately 41.25%. The process of checking the API’s
accuracy brought up a few important reflection points that can be used to summarize what was
learned and are shown below:
• To start, this accuracy level is significantly low, especially when reflecting on the potential
implications of misidentifying food ingredients for individuals with diet restrictions or aller-
gies. This is important because if the API thinks that a food is something which it is not,
it could cause a lot of trouble. For example, if someone is allergic to peanuts and the API
identifies the food has no peanuts when it actually does, this could make the person fall sick
or if someone is supposed to avoid sugar, but the API miss detecting sugar as an ingredi-
ent, it could big problem. Since the API incorrectly identifies foods so often, it does not offer
accuracy or consistency at this stage.
• Additionally, the evaluation strategy relied on a set of few images, and it must be acknowl-
edged that this limited sample size might not be sufficiently representative of the vast di-
versity of dishes. As evident in the tests, assessing the API with only three sets (with 4
images each, total 12 images) may not be the most comprehensive method to figure out
its overall accuracy. Increasing the sample size by including a more diverse set of images
could potentially offer a more accurate representation of the API’s performance.
• Furthermore, the testing methodology, i.e., the scoring system, assumes that the human
participants’ identifications if accurate, would cause API to lose points when participants find
an item which API missed and vice-versa. However, it is important to note that while partici-
pants were deemed fit if they had culinary experience, some may have had more knowledge
than others. There are always possibilities of human errors or differing perceptions of what
an ingredient might be, based solely on visual analysis might at times give advantage and
disadvantage to API. Hence, this might lead to potential biases in the assessment of the
API’s accuracy.
In summary, it is essential to highlight the difference between the API’s quantitative accuracy and
the subjective feedback from participants. Even with an accuracy rate of 41.25%, the majority of
participants perceived the results from the API positively. This could be because, the API seems
like a new and interesting feature, and many users might be surprised at how easily it can identify
ingredients from images, even if it is not very accurate.
9.2
Reflection on Design
The journey through the three design sprints of the ’freefromdiabetes’ app underscored the crit-
ical importance of iterative design and user feedback in creating an application that effectively
addresses the needs of its target audience.
From the initial concept validation in Sprint 1, it became clear that participants agreed with the app’s
core objective. This early validation proved essential as it offered a foundational confirmation that
the app’s idea had value and was perceived as a potential tool for managing diabetes. However,
70
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:77==
the previous round of testing also revealed certain usability challenges. Areas like the ’Progress’
and ’Dashboard’ screens were not as intuitive to users as initially expected. Such feedback is
helpful in design improvement. Later, in Sprint 2, these areas of ambiguity were addressed, leading
to a more tailored experience for users by adding personal data collection and improving visual
elements based on feedback.
In Sprint 2, there was debate about the ’Skip’ button. This revealed a design dilemma: whether
to offer users complete flexibility or to guide them for a more customized experience. The pri-
mary purpose of the app is to provide users with personalized feedback. However, several users
requested that the button skip steps. This was fixed in Sprint 3 by introducing a popup after skip-
ping. The popup describes what users are missing. Users have a choice but must understand
the consequences. As a result of the ’Skip’ button discussion, a balance was required. Users de-
mand freedom of choice, nevertheless the application functions best with instructions. The Sprint
3 solution attempted to strike a compromise between ethics and usability.
The design refinements incorporated in Sprint 3 were informed by user feedback gathered in ear-
lier sprints. Specifically, comments about difficulties interacting with the blood glucose graph, sug-
gestions to place the ’App Doctor’ feature, and requests for accessibility options like dark mode
played a key role in shaping the final prototype. Initially, only a very few users asked for a text
resizing feature, during the early testing phases. Therefore, it was not prioritized until usability
testing of the implemented app revealed more widespread readability issues. In response to this
later feedback, the ability to adjust text size was added to the final prototype design and can be
seen below:
Figure 9.1: Accessibility Options
The introduction of the ’App Doctor’ feature was an outcome of understanding user expectations
more deeply. Users wanted not just data but actionable insights and this feature aimed to fill
that gap. Its introduction and thoughtful placement in the app reflect a commitment to aligning
with user preferences and can be seen in figure 5.7. While user testing guided the ’App Doctor’
placement, the full feature has not been user tested yet. Throughout all sprints, feedback from
users clearly guided the app’s development. Every decision was based on user feedback, whether
it was understanding navigation bar labels or changing features to make them more intuitive.
In conclusion, the results from the three sprints demonstrate the benefits of an iterative design
approach. They highlight how consistent feedback and a commitment to improving designs can
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
71
==PAGE:78==
lead to an application that not only looks good but also serves its core purpose effectively. Through
this process, it’s clear that the true success of a user experience design lies in understanding,
adapting, and evolving based on user needs.
9.3
Reflection on User Stories
The application ’freefromdiabetes’ was designed based on user stories that highlighted the desires
and needs of potential users. These stories were very important for making sure the project went
in the right direction to ensure its success. The app has managed to meet some of the initial
functional requirements. However, due to the vast range of features, not all aspects were covered
within the scope of the project.
Moreover, since the app was tested on users from a social circle and was unable to recruit real
users with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes, the real impact on how it would change habits over time
and whether it helped gain control over glucose levels could not be fully ascertained. However,
a very small number of testers did use the app with a parent, and their honest feedback from
the last usability test survey provides some initial insights and are shared along the functional
requirements.
Lastly, the core functionality achieved in the initial app version is daily tracking, allowing users
to log and review their health data only for a day. This daily view lets users check their current
status. In the future, it could also let users see their progress over a week, month, or even a year.
However, the singular focus on daily tracking in this first iteration provides the essential building
block for expanding functionality in future releases. But for now, the most important features are
for daily recording and monitoring and review to provide immediate utility without overcomplicating
the app.
• Goal: Personalized health feedback based on individual profiles: When users first open
the app, they see a splash screen with the app’s name and a motivational tagline. Once
they get past this, they are taken to the login page, where they can choose to sign in or
make a new account. When a first-time user chooses to make an account, they are taken
to a screen that asks for important personal information. These details, such as gender,
age, and amount of physical activity, set the stage for the next screens. As part of the
onboarding process, the next screen asks users for more information, such as their height,
their present weight, their desired weight, their step goals, and their sleep goals. With all
of this information, the app moves to a screen that says ’Congratulations’ and shows the
user their daily calorie and water intake goals, which are based on the Basal Metabolic
Rate (BMR) estimates based on the information they provided. This gives each user an
experience that is special to them based on their personal information. Also, to make the
personalized tracking even better, this screen asks users for approval to access and track
daily steps using the phone’s sensors. This makes sure that health monitoring is done in an
integrated way.
• Goal: Efficient blood glucose tracking: Tracking glucose levels is a vital feature for di-
abetes management and for ’freefromdiabetes’ app this feature forms the core of the app
functionality. The ’freefromdiabetes’ app provides a solution that precisely addresses this
requirement. It not only makes easier for users to record their glucose levels, but it also
graphically presents this data using an easy-to-understand graph, which enables users to
evaluate and comprehend the trends in their blood glucose levels throughout the day.
During the usability tests, users praised the intuitive process of logging their glucose levels
in the app. They specifically mentioned that the interface was clean and intuitive, allowing
them to log their glucose levels quickly each time. Users also appreciated the timestamp
feature which allowed them to look how long ago the last test was taken along with the
glucose value. Small details like this showed the app was designed carefully with users in
mind. Overall, the feedback showed that focusing on logical app organization and useful
features resulted in an app that was easy for people to use daily. Small details like this
showed the app was designed carefully with users in mind. Overall, the feedback showed
72
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:79==
that focusing on logical app organization and useful features resulted in an app that was
easy for people to use daily.
Implementing the graph visualizations presented some challenges. The aesthetics of the
prototype design could not be fully replicated during app development due to some technical
constraints. This resulted in more issues that also delayed production timeline, leaving
less time for other things like, user recruitment. However, these challenges were worked
through and functionality proved more critical than aesthetics to users at this stage. The
most important thing was getting the graphs to work properly and making the app actually
function. While the graphs in the current version may not be as appealing as the prototype,
but they fulfill the core functionality, which was to be able to record the blood glucose levels
and track it. It must be noted, that the usability testing was performed on the actual app
rather than the prototype and despite the visualization shortcomings, users still found the
graph feature to be really useful.
• Goal: Simplified meal logging: By integrating the LogMeal API, the app successfully
makes it easy for its users to keep track of what they eat. It uses image recognition to auto-
matically detect the ingredients of a meal and activates the phone’s camera allowing users
to take picture of their food. This feature offers the unique advantage of reducing manual
data entry and the errors associated with it, making meal logging quicker without users hav-
ing to manually enter the details. During usability testing, users particularly praised the meal
logging feature for its simplicity and ease of use. They highlighted how straightforward it was
to capture an image of food and have the app detect and record the ingredients automat-
ically. This simplicity and convenience exceeded their expectations, making meal logging
an effortless feature they could integrate into their daily life. The users also liked that it not
only records the food, but user can go back anytime and review it. However, a user also
shared that would have wanted more in terms of macro-nutrients and calories.
Various challenges were faced during the implementation of this feature. Firstly, it was to
figure out where to save the images since saving directly on user’s phone would cause their
storage to fill up quickly. But soon it was realized that cloud storage could be used and it’s
URL be stored in the database. Next was integrating the API itself. The API was fairly simple
to implement with very well documentation provided by LogMeal on their website. However,
sometimes when saved the image, it did not bring the results, that is, it failed to identify the
ingredients and returned no results at all. Further investigation into their website revealed
the do’s and don’ts when capturing images [63]. It was mostly advised to take pictures from
the eye-level perspective and images be centered on the food and must be square images
for better results.
Despite the above challenges, the implementation was successful. Usability testing yielded
positive feedback for this feature and users were satisfied with the user interface and the
simplified meal-logging process. Especially, the ability to quickly log meals without going
through the tedious process of searching for each ingredient in a database, which is a preva-
lent feature in many apps, was found valuable and time saving.
• Goal: Effective daily targets monitoring: An integral feature of the app is the ’Targets’
screen. This allows users to continuously track their daily progress against set goals. The
screen tracks the last recorded blood glucose value entered, calories consumed from the
meals logged (subtracted from the daily calorie target based on the user’s BMR), and physi-
cal activity in terms of total daily Step count, The screen includes placeholder visualizations
and data for two additional metrics - water intake and sleep score. These features have not
yet been implemented and contain dummy data copied directly from the prototype mock-up.
The decision to implement a limited set of features has already been explained in Chapter
6. The app asks for permission to use the phone’s sensors so that it can track and record
the user’s steps data. This feature was implemented by obtaining the required permissions
from the pedometer API. The implementation was successful from a technical aspect. The
steps graph showed limited data points in the step count during usability testing. This was
because the app was install on an older Android device with battery drainage issues, so the
device could not be carried everywhere to fully track steps. To compensate, textfields were
created on the settings screen to allow manual input of step values for visualization on the
graph.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
73
==PAGE:80==
The major disadvantage was the inability to recruit real prospective users for evaluation and
testing, coupled with limited access to modern Android devices among the small test group
that was chosen. This made it hard to figure out how useful the feature could be if it was
used correctly in the real world use for a long period.. As a result, potential insights into
correlation between glucose levels and physical activity data were unable to be obtained
from these limited tests. Further study with a bigger sample size of real users is required to
properly validate the feature’s feasibility and relevance in assisting users to identify relevant
patterns.
In conclusion, the steps tracking feature was successfully implemented in the app along
with last recorded bllod glucose and calories set for the day. However, due to limitations
in testing on an older device with battery issues, the full potential and impact of integrating
steps data remains unproven. This highlights need for future improvement and testing is
required to accurately evaluate the value of the steps tracking feature.
The following user stories were part of the functional requirements but could not be implemented:
• As a user looking to visualize my data, I want to view all health metrics on interactive graphs
so I can spot trends and insights.
• As a user who needs updates, I want to get relevant notifications so I am informed about
my health data.
• Goal: Interactive visualization of all health metrics: The initial goal for ’freefromdiabetes’
was to provide users with a comprehensive overview of their health data in the form of
interactive graphs Since the app is designed primarily for individuals with prediabetes or
type 2 diabetes, the feature for recording and tracking blood glucose levels is core to its
purpose. The vision for future versions of the app is to overlay additional health parameters
onto the user’s existing glucose graph, including food intake, step count, water consumption,
weight, sleep data, and a diary for activities like exercise, social events, and leisure. The
intuitive graphs and insights from the app help users understand the underlying patterns
in their lifestyle habits. By visualizing how various activities influence blood glucose levels
over time, the app provides key information for users to self-reflect on their behaviors and
make informed decisions to better manage their diabetes.
This feature will enable users to individually analyze how each health metric impacts their
glucose levels and contributes to any spikes. It would enable them to seamlessly track
multiple metrics stacked on the glucose levels graph and help them understand the corre-
lations, and derive actionable insights. Additionally, it will provide users with detailed meal
overviews, pop-ups revealing insights for specific data points, and the ability to view metrics
across different date ranges including daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly views.
Although, this feature is important to give users full health insights, but it could not be de-
veloped yet due to technical limitations. Implementing complex visualizations in an easy,
user-friendly way is beyond current skills. Combining different data sources and meeting
demanding graphical standards for visual appeal may prove difficult. However, while this
feature is key for users to fully understand their health trends, it remains a goal for future
app versions when more technical experience has been gained.
• Goal: Personalized health notifications: For optimal user experience, a good user-centric
health app understands the importance of timely feedback and reminders. Accordingly, a
planned capability for ’freefromdiabetes’ is personalized notifications that give users timely,
relevant feedback based on the data they input and behaviors. These notifications would not
only serve as reminders to keep track of daily health metrics, but they would also offer users
with feedback on their daily targets they set for themselves, alerts on any worrying health
parameters, and most importantly on, diet or activity advice based on their recorded data.
Users can get real-time notifications through the ’App Doctor’ feature. This lets them know
how their choices impact their health condition, as they log meals and activities. It also
suggests better alternatives to help build healthy habits, for example, it can recommend
healthier foods based on what they are already eating.
74
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:81==
An important technological challenge is the real-time integration of multiple variables and
the resulting algorithmic selection of when and what to tell the user about with the collected
data. Additionally, care must be taken to strike the right balance between critical alerts and
excessive notifications. Too many alerts could risk overburdening users. For this, an in-
depth understanding of user behaviors and needs is required for a comprehensive period
of time, to determine appropriate notification frequency and priority.
As mentioned above, the initial release does not include this feature, it is an essential part
of future development plans. In subsequent versions, the app aims to offer customized
alerts that would be both proactive and reactive. The proactive alerts would be reminders
for goal achievements, to log a meal, etc. Whereas reactive alerts would provide feedback
and suggestions based on the user’s recorded data. Example of reactive alerts can be,
providing feedback to the user after logging food that may be healthy or unhealthy. Another
example could be assessment of the glucose levels after the user has input the data to record
blood glucose. Additionally, with the ’App Doctor’ feature in the pipeline, the potential for
suggesting healthier diet options and activities becomes even more promising, moving the
app closer to its goal of a holistic health tool for managing diabetes.
In summary, while ’freefromdiabetes’ has achieved core functionality that serve the essential needs
of its users, there remains a number of potential improvements and additional features that can
enhance the user experience. The continuous feedback loop of build-measure-learn used on
users and a commitment to iterative development will play a crucial role in realizing the app’s full
vision in future.
9.4
Limitations of this Study
This research had some limitations that provide opportunities for future work. Due to time con-
straints and development feasibility, real users with diabetes could not be included in testing. While
prediabetic and health-conscious users still offered valuable perspectives, direct feedback from
the target users would have proven its usefulness even more.
Additionally, only the core features could be implemented within the app’s implementation. The
initial version could not include some of the more advanced features that were planned, like vi-
sually appealing charts and graphs that show health data on top of each other. However, users
still responded positively to the essential tracking and logging features for blood glucose, meals,
and steps. This indicates the app delivers on its primary value proposition despite limited scope.
Solo development introduced restrictions in terms of technical proficiency and available time that
impacted the app. With more resources, the app could have included more features rapidly. Still,
user testing helped key functionality that addresses user needs allowing users to easily record
and track relevant health data like blood glucose levels, food and steps.
In summary, while the study had limitations around target users, features, and development, it
showed that the app could work and had potential. The positive response to essential features
and high usability scores are promising. This suggests that with continued refinement informed
by real diabetic users, the app can evolve into a valuable health management tool. The research
was an important initial step, but continuous iterative development and testing will be necessary
to fully realize the app’s potential and advantages for users.
9.5
Future Work
There are promising opportunities to expand on the ’freefromdiabetes’ app research and further
develop its features. Based on the information gathered so far, prospective areas for future im-
provement include:
Integration with Wearable Devices As wearable technology becomes more prevalent, integrat-
ing the app with devices that monitor health metrics in real-time can enhance user experience
and offer more comprehensive insights. Despite the fact that there are hundreds of applications
accessible, only a few actually interface with wearables. By establishing this connectivity, the
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
75
==PAGE:82==
app can be positioned as usual choice for people looking to explore and discover the ideal health
monitoring experience. Future iterations of the app, aided by wearable technology, will be able to
give users with real-time insights about their health including blood sugar levels, heart rate, and
physical activity. This combination provides an overall view of health, meeting the user’s desire
for a comprehensive health overview.
Improving Food Recognition Capabilities With a current accuracy rate of just approx. 41.25%,
there’s a clear need to reevaluate reliance on the LogMeal API. Exploring its accuracy further,
especially by testing with a broader dataset encompassing diverse cuisines globally, will determine
its true effectiveness. If it falls short, the search for alternative vendors or the development of
an in-house model using machine learning becomes pertinent. While introducing such a model
may present a learning curve, it can be enriched progressively. By seeking users’ consent to
share feedback on identified food ingredients, the model can be continually trained, potentially
accumulating substantial data to ensure accuracy and user trust in the long run.
Diverse User Testing Testing the app’s functionality with a larger and more diverse user group can
provide richer insights. Expanding user testing to include individuals from different backgrounds
could greatly improve insights and ensure the app’s usability for a broad audience. Additionally,
adding a way for users to give feedback within the app would help collect real-time experiences.
The app could use analytics to find the most common problems or suggested improvements.
Those could then be prioritized for fixing or to build new features.
Enhanced Security Protocols Health information is highly sensitive and private data. Adding
more security features would help keep user data safe. Looking into new encryption methods and
doing regular security checks can help protect data. This would make users feel confident trusting
the app with sensitive information.
Community Building Adding a feature for users to share tips and give support could be helpful.
A community forum or group in the app would let people connect over shared experiences. This
could create a feeling of belonging and being on the same journey.
76
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:83==
10
Conclusion
This research set out to explore how a digital intervention could combine diverse tracking features
to improve diabetes management. The developed prototype app demonstrates the feasibility of
integrating blood glucose monitoring with food, sleep, physical activity, and other health param-
eters to increase self-awareness and encourage healthy changes. Despite not being tested with
actual users with diabetes, this prototype offers a basis for thorough monitoring.
To address the goal of simplifying meal logging, integration with the LogMeal API which uses image
recognition, enabled automatic ingredient detection. While accuracy testing revealed limitations,
using this technology demonstrates potential for reducing manual typing and improving the ease
of food logging for users.
To help users make informed food choices, the prototype enables them to correlate health data
with glucose levels. Features like overlaying glucose graphs with tracked metrics for food, water,
exercise, sleep, and weight provide personalized insights. Visualizing these relationships can ed-
ucate users on lifestyle factors impacting their diabetes. While the prototype demonstrates this
concept of correlating food and glucose data, the initial released version has limited capabilities
in this regard. More design iteration and usability testing are needed to improve the data presen-
tations and analysis for optimal user understanding and utility. The current implemented version
does not yet offer visualization and correlation features, highlighting the need for continued de-
velopment to realize the full scope of the proposed functionality. While limited duration of testing
restricted real pattern discovery, the app design allows for the correlation of glucose data with diet,
exercise, sleep, and other variables. This may aid users in better understanding lifestyle links.
In conclusion, this research made a good start at combining different tracking tools into one app.
The logical next step is to conduct long-term testing with real users with diabetes over several
months. Extended use can reveal the app’s full potential to drive positive behavior change through
pattern identification. When used consistently for few weeks or a month, users may begin noticing
correlations between their glucose levels and health parameters like diet, physical activity, and
sleep. Visualizing these relationships can provide powerful insights that increase awareness and
understanding of how to better manage their condition. Consequently, these findings have the
potential to inspire gradual but significant improvements in individuals’ everyday health habits and
management of diabetes. While initial testing offered early insights, the app requires extensive
real-world validation to fully assess its capabilities for educating users about diabetes and em-
powering them to actively manage their condition. In the end, this thesis provides an outline for
an iterative and user-centric approach aimed at maximizing the effectiveness of the app as a tool
for diabetic self-management. Continued progress requires commitment to rigorous real-world
validation.
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
77
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization. Diabetes. 2023. URL: https://www.who.int/health-
topics/diabetes#tab=tab_1 (visited on 04/10/2023).
[2]
International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas | Tenth Edition. 2023. URL:
https://diabetesatlas.org/ (visited on 04/10/2023).
[3]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. What is diabetes? 2023. URL: https:
//www.cdc.gov/diabetes/basics/diabetes.html (visited on 04/10/2023).
[4]
International Diabetes Federation. What is diabetes. 2023. URL: https://www.idf.
org/aboutdiabetes/what-is-diabetes.html (visited on 04/10/2023).
[5]
Diabetesforeningen. Viden om diabetes. 2023. URL: https://diabetes.dk/forskning/
viden-om-diabetes/diabetes-i-danmark (visited on 04/10/2023).
[6]
PRISMA. PRISMA Statement. 2023. URL: http : / / www . prisma - statement . org /
Default.aspx (visited on 04/13/2023).
[7]
Yue Zhai and Wenyu Yu. “A Mobile App for Diabetes Management: Impact on Self-
Efficacy Among Patients with Type 2 Diabetes at a Community Hospital”. In: Medical
Science Monitor 26 (2020), e926719. DOI: 10.12659/MSM.926719.
[8]
Luke Van Rhoon et al. “A systematic review of the behaviour change techniques
and digital features in technology-driven type 2 diabetes prevention interventions”.
In: Digital Health 6 (2020), pp. 1–27.
[9]
Niala den Braber et al. “Requirements of an Application to Monitor Diet, Physical
Activity and Glucose Values in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: The Diameter”. In:
Nutrients 11.2 (2019), p. 409.
[10]
Meshari F Alwashmi et al. “A Digital Diabetes Prevention Program (Transform)
for Adults With Prediabetes: Secondary Analysis”. In: JMIR Diabetes 4.3 (2019),
e13904. DOI: 10.2196/13904.
[11]
Ellen W Seely et al. “Development and Feasibility of an App to Decrease Risk Fac-
tors for Type 2 Diabetes in Hispanic Women With Recent Gestational Diabetes
(Hola Bebé, Adiós Diabetes): Pilot Pre-Post Study”. In: JMIR Formative Research
4.12 (2020), e19677. DOI: 10.2196/19677.
[12]
Jing Wang et al. “A Behavioral Lifestyle Intervention Enhanced With Multiple-Behavior
Self-Monitoring Using Mobile and Connected Tools for Underserved Individuals
With Type 2 Diabetes and Comorbid Overweight or Obesity: Pilot Comparative Ef-
fectiveness Trial”. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 6.4 (2018), e92.
[13]
Maxine E Whelan et al. “A digital lifestyle behaviour change intervention for the
prevention of type 2 diabetes: a qualitative study exploring intuitive engagement
with real-time glucose and physical activity feedback”. In: BMC Public Health 21.130
(2021).
[14]
Ian Yi Han Ang et al. “Impact of a personalized mHealth program for type 2 dia-
betes mellitus during the COVID-19 pandemic: single-group pre-post retrospective
analysis”. In: JMIR Preprints 25820 (2020).
[15]
Bronte Jeffrey et al. “Mobile phone applications and their use in the self-management
of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: a qualitative study among app users and non-app
users”. In: Diabetology Metabolic Syndrome 11.84 (2019).
[16]
Angel Marie Chater et al. “Health behaviour change considerations for weight loss
and type 2 diabetes: nutrition, physical activity and sedentary behaviour”. In: Prac-
tical Diabetes 37.6 (2020), pp. 228–231.
78
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:85==
[17]
Arjun Krishnakumar et al. “Evaluating Glycemic Control in Patients of South Asian
Origin With Type 2 Diabetes Using a Digital Therapeutic Platform: Analysis of Real-
World Data”. In: Journal of Medical Internet Research 23.3 (2021), e17908.
[18]
Md.Mohaimenul Islam et al. “Use of Mobile Phone App Interventions to Promote
Weight Loss: Meta-Analysis”. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 8.7 (2020), e17039.
[19]
James Weatherall et al. “Sleep Tracking and Exercise in Patients With Type 2 Dia-
betes Mellitus (Step-D): Pilot Study to Determine Correlations Between Fitbit Data
and Patient-Reported Outcomes”. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 6.6 (2018), e131.
[20]
Eric Ries. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innova-
tion to Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Books, 2011.
[21]
AltexSoft. User Experience (UX) Design in Software Product Development: How to
Create Exceptional Product Value. 2023. URL: https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/
uxdesign/user-experience-ux-design-in-software-product-development-how-to-create-
exceptional-product-value/.
[22]
Scrum.org. What is Scrum? 2023. URL: https://www.scrum.org/resources/what-
scrum-module (visited on 08/31/2023).
[23]
Wikipedia. Agile software development. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Agile_software_development (visited on 08/31/2023).
[24]
Ash Maurya. Running lean: iterate from plan A to a plan that works. O’Reilly Media,
Inc., 2012.
[25]
Jeff Patton. User Story Mapping: Discover the Whole Story, Build the Right Product.
O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2014.
[26]
John Smith. What are UX Personas? Mar. 1, 2021. URL: https://www.uxdesigninstitute.
com/blog/what-are-ux-personas/ (visited on 07/08/2023).
[27]
Per Bækgaard. Lean methods for agile development. Wk2 Data Driven Design.
2022. URL: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/125840/viewContent/489687/
View.
[28]
Wikipedia contributors. Use case diagram. Feb. 11, 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Use_case_diagram (visited on 06/24/2023).
[29]
Techopedia. What is Top-Down Design? URL: https://www.techopedia.com/definition/
9744/top- down- design#:~:text=A%20top%2Ddown%20design%20is, detailing%
20any%20first%2Dlevel%20subsystems. (visited on 07/10/2023).
[30]
Nick Babich. UX Surveys: A Quick Guide to Get the Most Out of Them. Dec. 27,
2017. URL: https://uxdesign.cc/ux-surveys-a-quick-guide-to-get-the-most-out-of-
them-1889d136be6a (visited on 07/10/2023).
[31]
UX Planet. Most Common UX Design Methods and Techniques. Apr. 26, 2021. URL:
https://uxplanet.org/most-common-ux-design-methods-and-techniques-c9a9fdc25a1e
(visited on 07/11/2023).
[32]
Scribbr. Likert Scale: What Is It and How to Use It? URL: https://www.scribbr.com/
methodology/likert-scale/#:~:text=A%20Likert%20scale%20is%20a,about%20the%
20statement%20or%20question. (visited on 07/12/2023).
[33]
Experience UX. Guerrilla usability testing. URL: https://www.experienceux.co.uk/
faqs/guerrilla-usability-testing/ (visited on 07/17/2023).
[34]
Marvel Blog. Common UX Methods and Techniques. May 5, 2021. URL: https://
marvelapp.com/blog/common- ux- design-methods-techniques/#part15 (visited on
02/18/2023).
[35]
Google for developers. Guerilla Testing with Usability Cafe. Feb. 6, 2020. URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YL0xoSmyZI&t=18s (visited on 07/17/2023).
[36]
M. Yarde et al. “Sex differences in the risk of vascular disease associated with dia-
betes”. In: Biological Sex Differences (2020).
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
79
==PAGE:86==
[37]
Alexandra Kautzky-Willer, Jürgen Harreiter, and Giovanni Pacini. “Sex and Gender
Differences in Risk, Pathophysiology and Complications of Type 2 Diabetes Melli-
tus”. In: Endocrine Reviews 37.3 (June 2016), pp. 278–316. DOI: 10.1210/er.2015-
1137.
[38]
UK Healthline Media UK Ltd Brighton. How diabetes affects men vs. women. July 29,
2019. URL: https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/diabetes-affects-men-women
(visited on 06/09/2023).
[39]
CDC. Diagnosed and Undiagnosed Diabetes. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/
statistics-report/diagnosed-undiagnosed-diabetes.html. 2023-03-15.
[40]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Risk Factors for Type 2 Diabetes. URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/basics/risk-factors.html (visited on 03/15/2023).
[41]
MBS Festival. Why is Hydration Essential? 2021. URL: https://www.mbsfestival.
com.au/healthy-living-hub/why-is-hydration-essential/ (visited on 02/19/2023).
[42]
Wikipedia contributors. Harris–Benedict equation — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo-
pedia. [Online; accessed 2023-05-18]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Harris%E2%80%93Benedict_equation&oldid=1136284772.
[43]
Malia Frey Boyle. How Many Calories Should I Eat in a Day? June 29, 2022. URL:
https://www.verywellfit.com/how-many-calories-do-i-need-each-day-2506873 (visited
on 05/18/2023).
[44]
World Health Organization. Body mass index (BMI). Nov. 9, 2022. URL: https://
www.who.int/data/gho/indicator- metadata- registry/imr- details/2380 (visited on
06/27/2023).
[45]
Alexia Gottfried. High Blood Sugar (Hyperglycemia). https://www.healthline.com/
health/high-blood-sugar-hyperglycemia. Accessed: 2023-06-27.
[46]
Mayo Clinic. Type 2 diabetes - Diagnosis and treatment. June 11, 2022. URL: https:
//www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/type-2-diabetes/diagnosis-treatment/drc-
20351199 (visited on 06/27/2023).
[47]
Francesco Paolo Cappuccio et al. “Sleep duration predicts cardiovascular outcomes:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies”. In: European heart
journal 32.12 (2010), pp. 1484–1492.
[48]
James E Gangwisch et al. “Inadequate sleep as a risk factor for obesity: analyses
of the NHANES I”. In: Sleep 30.10 (2007), pp. 1289–1296.
[49]
Tarani Chandola et al. “The effect of short sleep duration on coronary heart disease
risk is greatest among those with sleep disturbance: a prospective study from the
Whitehall II cohort”. In: Sleep 33.6 (2010), pp. 739–744.
[50]
Zhilei Shan et al. “Sleep duration and risk of ischemic stroke in middle-aged adults:
a prospective cohort study of 0.5 million Chinese adults”. In: Stroke 46.7 (2015),
pp. 1717–1721.
[51]
Dayna A Beihl, Angela D Liese, and Steven M Haffner. “Sleep duration as a risk
factor for incident type 2 diabetes in a multiethnic cohort”. In: Annals of epidemiology
19.5 (2009), pp. 351–357.
[52]
Wikipedia Contributors. Firebase. Mar. 3, 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Firebase (visited on 08/09/2023).
[53]
Google. Cloud Firestore. Accessed: 2023-08-09. 2023. URL: https://firebase.google.
com/products/firestore (visited on 03/06/2023).
[54]
LogMeal. https://logmeal.es/. Accessed: 2023-04-22.
[55]
imaNNeo. Line Chart Sample 4. 2023. URL: https://github.com/imaNNeo/fl_chart/
blob/master/example/lib/presentation/samples/line/line_chart_sample4.dart (visited
on 03/09/2023).
80
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:87==
[56]
Interaction Design Foundation. Usability Testing. Interaction Design Foundation.
2023. URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/usability-testing
(visited on 03/07/2023).
[57]
Adam Fard. Usability Testing Methods: the Ultimate Guide. URL: https://adamfard.
com/blog/usability-testing (visited on 08/20/2023).
[58]
Kitchen at Hoskins. Kitchen at Hoskins. 2023. URL: https://www.kitchenathoskins.
com/ (visited on 08/10/2023).
[59]
Allrecipes. Allrecipes. 2023. URL: https://www.allrecipes.com/ (visited on 08/10/2023).
[60]
TasteAtlas. TasteAtlas. 2023. URL: https://www.tasteatlas.com/ (visited on 08/10/2023).
[61]
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. System Usability Scale (SUS). U.S.
Department of Health & Human Services. URL: https://www.usability.gov/how-to-
and-tools/methods/system-usability-scale.html (visited on 08/20/2023).
[62]
UI/UX Trend. Measuring System Usability Scale (SUS). URL: https://uiuxtrend.
com/measuring-system-usability-scale-sus/ (visited on 08/20/2023).
[63]
LogMeal. Do’s and Don’ts When Taking Pictures. 2021. URL: https://api.logmeal.
es/tutorial/#tag/Do’s-and-Don’ts-When-Taking-Pictures (visited on 08/14/2023).
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
81
==PAGE:88==
A
Appendix
A.1
User Story Map - Version 1.0
Suggest alternatives to 
unhealthy food/drinks
Accept or decline access 
to the location
MVP
MVP
Go to ‘Overview’ 
screen
Tap the icon of 
selected category to 
view data
Go to ‘Home’ screen
View all activities 
listed under tab 
‘Activity-Glucose’
Toggle one or more 
activity to overlay on 
blood glucose graph.
View details on 
graph
View details on 
graph
Toggle between 
‘Day-Week-Month-
Year’
View details on 
graph
Tap event to view as 
blinking dot on blood 
glucose graph.
Go to ‘Home’ screen
Tap ‘View Events’ tab
View all recorded 
events in descending 
order
Tap '+' to record
Position camera over 
meal to record 
ingredients using 
image recognition
Tap ‘Food’ icon
Tap ‘Blood Glucose’ 
icon
Tap '+' to record
Go to ‘Targets’ screen 
Tap '+' to record
Tap 'Save' to confirm 
image
Tap the category to 
record
View remaining daily 
targets
View last recorded 
blood glucose reading
Select measurement 
type 
Add note or 
comments
Fill details of the form 
and fields pertaining 
to category chosen
Fill details of the form 
and fields pertaining 
to category chosen
View list of all 
notifications
Tap the ‘Bell’ icon
Tap ‘Save’ to exit
Tap ‘Save’ to exit
Tap ‘Save’ to exit
View notifications & 
manage reminders
View all measured 
data
View all ‘activities’ 
data on the graph
View all ‘events’ 
data on the graph
Simplify meal 
logging
Record new 
activity/ event
View daily targets 
progress
Record blood 
glucose
Individuals with 
prediabetes or type 2 
diabetes
Understand 
connections between 
glucose levels and 
influencing variables
Target Group
Goals
Activities
Tasks
Record & track 
health data
SLICE 1
SLICE 2
Figure A.1: User Story Map: Version 1.0
82
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:89==
Understand how food, fitness &  sleep 
affect your blood glucose
Taking control of your diabetes 
is easier than ever.
freefromdiabetes
2
1
3
Record
Visualize
Improve
Your blood glucose, 
meals, exercise and sleep 
See how daily habits 
affect your levels
Use insights to improve
your health over time
A.2
Landing Page
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
83
==PAGE:90==
A.3
Survey 3: Usability Testing - ’freefromdiabetes’
84
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:91==
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
85
==PAGE:92==
86
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:93==
A.4
Survey 2: freefromdiabetes
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
87
==PAGE:94==
88
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:95==
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
89
==PAGE:96==
90
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:97==
A.5
Sketches
Figure A.2: Handmade Sketches
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
91
==PAGE:98==
A.6
Survey 1: Understanding Diabetes
92
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:99==
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
93
==PAGE:100==
94
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:101==
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
95
==PAGE:102==
A.7
Custom Figma Components
96
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
==PAGE:103==
Managing Diabetes by tracking food nutrition, sleep and exercise
97
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk
