==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
Interruptible Remote Attestation Protocol
for Securing IoT Devices
Nicolò Sponziello (s210226)
Supervisors: Nicola Dragoni, Edlira Dushku
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Remote attestation is a security mechanism that allows a trusted party to verify the
integrity and trustworthiness of an untrusted device. Usually, to ensure the security
of the procedure, the attestation is computed atomically. In some IoT systems it may
not be possible to execute the attestation without interruptions, as the procedure may
require a substantial amount of time and resources.
The objective of this thesis is to design and implement an interruptible remote
attestation protocol to verify the trustworthiness of a device even in the presence
of a mobile adversary, that can relocate during the interruptions. Compared to the
state-of-the-art of remote attestation, which computes the cryptographic hash as a
proof of the integrity of memory of a device, this thesis proposes a new approach
that relies on a Cuckoo filter. The protocol is based on a self-attestation scheme and
divides the device memory in blocks of a predefined size and splits the attestation
into multiple rounds, to allow the device to interrupt it when needed.
The implementation of a proof of concept involved the development of a software
simulator and a hardware implementation to test the effectiveness and eﬀiciency of
the proposed approach. The evaluation showed that with the proposed approach, it
is possible to implement an interruptible remote attestation protocol. The approach
proved to be flexible, as it is possible to tune its parameters to achieve a higher
detection rate or a lower impact on the device availability. The evaluation of the proof-
of-concept implementation shows that the proposed protocol is effective in detecting
a software and mobile adversary presence.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring a master degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, August 16, 2023
Nicolò Sponziello (s210226)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all I would like to express my deep gratitude to everyone that supported and
encouraged me during this two years at DTU and during my thesis. I would like to
thank especially my family and my girlfriend for their support and the many friends
I met here in Denmark, with whom I share life-long memories.
In particular, I would like to thank my co-supervisor Edlira Dushku, for her in-
valuable help, guidance and assistance that have been of great help for the realisation
of this project. I would also like to thank my supervisor Professor Nicola Dragoni,
for his precious advices and his support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Remote attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Bloom filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Cuckoo filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Offloading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Literature review
13
3.1
Interruptible Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
State-of-the-art of remote attestation protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Memory locking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Attestation Protocol Proposal
27
4.1
Overview of the approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
System model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Adversary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Security requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Device requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Protocol description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Discussion and security analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.8
Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Proof of Concept
49
5.1
Simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.2
Hardware implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Evaluation
57
6.1
Simulator evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Hardware evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Conclusion and future works
67
7.1
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A
Appendix
71
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The Internet of Things commonly refers to objects equipped with sensors and actua-
tors communicating over a network, forming systems of connected objects. Since their
initial development, the number of IoT devices has grown steadily, reaching today the
astonishing number of billions of deployed devices employed in a very large number
of fields of everyday life such as industrial, smart cities, healthcare, and smart home
[PHPMH19].
Often IoT devices are deployed in environments where they carry out critical oper-
ations or deal with sensitive information, and thus becoming an attractive target for
hackers. For example, IoT devices employed in smart home applications can be at-
tacked to spy the people inside their house or modify the connected devices’ behaviour
[DGM18]. The problem becomes more evident in the healthcare domain, where con-
nected devices are used to implement life-saving medications like implantable defib-
rillators [DGM18].
Every connected device can be potentially hacked. The attacker might compro-
mise an IoT device by exploiting a hardware design flaw or a bug in the software
application or the network stack [Ram21]. Other times IoT devices are vulnerable
due to poor security choices. An example is the malware Mirai, which infected and
took control of thousands of IoT devices and created a botnet. The exploit that the
malware used was the fact that the Linux operating system running on such devices
used the default username and password [Clo].
The security mechanisms needed to protect them from being hacked are often too
expensive or impractical due to the low resources that such devices have. For this
reason, remote attestation plays an important role in detecting an attacker’s presence
in a device. Remote attestation is a security protocol between two parties: a prover -
the IoT device - and the verifier. The latter is a trusted and secure entity, while the
prover is a vulnerable device. The protocol allows the verifier to measure the internal
state of the prover and detect whether it is legitimate or has been compromised. The
prover usually computes the cryptographic hash of its memory and sends it to the
verifier, which compares it with the expected one.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Problem statement
Traditionally, remote attestation has mostly been implemented as an atomic proce-
dure that cannot be interrupted once it has started. This is coherent with the aim of
the attestation: capture the current state of a device at a certain point in time. The
atomicity of the attestation ensures that the result reflects the state of the device at
the time when the measurement started.
While this solution is applicable for IoT devices that have enough computation
resources, it may be impractical for low-end devices. In fact, the computation of the
hash of its internal state could require a lot of resources and prevent the device to per-
form its operations for a substantial amount of time. In real-time devices this could
hinder the availability of the device, which in turn can lead to malfunctions - for exam-
ple in case of deadline misses. In addition, some devices, such as the energy harvesting
ones, have an intermittent execution model. This type of devices are not equipped
with a battery but instead they collect energy from the environment and boots up
only when the collected power is above a threshold. Most often, the execution time
is short due to small accumulators and intermittent power generation. To be able to
progress across interruptions, the software of such devices needs to implement mecha-
nisms to be able to be interrupted and resume without losing its progress.[LBCMR17]
In these cases, the traditional remote attestation protocols cannot be utilised when
the IoT device requires that the process can be securely interrupted and resumed.
The main issue of interrupting the attestation is that the device memory becomes
vulnerable to a mobile adversary, which can exploit the interruptions to evade the
detection. Recently, some remote attestation protocols started to address the issue
of interruptible attestation [RDVBDM21] [CRT18] [ABDWXLS20]. However, these
protocols rely on different assumptions about the adversary models and the device
architecture. The problem that this thesis project aims to address can be formulated
as:
How to design a novel remote attestation protocol that can be securely
interrupted.
This problem can be broken down in a set of research questions:
• RQ 1: What are the issues of interrupting remote attestation and what are the
state-of-the-art of existing approaches and solutions to this problem?
• RQ 2: How to design a novel memory measurement approach to implement an
attestation protocol that can be securely interrupted?
• RQ 3: How effective and eﬀicient is the designed interruptible attestation pro-
tocol?
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Contribution
3
1.2
Contribution
The goal of this project is to design and develop an interruptible remote attestation
protocol. In particular, the project focuses on designing an approach that allows the
attestation to be interrupted, while detecting (with a good probability) the presence
of a transient or migratory malware. The protocol is then simulated to verify the
effectiveness and security properties. In addition, the proposed protocol is also im-
plemented as a proof-of-concept on a hardware platform to investigate its eﬀiciency
and performance.
The idea is to split the attestation of the device memory into different rounds
that are performed atomically and independently, such that any interruptions can
occur between them. To achieve this, the designed approach utilises a Cuckoo filter,
a probabilistic data structure which is used to represent sets of elements and resolve
set membership queries. The prover memory is logically divided into blocks of prede-
fined size. The filter is initialised with the benign state of the prover’s memory blocks.
During the attestation, each block is checked using the filter: if the query returns a
positive answer the block is genuine. Otherwise, it is assumed to be compromised.
To detect transient malware, the protocol uses a self-attestation approach instead of
the traditional on-demand one. Moreover, the protocol measures the memory blocks
in a random order to increase the detection of migratory malware.
Additionally, the project proposes two protocol extensions that aim to improve its
effectiveness: an on-demand extension and an offloading extension. The first
one allows the verifier to request the attestation of the prover. This can be useful
when a fresher attestation proof is needed before performing a critical operation. The
second one focuses on devices that cannot securely store the filter in their persistent
memory because of the lack of resources. For this reason, this extension proposes
a way to offload the attestation to a more powerful device by sending each memory
block securely through the network.
The proposed protocol and its extensions are then implemented in a custom soft-
ware simulation and a hardware device. The goal of the simulation is to verify the
effectiveness of the protocols and whether they satisfy the security requirements. The
hardware implementation is instead used to verify the proposed protocol eﬀiciency
and performance in terms of execution time and clock cycles.
Finally, the project evaluates the protocol both in the simulation and in the hard-
ware device. The experimental results show that the proposed protocol achieves a
good malware detection performance, while having a low overhead in terms of run-
time of the execution of an attestation round.
To summarise, this project contributes to the field of remote attestation in the
following:
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
• This project presents a comprehensive literature review on the problem of in-
terruptible remote attestation, highlighting and comparing the current state-of-
the-art solutions. (RQ 1)
• This project proposes a remote attestation protocol that can be interrupted.
In particular, the project introduces the novel idea of using a Cuckoo filter to
detect the presence of a mobile adversary. Additionally the project proposes
two possible extensions of the protocol to improve its effectiveness. (RQ 2)
• The project simulates and implements the hardware proof of concept of the
proposed protocol.
Additionally, the evaluation highlights its eﬀiciency and
effectiveness, discussing the advantages and limitations. (RQ 3)
1.3
Outline
• Chapter 2: this chapter give an introduction to the fundamental concepts that
are need to understand the rest of the project.
It explains what is remote
attestation and the data structures used later for the design of the approach.
• Chapter 3: this chapter analyses the state-of-the-art literature to explain the
importance of an interruptible remote attestation.
In particular it gives an
overview to the existing relevant remote attestation protocol, the problem of
interruptible attestation and the available solutions.
• Chapter 4: this chapter introduces our solution to the proposed problem. It
explains the different component and how they work to realise the attestation
protocol.
In addition, it proposes some ways in which the protocol can be
extended in case of different requirements.
• Chapter 5: this chapter documents the implementation of the proposed ap-
proach as a proof of concept. The attestation approach is first implemented in
a software simulation to test the capability of detecting the malware presence,
then a proof of concept implementation is made for a hardware platform to test
the performance in a more realistic scenario.
• Chapter 6: evaluates the effectiveness and the eﬀiciency of the proof-of-concept
implementation.
In particular, each research question is addressed in a specific chapter. RQ 1 is
addressed in chapter 3 by analysing the current state of the art of remote attestation.
RQ 2 is addressed in chapter 4, where the proposed approach is introduced and
explained. Finally, RQ 3 is addressed in chapter 5 and chapter 6, which explain the
proof-of-concept implementation and its evaluation.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
The focus of this chapter is to introduce foundation of information needed to under-
stand the rest of the project. First it begins with an explanation of what is remote
attestation. Then it gives an overview of some data structures that will be used in
project.
2.1
Remote attestation
Remote attestation is a security protocol that plays a fundamental role in ensuring
trust in IoT systems [al16]. Its main purpose is to allow a trusted entity, commonly
referred to as verifier, to check the integrity of a untrusted and potentially com-
promised entity, the prover.
This ensure that the prover is running the intended
firmware, and therefore it can be trusted. The main idea is that the prover computes
an evidence of its integrity, which is then checked by the verifier. Traditionally, the
process is initiated by the verifier that sends a challenge - typically a nonce - to the
prover. To ensure the freshness of the result, the challenge is usually included in the
attestation calculation. Upon receiving the challenge, the prover starts to attest its
internal state, usually by computing an hash of its memory. The result is then sent to
the verifier, which checks if the result matches the expected one. If the received result
is different from what the genuine one, the prover has been compromised. The ver-
ifier can then force the prover to reset or to flag it as untrusted. [BKK21] [KFSYG22]
The remote attestation can either be static or dynamic, depending which part of
the memory of the device is measured. The static attestation involves the attesta-
tion of the persistent memory that contains the firmware of the device. Usually this
part does not change at runtime once the firmware has been deployed to the device
unless a malicious entity had modified it. The dynamic attestation, instead, involves,
the attestation of the volatile memory and the runtime behaviour of the prover with
techniques such as Control-Flow attestation. This type of attestation the execution
flow of the firmware running on the device and through the analysis of the control
flow allows the verifier to detect whether the device is behaving as supposed to. [al16]
To ensure the integrity and the authenticity of the attestation result, both the
prover and the verifier share a secret key with the purpose of signing the result. Usu-
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
ally this key is stored in a protected area of the memory of the prover, which is only
accessible by the attestation process.
If the key was compromised, the adversary
would be able impersonate either the prover or the verifier and undermine the effec-
tiveness of the attestation protocol.
The remote attestation approaches can be divided in three different categories:
• Software-based: software-based do not require that the prover have any hard-
ware security features, like a protected memory to store a secret key or protect
the attestation code. Software based approaches relies on software techniques
like random memory traversal, strict response timing and empty memory filling
to implement the attestation. This methods relies on strong assumptions that
cannot be guaranteed in practice [KFSYG22]. For example, the strict timing
method relies on the assumption is that if a device is compromised by a malware,
then the checksum computation of the device state will take more time than
expected to complete. This requires that the verifier and the prover communi-
cate directly without intermediate hops, due to the additional time overhead
of the communication which is incompatible with the timing comparison. For
this reasons, software-based approaches are diﬀicult to implement as they rely
on unpractical assumption [BKK21].
• Hardware-based: hardware-based approaches rely on specific hardware to exe-
cute the attestation procedure. An example is the TPM module which allows
to store securely the cryptographic key and measure the firmware integrity as
startup. Most of the available hardware platforms for IoT devices do not provide
such support, so hardware based approaches are mostly used in more powerful
devices. [BKK21]
• Hybrid: hybrid approaches fall in between the software-based and the hardware-
based ones. The aim is to overcome both shortcomings by relying on a software-
hardware co-design to implement the attestation procedure.
Respect to the
hardware-based, they have lower or minimal hardware requirements, while giv-
ing stronger guarantees than the software-based approaches. An example can
be the use of Memory Protection Unit to create a protected area in the memory
where to store the attestation code or the secret key and protect it with access
control policies.[BKK21]
Software-based approaches provides the lowest guarantees due to their limitations.
On the other hand, hardware-based approaches provide higher security guarantees but
they have a higher cost due the additional specialised hardware (e.g. TPM). Hybrid
approaches fall in the middle, aiming to providing strong security guarantees with
minimal hardware requirements (e.g. an access protected memory area). This ones
are the most common when it comes to remote attestation for IoT devices.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Bloom filter
7
2.2
Bloom filter
A Bloom filter is a probabilistic data structure created in the 1970 by Burton H.
Bloom that is used to represent a set of elements and and determine whether a specific
element belongs to it. The advantage of a Bloom filter is that is space-eﬀicient because
it does not store the element themselves. A Bloom filter is in its core an array of
bits (initially all bits are set to 0) and supports only the insertion and the lookup
operation. Each element of the set is mapped to a certain number of positions in
the array derived by the calculation of a certain number of hash functions [SL12]. A
Bloom filter defines the following parameters:
• k: number of hash functions used to identify the buckets in the array to which
map an element.
• m: size of the filter, corresponds to the number of buckets.
• n: number of items of the set that are inserted in the filter.
To insert an element (figure 2.1), the filter calculate a number of k hashes using
the non-cryptographic hash function defined by the implementation. Each hash is
mapped to a certain position in the bit array. When a element is inserted in the filter,
the bit in each of the k positions is flipped to 1. The lookup operation is similar to
the insertion. To check if an element belongs to the filter, the hash functions are used
to individuate the k positions in the filter where the element is mapped to. Then the
filter returns a positive answer if all the identified slots of the bit array contain a bit
with value 1.
Figure 2.1: Bloom filter with k = 3. The insertion operation sets the bits in the
buckets to 1 in the positions identified by the hash functions.
The lookup operation can return two type of answers:
• probably yes
• certainly not
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
The result can therefore be a false positive (element that is not in the set but the
lookup return a positive answer) but it can never be a false negative (element that
is in the set but the lookup operation return a negative answer). The probabilistic
nature of this data structure comes from the collisions that can happen during the
insertion or lookup operations. In fact it is possible that an item is mapped to buckets
that are used by one or more items. For this reason, the lookup operation can not
determine for sure whether the filter contains a certain element. The rate of false pos-
itives can be controlled by manipulating the filter size or the number hash functions
parameters. If the filter size is increased the chances that an element is mapped to an
already used position in the bit array are lower. Similarly, by using more hash func-
tions each element is mapped to more indexes in the bit array, lowering the chances of
collisions. As the number of elements inserted in the filter increases, the false positive
rate increases. To lower it, in this case the size of the filter has to be increased.
Given a desired false positive probability and the expected number of items to
insert in the filter, the optimal size of the bit array is given by [SL12]:
m = −n ln p
(ln 2)2
Similarly, the optimal number of hash functions to use is:
kopt = m
n ∗ln2
To reduce the number of hash functions needed, [KM] propose on optimisation
that uses only two hash function to simulate any amount of them. The idea is to
construct a third function g by combining two hash function h1 and h2 as following:
gi = h1(x) + i ∗h2(x)
where i can range from 0 to k-1 in order to create k functions. This optimisation
reduces the computation overhead that might occur by computing a large amount of
different hash functions without increasing the false rate probability.
Bloom filters are more space eﬀicient than other data structure to represent a
set of element because they do not store the items.
Moreover, they are able to
resolve a query in O(k). The applications of Bloom filters are multiple: for example
they are used in web servers to implement a cache system or the packet forwarding
functionality in network devices [SL12].
2.3
Cuckoo filter
The cuckoo filter is a data structure that was created as an improvement of the Bloom
filter[FAKM14]. Compared to Bloom filters, cuckoo filters are more eﬀicient in terms
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Cuckoo filter
9
of memory and computation time for the insert and lookup operations. In a Bloom
filter a high occupancy causes the false rate probability to rise, while the cuckoo filter
aims to achieve a high occupancy to increase its memory eﬀiciency.
A Cuckoo filter consists of a multi-dimensional array and two non-cryptographic
hash functions. Each position in the array can store multiple items (usually max-
imum 4). The first hash function maps the item to its main position in the array,
while the second is used to calculate the element’s alternate location. Contrary to the
Bloom filter which does not store any information about the elements that contains,
the cuckoo filter stores the fingerprint of the elements computed using a hash function.
To insert an element, initially the filter tries to insert the item to its main position
in the array, obtained by calculating the first hash function (2.2). If the calculated
position is already full, the second position is checked. If neither bucket is empty,
then one item in either the first or the second bucket needs to be evicted and relocated
to its alternate position. This procedure is commonly referred to as ”Cuckoo hashing”
and can cause a series of relocations which might affect the performance of the filter.
Figure 2.2: Cuckoo filter insertion example. In this picture, the filter has 4 elements
per location and each fingerprint is 3 bytes long. The insertion first
evaluates the bucket indicated by h1. If it is full, it tries to put the
element in the alternative bucket given by h2.
The lookup operation is straightforward: the fingerprint of the item is searched
either in the filter and returns true if it is found.
To avoid storing the full item data in case a relocation happens, the paper [FAKM14]
proposes a technique called ”partial-key cuckoo hashing”, which derives the item al-
ternate position based on its fingerprint already stored in the filter instead of the full
item. The two positions for the insertion are calculated as following:
h1(x) = hash(x)
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
h2(x) = h1(x) ⊕hash(fingerprint(h))
To calculate the alternate bucket j in case of a relocation, given an item y in position
i (independently whether i is from h1 or h2):
j = i ⊕hash(fingerprint(y))
According to the paper [FAKM14], cuckoo filters are more eﬀicient than Bloom
filters when the desired false positive rate is below 3%. The lookup is more perfor-
mant in the cuckoo filter. In fact, in a Bloom filter, a positive query needs to visit
k locations in the filter, with the value of k that tends to increase to obtain a low
false positive rate value. In a cuckoo filter, each query only reads a maximum of two
buckets of the filter, resulting in better cache performance. The space eﬀiciency of the
Cuckoo filter depends on the fingerprint size, which in turn depends on the false pos-
itive rate. As the filter gets filled with items the memory overhead per item increases
due to the necessity of having longer fingerprint to match the target false positive rate.
A possible downside of cuckoo filter happens when the load of the filter overcomes
a certain threshold. The number of empty buckets becomes low enough to cause a
high number of evictions and relocations, which in turns degrades the insertion per-
formance. To avoid this event, the filter size has to be increased, similarly to what
happens in the Bloom filter when the false positive rate increases due to the number
of items inserted.
Regardless of the performance differences, the Bloom filter and the cuckoo filter
offer the same functionality for applications that needs to insert and lookup items in
the filter.
2.4
Offloading
Usually, IoT systems are composed of a set of low-power devices (referred to as
the ”edge”) that are supported by more powerful devices (the ”cloud”). The cloud
supports the edge devices by providing computational power to elaborate the data
collected and provide specific services. The lack of computational resources in the
edge of an IoT system is particularly important in the context of remote attestation,
since this procedure can be computational demanding.
To overcome this limitation, a new approach to remote attestation for low-end IoT
devices has recently been proposed [CDMRR19] [ØDD21] where remote attestation
becomes a service provided by the cloud (Remote Attestation As a Service). The
main idea is to run the attestation on the more powerful cloud node instead on the
edge devices. This can be done by offloading the memory content of the prover
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Offloading
11
to the cloud device (i.e. the verifier itself or some intermediate trusted nodes) that
attest it. To offload its memory, the prover securely sends its memory content to the
verifier through the communication network.
An example of a RAaS can be found in [CDMRR19]. The proposed protocols
includes three entities: the verifier, the cloud node that provide the attestation service
and the prover. The protocol starts with the verifier that sends a signed challenge
to the cloud node, which verifies it. The cloud node then contacts the edge device
and requests its memory blocks. After attesting the memory content, the attestation
service sends the result and the challenge back to the verifier. The system model of
this attestation protocol can be seen in 2.3.
Figure 2.3: System model for Remote Attestation As a Service (RAaS). Source:
[CDMRR19].
By offloading the attestation procedure to the powerful cloud node, the edge
devices do not need to stop their operations to do the attestation. However, the of-
floading procedure has its own overhead, since the device has to transmit the memory
content to the cloud, which may require some time depending on the communication
channel performance.
The convenience of the offloading procedure over the local
attestation approach depends on the computational resources of the hardware IoT
device and the communication channel. In fact, the remote attestation via offloading
is convenient when the overhead of memory transmission is lower than the overhead
of the attestation computation. [CDMRR19]
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Literature review
The aim of this chapter is to give an overview of the existing literature about the topic
of remote attestation and the problem of its interruptibility. First, the problem of
interruptible remote attestation is introduced. . Then some attestation protocols that
form the state-of-the-art are illustrated. The chapter then concludes with an analysis
and discussion of the limitations of the state-of-the-art, delineating the context for
the solution proposed in this project.
3.1
Interruptible Attestation
Internet of Things systems are nowadays used in a lot of different environments, in-
cluding some safety-critical settings. For example, an IoT device can be used as a fire
alarm to detect the presence of smoke in the surrounding environment [CERST18].
Moreover, such devices may carry on critical operations that have real-time require-
ments. The device in this case has to complete this operations before a deadline to
guarantee its correctness. Therefore the availability of the prover is of high impor-
tance.
Another case is represented by intermittent devices, such as the energy harvesting
ones, a type of devices that have an intermittent computation scheme [LBCMR17].
Their main characteristic is that they are not equipped with large batteries but in-
stead they use the energy that they can collect from the environment, for example,
by using solar panels. They accumulate the energy in a small storage and then they
turn on when enough power has been collected. When the energy has been depleted,
the device turns off again. This intermittent powering causes the device to reboot
and reset frequently. To maintain forward progress of the execution, the embedded
application needs to implement specific mechanisms to ensure that the execution is
not restarted from scratch every time. An example can be the implementation of
checkpoints it the firmware, which saves the program state in the non volatile mem-
ory. The device is then able to resume the program progress when it restarts by
reloading the checkpoint [LBCMR17].
In such cases, where the prover availability is of great importance or the device has
an intermittent execution scheme, it may be diﬀicult to execute remote attestation
atomically. In fact, the most demanding operation of a remote attestation protocol
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Literature review
is the computation of the hash over the prover’s memory. The time required to do so
depends on numerous factor such as the size of the memory and the computational ca-
pabilities of the device. [CERST18]. In practice, the attestation computation might
require a substantial amount of time, in which the prover executes only the attesta-
tion and halts the execution of its normal operations [RDVBDM21] [CRT18] [CTR18]
[ABDWXLS20] [CERT18]. For example, in [CERST18] the attestation of the whole
memory (1GB) of a medium level IoT device would take around 7 seconds.
For this reasons, it this cases is important to implement a protocol that allows
the attestation to be interrupted, for example when a critical operation needs to be
execute or when the prover device is reset over a power loss.
3.1.1
Problems
Allowing the attestation to be interrupted is not trivial.
When the atomicity re-
quirement of the attestation is removed, the protocol become vulnerable to a mobile
adversary [KFSYG22]. The aim of this type of malware is to maintain its presence
in the prover for as long as possible without being detected by the attestation. To
avoid the detection, the malware can exploit the interruption to modify the prover
memory. In particular, it can employ two different strategies [CERST18] [CERT18]:
• Transient malware: a transient malware can be aware of when the attestation
starts and tries to avoid detection by deleting itself from the memory before the
measurement starts. The malware can then re-infect the device later on.
• Migratory malware: a migratory malware tries to avoid detection by relocat-
ing itself in different parts of the memory. For example, a successful strategy
might be to relocate during an interruption to the memory parts that have al-
ready been attested. In this way, the measurement procedure will not be able
to detect the malware presence.
A migratory malware, for example, can avoid being detected by interrupting the
attestation process and moving itself in a memory area that have already been mea-
sured and restore the original memory content in its previous location. In this way
the attestation result reports to the verifier a genuine state of the memory while, in
reality, it is not. A transient malware for example, might be able to intercept the
attestation challenge sent by the verifier to delete its traces from the prover’s memory.
3.2
State-of-the-art of remote attestation protocols
As introduced in the previous chapter (section 2.1), the hybrid remote attestation
protocols require less specialised hardware than the hardware-based attestation ones
and they offer higher security guarantees that the software-based ones. Usually they
==PAGE:25==
3.2 State-of-the-art of remote attestation protocols
15
requires a Memory Protection Unit to create a secure memory area to store the secret
information.
3.2.1
SMART
SMART [KT12] (Secure and Minimal Architecture for establishing a dynamic Root
of Trust) is the first hybrid remote attestation protocol that has been proposed in the
literature. Compared to the software and hardware attestation techniques already
available, SMART tries to minimise the hardware requirements while improving on
the limitations of software based attestation techniques. The aim of the protocol is
to authenticate the prover, verify the content of a memory region and guarantee that
a certain piece of code was executed.
The only hardware requirements of SMART are a Read-Only memory (ROM) and
a secure memory storage. The ROM memory is used to store the attestation code of
SMART. This prevents any unauthorised modification to the attestation routine. The
secure memory storage is needed to store the secret key used to sign the attestation
result. This secure storage is implemented via a MCU (Memory Control Unit) that
enforce access control rules to the protected memory area and a dedicate hardware
bus which has exclusive access to this storage.
SMART is a challenge-response protocol in which the verifier initiate the attesta-
tion by sending to the prover the code region boundaries to attest and a challenge.
The prover then computes the hash of the requested region with a keyed cryptographic
hash function. The attestation result includes the computed hash, the challenge and
the secret key, to ensure freshness and authenticity.
The SMART approach bases its security guarantees on two main properties:
atomic execution and key secrecy. By design, SMART do not allow the attestation
routine to be interrupted, and the system interrupts are disabled once the attesta-
tion process starts and then enabled back again as the last step of the attestation
process. Moreover, the attestation code cannot be execute partially, but it can only
be executed from start to the end. This prevent a malware to generate an interrupt
and read the secret key loaded in memory during the execution of the attestation. As
a security measure to avoid any leaks of the secret information, SMART triggers a
reset every time the MCU detect a violation of the memory access control rules. To
ensure the key secrecy, SMART uses a dedicated hardware bus that connect to the
memory area of the key when the instruction that is being executed belongs to the
attestation code memory region.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Literature review
3.2.2
TrustLite
TrustLite [KSSV14] is a security architecture that provides memory isolation of soft-
ware modules for low-cost devices that do not have any advanced security features.
The architecture is based on the footpath delined by SMART and it address some of
its limitations. In particular, TrustLite allows the interruption of security application.
The main idea behind the memory isolation provided by the TrustLite architec-
ture is the usage of a Memory Protection Unit (MPU) to enforce access control rules
on all memory accesses. The memory of the device is divided in a number of protected
regions with different access rules. Each task has access to a subset of this memory
regions. All the tasks and the memory regions are set up by a trusted component
called Secure Loader, which is executed at startup time. In TrustLite, the MPU is
execution-aware: each memory access is validated in combination with the current
instruction that is requesting it. This allows a fine-grained memory access control
based on which task is trying to access a certain memory segment. If a task tries to
access a memory region that it is not allowed to, the architecture raises an exception
that clears the execution pipeline to prevent data leaks.
To improve the device responsiveness, TrustLite allows to interrupt the execution
of the trusted applications. This is achieved via a modified exception engine that
avoid information leaks during an interrupt. When an exception occurs, the engine
stores the stack and instruction pointer in the data region of the interrupted task,
such that they are protected by the MPU access control rules, before clearing the
CPU registers. This ensure that in case of a malicious ISR, no data is leaked during
the context switch process.
TrustLite provide a local attestation feature, where the trustlets attests each other.
A trustlet, which becomes the initiator, sends to another trustlet, the responder, its
ID, the responder’s ID and a nonce. Upon receiving the message, the responder per-
forms a local attestation. When completed it replies with the same message received
and another nonce. The initiator then verifies the hash of the internal state of the
responder to check its integrity. Then the process can continue with the inverted
roles.
3.2.3
TyTAN
TyTAN [BMSWK15] is a security architecture for low-end embedded devices that
extends the approach proposed by TrustLite by implementing real-time guarantees.
In addition, TyTAN provides both local and remote attestation.
Similar to TrustLite, TyTAN features a execution-aware Memory Protection Unit
to enforce memory isolation based on which instruction tries to access a certain mem-
ory area and the interrupts are handled according to the memory access rules to avoid
==PAGE:27==
3.2 State-of-the-art of remote attestation protocols
17
information leaks. The MPU is used to secure the secret key, which is stored in a
protected memory area that can be accessed only by trusted software components.
To load the secure components, the architecture uses a Secure boot component that
initialise the platform during a reset and creates the memory region access rules.
To provide real-time guarantees, TyTAN includes an operating system that per-
forms real-time scheduling of the tasks and interrupts them when needed. Similarly
to TrustLite, TyTAN includes a custom interrupt handler that stores the CPU con-
text of the task in its stack memory.
The TyTAN architecture provides a local and remote attestation functionality
that allows to verify the integrity of the tasks. The architecture includes a Root of
Trust for Measurement secure task that computes the cryptographic hash of a the
binary code of all the tasks. This hash represent the id of the task itself when they
are loaded in memory. Compared to SMART, this attestation task can be interrupted
during the hash computation. During the interruption, the task that is being attested
cannot be executed and its memory is kept isolated from the rest by the MPU. To
provide a proof of integrity of a task to a remote verifier, TyTAN sends the hash of
the task and a Message Authentication Code calculated with the secret key of the
device.
3.2.4
RESERVE
RESERVE [RDVBDM21] is a hybrid remote attestation protocol that address the
problem of remote attestation in intermittent devices. In particular, RESERVE aims
to overcome the limitations of the existing attestation protocols, which may not be
implemented in intermittent devices due to the atomicity of the attestation compu-
tation.
RESERVE [RDVBDM21] proposes an attestation approach that is compatible
with this intermittent execution model. The main idea is to break down the memory
attestation in modules and use checkpoints to maintain forward progress. Each time
the attestation is execute, a subset of the software modules are attested. The attesta-
tion protocol can therefore be interrupted multiple times. Compared to the existing
remote attestation approaches, RESERVE does not require any additional hardware.
The protocol requires that the software on the prover device is instrumented in
modules, each of which is associated with a checkpoint. Each module represent the
minimal unit that has to be attested atomically. When the device wakes up, it per-
forms its regular operations and if some energy is left it performs the attestation of
the each software module. To attest an attestation, the device computes a collision
resistant hash of a module memory and the timestamp. To ensure that the previ-
ous attested modules have not been tampered during the offline time, the protocol
includes an additional integrity check. After calculating the hash, the device uses the
random number generator to select a line in the code of the module and stores them
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Literature review
in the checkpoint data. Before going to sleep, the prover sends to the verifier the
attestation result of the module.
In the next attestation round, the prover initially continue attesting the remaining
modules and then it checks the integrity of the previously measured one by comparing
the randomly selected line of the module stored in the checkpoint data with the actual
line of code of the module. If the adversary modified the module during the offline
time, this check may fail.
3.2.5
SMARM
SMARM (Shuffled Measurements Against Roving Malware) [CRT18] is the first ap-
proach that addresses the problem of interruptible remote attestation. SMARM pro-
poses an interruptible remote attestation protocol that gives probabilistic guarantees
to detect the presence of a roving malware, a type of malware that relocates itself in
the memory during the interruptions to evade detection.
The approach proposed attests the device memory in a secret random order. This
secrecy of the attestation order prevents the roving malware from knowing which
parts of the memory have been attested already to relocate there. The SMARM ar-
chitecture is based on SMART ([CRT18]) - without the atomicity requirement - and
it assumes that the prover’s memory is divided into blocks. Each block represents
the minimum attestation unit and is attested atomically, but interruptions can occur
in between.
The protocol is based on the challenge-response scheme, starting with the challenge
sent by the verifier. The order of measurement of the memory blocks is computed
once at the beginning of the attestation, and it is generated by seeding a pseudo-
random number generator using the challenge sent from the verifier and the shared
secret key. Then block permutation of the attestation is stored in the secure storage
and can only be accessed by the attestation code.
During the attestation, the device computes the hash of each block following
the computed order. To avoid being detected, the malware has to relocate at least
once, and its optimal strategy depends on its knowledge of the prover’s memory
and attestation state. The authors consider realistic only the scenario in which the
malware knows the size of the memory that has not been attested yet by estimating
the number of blocks already measured. In this case, the optimal strategy for the
malware is to relocate after each block attestation. By doing so, the probability of
evading the detection is illustrated in 3.1, assuming that the malware occupies only
one memory block.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 State-of-the-art of remote attestation protocols
19
Figure 3.1: Probability of evading the attestation by relocating after each block
attestation. Source: [CRT18].
The protocol analysis finds that when the non-interruptibility period increases
(and therefore the block size increases) the chances of evading detection decreases
but also the availability of the prover is impacted. Moreover, even if the chance of
evading one attestation is fairly high (around 37%), each attestation is independent
and therefore the probability of evading multiple consecutive attestations decreases
over time significantly, reaching a value of 10−6 for 13 measurements.
3.2.6
ERASMUS
ERASMUS (Eﬀicient Remote Attestation via Self-Measurement for Unattended Set-
tings) [CTR18] is a protocol that performs the attestation as self-measurement process.
Compared to traditional ”on-demand” approaches, in which the verifier initiates the
attestation by sending a challenge to the prover, in ERASMUS it is the prover itself
that starts the attestation at specific time intervals. This approach has the advan-
tage of being able to detect mobile malware better and being able to schedule the
attestation eﬀiciently around more critical tasks.
ERASMUS distinguishes between two phases that happen periodically: the mea-
surement phase and the collection phase. In the measurement phase the prover pe-
riodically measures its memory and stores the results in its internal memory, while
in the collection phase the verifier contacts the prover and retrieve the latest attes-
tation results. The timing for measurements and collections depends on the prover
implementation and duties: if the frequency is low (the time between two attesta-
tions or collections is high) then it becomes ineffective because the malware has more
possibilities to infect and leave before the next attestation. On the other side, if the
frequency is too high, the prover might not be able to perform its operations due to
the attestation overhead.
The prover uses a hardware clock to check when to begin a new attestation. When
the attestation starts, the prover computes the hash of its entire memory content. The
result produced by the attestation at time t is defined as:
Mt =< t, H(memoryt), MACK(t, H(memoryt)) >
where H is cryptographic hash function, K is a secret key shared between the parties
and memoryt is the content of the memory at time t. The measurements are stored
in a buffer in the prover insecure storage. The attestation results are not protected
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Literature review
because any attempt of modifying them will be detected by the verifier. In fact, since
the malware cannot access the key K, the adversary cannot forge or modify any attes-
tation result. If any result would be created or modified, the attack will be detected
when the verifier checks the MAC of each result since it will not match.
ERASMUS implementation is based on SMART and HYDRA and it does not
allow the attestation procedure to be interrupted. All the timestamps are based on a
Reliable Read-Only Clock, a hardware clock that cannot be modified by software. To
protect against a mobile malware that comes and goes, ERASMUS proposes irregular
intervals for the attestation. This prevent the malware from knowing when the next
attestation will start.
3.2.7
ERAMO
ERAMO [ØDD21] is a hybrid remote attestation protocol that targets low-end re-
source constrained devices.
It builds on the proposal of Remote Attestation as a
Service [CDMRR19] and propose an approach that uses offloading to attest wider
portions of the memory of a device. The offloading technique is particularly beneficial
in devices that do not have enough computational resources and for which the attesta-
tion would have a significant computational overhead. Moreover, the more powerful
entity can employ more sophisticated techniques to attest the memory, including the
dynamic state of the prover. In ERAMO, the prover offloads the application binary
memory, the dynamic memory (RAM) and the peripheral registers content.
In ERAMO the prover’s memory is divided into blocks. In addition, the protocol
assumes that the verifier knows the set of all possible states of the offloaded memory
of the prover. The protocol is based on a challenge-response interaction. The verifier
sends a challenge to the prover, which upon receiving it, reads its memory content
and sends it to the verifier together with a MAC to ensure integrity of the transmitted
data. The transmission of the memory to the verifier can be split chunks based on
the memory blocks. To ensure the freshness of the transmitted memory blocks, the
prover can append a random byte to the message. When the verifier receives the
memory content, it starts to verify the program binary content by calculating the
hash of the data and comparing it to the legitimate one and attest the RAM content.
The attestation of the RAM can be done with advanced forensics techniques, for ex-
ample by using the Volatility framework. [ØDD21]
The ERAMO protocol addresses the problem of a mobile adversary. The solution
it proposes relies on the memory locking technique proposed in [CERT18], which in-
volves making the memory blocks read-only once the attestation starts and releasing
the lock once the offloading is completed. This ensures that the memory is not mod-
ified during the attestation. Finally, ERAMO uses TrustZone, a hardaware enforced
==PAGE:31==
3.2 State-of-the-art of remote attestation protocols
21
Trusted Execution Environment, to protect the execution of the attestation code and
allowing it to run at the same time of the device’s normal operations.
3.2.8
HAtt
HAtt is a lightweight hybrid remote attestation protocol that focuses on achieving
high availability for the prover [ABDWXLS20]. The protocol focuses particularly on
providing a solution that makes the attestation interruptible and provides security
guarantees against mobile malware.
Compared to the more common hybrid approaches, HAtt only requires an addi-
tional hardware, a Physical Unclonable Functions (PUF) to implement the device
attestation. A PUF is a physical object located on the IoT device board that when
given a challenge it outputs a response. The output of the PUF depends on the ran-
dom changes that happen during the device manufacturing, therefore the response R
is unique to the specific PUF of the specific device and challenge. Given the same
challenge, a different PUF will return a different response due to the different internal
random structure of the object. A PUF can therefore be used to identify uniquely a
device.
Similarly to SMARM, the protocol proposes an approach where the memory of the
prover is measured in a random order. The protocol assumes that the memory of the
prover is divided into blocks, each one composed of a number m of words. The attes-
tation starts with the verifier that sends a challenge and two random numbers (seeds)
to the prover. The prover than seeds the challenge to the PUF and uses the response
together with one of the seeds to generate a permutation of the order of attestation
of the memory blocks. Each block is measured atomically but the attestation can be
interrupted in between blocks. To attest a block, the prover uses the other seed and
the block index to select a number of random bits from each word of the block. The
bits are then appended to a bit string stored in the device memory, which represents
the attestation result. When all the blocks have been processed the bit string is sent
to the verifier. The verifier then compares the received bit string with the expected
one. The comparison is possible because the verifier stores a challenge-response pair
(the response R to a challenge C) for every device to attest. This allows the verifier
to know the response of the device PUF and compute the legitimate bit string.
HAtt assumes that the only information that the verifier can obtain is the size of
the memory not attested yet. Since the approach and the adversary model is similar
to SMARM, the probability of detection in one attestation round in case the malware
occupies a single memory block is the same: 1 −e−1 (probability of evading the
attestation is therefore e−1). To increase the detection performance, the protocol can
iterate multiple times over the memory and increase the number of words selected
from each memory block.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Literature review
3.3
Memory locking
A possible solution against the migratory and transient malware for remote attes-
tation is represented by the memory locking technique. Usually, the result of the
attestation is represented by a hash that the prover computes over its memory. This
hash function assumes that the input data - the prover’s memory - does not change
during the computation in order to ensure the correctness of the result. This may not
be possible if the attestation is interrupted, as a roving malware might modify the
device memory. In this case the attestation result is not temporal consistent. The
temporal consistency of the integrity computation means that the result represent the
state of the input at some point in time [CERT18]. An attestation result is consistent
at a certain time t if it reflects the memory state of the prover at that time. So, if
at the time of the beginning of the attestation there was a malware in the prover’s
memory, it cannot avoid the detection. [CERT18]
One possible solution to achieve the temporal consistency of the attestation result
involves locking the memory. Locking a memory area means making it temporarily
read-only so that any writing attempt to that area fails. The locking mechanism needs
to be supported by the underlying hardware and software platforms, like a microkernel
that provide this functionality via system calls. [CERT18]
When it comes to memory locking, different strategies can be considered, each one of
them with different advantages and disadvantages:
• No-Lock: no memory locking mechanisms are employed, therefore there are no
consistency assurances.
• All-Lock: lock the entire memory at the beginning of the attestation and release
it once the integrity computation function has completed. While providing good
guarantees, it is not feasible for critical tasks that might need to perform write
operation in the memory.
• All-Lock-Ext: the memory is locked like in the previous approach but released
in an arbitrary time before the end of the computation.
• Dec-Lock: all the memory is locked at the beginning and, as each memory block
is processed by the integrity computation function, it is released. The result is
consistent with the memory state at the beginning of the computation.
• Inc-Lock: opposite of the previous one, the memory is locked incrementally
block-by-block as they are processed by the integrity function. The output is
consistent only with the memory state at the end of the process (when all blocks
have been attested).
• Inc-Lock-Ext: similar to Inc-Lock but the memory is released in an arbitrary
point in time before the completion of the process. The output is consistent
only until the release time.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Discussion
23
• Cpy-Lock: the memory is initially cloned and only the copy is attested. The
original memory is locked only for the time required to copy it, while the copied
memory is locked until the attestation process is completed. This is more per-
formant if the time required to copy the memory is much smaller than the time
to compute the attestation.
• Cpy-Lock & Writeback: the strategy here is to copy back each block after it
has been attested.
The detection of transient and migratory malware depends on the specific memory
locking strategy employed 3.2:
Figure 3.2: Memory locking strategies ability to detect transient and migratory mal-
ware. Source: [CERT18].
3.4
Discussion
Remote attestation is an important security mechanism to ensure the correct func-
tionality of IoT systems. However, attestation is typically considered an overhead op-
eration which in certain IoT systems can be expensive in terms of computational time
and resources. This overhead might make impossible to implement the attestation
service in real-time devices or devices that require the application to be interrupted
(e.g. energy harvesting). Running the attestation atomically can halt the normal
operation of an IoT device, hinder its availability. For this reasons, the attestation
should be able to be securely interrupted when needed.
This is not a trivial operation, as interrupting the attestation creates the possibil-
ity for a mobile adversary to evade the detection. A migratory and transient malware
can exploit the interruptions to relocate or delete itself from the memory and thus
preventing the attestation to detected the malware presence.
The approaches review from the start-of-the-art address this issue by either not
allowing the attestation to be interrupted or by implementing mechanisms to im-
prove the detection of a mobile adversary. SMART and ERASMUS require that the
attestation runs atomically. This prevents a malware to modify the memory during
the measurement, but it can block the device operations for a substantial amount of
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Literature review
time. ERASMUS can lower the overhead of the attestation on the device availability
[CTR18]. The self-measurement approach that it implements allows to schedule the
attestation in order to not interfere with the critical operations.
Among the rest of the approaches, TrustLite and TyTAN are the ones that provide
the least guarantees against a mobile adversary. In fact, this security architectures al-
low all the tasks of the system - including the attestation - to be interrupted but they
do not protect against a mobile malware. TrustLite only provides local attestation
while TyTAN provides both local and remote attestation of the tasks. In TyTAN the
attestation can be interrupted by task that have a higher priority, while the attested
task is prevented from execution. This does not protect against a malware spreaded
to different tasks and in case the system has only one tasks, the attestation becomes
non-interruptible [CERST18]. In addition, the attestation task in TyTAN only com-
putes the hash of each tasks when they are first loaded in memory.
Another way to solve the problems of interruptible attestation is via shuffled mea-
surement of the memory. This approach is implemented in SMARM and HAtt and
involves the measurement of the memory in a secret and fresh random order. The
device memory is divided in multiple blocks, and each block is attested atomically,
allowing the interruptions to happen in between two blocks measurements. The idea
is that, if the attestation order of the blocks is kept secret and it is fresh, the malware
cannot predict which block will be measured next, therefore it cannot evade the de-
tection with certain probability. The malware can only deduct the size of the already
attested memory by measuring the time taken for the attestation. Since it cannot
know which block is attested next, the best strategy for the malware is to relocate in
a different position after each memory block is attested.
In SMARM, the attestation of a block is done by computing the hash of the block.
HAtt uses a different approach for the attestation of the memory blocks. Instead of
computing the hash, it uses a PUF and the seeds sent by the verifier to randomly
select an amount of bits from each word of the block. This bits are appended to a
bit string that forms the attestation result. Since both SMARM and HAtt assumes
the same adversary model and shuffled-measurement approach, the detection perfor-
mance is the same. The problem with the SMARM protocol are multiple. Firstly, it
does not consider in the adversary model the transient malware behaviour. Addition-
ally, the computation of the hash of the memory block may still require a substantial
amount of time and the shuffled-measurement approach that it implements does not
offer great performance in the detection of a mobile malware. In fact, as the attes-
tation progresses, the probability for a migratory malware to relocate to an already
attested block increases. On the other side, HAtt creates an attestation result that is
long and requires an additional hardware component. Moreover, both SMARM and
HAtt require multiple attestations or multiple passes on the memory to improve the
malware detection [ABDWXLS20] [CRT18].
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Discussion
25
RESERVE proposes an approach that allows the attestation to be interrupted.
Each time the device has enough energy left, it attest one or more software module
by computing its cryptographic hash. To protect against memory modifications dur-
ing the interruptions, during the attestation of a module the protocol randomly select
a line of code and stores it securely. Then, after attesting the next module in the
sequence, the protocol retrieves the previous module line and compares it with the
actual line in the memory to detect any tampering of the memory during the offline
time. The problem with this approach is that only a small part of the module is
checked. A malware might modify a small part of the code of the module that is not
checked and evade the detection.
Finally, the last approach available that protects against a mobile malware when
the attestation is interrupted is memory locking. This approach blocks the memory
content preventing any write operation to it until the lock is lifted. This allows to
detect a mobile adversary since once the memory is locked, it cannot evade the detec-
tion. The locking functionality of the memory is not always available: in fact it needs
the support of the hardware and of a software kernel that provides the necessary
system calls [CERT18]. Moreover, the lock of the memory might prevent the correct
functioning of an application that needs to write data in the storage. ERAMO is an
attestation protocol that uses memory offloading to improve the availability of the
prover, since the computation is done by a third entity. To lower the overhead of the
communication, the transmission of the memory can happen in blocks. Finally, it
uses the memory locking technique to ensure that the content does not change during
the offloading operation. The problem with ERAMO is that its benefits depends on
the device and the communication channel, as the offloading can result to be more
time demanding than the attestation itself [ØDD21]. Moreover, the memory locking
technique is only available to devices that supports the execution of a kernel.
Table 3.1 summarises the state-of-the-art approaches. The interruptibility of the
attestation computation is of great interest and importance. While some of the avail-
able hybrid remote attestation approaches try to solve the interruptibility issue, they
consider different adversary models and assume different device hardware capabilities.
The contribution of this project is the following: design an develop a novel remote at-
testation protocol that can be securely interrupted, and that aims to detect migratory
and transient malware.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Literature review
Interruptible
Additional
components
Transient malware
Migratory malware
Verification
SMART
No
Hardware
Bus
✓
✓
Hash
TrustLite
✓
No
No
No
Hash
TyTAN
✓
No
No
No
Hash
SMARM
✓
No
No
✓Shuffle measurements
Hash
ERASMUS
No
No
✓
✓
Hash
RESERVE
✓
No
✓(partial)
✓(partial)
Hash
and
random code
line
HAtt
✓
PUF
✓
✓
bit string
ERAMO
✓
TrustZone
and
offload-
ing
✓
✓
Hash and dy-
namic
mem-
ory analysis
Memory Locking
✓
System calls
support
✓
✓
-
Table 3.1: Summary of the approaches.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Attestation Protocol
Proposal
This chapter outlines the proposal of a remote attestation protocol which can be
interrupted while providing the detection of migratory and transient malware. In the
following, we start first by introducing the system model, the adversary model and
the security requirements. Afterwards, the design of the protocol is introduced and
explained, followed by a high-level security analysis and discussion. Finally, some
extensions of the proposed protocol are introduced.
4.1
Overview of the approach
One of the goals of the protocol is to provide an approach that can be interrupted
based on the device operation needs. This cannot be achieved with the traditional
way of attesting a device by computing the cryptographic hash of its entire memory.
Therefore the approach proposed in this project involves splitting the attestation of
the program memory in different parts.
First of all, the program memory of the device is logically divided into blocks
of predefined size. This division in blocks is not enforced at a physical level - like
in RESERVE [RDVBDM21] where the program has to be divided in modules - but
a block represents the minimum amount of data that is processed at a time. For
example, the value of the block size can be the minimum amount of data that can
be read from the program memory with one read operation. The whole program
memory can thus be considered as an array of blocks, as can be seen in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Representation of the memory division in blocks.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
The attestation approach proposed in this project uses a Cuckoo filter to check the
integrity of the memory blocks. The Cuckoo filter is a data structure that represents a
set of elements and allows to determine whether a given item belongs to the set or not.
This characteristic can be used to implement an attestation approach: a Cuckoo filter
is used to represent the set of the legitimate memory blocks of the prover. During the
attestation, the filter is queried to check whether a certain block is contained in the
filter (figure 4.2). If the query returns a positive answer the block can be considered
genuine. Otherwise, the block can be considered compromised as its content differs
from the expected one.
Figure 4.2: Cuckoo filter to attest a memory block.
4.2
System model
Following the state-of-the-art of hybrid remote attestation, the model of the system
(figure 4.3) is composed of the three following entities:
• Prover PRV: The prover is an untrusted IoT device which has to prove its
trustworthiness to the trusted party, the verifier. We consider it to be a low-end
device, which lacks the computational resources to implement defensive secu-
rity mechanisms to prevent the attacks of an adversary. The prover device is
equipped with different types of memory: a volatile memory (RAM) to store the
execution data, a persistent storage (flash memory) to store the firmware code
and the persistent data and a read-only memory to contains immutable code
or data. The flash storage can be split into protected memory and unprotected
memory. The protected memory contains the information whose access needs
to be regulated; for example the secret key. The unprotected memory contains
the application code, which is executed during the device normal activity.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Adversary model
29
• Verifier VRF: The verifier is the trusted entity in the system, which is is
assumed to be secure and not vulnerable. The role of the verifier is to check
the attestation results produced by the prover and detect whether the device
has been compromised or not. When the prover perform a self-attestation, the
verifier is a passive entity, whose responsibilities are to collect and verify the
results from the prover itself. In addition, the verifier can also ask the prover
to perform the attestation of its memory on demand. We consider the verifier
to be a powerful enough device to run the protocol without any issues.
• Network Operator NO: Aligned to the state of the art of the literature, the
network operator is responsible for the deployment and the set up of the system.
For example, it deploys the legitimate software on the devices, and initialise the
protocol by generating and distributing the secret keys and so on. The initiali-
sation phase of the protocol is explained in 4.6.3.
Figure 4.3: System model.
The prover is assumed to perform real-time operations, whose execution can be
interrupted and resumed to meet the real-time guarantees. The firmware of the de-
vice can contain multiple applications, which are referred to as tasks. The scheduling
of the execution of the tasks is governed by an operative system.
4.3
Adversary model
The main goal of the adversary considered in this project is to infect the device with
the purpose of stealing information and/or disrupting or altering the device normal
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
behaviour. Moreover, the adversary might want to maintain its presence in the device
for as long as possible. To do so, it can employ techniques to avoid the detection by
the attestation procedure.
Commonly to the state-of-the-art of static remote attestation, we consider a re-
mote software adversary which can carry on software attacks. This type of adver-
sary uses code injection to modify the firmware running on the device. For example,
it can inject a malware in a specific location in the device memory, such that it gets
executed. Additionally, it can modify the content of the memory in order to make it
not-executable or to modifying the normal device operations. The attacks can target
only the firmware stored in the persistent storage, as runtime attacks are not consid-
ered in this project.
In addition, since the attestation protocol proposed it can be interrupted, the
adversary model includes a mobile adversary. A mobile adversary, in addition to
its malicious operations, tries to maintain his presence in the prover for as long as
possible by exploiting the interruption of the attestation procedure. Typically, the
mobile adversary can employ the following behaviours:
• Migratory Malware: A migratory malware can move itself in the memory to
avoid detection. For example, the optimal strategy for avoiding detection could
be to relocate itself in the already attested memory area. This can be done
when the attestation is interrupted and before it is resumed.
• Transient Malware: A transient malware tries to avoid detection by deleting
itself from the memory, with the purpose of re-infect the device in a future
moment.
Moreover, the adversary can perform a software attack to disrupt the device oper-
ations by exploiting a characteristic of the Cuckoo filter. The adversary can swap
two memory blocks with each other without modifying their content, which may
result in an erroneous program state that cannot be execute or behaves incorrectly.
This type of attack is possible because the Cuckoo filter used for the attestation does
not consider the order of the input elements, as it represents a set of items.
In addition to the software attacks, the adversary can also perform communication
attacks. In fact the adversary is assumed to have full control of the communication
channel. It can intercept, create, modify and replay any messages that are sent be-
tween the prover and the verifier. The adversary can performs replay attacks, in
which an attestation result is intercepted and sent later on to the verifier to hide a
legitimate attestation result which might uncover the malware presence.
Adversary limitations
The adversary is assumed to have the following limitations:
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Security requirements
31
• The adversary cannot break the security architecture implemented in the device.
This means that the adversary cannot modify the attestation code or steal the
secret key of the prover.
• The adversary cannot compromise the verifier.
• The adversary cannot perform physical attacks.
4.4
Security requirements
The design of the protocol must satisfy the following security requirements:
1. SR1 - Freshness: the protocol must be able to ensure the freshness of the
attestation result.
2. SR2 - Tampering detection: the protocol must be able to detect any modifica-
tion of the prover’s memory - like the presence of a malware.
3. SR3 - Mobile adversary detection: the protocol must be able to detect the
presence of a mobile adversary.
4. SR4 - Integrity of the results: the verifier must be able to detect any tampering
attempts on the attestation result.
5. SR5 - Communication integrity and authenticity: the protocol must be able
to ensure that the messages exchanged cannot be modified or replayed by an
adversary.
4.5
Device requirements
In the design of the protocol, we assume that the underlying architecture of the prover
has the following components, which are common in the state-of-the-art approaches:
• Secure storage: The secure storage is a part of the memory which access is pro-
tected. In particular, this memory area can only be accessed by the attestation
code. This component can be implemented via a software security architecture
or via a hardware architectures.
For example, it can be implemented via a
Memory Protection Unit (MPU), a chip that allows to define memory access
control rules for different memory areas. The purpose of the secure storage is
to protect the secret information from unauthorised access by the adversary.
The secure storage contains the Cuckoo filter and the secret key used for the
attestation protocol and can be accessed only by the attestation code.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
• Secure interrupts: The interrupts are events that cause the execution of
a corresponding interrupt handler. The context switch that happens when an
interrupt is raise can be exploited by the adversary to leak protected information
that are left in the processor’s registers. A secure interruption engine, like the
one proposed in TyTAN and TrustLite, make sure that all the tasks information
of the interrupted application are cleared from the CPU.
• Real-Time Clock: The Real-Time clock is a hardware component that keeps
track of the time (monotonically increasing). Commonly to the state-of-the-art,
we assume that the clock cannot be modified via software.
• Protected Attestation Code: usually a write-protected memory area which
contains the code for the attestation protocol that protects it from any tamper-
ing attempts of the adversary. It can be realised with a ROM memory or by
setting specific MPU rules.
• CSPRNG: a Cryptographically Secure Pseudo-Random Number Generator is
a random number generator whose output sequence cannot be predicted. The
adversary therefore cannot predict which number will be generated next.
4.6
Protocol description
This section explains how the attestation protocol works and all the components that
are needed for it. The goal of the attestation protocol is to detect any adversary
presence in the prover device, while allowing the attestation to be interrupted to not
hinder the device availability.
4.6.1
Overview
The protocol performs a static attestation, so only the program memory integrity
is checked, while the runtime memory (e.g. the RAM) is not considered. Moreover,
the protocol is based on the self-attestation scheme, like in ERASMUS [CTR18].
The prover periodically performs a self-measurement of its memory and stores the re-
sult in its persistent storage while the verifier periodically collects this results. Once
collected, the verifier checks their integrity and authenticity and controls whether the
prover is compromised or not. Then, the results are added to the history of attesta-
tion of the prover that the verifier keeps in its memory.
As introduced in 4.1, the protocol assumes that the memory of the prover is split
into multiple blocks. These blocks are attested independently using a Cuckoo filter.
The attestation is split in multiple independent rounds. Instead of measuring the
memory as whole, each round attests a certain number of memory blocks. An at-
testation round represents the minimum attestation unit that has to be performed
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Protocol description
33
uninterrupted, so any interruption can happen in between rounds.
The prover device executes at least two applications: the attestation and its in-
tended operations. These applications are scheduled by an operative system that
ensures both are executed for the required amount of time to meet their real-time
requirements. For example, the scheduler of the OS executes the normal operations
for a certain amount of time and then switches the execution over to the attestation
program for another time slice.
4.6.2
Self-attestation
Traditionally, remote attestation is a challenge-response protocol: the verifier initiate
the attestation by sending a challenge - typically a long random number called nonce
- to the prover, which computes the hash of its internal state and signs the result
with the challenge and the shared secret key. In this project, we decided to design
the protocol as a self-measurement procedure, similarly to ERASMUS [CTR18]. A
self-measurement attestation protocol does not rely on a challenge from the verifier
to initiate the measuring process, but instead it is the prover itself that begins the
attestation at specific time intervals and the verifier periodically collects the results.
Formally, we call Tatt the time of when the self attestation starts and Tcoll the time
when the verifier collects the results from the prover.
The choice of the self attestation has some benefits compare to the on-demand
classic remote attestation:
• Easy to schedule the attestation: the self measurement process can be scheduled
by the device according to the current workload. If some other computations
needs to be performed by the prover to meet their deadline requirements, the
attestation can be deferred. [CTR18]
• No Denial of Service attack: since the self attestation does not require the re-
ceipt of a challenge to start the measuring procedure, it will be impossible for the
adversary to perform a Denial of Service attack. This type of attack is possible
in remote attestation protocol where is the verifier that initiate the attestation,
as the adversary can impersonate a verifier and overload the prover by sending
many attestation challenges. The only interaction between the prover and the
verifier happens during the collection of the results, which is not a demanding
operation for the prover. [ISZ17]
As explained in the literature, the choice of self attestation or on-demand attesta-
tion are not mutually exclusive. An on-demand version of the same protocol will be
introduced in section 4.8.1.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
4.6.3
Initialisation
Before the attestation protocol can be executed, it needs to be initialised by the
network operator. The initialisation involves choosing the protocol parameters and
setting up the required information in both the prover and the verifier. In particular,
the network operator initialises the following:
• Secret key: the network operator generates a secret key and shares it to both
the prover and the verifier. The key is stored in the secure memory of the prover
device and it can only be accessed by the attestation code.
• Block size: the network operator decides the size of the blocks of memory that
the protocol uses during the attestation.
• Cuckoo filter: the network operator construct the cuckoo filter needed for the
attestation procedure using the expected program memory state of the prover
and the defined block size. The construction of the filter involves inserting each
block of memory. Once completed, the filter is deployed only in the prover’s
protected memory.
• Period of attestation: the network operator decides the maximum time period
in between two attestations.
• Period of collection: the network operator decides the period with which the
verifier collects the attestation results from the prover.
• Attestation code: the attestation code of the protocol is installed in the prover
in the secure memory or ROM, in order to prevent any modification from an
adversary.
• Application code: the code that implements the prover behaviour is installed
in the device persistent memory.
• Real-time clock: the network operator sets up the real time clock in the prover
device. The clock is write-protected, meaning that the adversary can read its
value but cannot modify it.
• Pseudo-Random Number Generator: the network operator configure the CSPRNG
with a seed.
• Checks (n): number of memory blocks to check randomly during the attestation
round (more details in 4.6.4).
During the construction of the filter, each memory block is inserted in the data
structure together with the index of the block (figure 4.4). This links the index of
the block (in the memory array representation) with the legitimate block state.
==PAGE:45==
4.6 Protocol description
35
Figure 4.4: Cuckoo filter construction: each block is inserted together with the
corresponding index in the memory block array..
4.6.4
The protocol
To keep track of the progress of the attestation (how many blocks have been attested
at least once), the prover keeps in the protected memory an attestation counter.
This variable, whose values go from 0 to the total number of memory blocks, keeps
track of the index of the next block to attest and is incremented at each attestation
round.
The protocol defines two actions:
1. ATTEST: check the integrity of the next memory block in the memory block
array based on the value of the attestation progress variable.
2. CHECK: selects randomly a predefined number of blocks that have been al-
ready (in the interval 0 to the current attestation progress) and checks again
their integrity.
The purpose of the ATTEST action it to make the attestation progressing for-
ward, while the CHECK action verifies that the previously attested blocks are have
not been modified since their attestation.
An attestation round includes both actions: first the prover executes the ATTEST
action followed by the CHECK action. The number of blocks n that are checked by
CHECK are decided during the protocol initialisation.
The attestation protocol can be broken down in the following sequence of steps:
Step 0: To prevent the adversary to infer when the next attestation will start,
the starting time is chosen randomly. To calculate this value, the prover generates a
random value below the attestation period parameter. This value is stored in Tatt.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
Step 1: The attestation starts when it has passed enough time from when the
last attestation ended (T end). Given an attestation period of Tatt the attestation i
starts when
Ti >= T end
i−1 + Tatt
where T end
i−1 is the timestamp of when the last attestation ended. The timestamps
are provided by the real-time clock of the device. Upon starting, the prover reset the
attestation progress variable to 0.
Step 2: Each time the attestation task is scheduled and the attestation is in
progress, an attestation round begins. Here the prover initially disables the inter-
rupts and then performs the ATTEST and CHECK action. This actions perform
a series of queries to the local Cuckoo filter to check the integrity of a subset of
memory blocks. For each of the queries the input is composed of the block’s index
(referring to the position in the memory blocks array sequence) and the block content.
Step 2a: Given the attestation progress variable k, the ATTEST action will re-
trieve from the memory and check if the filter contains the block k.
Step 2b: After that, the CHECK action proceeds by selecting a number n of
memory blocks chosen randomly in the interval [0, progress] including interval limits.
Each of this blocks is read from the program memory and checked.
Step 2c: The attestation progress variable k is incremented by one.
Step 3: the attestation ends when either one of the following conditions is met:
• All the memory blocks have been attested, i.e. k == MemorySize/BlockSize.
The attestation completed successfully since no compromised memory blocks
have been found.
• The filter returned a negative result for one of the memory blocks. The attes-
tation failed, therefore the prover is considered compromised.
The attestation result is represented by a boolean value: true when the attestation
complete successfully (first condition), false in the other case (second condition).
Step 4: When the attestation is ended, the result is created and stored in the
prover persistent storage. The result has the following format:
< Ti, r, MAC(Ti, r, key) >
where Ti is the timestamp of the start of the attestation, r is the boolean result
and key is the secret key. The attestation result is signed with a Message Authenti-
cation Code created with the secret key. The attestation result is then stored in the
==PAGE:47==
4.7 Discussion and security analysis
37
prover memory. The attestation i is concluded.
Step 5: verifier collects the results from the prover at Tcoll intervals. To collect
the results, the verifier sends a RESULT_COLLECTION message to the prover via
the communication channel. Upon receiving it, the prover replies with all the stored
attestation results.
Step 6: for each of the collected results, the verifier checks the integrity of them
by re-calculating the MAC using the shared key. If the calculated MAC and the
received one match, the result has not been modified and therefore the verifier can
trust it. Finally, the verifier updates the history of the results of the prover.
To make it clearer, here is detailed an example of an attestation round. Let’s
suppose that the attestation progress variable contains the value 10 - which means
the first nice memory blocks have already been attested.
When the next round
begins, the prover executes first the ATTEST action and then the CHECK action.
The ATTEST action will attest the block with index 10. Then, the CHECK action
randomly selects a number of blocks n in the range 0 to 10. Supposing the malware
is placed in the block 8 and this block is selected in the CHECK operation, the
attestation ends with a failure, since the cuckoo filter will return a negative answer
when queried. Otherwise, if the malware is located in a block that is not measured by
the CHECK action, the round completes and the attestation proceed. Finally, when
either a non-legitimate block is found or when all the blocks have been measured by
the ATTEST action, the attestation ends and the result is stored in the memory. The
pseudo-code of this attestation protocol can be seen in Algorithm 1.
4.7
Discussion and security analysis
This section contains the discussion and the analysis of the proposed protocol. The
discussion covers some design choices while the security analysis will show how the
protocol satisfies the security requirements defined in Section 4.4.
4.7.1
Discussion
The proposed protocol aims to deliver a remote attestation protocol that can be
securely interrupted, whilst detecting the presence of a mobile adversary. The inter-
ruptibility of the protocol is achieved by splitting the memory into blocks and the
attestation into different independent rounds. This division allows the protocol to be
interrupted in between rounds, lowering the impact of the attestation on the device
normal operations and availability. Moreover, by employing a self-attestation scheme,
the scheduling of the attestation rounds can be mindful of the critical operations. This
enables a more fine-grained control over the attestation scheduling, as the rounds can
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
Algorithm 1 Attestation pseudo-code
n ←number random checks
t ←current time
progress ←0
key ←secret key
blocks_num ←memory_size ÷ block_size
Tatt ←random attestation time
if t < Tatt then
return
end if
if progress == blocks_num then
res ←True
mac ←MAC(t, res, key)
resatt ←< t, res, mac >
store_res(resatt)
progress ←0
Tatt ←t + random_time_interval()
return
end if
block ←memory[progress]
▷ATTEST action
res ←filter_contains(progress, block)
if res ̸= True then
mac ←MAC(t, res, key)
resatt ←< t, res, mac >
store_res(resatt)
Tatt ←t + random_time_interval()
progress ←0
return
end if
i ←0
▷CHECK action
while i < n do
rand_idx ←random(0, progress)
block ←memory[rand_idx]
res ←filter_contains(rand_idx, block)
if res ̸= True then
mac ←MAC(t, res, key)
resatt ←< t, res, mac >
store_res(resatt)
Tatt ←t + random_time_interval()
progress ←0
return
end if
i ←i + 1
end while
progress ←progress + 1
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Discussion and security analysis
39
be scheduled individually when enough resources are available, lowering the overhead
of the procedure.
Additionally, the protocol is able to detect the presence of both a transient mal-
ware and a migratory malware. The detection of a transient malware is possible due
to the choice of the self-attestation scheme and the use of random attestation times.
If the malware cannot be aware of when the attestation is about to start (the start
time is computed with a CSPRNG), it cannot delete itself from the memory [CTR18].
In a traditional on-demand attestation scheme, if the adversary has control over the
communication channel, it can detect the challenge sent by the verifier and remove
itself from the device. Regarding the migratory malware, its detection is provided by
the CHECK action, whose purpose is to verify that the attested blocks haven’t been
modified by a migratory malware.
The proposed protocol defines some parameters that can affect its performance.
The first one is the block size, which is is defined in the initialisation phase of the
protocol by the network operator. A larger value for the block size means that the
memory is divided in a lower number of blocks and thus the attestation will complete
faster, as it would need less rounds. On the other side, a larger block size increases
the time necessary for prover to complete one attestation round, as the contains op-
eration of the filter will take more time to complete. A smaller block size would have
the opposite effect. The number of blocks increase, and so also the required rounds
to complete the attestation. At the same time, the time required to complete an
attestation round will be lower, as the filter would have to process a lower amount of
data per block. Additionally, the number of memory blocks influences the size of the
Cuckoo filter: a lower number of block means a smaller filter and vice versa, while
maintaining the same false positive rate.
Another parameter that influences the performance of the protocol - both in terms
of time and detection - is the number of previously attested blocks that are checked
in the CHECK operation. When this value increases, the chances of detecting a mal-
ware - mobile or not - increases, but the attestation round will require more time
to complete as it needs to check more memory blocks. Similarly, when the CHECK
operation measures a lower amount of memory blocks, the malware detection perfor-
mance is expected to be lower, while the attestation round will complete faster.
The overhead of the proposed protocol depends on the time required to perform
a single attestation round. The Cuckoo filter allows to lower the block attestation
time because during an attestation round the protocol executes only one operation
on the filter: the contains operation. No data are added to the filter and written
to memory after initialisation. This can decrease the time required to perform the
round, as memory write operations - either in RAM or in flash storage - are more
expensive than read operation in terms of time overhead. Additionally, this increases
the memory lifetime, as in embedded devices the flash storage has a limited lifetime
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
in terms of how many times it can be written.
Moreover, the Cuckoo filter has good performance when checking whether an el-
ement belongs to its set. The filter, in fact, uses a non-cryptographic hash function
for mapping the elements to the positions in the filter array. This functions have a
lower computational overhead compared to the cryptographic ones. In addition the
filter requires at most two memory accesses to find an element in the table.
It is important to note that, to ensure the security and effectiveness of the pro-
posed attestation protocol, the attestation progress variable and the cuckoo filter need
to be stored in the secure memory, and made accessible only to the attestation code.
If the adversary can modify the progress variable, it can reset its value continuously,
preventing the attestation to move forward. Additionally, if the adversary has access
to the filter, it may pollute it by adding malicious blocks, which won’t be detected
during the attestation.
Moreover, to ensure the effectiveness of the attestation approach, each block is
added and checked in the filter together with its index. Since each memory block is at-
tested independently, the Cuckoo filter cannot detect an attack where two blocks are
kept genuine but they are placed in each other position in the memory. The cuckoo
filter represents a sets of items, therefore it does not consider their order of insertion.
Adding each block together with its memory index links the two information together
at the expenses of a possible higher number of items in the filter - two blocks with
the same content but with a different index are considered different elements.
Finally, it is interesting to compare the proposed attestation protocol with the
state-of-the-art.
• Compared to SMART and ERASMUS, the proposed protocol allows the attes-
tation to be interrupted, without the need of the dedicated hardware bus pro-
posed by SMART to protect the secret key. It uses the same self-measurement
attestation approach as ERASMUS to lower the impact of the attestation on
the device operations. Moreover, the proposed approach does not compute the
hash of the memory, as in the this two protocols.
• Compared to TrustLite and TyTAN, the proposed protocol consider a mobile
adversary in its adversary model and provide a mechanism to detect its presence
(via the CHECK action).
Both the approaches allows the attestation to be
interrupted, but in TrustLite and TyTAN is not done securely. TrustLite only
consider local attestation.
• Both SMARM and the proposed protocol allow the interruption of the attes-
tation. In addition, the proposed protocol includes the transient malware in
its adversary model. Similarly, both approaches divide the device memory in
blocks, but in SMARM each block is attested by computing its cryptographic
hash. Moreover, in SMARM the possibility of evading detection for a malware
==PAGE:51==
4.7 Discussion and security analysis
41
increases as the attestation progresses, because, compared to the proposed ap-
proach, it does not check the integrity of the previously attested blocks.
• Similarly to the proposed approach, RESERVE allows the attestation to be
interrupted and checks the previously measured modules/blocks to detect a mo-
bile adversary. In RESERVE this check is implemented by randomly selecting
a line of code from a module and comparing it with its actual state, while in the
protocol proposed in this project the entirety of the memory block is processed.
In RESERVE is possible in fact that a malware modifies a part of a module
that is not covered by the random line check and evades the detection.
• Similarly to the proposed protocol HAtt addresses the issue of the interruptibil-
ity of the attestation. The difference lies in the device requirements and the
attestation computation. HAtt, in fact, uses a PUF component to generate a
unique and secret order of attestation of the memory blocks [ABDWXLS20].
Moreover, the attestation involves the construction of a bit string that contains
a selection of random bits from each word of the memory block, which can
create long attestation results.
• Both the proposed protocol and ERAMO allow the attestation to be interrupted.
But ERAMO uses the memory locking approach to ensure that a mobile ad-
versary does not relocate during the memory offloading. While effective, this
technique availability depends on the underlying kernel, and it may introduce
malfunctions for applications that require to write to the memory.
4.7.2
Security analysis
This section presents an informal discussion on how the proposed protocol satisfies
the security requirements of section 4.4.
SR1 - Freshness of the result
The freshness of the result is guaranteed by the presence of the timestamp of the
beginning of the attestation. Since the prover’s clock is assumed to be write-protected,
the adversary cannot modify the clock value to force the prover to create attestation
results that refer to a different point in time. As the clock value is monotonically
increasing, the verifier expects increasing values in the attestation results timestamp.
In case of the receipt of a result with a timestamp that is smaller or equal to the
results already collected, the verifier can assume that the adversary is replaying the
attestation results and spot the infection.
SR2 - Tampering detection
This property ensures that the protocol is able to detect any unauthorised mem-
ory modifications. For example, the adversary might inject a malware in the program
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
memory or swap two memory block with each other. This property is guaranteed by
using the filter to attest each memory block, i.e. check if the block is benign. In fact,
the filter is constructed to contain the set of all the memory blocks in their legitimate
state. During the attestation, the filter is used to check if each block belongs to the
filter. If it does not, the block is not in a legitimate state. In addition, to prevent a
block swap attack, during the construction of the filter each memory block is added
by concatenating the block index with the block data. If the adversary would swap
two blocks together, the attestation of those blocks will fail.
Moreover, when the attestation completes successfully, it is guaranteed that each
memory block has been attested at least once. This is ensured by the ATTEST action,
which moves the attestation progress forward at each round.
Finally, this property is guaranteed only if the integrity of the Cuckoo filter is
ensured and protect from potential tampering by the adversary. Any unauthorised
modification of the filter will undermine the effectiveness of the attestation protocol.
For example, the adversary could add additional elements to the filter representing
the malicious state of some memory blocks. For this reason, the filter needs to be
stored in the persistent secure memory and ensure that it can be accessed only by
the attestation code.
SR3 - Mobile adversary detection
This security requirement is similar to the previous one, but it targets a mobile ad-
versary. The protocol must be able to detect the presence of a mobile adversary, that
tries to escape the attestation by relocating in the memory.
A transient malware can be detected by the protocol because the attestation tim-
ing is not fixed but it changes randomly. This prevents the malware to observe the
device, deduct the attestation period and then delete itself just before the beginning
of the next attestation. Moreover, by employing a self-attestation scheme, the mal-
ware in the prover cannot intercept the attestation challenge sent by the verifier and
delete itself from the memory.
Regarding the migratory malware, the adversary model assumes that it performs
its best strategy as state in [CRT18]: the malware relocates at least once at every
attestation round. The detection of this type of malware is done with the ATTEST
and the CHECK actions:
• if the malware relocates to the next memory block to attest, the ATTEST action
will find it at the next round.
• if the malware relocates to a previously attested memory block, the CHECK
action will be able to detect it with probability
checks
progress, where checks is the
number of random blocks that are check during the CHECK action and progress
is the attestation progress.
==PAGE:53==
4.7 Discussion and security analysis
43
In particular, the aim of the CHECK action is to ensure that the previously attested
blocks have not been modified by a migratory malware. The malware can still avoid
detection by relocating in a block which is never selected by the CHECK operation.
This can only happen randomly, as the malware cannot predict which block will be
selected next by the CHECK action.
SR4 - Integrity of the results
Similarly to [CTR18], the attestation results in the prover are protected by a Mes-
sage Authentication Code that ensure their integrity and authenticity. Since each
attestation result is signed with a MAC computed using the shared secret key, it is
impossible for the adversary to modify the attestation results without being detected.
Any attempt to do so will be detected by the verifier, as the MAC of the message will
not match the once computed when verifying the results. Since the adversary has no
access to the secret key to create a new MAC, it cannot create any attestation results
or modify the existing ones without being detected.
SR5 - Communication integrity and authenticity
This security requirement ensures that the messages between the prover and the ver-
ifier cannot be modified or by an unauthorised party acting as a man-in-the-middle.
In the proposed protocol, all the messages exchanged are signed with a Message Au-
thentication Code to ensure their integrity and authenticity. Since the adversary has
no access to the secret key, it cannot create a valid MAC. Therefore, any attempts
to modify the exchanged data will be detected.
For example, during the collection of the results, the prover sends the list of
the attestation result, each one containing its MAC. If the adversary intercepts the
message and tries to modify any values in one result, when the verifier checks the
result the MAC will not match.
4.7.3
Limitations
The proposed protocol has the following limitations:
• Attestation starving: if the malware generates with a high frequency some soft-
ware interruptions, the attestation task might go into starvation. The inter-
ruptions might prevent the operating system to schedule the attestation task
due to the higher priority interrupt handlers to execute. This is a remote pos-
sibility, as real-time operating systems have scheduling algorithms that ensure
a fair sharing of the computing resources among all tasks. Therefore it is not
possible - besides exploiting weaknesses in the operating system - to achieve the
starvation of the attestation tasks.
• Last memory blocks are checked less than the first ones: during an attestation
round, the CHECK action select randomly a predefined number of memory
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
blocks that have already been attested to be checked again. As the attestation
progresses, the pool of attested blocks to choose from increases, therefore the
last memory blocks are checked less than the first ones. In fact, a malware
that is aware of this pattern, can manage to maintain is presence for as long
as possible by placing itself in the last block of the memory, which is the least
checked. To address this limitation, the CHECK action can be extended by
allowing it to choose the random blocks from the whole memory, instead of
limiting the choice to only the already attested ones.
• Additional protected storage for the Cuckoo filter: to ensure the security of
the attestation process, the protocol requires that the Cuckoo filter is stored
in a secure persistent memory on the device, where it can only be accessed by
the attestation code. Some IoT devices, especially in case of the low-end once,
might not have enough secure storage to contain the filter. To address this
issue, this project proposes a possible extension of the protocol that offloads
the block attestation using the same filter approach to a more powerful trusted
party. Another possible solution is to use a higher block size value to decrease
the total amount of memory blocks and therefore decrease the memory footprint
of the cuckoo filter.
• Increased latency: this protocol has a higher latency - considered as the time
that passes between when the attestation starts and when it ends - compared
to traditional atomic attestation approaches. This is due to the fact that the
attestation is interleaved with the device normal operations, instead of being
executed in one go.
This increased flexibility is a trade-off with the higher
latency. In addition, since the attestation is done via self-measurement, it is
possible for the device to execute it when there is the enough computation
time available. This allows to execute multiple rounds in a row and therefore
decreasing the overall attestation latency.
4.8
Extensions
In the protocol presented in this project, the prover performs a self-attestation of
its own memory.
In some occasions, the verifier wants to get a fresh attestation
proof before performing some critical operation [CTR18]. This may not be possible
to achieve with the self-measurement scheme, as the prover performs the attestation
based on its own scheduling. Moreover, to satisfy the security requirements, the prover
needs enough secure storage to memorise the filter. To overcome this limitations, this
section presents the following extensions:
• On-demand attestation instead of self measurements.
• Remote attestation via memory offloading.
==PAGE:55==
4.8 Extensions
45
This extensions are not mutually exclusive but they can be combined with each other
to enhance the benefits based on the specific scenario.
Moreover, they maintain
the same advantages in terms of interruptibility and security properties of the self-
attestation protocol presented above.
4.8.1
On-demand attestation
The protocol presented above implements the attestation as a self measurement pro-
cess, in which the prover initiates the attestation process by itself.
Traditionally,
remote attestation is a challenge-response protocol, where the measurement is initi-
ate by the verifier by sending a nonce to the prover. This nonce is fundamental to
guarantee the freshness of the result and the protection against replay attacks. In
the self attestation protocols, the timestamp plays the role of the nonce, making it
possible to distinguish the attestation result from each other.
Compared to the self-attestation, the on-demand attestation has some benefits in
respect of the self measurement attestation. For example, the verifier might be in-
terested in knowing whether a prover is trustable or not before performing a critical
operation or a software update [CTR18]. In this case, it would be useful to perform
the attestation just before the critical operation to get a fresh result.
The design of the protocol presented in this project can be easily extended to
provide on-demand attestation. The process in the on-demand extension is performed
in the same way as the self-measurement protocol by using the local Cuckoo filter in
the prover memory. The attestation, instead of starting at specific time intervals, is
triggered by the verifier that sends a challenge - i.e. the nonce n - to the prover. This
nonce is treated in the same way as the timestamp of the beginning of the attestation
in the self-measurement approach and at the end it is included in the result:
< result, n, MAC(result, n, key) >
The on-demand attestation flow can be seen in figure 4.5.
Compared to the self-
measurement approach, in which is the verifier that collects the results, here the
attestation proof is sent directly by the prover once the process completed.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
Figure 4.5: Flow of the on-demand extension.
4.8.2
Offloading
So far it was assumed that the prover is a device with enough resources to perform
the attestation protocol presented in this project. This assumption might not always
hold, for example:
• The device might not have enough secure memory to store the Cuckoo filter.
• The device might not have enough processing power to check whether the fil-
ter contains a certain element, as it involves the computation of some non-
cryptographic hashes.
In this cases, the offloading technique allows to implement this attestation mech-
anism even to low-level embedded systems. In this case, the prover does not perform
the attestation directly, but instead it offload its computation to a third trusted
party. This mechanism has its advantages when the overhead of sending the infor-
mation to the third party is significantly lower than performing the attestation itself
[CDMRR19].
In the protocol proposed in this project, the most computational demanding op-
eration is checking whether a certain block of memory is contained in the filter, as
it involves the computation of some non-cryptographic hashes and some memory ac-
cesses. This operation can be execute by the third party, by offloading the memory
blocks of the prover. This can be achieved by deploying the prebuilt cuckoo filter
to the trusted third party and modifying the attestation protocol deployed in the
prover. In each round, instead of querying the filter stored in the local memory, the
==PAGE:57==
4.8 Extensions
47
device offloads the memory blocks it wants to attest by sending a message over the
communication channel to the trusted third entity that includes:
• The block of memory, b
• Its index, i
• The timestamp of the begin of the attestation, t
• The MAC of the whole message, to ensure the integrity of the information
The message therefore has the format of:
< i, t, b, MAC(b, t, i, k) >
where k is the shared secret key, which this time needs to be shared with the third
entity too. This can be done for both the ATTEST and CHECK action.
The idea is that the prover does not perform any computation for the attestation
of a memory block, but instead it queries ”remotely” the filter stored in the trusted
party via network requests. The offloading of the memory blocks is secured by the
MAC attached to the message. If the MAC matches the computed one, the trusted
entity proceeds to query the filter in the same way as explained before in the self-
attestation protocol. If the query is successful, the attestation continues, otherwise
the third entity communicates the negative result to both the prover and the verifier
and the attestation concludes.
Figure 4.6: Offloading attestation for block i. Instead of querying the cuckoo filter
stored in the protected memory, the prover sends the information to a
trusted party who contains the filter..
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Attestation Protocol Proposal
However, this extension has a performance limitation due to the number of mes-
sages. Depending on the block size, this extension might not be convenient to imple-
ment, as the overhead of the communication would be higher than performing the
attestation on the prover. In fact, each time a memory block has to be attested, the
prover sends a message to the verified. Depending on the total number of blocks and
the number of checks done in the CHECK action, this might generate a very high
number of messages that might hinder the network performance.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Proof of Concept
This chapter details the implementation of a proof-of-concept for the proposed pro-
tocol. The protocol is implemented in a software simulation to test its capability of
detecting the adversary attacks. In addition, a proof-of-concept hardware implemen-
tation is provided.
5.1
Simulator
The aim of the simulation is to understand on a practical level how the different
entities of the protocol interact together and how well the filter approach performs
in the context of remote attestation. The simulation of the protocol is particularly
useful for various reasons:
• Requirements satisfaction: by creating a model of the system it is possible
to verify whether the protocol satisfies the requirements of the system.
For
example, it is possible to identify flaws or parts that can be optimised.
• Lower implementation time: the implementation of the entities in a simula-
tion require less time than implementing the whole protocol in hardware. By
building and simulating a model of the system allows to abstract the low level
implementation and focus only on the protocol itself.
• Security test: the simulator allows to implement and test the behaviour of the
system under the different type of attacks of the adversary.
• Parameter testing: the performance of the protocol depends on different pa-
rameters, e.g. the number of block to verify in the CHECK operation. The
simulation allows to quickly test the system for different combination of values
for the parameters and identify the best ones.
The goal of the simulator implementation is to evaluate the proposed approach on
a practical level, identify the possible flaws and measure its effectiveness. The
effectiveness is measured by how well the verifier is able to detect a compromission
of the prover.
The simulator implements a prover, a verifier and an adversary for the following
protocols:
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Proof of Concept
• Self attestation
• On-demand extension
• Offloading extension
The implementation is done in C# using the .NET 6 framework and, following
the object oriented design, each entity is represented by a class. The adversary model
implements the following attacks:
• Block injection
• Block swap
• Transient attack
• Migratory attack
The simulation does not implement the replay attack and does not allow the at-
tacker to modify the packets transmitted over the communication channel. This type
of attacks, in fact, are not related to the remote attestation approach proposed in this
project. The protocol here proposed already implements the protection mechanisms
against replay attacks that are commonly used in the state-of-the-art of remote at-
testation protocols. In fact, the proposed protocol uses MACs to ensure authenticity
and integrity of the exchanged messages and a challenge or a timestamp to ensure
the freshness of the attestation result.
The main entities (at a high level) of the system simulation are represented in 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Main system entities.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Simulator
51
5.1.1
Memory content
In the simulator, the memory of the prover is represented by the memory content
entity. This object represents the memory that it is attested during the execution
of the protocol and that is modified by the adversary.
The content of the memory is implemented internally as an array of bytes. The
size of the array and the size of the memory blocks are parameters that are set at
compile time. The memory is logically divided into blocks of predefined size. The
entity offers an interface that allows to:
• Retrieve a block of memory: given a certain index, the method returns the
corresponding block of memory.
• Set the content of a specific block: given the index of the memory block and a
block of data, the method overwrite the content of the memory block specified
by the index with the given input.
This is used to implement the memory
attacks performed by the adversary.
• Swap memory blocks: given two indexes that refers to two memory blocks, this
method swap their content in the memory array.
5.1.2
Filter
In the protocol and its extensions the filter is used to represent the legitimate memory
content of the prover. The simulator uses the Cuckoo filter implementation provided
by the library [Mic], available as an open-source project.
The library follows the
[FAKM14] specifications for the implementation.
The Cuckoo filter is initialised at the beginning of the simulation by the verifier,
who knows the legitimate state of the prover’s memory. To populate the filter, the
verifier iterates over the legitimate memory blocks and inserts each one together with
the corresponding block index. Then the filter is stored internally in the prover entity.
5.1.3
Communication channel
To communicate, the prover and the verifier exchange messages over a communication
channel, implemented as a queue. When an entity wish to send a message, it creates
a message object and sends it to the channel, which stores it in its internal queue.
Periodically, the channel checks if there are any messages to send. To send a message,
the channel removes it from the queue and notify all the entities that are interested.
The message delivery is based on a pattern observer. Every entity can use the
channel to send a message, but to receive them the entity has to subscribe to it. To
be able to listen to the incoming messages, an entity has to implement the defined
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Proof of Concept
IListener interface, which specifies the NotifyMessage method. In this method the
entity can define the specific actions to do upon receiving a message based on its type.
The simulator uses different message types for different purposes. Each message
type inherits from a base class BaseMessage (figure 5.2). Each different class contains
the specific properties for the information needed. The entities can then check the
run-time type of the received message.
Figure 5.2: Message types.
5.1.4
Attacks implementation
As specified before, the attacker model in the simulator implements the memory in-
jection attack, the block swap attack, the transient attack and the migratory attack.
To implement the attacks, the adversary entity has a reference to the prover entity
from which it can access its memory content. The timing of the attack is not fixed,
but chosed randomly at run-time.
For the implementation of the memory injection attack, the adversary selects
a random block index and generates a random memory block of bytes. Then it over-
write the selected bloc with the generated block in the prover memory.
The implementation of the block swap attack is similar to the block injection
one. The swap attack is implemented as the injection of two memory blocks, whose
content is swapped. The adversary select randomly two memory blocks and swap
their content, using the same API from the injection attack.
For the transient, the adversary initially perform an injection of a memory block
in a random position in the prover’s memory and memorise the block index and its
original content. Then it selects a future time in which the malware wants to leave
the device. When the adversary wants to remove its presence, it undoes the modifica-
tion in the device memory by restoring the original block content. At the same time
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Simulator
53
it computes a time in the future in which the malware re-infects the device. This
time is computed by adding a random value to the current removal time. When the
malware returns, it injects itself in another memory block, choose randomly.
Finally, the implementation of the migratory malware follows the best strategy
presented in [CRT18], which involves the malware relocation after each attestation
unit. Initially, the attacker generates a memory block filled with random bytes that
represent the malware content. The attack then starts by selecting a random memory
block and storing the original content. Then the malware injects its content the se-
lected block in the device memory. After each attestation unit, the malware relocates
itself in another block. To do so, it restores the original content of the memory block,
select randomly another block and injects itself there.
5.1.5
Simulation
As specified above, the simulator implements the self-attestation protocol and the
on-demand and offloading extensions. Each of this protocols run independently from
each other and they implement some specific behaviours, even though the majority
of the model is shared among them.
The simulation is implemented as a loop that terminates when either all the
memory blocks have been tested or one block is detected being compromised. The
time is represented as a counter which is incremented at every loop iteration. At
each iteration, all the entities perform one action. For example, the verifier sends a
message to collect the results, or the adversary perform an attack. When the attes-
tation is in progress, the prover completes one attestation round in one loop iteration.
To simulate the adversary presence on the prover, the adversary entity has access
to the prover and its memory content. The behaviour of the entities is related to the
time that has elapsed in the simulator. For example, the prover periodically check
the elapsed time and when it is above a certain value it starts a new attestation.
Similarly, the verifier in the on demand protocol can send a message to the prover to
start a new attestation. The attestation time and the attack time are not fixed, but
chosen randomly at runtime. This allows to test the simulation over different timing.
For example, the attestation may start before the adversary performed an attack, or
vice versa, the attack might be done while the attestation is running. This allows to
cover more situations that can happen in a real-life scenarios.
The following parameters can be changed in the simulation:
• Checks: number of blocks that are tested by the CHECK operation at each
round.
• Block Size: specifies the size of the block in bytes.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Proof of Concept
• Max Attack Interval: the maximum time in which the attacker does an attack.
The time at which the adversary does an attack is chosen randomly at runtime.
This is coherent with the adversary model presented before, in which the adver-
sary does not know when the next attestation is starting, so it cannot decide
specifically at what time is best to attack.
• Collection Interval: maximum time interval in between results collection. This
value is used in the self-attestation protocol by the verifier and specifies the
period of the result collection.
• Max Attestation Interval: maximum time interval in between two attestations.
As the attestation start time is chosen randomly (to not allow the adversary to
predict when the next attestation starts to evade detection), this value specifies
the upper bound limit for the choice of next attestation time.
The output of the simulation represent how many times the protocol detected the
malware presence. In the self-attestation base protocol, the attestation ends when
the verifier, after collecting the results, finds an attestation result with a negative
value, which indicates that the prover found a non-legitimate block in its memory.
The result of the simulation in this case returns the history of the attestation results,
to show when the prover detected a compromission in its memory. In the case of the
offloading and the on-demand protocols, the simulation ends when the attestation
completes independently whether a malware is found or not. Each protocol is run in
the simulation multiple times. The aim is to measure how many times, for each type
of attack, the protocol is able to detect them and how many times it fails to do so.
When the simulator completes all the runs it outputs how many times a specific attack
was detected over the total amount of times that attack was carried out. For exam-
ple, in case of an injection attack over 100 runs, the simulation might output: Inject
attack: 89/100 (89%). This means that out of 100 attestations in which there was
an injection attack carried over, the verified found it 89 times, for an accuracy of 89%.
5.2
Hardware implementation
While the simulation allows to evaluate whether the remote attestation approach
proposed in this project works and how well it detect the malware presence, it does
not give any information about the performance of the approach in a real world IoT
system. For this purpose, the prover side of the protocol has been implemented in an
embedded system as a proof-of-concept.
5.2.1
Board setup
The hardware platform chosen for this purpose is an ESP32.
This board is very
common in the IoT world, as it is inexpensive, easy to work with and has good
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Hardware implementation
55
software and hardware support. The ESP32 platform is composed of the following
component: [Esp23] [Esp]
• Networking chip that supports Bluetooth and WiFi technologies
• 4MB integrated flash memory
• Dual-Core low-power Xtensa® 32-bit LX6 CPU with a maximum frequency of
240MHz
• 448Kb of ROM
• 530Kb of SRAM
• Cryptographic hardware accelerator for AES, SHA-2, RSA, ECC, RNG
For the operative system level, the choice went for FreeRTOS. FreeRTOS [Fre] is
an operative system for real-time applications with a minimal memory footprint. In
fact, it provides only the scheduling functionality, the inter-task communication and
synchronisation. The purpose of a real-time operative system is to make sure each
critical task gets executed before its deadline. To do so, differently to a standard
operative system, the scheduling of the different tasks has to be deterministic. In
FreeRTOS, the deterministic scheduling is priority-based: the choice of which task is
executed next is made by comparing the priority of the application tasks and choosing
the one with the highest value.
The environment used for the development is ESP-IDF provided by the manu-
facturer of the platform (Espressif). The ESP-IDF is a development framework that
provides the basic libraries for the development of the embedded application and the
functionalities for the compilation and deployment of the binaries to the embedded
board.
5.2.2
Protocol implementation
In FreeRTOS an embedded application is composed of a series of tasks. This tasks are
handled by the OS’ scheduler, which assigns them the CPU at specific time intervals.
The implementation is composed of two tasks:
• Computation task: this task simulates the device normal operations. For
example, the device might read and process some data from a sensor and store or
send them through the network. To simulate this behaviour, the task increases
a counter and prints it in the console.
• Attestation task: this task implement the self-attestation protocol proposed
in this project.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Proof of Concept
The verifier part of the protocol is implemented by a Python3 script that period-
ically contacts the prover device to collect the attestation results. The attestation
results are transmitted in the JSON format (figure 5.3). Upon receiving the list of the
results, the verifier checks their integrity and authenticity by computing the Message
Authentication Code of each of them. The signing of the attestation results by the
prover has been implemented with the mbedtls library, which provide a keyed SHA256
hash function. The verifier keeps a list of the attestation results of the prover at dif-
ferent point in time.
Figure 5.3: Attestation results collected from the prover via http request. t is the
timestamp, m is the result (1 for successful attestation, 0 for unsuccess-
ful) and the MAC..
To communicate with the verifier, the prover device implements a web server that
receives and responds to HTTP requests. The prover exposes one endpoint /results
which accepts GET requests. Upon receiving a request, the prover reads the attes-
tation results stored in its memory and converts them to an array of JSON objects.
This array is then transmitted back to the verifier as the request response.
When the attestation task is scheduled and it does not have an attestation in
progress, it checks whether it is time to start a new one.
The implementation
of the Cuckoo filter used for the attestation is taken from the open-source project
[Har]. During the boot, the device sets up and initialise the filter by reading the
program partition memory blocks. The application partition data is read using the
esp_partition_read function providing the pointer to the partition, the starting offset
and the amount of bytes that it should read. The progress of the attestation is stored
in a variable, which indicates how many blocks of memory have been attested.
When the filter has been initialised, the device starts its normal operations. Both
the computation task and the attestation tasks are pinned by default to the same core.
This simulates a device that has only one core and leaves the other core of the CPU
free for the web server communications. The tasks are handled by the FreeRTOS
operating system and each time the attestation task is scheduled (and the attestation
process has started), it performs one round.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
The protocol has been evaluated both in the simulation and in the embedded platform.
In the simulator the focus of the evaluation was to verify the effectiveness of the
proposed protocol to detect a malware presence.
On the other hand, the
embedded device implementation allowed to extract some performance metrics
that represent a real-world behaviour of the protocol.
6.1
Simulator evaluation
The simulator implements all three variants of the protocol proposed in this project:
the self-attestation protocol, the on-demand extension and the offloading extension.
Additionally, the following attacks were implemented in the simulation:
• Block injection attack
• Block swap attack
• Malware migratory attack
• Malware transient attack
The self-attestation simulation goal is to show how many attestations are needed
for the prover and the verifier to detect the malware presence. An example of the
simulation output can be seen in listing A. Figure 6.1, shows the result of the self-
attestation simulation. The first attestation at time 482 was successful as the malware
did not attack yet or wasn’t detected. The next attestations instead are unsuccessful
because the protocol detected the malware presence in the device memory. Before
checking the attestation results, the verifier ensure that the received results have not
been modified by computing and comparing the MAC.
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Evaluation
Figure 6.1: Self attestation and inject attack output example.
Regarding the on-demand and offloading extensions, the simulator runs the pro-
tocol multiple times. Each run is independent from the others and the state of the
entities is reset at the end of each execution. In each run the adversary performs an
attack at a random time. The aim of this simulation is to verify how many times
the protocol can detect an infection and how many times it fails to do so. To test
it against all the implemented attacks, the simulator allows to specify a random at-
tack option, which involves the attacker to randomly select which attack to perform
at each run. Figure 6.2 and 6.3 show an example of the simulator output for the
on-demand extension and the offloading extension respectively. The output breaks
down the detection performance for each attack type. The value displayed for each
attack type is the comparison between the number of runs in which the protocol
detected the attack and the amount of times the attack was performed - across all
the runs. For example, in picture 6.2, the inject attack was successfully detected 20
times and it was performed 20 times, for a detection performance of 100%. In the
case of the migratory attack, it was detected 23 times over 25, with a lower detection
performance.
Figure 6.2: On-demand
proto-
col test.
Figure 6.3: Offloading protocol
test.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Simulator evaluation
59
It is interesting to test how the value of the number of random memory blocks
already attested that are checked each round (by the CHECK action) n, affects the
malware detection performance. Figure 6.4 and 6.5 show how the detection perfor-
mance changes for different values of n for the on-demand and offloading protocols
respectively.
Figure 6.4: On-demand detection with different value of n. Each value is the average
detection performance over 100 runs.
As expected, the accuracy of the malware detection increases as the number of
tested block increases. This is especially evident in the migratory and transient mal-
ware attacks. In fact, as they move in the memory during the attestation to avoid
being detected they are the most affected by the increased number of block checks.
On the other hand, the detection of the block inject and the block swap attacks is
not greatly affected by the increased number of checks. This is due to the fact that
these type of attacks are static and do not operate any memory modification after
the initial infection. Therefore, if a malware is inject into a block that hasn’t been
attested yet it will certainly be detected once the affected block is attested. If the
attack involves a block that has already been attested then it will be detected only if
that specific block will be tested again by the CHECK action. This explains why the
detection performance increases slightly as the value of n increases. The fluctuations
in the detection accuracy are due to the fact that the attacks and the attestation
happen at random times.
This overall performance of the protocol over multiple attack types is shown in
figure 6.6 and 6.7. The figures present how the overall malware detection performance
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Evaluation
Figure 6.5: Offloading detection with different value of n. Each value is the average
detection performance over 100 runs.
changes in relation to different values of n when considered a random choice of attack.
The value is calculated as the average of the detection performance for each attack
type over 100 runs. As it can be seen, the detection improves significantly when the
number of blocks tested by the CHECK operation at each round increases.
Figure 6.6: On-demand average detection for random attacks.
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Simulator evaluation
61
Figure 6.7: Offloading average detection for random attacks.
Another interesting characteristic to evaluate is how the block size influences the
malware detection performance of the protocol. Intuitively, as the size of the blocks
increases, the total number of blocks decreases (less blocks of bigger size).
Con-
sequently, a malware will have fewer choices to select a block when infecting the
memory, therefore the detection performance should increase. On the other hand, a
lower block size means that there are more blocks overall. The malware will have
more chances to choose a block to relocate to or to infect, therefore the detection
performance should decrease. Pictures 6.8 and 6.9 show how the detection perfor-
mance changes in relation to the block size in the on-demand and in the offloading
extensions respectively.
Figure 6.8: On-demand.
Figure 6.9: Offloading.
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Evaluation
The tests where performed for 100 runs, with 3 backward checks each round and
a random attack selection. The horizontal axis represent the block size is bytes. As
it can be seen in the figures, the average detection performance is almost constant
and it does not change when the block size increases or decreases.
This can be
explained with the fact that when the total number of blocks increases, also the
total number of attestation rounds increases, and in each round, the CHECK action
perform multiple checks on the previously attested blocks. Therefore, as the total
number of blocks increases, also the total number of checks of the memory blocks do
so. This is also valid when the total number of blocks decreases. In this case, the
number of attestation rounds decreases and so also the total number of checks on the
memory blocks.
6.2
Hardware evaluation
The performance of the protocol implementation have been tested on the ESP32
hardware platform. Only the self-attestation protocol have been implemented as the
aim of the tests is to gather information about how the performance of the proposed
attestation approach. The tests measure the performance in terms of cpu cycles and
run time of querying the filter for a memory block and completing one attestation
round.
The most expensive operation in a Cuckoo filter is the hash calculation used to
insert or query the elements, so the first test evaluated two different non-cryptographic
hash functions: FNV (source code from [cat]) and MurmurHash 3 (source code from
[Pet]). This libraries are available as open source projects and have been adapted to
be compiled for the ESP32 platform. Table 6.1 summarises the performance in terms
of cpu cycles and run time for both the FNV and MurmurHash 3 used in a Cuckoo
filter with memory blocks of size 512 bytes.
FNV
MurmurHash3
Avg check cpu cycles
35741,71
16348,4
Avg check time (us)
224,3
102.34
Table 6.1: FNV and MurmurHash 3 hash function comparison.
Table 6.1 shows that the performance of the two hash function differ significantly.
MurmurHash 3 is substantially quicker than FNV, therefore the rest of the tests will
use this hash function.
In the proposed protocol, the size of the memory blocks determines the number
of the memory blocks that needs to be measured for the attestation. Moreover, the
size of the blocks is expected to influence the time required for the filter to process
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Hardware evaluation
63
them. Table 6.2 shows how the performance of checking whether a block is contained
in the filter and the memory occupation change in relation to the block size.
256 bytes
512 bytes
1024 bytes
2048 bytes
4096 bytes
Avg check cpu cycles
8860,35
16348,4
31713,24
62459,21
123918,26
Avg check time (us)
53,62
102.34
198,21
390,81
774,71
Blocks
4096
2048
1024
512
256
Cuckoo filter bytes
16384
8192
4096
2048
1024
Table 6.2: Performance of checking a block and memory occupation of the filter for
different block size.
As it can be seen in table 6.2, there is a linear correlation between the time re-
quired to measure one block and its size. The smaller the block is, the quicker it is
processed by the cuckoo filter. Moreover, when the block size decreases, the total
number of blocks increases. The filter has to store more items therefore its size and
memory footprint increases. When the block size grows, the total number of blocks
is lower. Therefore, the overhead of performing a membership query on the filter is
higher, but memory footprint of the filter is lower.
Another interesting aspect to analyse is the time required to complete one attes-
tation round in relation to different values for the number n of random block checks.
The results can be seen in table 6.3, which shows the cpu cycles and the time (in
microseconds) necessary to complete one round for each number of random block
checked. The block size is set to 512 bytes.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
cpu cycles
58062
114559
171881
228854
285996
343166
400407
457567
514728
571799
time (us)
362
716
1074
1430
1787
2144
2502
2859
3216
3573
Table 6.3: Round time as the number of random block checks changes.
Table 6.3 shows that when the number of random blocks checked increases, the
time and the cpu cycles required to complete one round increases linearly. For ex-
ample, when the CHECK action selects 3 blocks to check, the run time is around
4x the time of when no blocks are checked. This is due to the fact that during the
attestation round, at least one block is processed by the filter for the ATTEST action.
So when the CHECK action selects 3 memory blocks to check, the round performs 4
query to the filter. Additionally, the table shows the performance of the Cuckoo filter
approach to measure memory blocks in the context of remote attestation. Even with
a lot of additional checks (for example n=9), the total round time is around 3.5ms.
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Evaluation
Finally, it is interesting to test how the Cuckoo filter compares to the Bloom
filter for the purpose of this project. In fact, both filter can be used in the proposed
protocol as they offer the same functionality. Their difference mostly lies on how they
store and handle the set of element they represent. The choice of using a Cuckoo filter
instead of a Bloom filter was based from [FAKM14], which states that the Cuckoo
filter is faster than the Bloom filter when the false rate probability is less than 3%.
The attestation test was execute with blocks of 512 bytes, using the MurmurHash 3
function in both cases, false rate probability of 0.001 (0.1%) and n = 3. Table 6.4
summarise the performance difference.
Bloom filter
Cuckoo filter
Avg check cpu cycles
42897,65
16347,73
Avg round cpu cycles
336354,88
228836,02
Avg check time (us)
269,04
102.33
Avg round time (us)
2102,05
1430.05
Memory (bytes)
3681
8192
Table 6.4: Bloom filter and Cuckoo filter performance comparison.
Overall, in accordance with the literature, the Cuckoo filter required less time to
complete an attestation round compared to the Bloom filter. This can be explained
by the fact that the Bloom filter, on average, requires to compute a higher number of
hashes per operation. On the other hand, the Bloom filter require less than half of the
memory to store the same amount of elements compared to the Cuckoo filter. The
choice of which filter to use depends therefore on the requirements and the limitations
of the specific project.
6.3
Discussion
The test conducted in the previous section shows the effectiveness and eﬀiciency of
the proof-of-concept in detecting a software and a mobile adversary. The on-demand
and the self-attestation protocols uses the same underlying attestation mechanism,
with the only difference represented by the way the attestation is initiated. Overall,
all three the protocols proved to be effective in detecting the malware presence across
attestation interruption.
First of all, the simulation results show how the different choices of the protocol
parameters affect the detection performance. At a higher number of blocks measured
by the CHECK action corresponds an increase of the detection performance (figures
6.6 and 6.7) and an increase of the time required to complete one attestation round
(table 6.3). The time to perform one attestation round grows proportionally to the
number of blocks measured during the CHECK action. In particular, the detection
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Discussion
65
performance of the migratory malware and the transient malware is significantly af-
fected by the CHECK action (figure 6.4 and 6.5).
The block size, on the other hand, does not seem to influence the detection per-
formance of the protocol. This can be see in figures 6.8 and 6.9, where as the block
size changes the detection performance remains constant. This can be explained by
the fact that the total number of block checks performed by the protocol during the
attestation depends on the number of attestation rounds. When the block size in-
creases, the total number of memory blocks and the number of attestation rounds
decrease. The malware will then have fewer choices of blocks to infect or to migrate
to, but overall the memory is checked less (due to the lower number of attestation
rounds). Vice versa when the block size decreases. The value of the block size affects
more significantly the time required to perform a query to the filter for one memory
block. Table 6.2 shows that the run time of a query to the filter grows proportionally
to the size of the block.
Additionally, the evaluation shows that the cuckoo filter approach has good per-
formance in terms of execution time. In fact, the execution of one attestation round
requires around few milliseconds (table 6.3) to complete, limiting the overhead of the
attestation procedure.
Finally, this evaluation shows the flexibility of the proposed protocol. By tuning
its parameters, the protocol can be adapted to different situations. For example, a
device that has to perform multiple time-critical operations might prefer a smaller
block size or fewer random block checks to benefit from the lower attestation round
time. Or a device that requires maximum detection performance at the cost of a
higher attestation round time might want to increase the number of blocks checked
by the CHECK operation.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and future
works
Given the increasing number of IoT devices employed in many different fields, their
security is of remarkable importance. Due to their lack of computational resources, it
is often unfeasible to prevent a malware infection. In these cases, detecting the mal-
ware presence on a device becomes then fundamentally important to ensure security
and trust in IoT systems. Remote attestation is a security mechanism that allows a
trusted party - the verifier - to check the integrity of an untrusted party - the prover -
with the purpose of verifying whether the device has been compromised by a malicious
adversary. This procedure can be an expensive computation to perform, especially
for low-end IoT devices that have real-time requirements or have to perform critical
operations. Performing the attestation would require the device to halt its normal
operation for a substantial amount of time, which may lead to malfunctions. For this
reason, remote attestation needs to be interruptible to not interfere with the critical
operations of the device. Some hybrid attestation protocols in the state-of-the-art do
not address this problem because making the attestation interruptible opens up new
possibilities for the malware to evade detection. A migratory malware, in fact, can
exploit the interruptions to relocate itself to an already attested memory area to hide
its presence from the protocol. Only some attestation approaches address this issue,
with limited security and detection guarantees.
This thesis project proposes the design of an attestation approach and protocol
that can be securely interrupted as needed and provides a mechanism to detect a
mobile adversary.
Firstly, the available state-of-the-art literature was analysed to
understand the need for interruptible attestation, its problems and the current solu-
tions. Then, the project includes an analysis of the system model, adversary model
and security requirements to propose an interruptible remote attestation protocol.
The proposed approach is based on a Cuckoo filter that is used to check the
integrity of the memory of the prover. The program memory is logically divided into
blocks and the attestation is split into independent rounds, each attesting a subset of
the memory blocks. The filter represent the expected legitimate state of each memory
block, therefore it is used to verify that the actual prover’s memory blocks are in their
legitimate state. To ensure that a migratory malware does not evade detection, at
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Conclusion and future works
each round the protocol includes a check on the previously attested blocks. A number
of blocks are selected randomly and checked again with the filter.
This number
of selected blocks can be configured during the initialisation of the protocol. The
proposed approach implements a self-measurement scheme with random attestation
intervals to avoid a transient malware to predict when the next attestation will start.
The security analysis shows that this protocol satisfies the needed requirements.
It does have some limitations, for example regarding the secure memory to store the
filter in the prover, the freshness of the result and the latency of the attestation. To
address some of this limitations, the project proposed an on-demand and an offload-
ing extensions that uses the same attestation approach.
The protocol is then simulated and implemented in a hardware proof-of-concept.
A custom software simulator was created to verify the effectiveness of the protocols
and how the malware detection performance changes based on the different parame-
ter configurations. Additionally, we test the eﬀiciency of the protocol in terms of run
time in a real embedded device. The hardware selected was an ESP32, a common
platform for IoT and embedded applications.
The evaluation done on the implementations, shows interesting results.
The self-
attestation protocol is able to successfully detect the malware presence in a few con-
sequent attestations. Moreover, the more blocks are checked by the CHECK action,
the higher the accuracy in detecting the malware presence in both the offloading and
on-demand extensions. This, on the other hand, causes a proportional increase in
the run-time observed in the hardware implementation. Interestingly, the block size
does not affect the malware detection performance of the protocol. The hardware im-
plementation shows that the performance of the filter depends on the hash function
chosen. The test conducted compared an implementation of the FNV and Murmur3
functions, which resulted in Murmur3 being 2x faster. The hardware implementation
showed that the runtime of processing one memory block depends on its size. Finally,
the Cuckoo filter and the Bloom filter where tested for performance and memory
occupation. The evaluation showed that the Bloom filter requires less space but has
a higher runtime when checked if an element is in the filter compared to the Cuckoo
filter.
In conclusion, the project successfully designs, implements and evaluates a novel
attestation approach that is able to detect the malware presence and allows the at-
testation to be interrupted. In particular, the use of a Cuckoo filter, a data structure
normally used in databases, proved to be effective also to perform the attestation of
IoT devices.
7.1
Future works
This thesis provided a solution to the problem of interruptible remote attestation
using a new approach based on a Cuckoo filter. This work lays the foundations for
==PAGE:79==
7.1 Future works
69
possible more research that expands this concept.
A possible extension that could be considered is the development of a protocol that
uses the same filter approach to realise continuous attestation. Instead of limiting
the attestation inside time boundaries or limiting the number of blocks measured, the
protocol can continuously measure the prover’s memory. Each time the attestation
task is scheduled, the device checks the integrity of one or more memory blocks using
the filter. Then, the verifier can query the prover to get its real-time attestation result
- whether or not a compromised block has been found. This requires to investigate
how to lower the overhead of the attestation rounds.
Moreover, this thesis did not cover the scalability of the protocol.
A possible
extension of this work can be to scale the protocol to include the attestation of mul-
tiple devices. For example, the protocol can be adapted to perform swarm attestation.
As it can be seen in Chapter 6, the filter’s performance depends on the specific
type of filter chosen and the hash functions used. A possible direction of research
can be focused on determining the best choice for the filter, its parameters, and the
hash functions. This can significantly optimise the runtime of one attestation round,
lowering even more the impact on the availability of the device.
Finally, in this project we provided a proof-of-concept implementation of the pro-
tocol to show its feasibility and effectiveness. In the future the protocol implemen-
tation can be extended, optimised and compared in terms of performance with the
state-of-the-art solutions.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
1 STARTING SELF ATTESTATION FLOW
2 Backward checks: 3
3 Chosen attack: Inject
4 SelfAttestationProver computation 0
5 SelfAttestationProver computation 200
6 SelfAttestationProver computation 400
7 Attestation starting at 482
8 SelfAttestationProver computation 600
9 SelfAttestationProver computation 800
10 SelfAttestationProver computation 1000
11 SelfAttestationProver computation 1200
12 SelfAttestationProver computation 1400
13 SelfAttestationProver computation 1600
14 SelfAttestationProver computation 1800
15 SelfAttestationProver computation 2000
16 SelfAttestationProver computation 2200
17 SelfAttestationProver computation 2400
18 SelfAttestationProver: Attestation ending at 2531
19 SelfAttestationProver computation 2600
20 SelfAttestationProver computation 2800
21 Attacker injecting block 1594
22 SelfAttestationProver computation 3000
23 SelfAttestationProver computation 3200
24 SelfAttestationProver computation 3400
25 SelfAttestationProver computation 3600
26 SelfAttestationProver computation 3800
27 SelfAttestationProver computation 4000
28 SelfAttestationProver computation 4200
29 Attestation starting at 4358
30 SelfAttestationProver computation 4400
31 SelfAttestationProver computation 4600
32 SelfAttestationProver computation 4800
33 SelfAttestationProver computation 5000
34 SelfAttestationProver computation 5200
35 SelfAttestationProver computation 5400
36 SelfAttestationProver computation 5600
37 SelfAttestationProver computation 5800
38 Malware found in block 1594
39 SelfAttestationProver found malware in block 1594
40 SelfAttestationProver: Attestation ending at 5953
41 SelfAttestationProver computation 6000
42 SelfAttestationProver computation 6200
43 SelfAttestationProver computation 6400
==PAGE:82==
72
A Appendix
44 SelfAttestationProver computation 6600
45 SelfAttestationProver computation 6800
46 Attestation starting at 6844
47 SelfAttestationProver computation 7000
48 SelfAttestationProver computation 7200
49 SelfAttestationProver computation 7400
50 SelfAttestationProver computation 7600
51 SelfAttestationProver computation 7800
52 SelfAttestationProver computation 8000
53 SelfAttestationProver computation 8200
54 SelfAttestationProver computation 8400
55 Malware found in block 1594
56 SelfAttestationProver found malware in block 1594
57 SelfAttestationProver: Attestation ending at 8439
58 SelfAttestationProver computation 8600
59 SelfAttestationProver computation 8800
60 SelfAttestationProver computation 9000
61 SelfAttestationProver computation 9200
62 SelfAttestationProver computation 9400
63 SelfAttestationProver computation 9600
64 SelfAttestationProver computation 9800
65 SelfAttestationProver computation 10000
66 SelfAttestationVerifier collects results
67 Attacker observe message RequestStoredAttestationResultMessage
68 Result at 482 is original
69 Result at 4358 is original
70 Malware detected at 4358
71 Result at 6844 is original
72 Malware detected at 6844
73 Attacker observe message StoredAttestationResultMessage
74 *** HISTORY ***
75 482: True
76 4358: False
77 6844: False
78 ***********
79 Total attestations: 3
.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[ABDWXLS20]
Muhammad Naveed Aman, Mohamed Haroon Basheer, Siddhant
Dash, Jun Wen Wong, Jia Xu, Hoon Wei Lim, and Biplab Sikdar.
“HAtt: Hybrid Remote Attestation for the Internet of Things With
High Availability.” In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7.8 (2020),
pp. 7220–7233. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2020.2983655.
[al16]
T. Abera et al. “Invited - Things, trouble, trust: on building trust in
IoT systems.” In: Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Design Automation
Conference. Jun. 2016, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1145/2897937.2905020.
[BKK21]
Alexander Sprogø Banks, Marek Kisiel, and Philip Korsholm. “Re-
mote Attestation: A Literature Review.” In: CoRR abs/2105.02466
(2021). arXiv: 2105.02466. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.
02466.
[BMSWK15]
F. Brasser, B. El Mahjoub, A. R. Sadeghi, C. Wachsmann, and
P. Koeberl. “TyTAN: tiny trust anchor for tiny devices.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 52nd Annual Design Automation Conference, San
Francisco California: ACM. 2015. doi: 10.1145/2744769.2744922.
[cat]
catb0t. fnv-hash. url: https://github.com/catb0t/fnv-hash,
%20http://www.isthe.com/chongo/tech/comp/fnv/index.html.
[CDMRR19]
Mauro Conti, Edlira Dushku, Luigi V. Mancini, Masoom Rabbani,
and Silvio Ranise. “Remote Attestation as a Service for IoT.” In:
2019 Sixth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems,
Management and Security (IOTSMS). 2019, pp. 320–325. doi: 10.
1109/IOTSMS48152.2019.8939224.
[CERST18]
Xavier Carpent, Karim Eldefrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, Ahmad-
Reza Sadeghi, and Gene Tsudik. “Invited: Reconciling Remote At-
testation and Safety-Critical Operation on Simple IoT Devices.”
In: 2018 55th ACM/ESDA/IEEE Design Automation Conference
(DAC). 2018, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/DAC.2018.8465928.
[CERT18]
Xavier Carpent, Karim Eldefrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and
Gene Tsudik. “Temporal Consistency of Integrity-Ensuring Compu-
tations and Applications to Embedded Systems Security.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 on Asia Conference on Computer and Com-
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
munications Security. ASIACCS ’18. Incheon, Republic of Korea:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, pp. 313–327. isbn:
9781450355766. doi: 10 . 1145 / 3196494 . 3196526. url: https :
//doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/3196494.3196526.
[Clo]
Cloudflare. url: https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/
ddos/glossary/mirai-botnet/.
[CRT18]
Xavier Carpent, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Gene Tsudik. “Re-
mote attestation of IoT devices via SMARM: Shuffled measure-
ments against roving malware.” In: 2018 IEEE International Sym-
posium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST). 2018,
pp. 9–16. doi: 10.1109/HST.2018.8383885.
[CTR18]
Xavier Carpent, Gene Tsudik, and Norrathep Rattanavipanon. “ERAS-
MUS: Eﬀicient remote attestation via self-measurement for unat-
tended settings.” In: 2018 Design, Automation & Test in Europe
Conference & Exhibition (DATE). 2018, pp. 1191–1194. doi: 10.
23919/DATE.2018.8342195.
[DGM18]
Nicola Dragoni, Alberto Giaretta, and Manuel Mazzara. “The Inter-
net of Hackable Things.” In: Proceedings of 5th International Con-
ference in Software Engineering for Defence Applications. Ed. by
Paolo Ciancarini, Stanislav Litvinov, Angelo Messina, Alberto Sil-
litti, and Giancarlo Succi. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2018, pp. 129–140. isbn: 978-3-319-70578-1.
[Esp]
Espressif. ESP32 Series datasheet. url: https://www.espressif.
com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32_datasheet_
en.pdf.
[Esp23]
Espressif. ESP32-WROOM-32 datasheet. 2023. url: https://www.
espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-
wroom-32_datasheet_en.pdf.
[FAKM14]
Bin Fan, David G. Andersen, Nichael Kaminsky, and Michael Mitzen-
macher. “Cuckoo Filter: Practically Better Than Bloom.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 10th ACM International on Conference on emerging
Networking Experiments and Technologies. 2014, pp. 75–88. doi:
10.1145/2674005.2674994.
[Fre]
FreeRTOS. url: https://www.freertos.org/index.html.
[Har]
John Harris. libcuckoofilter. url: https://github.com/jonahharris/
libcuckoofilter.
[ISZ17]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Shaza Zeitouni. “SeED:
secure non-interactive attestation for embedded devices.” en. In:
Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy
in Wireless and Mobile Networks. ACM, July 2017, pp. 64–74.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
75
[KFSYG22]
Boyu Kuang, Anmin Fu, Willy Susilo, Shui Yu, and Yansong Gao.
“A survey of remote attestation in Internet of Things: Attacks, coun-
termeasures, and prospects.” en. In: Computers Security 112 (Jan.
2022), p. 102498. issn: 01674048. doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2021.
102498.
[KM]
Adam Kirsch and Michael Mitzenmacher. “Building a Better Bloom
Filter.” en. In: ().
[KSSV14]
P. Koeberl, S. Schulz, A. R. Sadeghi, and V. Varadharajan. “TrustLite:
a security architecture for tiny embedded devices.” In: Proceedings
of the Ninth European Conference on Computer Systems, Ams-
terdam The Netherlands: ACM. 2014. doi: 10 . 1145 / 2592798 .
2592824.
[KT12]
D. Perito K. Defrawy A. Francillon and G. Tsudik. “SMART: Secure
and Minimal Architecture for (Establishing a Dynamic) Root of
Trust.” In: The Network and Distributed System Security Symposium
(NDSS) (2012).
[LBCMR17]
Brandon Lucia, Vignesh Balaji, Alexei Colin, Kiwan Maeng, and
Emily Ruppel. “Intermittent Computing: Challenges and Opportu-
nities.” In: 2nd Summit on Advances in Programming Languages
(SNAPL 2017). Ed. by Benjamin S. Lerner, Rastislav Bodík, and
Shriram Krishnamurthi. Vol. 71. Leibniz International Proceedings
in Informatics (LIPIcs). Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-
Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2017, 8:1–8:14. isbn: 978-3-95977-032-3.
doi: 10 . 4230 / LIPIcs . SNAPL . 2017 . 8. url: http : / / drops .
dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2017/7131.
[Mic]
Microsoft. mixer-cuckoo. url: https://github.com/microsoft/
mixer-cuckoo.
[ØDD21]
Jeppe Hagelskjær Østergaard, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola Dragoni.
“ERAMO: Effective Remote Attestation through Memory Offload-
ing.” In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security
and Resilience (CSR). 2021, pp. 73–80. doi: 10.1109/CSR51186.
2021.9527978.
[Pet]
PeterScott. murmur3. url: https://github.com/PeterScott/
murmur3.
[PHPMH19]
Yusuf Perwej, Kashiful Haq, Firoj Parwej, M Mumdouh, and Mo-
hamed Hassan. “The internet of things (IoT) and its application do-
mains.” In: International Journal of Computer Applications 975.8887
(2019), p. 182.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[Ram21]
Rabie Ramadan. “Internet of Things (IoT) Security Vulnerabili-
ties: A Review.” In: PLOMS AI 2.1 (Oct. 2021). url: https://
plomscience . com / journals / index . php / PLOMSAI / article /
view/14.
[RDVBDM21]
M. M. Rabbani, E. Dushku, J. Vliegen, A. Braeken, N. Dragoni, and
N. Mentens. “RESERVE: Remote Attestation of Intermittent IoT
devices’.” In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Embedded
Networked Sensor Systems. Nov. 2021. doi: 10 . 1145 / 3485730 .
3493364.
[SL12]
C. E. Rothenberg S. Tarkoma and E. Lagerspetz. “Theory and Prac-
tice of Bloom Filters for Distributed Systems.” In: IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutorials, vol. 14, no. 1 (2012). doi: 10.1109/SURV.2011.
031611.00024.
