==PAGE:1==
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Char­
acterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
Preliminary design and Proof of Concept
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Mate­
rials
Preliminary design and Proof of Concept
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Christian J. Katona
Supervisor
Finn T. Agerkvist
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis is to begin the development of a magnetic measurement sys­
tem for characterising soft magnetic material samples that deviate from the dimensional
requirements of established systems based on the state of the art IEC 60404­4 standard.
To achieve this, a preliminary design inspired by the IEC 60404­4 standard is proposed
for a magnetising yoke and a field measurement array. Throughout the development of
the measurement system, a discrepancy in the H­field measurement method used by
the standard is identified. This flaw is addressed by presenting a proof of concept for
two numerical methods designed to mitigate this issue. The results suggest that the pro­
posed measurement system, including the physical measurement set­up and the numer­
ical methods, can serve as a good basis for further development along this path.
ii
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor Finn T. Agerkvist for helping me keep on track
with the arduous task of developing a magnetic measurement system from scratch. As
well as for providing me with many thought provoking discussions.
I would also like to thank Carsten Tingaard, and Lars Risbo and the Purifi­Audio team
for providing me with the opportunity of carrying out this project in collaboration with them.
Additionally I would like to thank them for continually supporting me and providing me the
equipment and materials I required.
Finally, I would like to dedicate the work I put into this thesis to my mother, whom I wish I
could have made proud one last time.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Preface
1
1
Introduction
2
2
Theory and the Basis for Development
4
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Nuances in the Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Measurement Sample Options
15
4
Development Process
16
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Surface Mount Yokes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Toroidal Yokes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
The Final Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Measurement Set­Up
27
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Yoke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Sense Coils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.4
Data Acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6
Methods
30
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2
Field Excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3
Sense Coil signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.4
H­Field Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Results & Discussion
42
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.2
Measurements with the Physical Set­Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.3
Simulation Environment Testing of the Approximation Methods . . . . . . . 45
8
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
50
A Example Bezier Approximation Results
51
B Equivalent Reluctance Method Results
53
iv
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:6==
Preface
Collaboration Background
This thesis project was conducted in collaboration with PURIFI Audio, an audio research
and development company based in Roskilde, Denmark. One of Purifi’s objectives is
to develop loudspeaker drivers with as low distortion as possible, through the means of
geometric optimisation rather than the use of exotic materials. To do this they rely on
creating near­life­like computer model representations of their drivers.
Intention
This report shall mainly serve as a basis for further development by PURIFI in the area
of the magnetic characterisation of soft magnetic samples with non­standard dimensions
and sizes. It is not intended to be used as a manual for the development of a fully fledged
magnetic measurement apparatus. However, it may provide a basis for the investigation
of various ideas and concepts presented throughout the development process described.
This report also seeks to provide an introduction to the relevant magnetic principles which
govern the problem at hand, but it is not intended to be a complete review of such princi­
ples, for that please refer to [1] and [2].
Assumed Knowledge
The audience of this report should posses at least basic knowledge and intuition in the
following areas:
• Magnetic circuits, properties, and quantities
– MMF(Fm), φ, R, B, H, µ, µ0
– Electrical analogies
– Magnetic boundary conditions
• BH curves
– Non­linearity of soft magnetic materials
– Relationship between B, H, and µ
• AC vs DC magnetic field behaviour
– Eddy currents
– Hysteresis
• Lumped element models (LEM)
– Limitations
• Finite Element Method (FEM)
– Principle of operation
– Limitations
For information on these areas please refer to [1] for magnetics, [3] for LEM, and [4] for
FEM.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Most readers will be familiar with the concept of the observer’s paradox. A concept which
concisely describes the phenomenon where the mere observation of a process or event
will influence the outcome thereof. The measurement of the magnetic properties of soft
magnetic materials falls loosely in the case of the observer’s paradox. Where the pro­
cesses used to measure the properties of a sample will alter said properties to some
extent.
To quote the 1989 edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, ”Few subjects in science are
more difficult to understand than magnetism.” The engineers at Purifi are attempting es­
tablish a deep understanding of it, to enable them to create Finite Element models of their
loudspeaker drivers as accurately as possible. So far they have managed to optimise
many components of their loudspeaker drivers. What exactly are these components, and
what do they do?
A loudspeaker driver is typically constructed of three main components, the cone, the sus­
pension, and the motor. The motor provides the force to move cone to produce sound,
while the suspension stabilises this movement. The motor system itself has three com­
ponents: a coil, a permanent magnet, and a yoke. The permanent magnet produces a
constant magnetic field, and through the Lorentz force a current signal driven through the
coil will induce a moving force on the coil. The magnetic field produced by the permanent
magnet is guided and concentrated into an air­gap where the coil is situated. Guiding
a magnetic field is almost always done with the use of soft magnetic materials, such as
steel. During the typical operation of a loudspeaker driver the steel components oscillate
between magnetically saturated and unsaturated states, different areas in a yoke also
experience different levels of saturation. Therefore, between all the regions of the yoke,
the steel will experience a wide range of magnetic field intensities, covering the majority
of the BH curve of the yoke material. Thus, in order to model the magnetic behaviour of
a loudspeaker accurately, it is critical to know the exact BH curves of the materials used
in the motor yoke.
The state of the art for soft magnetic material testing is based on the IEC 60404­4 stan­
dard, which requires its samples to conform to a specific set of geometries. These ge­
ometries include bars, rods, rings, strips, etc.; all of them with their own dimensional
constraints. To comply with these constraints material samples need to be cut, or formed
into one of these shapes.
The effects of mechanical processes on the magnetic properties of soft magnetic materials
are well documented, [1]. However, it is near impossible to accurately predict these effects
with a high level of confidence without measurements. This is where the current state of
the art falls short for Purifi. It is reasonable to assume that there will be some difference in
the magnetic properties between the components used in the drivers and the samples cut
to the required dimensions used for the measurement. Due to the uncertainties produced
by mechanically deforming the steel, Purifi would require a data verification step for their
magnetic simulations to match the real world drivers, in order to have an increased level
of confidence in their optimisation processes. The BH curves produced by this method
could then be compared against the BH curves provided by the steel suppliers.
2
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:8==
To achieve this, an apparatus is to be developed in order to directly measure the mag­
netic properties (BH curve and hysteresis loop) of the components being used in their
drivers, without the need to cut them into standard dimensions. For this the apparatus
must be able to accept samples which do not conform to the dimension requirements of
current state of the art. This objective presents us with a range challenges. Most notably,
determining the H­field within the sample.
This report will follow the development process through numerous different design prin­
ciples, ideas and iterations, each of which could be further investigated to a great extent
for a use case similar to this application or other.
The thesis is structured as follows. Firstly, it is critical to establish a good understanding
of the physics at play in a magnetic system, hence the first portion of this report will con­
cern itself with expanding the fundamental and basic knowledge the reader may possess.
Building on this the current state of the art instruments will be presented and discussed,
both as to why they are not suitable for the task, and what parts can be taken as inspira­
tion. Then the yoke components of a Purifi driver will be introduced with regards to their
suitability as samples for the magnetic measurements. Following this a chronological and
detailed outline of the different conceptual development iterations will be presented, with
the logical steps taken to advance from one to the other. Once the selected design is
reached the measurement set­up along with the data acquisition and processing is pre­
sented. Subsequently the measurement methods, and the numerical methods for the
H­field estimation will be exhibited. The results produced by the methods will then be ex­
amined, and discussed whether they are worthy of further investigation. Finally the report
is summarised and concluded.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory and the Basis for Development
2.1
Introduction
To attempt to develop a method to measure the fundamental magnetic behaviour of mag­
netic materials, one must be deeply familiar with the basics of magnetics. The definitions
which may be currently familiar to us, albeit accurate, do not show the whole picture of
what is happening in a material. Hence it is important to revisit some areas in magnetics
where these more intricate definitions are required. Utilising these, the intricacies of the
current state of the art systems should unravel with much more ease.
2.2
Nuances in the Fundamentals
2.2.1
An Elaboration of µ
The typical way of describing the interaction between an applied magnetic field intensity
(H) and the induced magnetic flux density(B) is
B = µH,
(2.1)
where µ, the permeability can be split into the material’s relative permeability(µr), and the
permeability of free space(µ0). When we make a measurement of this relationship, we are
essentially indirectly measuring the material’s µr. In this context it is important to clarify
that µ is not the gradient of the BH curve, hence not equal to dB/dH, which is known as
the differential permeability. This distinction becomes apparent when we take a look at a
BH curve in Figure 2.1. This may be obvious, however it is important to highlight; as both
the differential permeability and the permeability are often separately used. One instance
where the differential permeability becomes interesting is after the saturation point(Bsat)
of a soft magnetic material. Past Bsat the differential permeability will become 4π10−7 or
simply µ0 [1].
0
500
1000
1500
2000
H-Field (A/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
B-Field (T)
Figure 2.1: The BH curve of annealed pure iron, with a demonstration of the difference
between dB/dH and µ at a conveniently selected point on the curve. µ is the gradient from
the origin, while dB/dH is the local gradient on the curve.
4
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:10==
2.2.2
The Kennelly Convention
Equation 2.1 provides a basic, yet accurate, representation of what happens in a material
when subject to an external magnetic field. However, a more accurate representation of
the two fields interacting can be described by
B = µ0H + J,
(2.2)
known as the Kennelly convention; where J is the magnetic polarisation or simply polar­
isation of a material and it is proportional to its magnetisation (M), with J = µ0M. The
transformation of Equation 2.1 into Equation 2.2 can be seen as splitting µH into two
components; the flux induced directly by the applied field(µ0H), and the flux due to the
magnetic polarisation of the material induced by the applied field(J) [5]. Hence, the effect
of µr is simply moved from µH into J. This provides a description more coherent with the
magnetic interactions inside an observed material.
Magnetic polarisation can mainly be attributed to materials which retain magnetisation
after being exposed to an external field, their characterisation being ferromagnetic and
ferrimagnetic materials. The distinction between these two types of magnetic properties
are not of much importance for the purposes of this project, however it is important to note
that almost all soft magnetic materials to be used in electromagnetic machines will have
moderate ferromagnetic properties, rather than ferrimagnetic properties.
Ferromagnetic materials exhibit spontaneous magnetisation and retain their magnetic po­
larisation after the external magnetic field is removed, until another magnetic field is ap­
plied to demagnetise them. Therefore when measuring the BH curves of soft magnetic
materials it is important, and common practice, to demagnetise them completely before­
hand.
In literature, and the documentations of the state of the art, it is common to see the mag­
netisation curve used instead of the BH curve. It is useful to keep in mind that the magneti­
sation curve will differ from the BH curve merely by a factor of µ0H, as per Equation 2.2.
2.2.3
The Effects of Stress
Mechanical and thermal processes such as cutting, welding, pressing, heat treating, etc.,
have been shown to alter the magnetic properties of magnetic materials. This effect de­
pends on a phenomenon called mangetostriction. Which, in short, is when a substance
is exposed to a magnetic field, its dimensions change [1]. The mechanisms dictating why
this occurs is of less relevance to us, as its relationship to the BH curve and stresses
placed on a material.
”Although the magnetostrictive strain is small in most magnetic materials, the existence of
magnetostriction means that an applied mechanical stress can alter the domain structure
[...]. These effects can have a substantial effect on the low­field magnetic properties,
such as permeability [...]” [1]. Hence both mechanical and thermal processes will alter
the existing internal mechanical stresses present in the polycrystaline structure, and in
effect the magnetic domain structure, of steel. This will in turn affect the BH relationship
of the material, as can be observed in Figure 2.2.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: Effects of applied tensile (+) and compressive (­) stress on the magnetisation
curve of iron; 8000 lb·in2 ≈55 MPa [1].
2.3
State of the Art
2.3.1
Introduction
Taking a look at the instruments available in the field of magnetic characterisation of soft
magnetic materials, a handful can be found to be relevant for the purposes of this project.
The state of the art for soft magnetic material DC analysis is defined by the IEC 60404­4
standard. The remaining examples were used as inspiration for the development process.
2.3.2
IEC 60404­4: Methods of measurement of d.c. magnetic properties
of magnetically soft materials
This standard compiles a range of methods providing adequate precision and accuracy
for the measurement of the DC magnetic properties of soft magnetic materials. It can be
split into two device categories: determination of the magnetic characteristics through the
ring method, and through the permeameter method.
Ring Method
This method is the simpler of the two. It involves wrapping a field winding and a sense
winding around a ring sample with either a rectangular or a circular cross section, see
Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Basic circuit diagram of the ring method. N1 is the number of field winding
turns, while N2 is the number of sense winding turns. The field winding is connected to a
current source, while the sense winding is connected to an integrating fluxmeter.
Due to the geometry of the sample all the flux generated by the field winding can be
assumed to be contained by the material. This is due to the fact that the ring forms
6
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:12==
a closed magnetic circuit with no sharp corners where stray field lines may form. This
enables us to find the H­field within the sample simply through
H = N1 · I
lm
,
(2.3)
where lm is the mean magnetic path length, which can usually be obtained through
lm = π · D + d
2
,
(2.4)
where D is the diameter of the ring, and d is the diameter of the cross section.
Consequentially the sense winding is used purely to measure the flux passing through
the magnetic circuit. This measurement is performed by manipulating Faraday’s law of
induction into the form of
E = −N2AdB
dt
→
B = −
1
N2A
∫
Edt,
(2.5)
where A is the cross­sectional area of the sample within the sense winding, and E is
the electromotive force (EMF) induced across the terminals of the sense coil due to the
change in flux passing through the coil.
This method provides the simplest path to measuring the magnetic properties of a sample.
However a major inflexibility in the sample’s geometry makes this method impractical for
non­ring­shaped samples.
Permeameter Method
The permeameter method is based on a measurement device patented in 1924 by Frank
P. Fahy, called the Fahy Simplex Pereameter. The geometry and measurement principles
have not changed greatly since 1924, so much so that the electronics provided with a
modern system, such as the REMAGRAPH® C by Magnet­Physik, are compatible with the
yoke of the Fahy Simplex Permeameter and its predecessor the Fahy Premeameter [6].
A simplified schematic drawing of the REMAGRAPH® C yoke can be seen in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: A schematic drawing of a REMAGRAPH® C permeagraph yoke developed by
Magnet­Physik. 1: Sample, 2: Yoke, 3: Exchangeable pole pieces for bars and strips, 4:
Field genereting coils, 5: J­compensated surrounding coil, 6: Chattock coil, 7: Connection
to J­Fluxmeter, 8: Connection to H­Fluxmeter, 9: Direct reading of the rate of change in
flux density for input current control.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
7
==PAGE:13==
The main challenge facing the permeameter method, as well as all methods where Am­
pere’s law is not applicable, is determining the H­field within the sample. In IEC 60404­4
two methods for measuring the H­field are proposed. One of them utilises a Chattock coil,
see label 8 in Figure 2.4. The other method utilises a set of concentric coils surrounding
the sample.
The Chattock Coil
The Chattock coil, often referred to as the Rogowsky­Chattock coil, magnetic potentiome­
ter, or potential coil, is an instrument used to measure the gradient of the magnetic po­
tential between two points. A simplified schematic of a Chattock coil can be seen in
Figure 2.5.
A
B
Figure 2.5: A basic schematic of a static Chattock coil. Point A and Point B represent the
two ends of the bent coil wrapped around a non­magnetic material. Pa and Pb represent
the magnetic field’s potential in the sample at point A and point B respectively.
A Chattock coil is comprised of long helical winding wound uniformly around a non­magnetic
rod of constant diameter. Let us consider a coil with n number of turns, length l, diameter
a, and volume v. Then the average difference in magnetic potential, ¯V , between the two
ends A and B can be described by
¯V = 1
a
∫
Hdv.
(2.6)
Now, taking the coil into account, the induced EMF can be described by
E = n d
dt
∫
Hdv = nad ¯V
dt .
(2.7)
The value of E is thus proportional to the rate of change of ¯V [7]. A resemblance to
Faraday’s law of induction can be drawn. Similarly to devices utilising Faraday’s law of
induction, the Chattock coil requires a varying magnetic field in order for it to operate.
Finally, it is important to highlight that a Chattock coil measures the difference in field
potential between two points located at the ends of the coil. Hence, a Chattock coil in
application will measure the H­field at the surface of the sample, and not the field inside
it.
Concentric Coil Method
The concentric coil method for the measurement of the H­field is made up of a set of two
coils coaxially encircling the sample and one another, as can be seen in Figure 2.6.
8
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:14==
Sample
1
2
Figure 2.6: Simplified diagram of a concentric coil H­field measurement system. Two
coils, labelled 1 and 2, surround the sample and one another. The sample and magnetic
field direction can be seen normal to the plane of the image.
On their own each of these coils, through the application of Farraday’s law of induction,
will measure the total amount of flux passing through their respective encircled areas. If
the area­turns product(NA) of the two coils match, and we wire the pair in series opposition
electrically, the flux passing through the air between the two coils can be attained [8]. This
flux can then be used to calculate the H field around the sample.
Measuring the flux passing around the sample can also be achieved by an alternative
method mentioned in [8], albeit in [8] it is not intended for the purpose of measuring the
H­field. If we wind a coil in such a way that the area the coil surrounds is not entirely
enclosed by it, we can measure the flux passing through the crescent area this coil forms,
as seen in Figure 2.7.
Sample
N1A1
Figure 2.7: A simplified diagram of a crescent shaped coil, used to measure the flux
passing through the air around the sample.
Flux­Sensing Coil(B­coil)
A flux­sensing coil system, other wise known as a B­coil, is the simplest way of measuring
the B­field within a sample. It employs a single coil wound around the test sample, if the
sample fills out the area of the coil (A1 = As), then the B­field can be found utilising
Faraday’s law of induction as in Equation 2.5. However, if A1 > As, then a corrected
value of the B­field compensated for the flux passing through the air in the gap between
the coil and the sample can be found by
Bcorr = B −µ0H A1 −As
As
,
(2.8)
where H is the magnetic field intensity in air, measured by a separate coil system.
J­Compensated Surrounding Coil
A J­compensated coil system aims to measure the J­field generated by the material di­
rectly. Here an additional coil is placed between coil 1 and the sample in Figure 2.7,
forming the array in Figure 2.8. This coil will be responsible for measuring the B­field
passing through the sample.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
9
==PAGE:15==
Sample
N1A1
N2A2
Figure 2.8: A simplified diagram of a J­compensated surrounding coil.
The flux sensed by the inner coil can be described by
ϕs = BsN1As,
(2.9)
where the s suffix denotes the sample. If As < A1, then the flux passing through the air
surrounding the sample can be described by
ϕA1 = µ0HN1(A1 −As)
(2.10)
where H is the field strength in the air next to the sample. The flux passing through A2
can be described by
ϕA2 = µ0HN2A2.
(2.11)
The two coils are placed in series opposition electrically, with their area­turn products
being equal. The flux measured by the flux integrator is then
ϕ = ϕs + ϕA1 −ϕA2 = (Bs −µ0H)N1As = JN1As.
(2.12)
The J­field within the sample can then be found by
J =
ϕ
N1As
.
(2.13)
The BH curve can then be calculated by employing the Kennelly convention described by
Equation 2.2.
Determination of the Magnetisation Curves
Both the ring and permeameter method make use of the same set of measurement meth­
ods. The magnetisation curve measurements can be split into: the normal magnetisation
curve measurement, and the hysteresis loop measurement. Both types of measurements
can be preformed two different ways: the continuous recording method, and the point­by­
point method.
The continuous method for the normal magnetisation curve measurement uses a con­
tinuously increasing magnetising current from 0 till the maximum required field strength
is induced. This method works similarly for the hysteresis loop measurement, where an
oscillating magnetising current, with peak values sufficient to produce the maximum mag­
netic field strength required, is applied. In both cases the flux integrators are continuously
running from the initial steady state till the sequence is completed. In the case of the
hysteresis loop measurement the frequency of oscillation should be low enough as to not
induce a significant amount of eddy currents.
The point­by­point method for the measurement of the normal magnetisation curve makes
use of a useful characteristic of minor hysteresis loops. When a symmetric oscillating
field is applied with a random peak amplitude, the magnetisation of the material will travel
10
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:16==
through a loop, similar to the total hysteresis loop of the material, called a minor hysteresis
loop. There are an infinite number of symmetric minor loops, and the reversal points of
these will lie on the normal magnetisation curve of the material [1]. This can be observed
in minor loop a­d in Figure 2.9. With this the point­by­point method employs the measure­
ment of a set of symmetric minor loops with increasing magnitudes. Each minor loop is
excited for 5 cycles to establish a steady state in the material.
The point­by­point method for the measurement of the hysteresis loop makes use of an­
other useful characteristic of minor hysteresis loops. All minor loops, if oscillating at the
same frequency, will be contained by the major hysteresis loop. This also applies to asym­
metric minor loops, which oscillate around an offset. This can be observed in minor loop
f­g and h­k in Figure 2.9. However this method is not relevant for the purposes of this
project as it had been devised to combat the more significant integration drift of analogue
systems.
Figure 2.9: A diagram describing the behaviour of the hysteresis loops in a soft magnetic
material in [1]. (The height of the M curve is exaggerated relative to that of the B curve.)
2.3.3
Soken Tester
The Soken tester, more accurately DAC­IR­3, is a device developed to measure the mag­
netic properties of steel sheets utilising a surface probe. According to the marketing mate­
rial offered by [9], ”generally, magnetic characteristics tests are performed with an Epstein
measurement. The Epstein measurement is a test method that has long been used in
commercial transactions worldwide because it provides reproducible values in a particu­
lar test condition. However, conducting the Epstein measurement requires expertise and
time to cut electrical steel sheets in the correct direction and size using an appropriate cut­
ting tools and to set 12 or more samples into an Epstein frame. To meet the demands for
easy confirmation of the grade of electrical steel sheets, SOKEN has developed a single
sheet tester that can easily determine the overall iron loss value with only a single sheet”.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
11
==PAGE:17==
A schematic of the tester, based on the description in [10] can be found in Figure 2.10.
Yoke
Field Coil
Sense Coil
Sample
Figure 2.10: A simple schematic of a Soken DAC­IR­3 yoke based on the description in
[10].
The DAC­IR­3 is intended for AC testing of steel sheets used in transformer yokes. It oper­
ates at either 50Hz or 60Hz, and it only accepts sheets with a thickness between 0.05mm
and 0.90mm [10]. With the effective cross­sectional area of samples being significantly
smaller than the cross­sectional area of the yoke, the core loss due to the sample will be
the dominating factor in the measurement.
2.3.4
Barkhausen Noise Analyser
Similar to the Soken tester described in subsection 2.3.3 in geometry, a Barkhausen noise
analyser measures the magnetic properties of a sample through detecting the noise gen­
erated by the Barkhausen effect.
The Barkhausen Effect
Magnetic materials are made up of magnetic domains. The direction and size of the
magnetisation of these domains in a material sample dictate the overall magnetisation of
the sample. The border between neighbouring domains are called domain walls, which
will move in response to an applied magnetic field. This motion is often observed to be
jerky and discontinuous, rather than smooth, as shown in Figure 2.11. This phenomenon
is known as the Barkhausen effect [1].
B
H
Figure 2.11: A depiction of the Barkhausen effect on an arbitrary BH curve [1].
Barkhausen Noise
In reality most soft magnetic materials will contain inclusions, which hinder the domain
wall motion. As stated by [1], ”inclusions may take many forms. They may be particles of
a second phase in an alloy, present because the solubility limit has been exceeded. They
may be oxide or sulphide particles and the like, existing as impurities in a metal or alloy.
They may be simply holes or cracks. From a magnetic point of view, an “inclusion” in a
domain is a region which has a different spontaneous magnetisation from the surrounding
material, or no magnetisation at all”. When a domain wall moves it will often encounter
12
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:18==
an inclusion, the wall will tend to cling to the inclusion, trying to minimise the area of the
wall, and in effect the energy of it. This phenomenon is shown in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: A depiction of the passage of a domain wall through an inclusion [1]. The
arrows represent the magnetisation vectors in the material.
When the domain wall abruptly snaps back to its original shape, away from the inclusion,
the energy of the domain jumps. To give an analogy, stretch a rubber band between the
index finger and thumb on one hand, this represents a domain wall, and take the index
finger from the other hand, this represents an inclusion, pointing perpendicular to the
rubber band. If we move the rubber band, or domain wall, with constant velocity towards
our stationary index finger, or inclusion, the rubber band will get caught up on the side
of the index finger. If we keep moving the domain wall the rubber band will stretch, then
eventually it will roll off the tip of our index finger, springing back into its original shape,
releasing the elastic energy stored in the rubber as it snaps back. This jump in energy
released from the domain walls snapping back into shape can be picked up by a sense
coil, where they in turn induce spikes of EMF, this is called the Barkhausen Noise. This
is what causes the discontinuities in the BH curve of Figure 2.11.
Barkhausen Noise Analysis
When a magnetic material is being magnetised the domains with orientations closest to
the direction of the external magnetising field will grow in size, while domains with other
orientations will decrease in size. When the domains cannot expand any further, the
magnetic orientation of the domains, which are not parallel with the external field, will
rotate to become parallel with the field. This hand­over in magnetisation process occurs
around the knee point of the magnetisation curve shown in Figure 2.13.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
13
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.13: Magnetic domain magnetisation processes along a magnetisation curve [1].
Therefore it can be deduced that the Barkhausen noise will be detectable in the region be­
low the knee point of the magnetisation curve. Below this point the Barkhausen noise will
be proportional to the magnetisation of the material, hence if the magnetic field strength
is known a magnetisation curve can be attained.
In application the Barkhausen noise analysis is mostly used for the measurement of the
effects of mechanical processes such as machining (turning, milling, drilling, grinding),
cold working (shot peening, laser peening, autofrettage), and case hardening (carburis­
ing, nitriding, induction hardening)[11]. Additionally, Barkhausen noise analysis has an
effective penetration depth of around 1mm, due to the skin effect which is caused by the
opposing eddy currents induced by the changing magnetic field [11].
14
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:20==
3
Measurement Sample Options
A loudspeaker driver motor assembly is made up of three fundamental components: a
permanent magnet to generate the a constant magnetic field, a soft magnetic yoke to
guide the magnetic field and concentrate it across an air­gap, and a voice coil in said
air­gap which introduces an alternating magnetic field inducing motion. To simplify the
assembly process of a Purifi driver, the yoke is split into four, sometimes five, components.
These components are machined separately from the same material, then glued together.
A simplified schematic of a Purifi driver can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Bottom Plate
Pole Plate
Top Plate
Pole Hat
Axis of symmetry
Figure 3.1: A simplified cross cut diagram of a Purifi loudspeaker driver, with its individual
components labelled.
The machining process used for the individual components will be the same, hence they
will undergo near identical mechanical stresses. In effect the changes in magnetic prop­
erties due to the stresses should be nearly identical across all the components.
Purifi manufacture drivers ranging from 4 inches all the way up to 10 inches. With this
comes a relatively wide range of component dimensions. To give an idea of scale, the
middle of the line, in terms of motor size, is the 6.5 inch driver. The outer diameter of
its motor is 100mm, while the plate thicknesses range from 4 to 7.5mm. This provides a
variety of different sample options to use in the magnetic measurement process.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
15
==PAGE:21==
4
Development Process
4.1
Introduction
When designing a new device from the ground up, a clear set of requirements are nec­
essary to keep the development route on track. Fundamentally there are only three main
requirements for the device at hand. Firstly, the device should be able to accept samples
of various geometries. Secondly, the device has to be able to produce a uniform mag­
netic field through the sample with a high enough intensity to push the sample’s material
past its saturation point. Thirdly, the device has to be able to measure the B­ and H­fields
passing through the sample with an appropriate amount of precision.
This chapter will deal with conceptual investigation of the exploratory magnetic yoke de­
signs leading up to the final design of this device. The exploratory designs can be split
into two main categories: surface mount yokes, and toroidal yokes.
4.2
Surface Mount Yokes
The first design requirement to be tackled was for the device to be able to accept samples
with various geometries. Logically, a magnetic yoke which can be held up against a sam­
ple would accommodate for this requirement. Samples with any geometry, as long as it
has a flat surface big enough for the yoke, could be analysed. In fact, devices such as
the Soken Tester in subsection 2.3.3 and Barkhausen Noise Analyser in subsection 2.3.4
make use of this design philosophy.
4.2.1
First Concept
The first concept made use of a U­shaped magnetising yoke, as shown in Figure 4.1. With
this design a magnetic field would be generated down under the surface of the sample
between the yoke legs.
Field Coil
Yoke
Sample
Figure 4.1: A schematic of the basic initial concept for the field generating yoke. A Field
coil would wrap around the horizontal section of an upside down U­shaped magnetic yoke.
4.2.2
Field Dispersion
With this the first requirement is satisfied. An obvious flaw, with regard to requirement
number two, becomes apparent when looking at the schematic in Figure 4.1. The flaw
being: the lack of control of the field within the sample. In accordance with the behaviour
common to all fields, flux wants to find the path of least resistance between field sources
and sinks in a region. Since we know that the reluctance of a material increases as it
16
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:22==
becomes saturated, the flux passing through the material will disperse in order to decrease
the total reluctance experienced by it. In this case, the flux will stray deeper into the sample
as the magnetic field intensity increases. Resulting in the field within the sample being
non­uniform, and not intense enough to drive the material into and past saturation, as can
be seen in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: A magnetic FEM simulation of the basic initial concept shown in Figure 4.1.
4.2.3
Sample Thickness
To remedy this the sample must be restricted in thickness. If the yoke material has similar
magnetic characteristics to the sample, the sample must have a cross­sectional area less
than or equal to that of the yoke. This can also be achieved by increasing the size of the
yoke, however this becomes impractical after some point. Hence a balance between the
yoke and sample size should be found. Therefore, as long as the measurement yoke has
a thickness greater than the sample, the yoke should be able to produce an adequate
magnetic field through the sample, this can be observed in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: A magnetic FEM simulation of the basic yoke, with a sample thinner than the
yoke. Note the significant increase in field uniformity in the sample material between the
yoke legs.
4.2.4
B­field Measurement
With the yoke being able to produce a uniform magnetic field through the sample, the
question of measurement is raised. For this concept a method similar to that used in the
Soken tester in Figure 2.10 can be used to measure the B­field through the sample. With
a sense coil wrapped around one of the legs of the yoke, the total flux passing through the
sample can be measured, knowing the cross­sectional area of the region of the sample
where we are measuring, we can calculate the average flux density passing through it.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
17
==PAGE:23==
Barkhausen Noise
With the field dispersion being controlled in the z­axis by the sample thickness, the field is
still free to stray in the y­axis(normal to the page). This field dispersion is demonstrated in
Figure 4.4. Hence the flux density estimated by the sense coil placed on one of the yoke
legs would have relatively high level of uncertainty. A further restriction in the width of the
sample would negate the flexibility in sample dimensions promised by a surface probe
approach. Therefore the Barkhausen noise method could be applied to circumvent these
issues, and measure the B­field locally. Unfortunately, due to the physical upper limit of
the Barkhausen effect, measurements would not be possible beyond the knee point of
the BH curve of the sample’s material. In the realm of verifying BH curve measurements
this is somewhat acceptable, nevertheless sub optimal.
Figure 4.4: A magnetic FEM simulation of the flux passing through a sample, observing
the xy­plane.
4.2.5
H­field Measurement
Measuring the H­field in a sample is a crucial and challenging task. The H­field could be
estimated using Equation 2.3, recognising the geometry of the system to be fully closed.
However this method relies on the set­up to be ideal for it to produce an estimate with
a high enough accuracy. Another method could be using a Chattock coil, described in
subsubsection 2.3.2. With the sense coil for the B­field measurement already requiring an
alternating field, this method’s requirements are already accommodated for. One caveat
being, that once the yoke’s dimensions are optimised for the task, the distance between
the two measurement points of the Chattock coil may be too small, and the signal to
noise ration of the measurements may become too small. To circumvent these issues
a method measuring the reluctance, and in turn the permeability, instead of the H­field
could be employed.
4.2.6
Magnetic Relief Path Method
This method makes use of the flux balance through parallel reluctances. This way the
H­field is indirectly measured through obtaining the permeability from the estimated re­
luctance of the sample. This would be achieved by adding a magnetic relief path with a
known reluctance in parallel with the measurement sample. The reluctance of air is linear
and a universal constant, hence an air­gap makes for the perfect known reluctance; with
the added benefit of being able to use a hall­effect sensor instead of a sense coil. This
concept can be seen in Figure 4.5. The main downside of this method is the reliance
on knowing the reluctance of the yoke through a range of field intensities. Additionally,
uncertainties can arise from the flux density non­uniformity in the sample near the yoke
legs.
18
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.5: A magnetic simulation of the basic yoke, with an added magnetic relief path
for estimating the reluctance of the sample.
4.2.7
Improving efficiency and Field Uniformity in the Yoke
As can be observed in Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.3 some regions of the yoke become satu­
rated, this decreases the efficiency of the system, and introduces a stress on the material,
which may alter its magnetic properties. This becomes crucial, especially when the sam­
ple needs to be pushed past its saturation point. As the saturated regions appear near
the internal corners of the yoke, rounding these off will remedy the issue. Applying this to
the basic design we get the yoke seen in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: A magnetic FEM simulation of the geometrically optimised yoke of the ini­
tial concept shown in Figure 4.1. Note the decrease in saturation and increase in field
uniformity in the yoke.
This improvement in yoke shape could also be applied to the relief path concept shown
in Figure 4.5.
4.2.8
Flaws in the Surface Mount Yoke
For this method to work successfully too many restrictions would be needed on the sam­
ple dimensions. As mentioned, the magnetic field within the sample can be concentrated
effectively by defining the thickness of the sample. However the fields will still stray in
the y­axis, resulting an inefficient system, and a nonuniform field distribution in the sam­
ple. With respect to the requirements for this device, this development path is therefore
deemed impractical.
4.3
Toroidal Yokes
With the surface probe method deemed impractical, the design philosophy for the mag­
netising yoke was pivoted. The design presented in Figure 4.6 bared resemblance to the
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
19
==PAGE:25==
ring method described in subsection 2.3.2. In view of this the sample was rotated by 90◦
about the y­axis, and placed inside an air­gap cut out of a toroid, seen in Figure 4.7.
Field
Coil
Yoke
Sample
Figure 4.7: A simplified schematic of an oblong toroid yoke with a open segment for
measurement samples.
With this design being much less flexible with sample dimensions, the pole plate, seen in
Figure 3.1, was found to be an ideal candidate for this design.
4.3.1
Alternate Ring Design
Alternately, a method more akin to the ring method described in subsection 2.3.2 was
briefly explored. Here the top plate, seen in Figure 3.1, would be used as the sample.
However, having to manually wind the field and sense coils around the sample is time
consuming and impractical. A proposition to remedy this was a clamping mechanism for
the coils. This mechanism would allow the coils to unhinge, without the need for them
to be unwound. However, this would require a connection between the two coil halves
which could house enough conductors and withstand enough current. This was ultimately
deemed impractical for the purposes of this device, returning focus on the design principle
shown in Figure 4.7.
4.3.2
Segment Replacement Method
Following the procedures for the ring method described in subsection 2.3.2, both the H
and the B­field can be estimated relatively easily with such a geometry. Applying those
procedures to this design, the following process may result in a successful measurement
method. First, a calibration sample, ideally made of the same material as the yoke, is
placed in the measurement gap. A measurement procedure is run in accordance with the
method described by [8], to measure the BH curve of the entire magnetic system. The
calibration sample is then replaced with a measurement sample. The same procedure
is followed as before, except this time the resulting measurement is compared to the
calibration measurement. Any differences in the magnetic fields within the system will be
due to the difference in magnetic properties of the sample. From this the BH curve of the
sample material could be extracted.
In theory this method could produce accurate measurements with convenience. Unfortu­
nately the sample dimensions are restricted on all axes, requiring the height to be precise
enough so that there would be no air­gap between the sample and the yoke. Additionally,
due to the geometry of the yoke, both the sample and the yoke would reach saturation
at similar magnetic field strengths. This would make measurements above the saturation
point of the sample material very inefficient, this can be demonstrated in Figure 4.8.
20
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:26==
(a) Fm = 2000A­t, ¯B = 1.72T
Density Plot: |B|, Tesla
1.900e+000 : >2.000e+000
1.800e+000 : 1.900e+000
1.700e+000 : 1.800e+000
1.600e+000 : 1.700e+000
1.500e+000 : 1.600e+000
1.400e+000 : 1.500e+000
1.300e+000 : 1.400e+000
1.200e+000 : 1.300e+000
1.100e+000 : 1.200e+000
1.000e+000 : 1.100e+000
9.000e-001 : 1.000e+000
8.000e-001 : 9.000e-001
7.000e-001 : 8.000e-001
6.000e-001 : 7.000e-001
5.000e-001 : 6.000e-001
4.000e-001 : 5.000e-001
3.000e-001 : 4.000e-001
2.000e-001 : 3.000e-001
1.000e-001 : 2.000e-001
<0.000e+000 : 1.000e-001
(b) Fm = 4000A­t, ¯B = 1.82T
Figure 4.8: A magnetic FEM simulation of the oblong toroid yoke at two levels of MMF
near the saturation point of the yoke and sample materials. A two times increase in coil
current results in a minimal increase in flux density of 0.1T.
4.3.3
Shape optimisation: Yoke Saturation
Staying in the realm of magnetics, the saturation issue is tackled first. This can simply
be improved by thickening the yoke and introducing two tapered sections adjacent to the
sample, so that a smooth transition between the two cross­sectional areas is ensured. The
taper angle should be balanced between two constraints: flux leakage round the sample,
and yoke saturation in the tapered region. If the taper angle is too steep, at higher levels of
magnetisation flux may find alternate paths through the air around the sample. Alternately
if the taper angle is too shallow, the region where the yoke will experience saturation will
be too large. These effects can be observed in Figure 4.9.
(a) Flux leakage around the sample
due to a steep taper angle.
Density Plot: |B|, Tesla
1.900e+000 : >2.000e+000
1.800e+000 : 1.900e+000
1.700e+000 : 1.800e+000
1.600e+000 : 1.700e+000
1.500e+000 : 1.600e+000
1.400e+000 : 1.500e+000
1.300e+000 : 1.400e+000
1.200e+000 : 1.300e+000
1.100e+000 : 1.200e+000
1.000e+000 : 1.100e+000
9.000e-001 : 1.000e+000
8.000e-001 : 9.000e-001
7.000e-001 : 8.000e-001
6.000e-001 : 7.000e-001
5.000e-001 : 6.000e-001
4.000e-001 : 5.000e-001
3.000e-001 : 4.000e-001
2.000e-001 : 3.000e-001
1.000e-001 : 2.000e-001
<0.000e+000 : 1.000e-001
(b) Yoke saturation due to a shallow ta­
per angle.
Figure 4.9: A magnetic FEM simulation of two variants of the taper angle applied to the
yoke regions adjacent to the sample.
Of the two constraints flux leakage bears more weight, as this is more difficult to compen­
sate for when compared to yoke saturation. This is because the amount of flux leakage is
dependent on the permeability of the sample material, while the yoke saturation is a func­
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
21
==PAGE:27==
tion of flux and the geometry of the yoke. Therefore, knowing the geometry of the yoke,
and already measuring the flux passing through it, it is relatively simple to compensate
for.
4.3.4
Shape Optimisation: Sample Dimension Flexibility
To accommodate for samples with various thicknesses and diameters the yoke needs
a mechanism which allows it to open and close the gap, as well as adjust for different
diameters. For this, inspiration was taken from a Brockhaus HG 200 hystograph, used
during a laboratory visit at DTU. The Brockhaus HG 200, seen in Figure 4.10, is based
on the IEC 60404­5[12] standard, the counterpart for the IEC 60404­4 standard oriented
towards hard magnetic material characterisation.
Figure 4.10: A Brockhaus HG 200 hystograph electromagnet and yoke from [13].
Here two exchangeable yoke poles can be moved towards and away from each other with
the use of a linear actuating manual crank mechanism. When inspecting the geometry
of the HG 200, it bares resemblance to the design in Figure 4.7. If we mirror the de­
sign in Figure 4.7 across the centre of the sample, the resemblance becomes even more
apparent.
4.4
The Final Design
With the toroidal yoke approach not presenting too many flaws, it was deemed suitable for
the purposes of the project. By chance Purifi happened to have an old Walker Scientific
MH1020 hystograph sitting in the back of their warehouse, forgotten about.
Figure 4.11: A photograph of the Walker Scientific MH1020 hystograph yoke.
22
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:28==
Even though the MH1020 has removable yoke pole pieces, having new ones designed
and manufactured would not have fit within the time constraints of this project. Hence with
the existing yoke pole pieces the H­field measurement method using Equation 2.3 would
not be provide enough accuracy, due to the flux leakage around the sample.
4.4.1
Field Measurement
As the yoke complies with the standard IEC 60404­5, it is sensible to take inspiration from
the field measurement method utilised by the Brockhaus HG 200. The Brockhaus uses a
J­compensated coil array, which is the same as the design described in subsection 2.3.2
in the standard IEC 60404­4.
Reviewing the principle of operation of the J­compensated coil system, it becomes clear
that the coils can be rearranged such that only two are required. Instead of combining the
signals straight away in an analogue fashion, it allows for more flexibility to combine the
signals digitally once processed. To do this it is important to recognise that Equation 2.12
can be simplified to
JN1As = (Bs −Bo)N1As,
(4.1)
where Bo is the flux density around the sample. With this the coil system can be simplified,
and will end up looking like the concentric coils in Figure 2.6, except the two coils will be
connected to each of their own flux integrator channels. The flux measured by the inner
coil will be used to calculate Bs and to calculate Bo together with the outer coil. Bo can
be found by
Bo = ϕ2 −ϕ1
A2 −A1
,
(4.2)
where ϕ1 is the flux passing through the inner coil, ϕ2 is the flux passing through the
outer coil, and A denotes the areas of the coils. Additionally, the sensitivity of the Bs
measurement can potentially be increased by incorporating the flux measured by the outer
coil through
Bs = ϕ1 −Bo(A1 −As)
As
+ ϕ2 −Bo(A2 −As)
As
,
(4.3)
where a gap between the inner coil and the sample is anticipated.
A definitive method for attaining the H­field within the sample has not yet been identified.
The attempts for doing so will be discussed in a later chapter. In the mean time the field
coil current and the H­field around the sample will be used as a place holder.
4.4.2
Sense Coils
The design of the sense coils may be simple, but there are a couple considerations to
make when deciding on their dimensions. When looking at the field distribution between
the pole pieces in Figure 4.12, it becomes apparent that the diameter of the sense coil
will be dependent on the diameter of the sample.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
23
==PAGE:29==
0
10
20
30
40
Radial position (mm)
50
60
70
80
H-Field (kA/m)
Air
Sample
(a) The H­field measured through the
middle of the gap from the centre of the
sample to the edge of the pole piece.
Density Plot: |B|, Tesla
2.090e+000 : >2.200e+000
1.980e+000 : 2.090e+000
1.870e+000 : 1.980e+000
1.760e+000 : 1.870e+000
1.650e+000 : 1.760e+000
1.540e+000 : 1.650e+000
1.430e+000 : 1.540e+000
1.320e+000 : 1.430e+000
1.210e+000 : 1.320e+000
1.100e+000 : 1.210e+000
9.900e-001 : 1.100e+000
8.800e-001 : 9.900e-001
7.700e-001 : 8.800e-001
6.600e-001 : 7.700e-001
5.500e-001 : 6.600e-001
4.400e-001 : 5.500e-001
3.300e-001 : 4.400e-001
2.200e-001 : 3.300e-001
1.100e-001 : 2.200e-001
<0.000e+000 : 1.100e-001
(b) A side view of the magnetic flux den­
sity in the pole pieces and the sample.
Figure 4.12: An axisymmetric magnetic FEM simulation of an arbitrary sample placed in
between the pole pieces, at a magnetisation level near the saturation point of the sample
material, at 400A­t.
As seen in Figure 4.12a the field experiences two types of straying near the sample bound­
ary and the edge of the pole piece. In the gap between the pole pieces the magnetic field
can be assumed to be unidirectional, with the exception of the region near the sample
surface, where the flux lines experience a slight bowing effect. Near the sample bound­
ary the tangential component of the magnetic field strength has to be continuous, as the
applied field can be assumed time­invariant and no surface currents would form. Due to
this a transition region between the field strength in the steel and the air is formed. The
shape of this, at the level of the applied magnetic field seen in Figure 4.12, is similar to
the effects of the straying field lines at the edge of the pole pieces.
Due to the straying effects in the gap two routes could be taken for determining the diame­
ter of the sense coils. One of the design philosophies would dictate that the gap between
sense coils to cover the entirety of the area where flux passes around the sample. With
this an accurate representation of the total flux density outside the sample could be mea­
sured. The other design philosophy would dictate that the gap between the sense coils
should only cover the area in the air­gap where the field can be assumed linear, and es­
timate the straying effects at the edges. Taking a look at the J­compensated surrounding
coil in Figure 4.13, it can be deduced that the state of the art opts for the second design phi­
losophy. It is important to note that the hard magnetic materials intended to be measured
by a machine compliant with the IEC 60404­5 standard will have relative permeabilities
closer to that of air than soft magnetic materials. This means that the difference in H­field
in side and around the hard magnetic material sample will be much more uniform than
for the soft magnetic material sample. Hence there will be nearly no stray effects by the
boundary to account for in the case of hard magnetic materials.
24
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.13: A J­Compensated surrounding coil used by an IEC 60404­5 compliant hys­
teresis graph, shown in [2].
When scrutinising the design concept where the sense coils cover the entire air­gap re­
gion, it becomes apparent that for this method to function as intended the inner coil must
have the same inner diameter as the diameter of the sample. This becomes impracti­
cal when a variety of different sample sizes and shapes are intended to be measured.
Therefore the second design concept will make for a more suitable solution for the sense
coils.
To get an accurate representation of the uniform region of the magnetic field in the air­
gap, it is important to set the coil diameters to be within this region. These dimensions
will be dependent on the height of the gap, with a wider gap resulting in a greater stray
field effect. Therefore the closer we place the sense coil gap to the centre of the uniform
region the better. With the sample diameter being variable, the inner coil diameter should
be at least 4­5mm greater than that of the largest intended sample size. The outer coil
should have a diameter at least 10mm less than the diameter of the pole piece.
Field shapes in the uniform region
As the flux in the system will find the path of least resistance, the magnetic path length is a
factor will affect the distribution of the flax across the air­gap. The flux that passes through
the uniform region in the air­gap travels through the edges of the pole pieces, as seen in
Figure 4.12b. Hence the flux passing through the uniform region in the air­gap nearest
to the sample will have a longer magnetic path length than the flux passing through the
air­gap near the edge of the pole piece. From this it becomes clear that more flux will flow
the further we move from the sample boundary. This effect is demonstrated in Figure 4.14
at two different induced magnetic field strengths. This demonstrates an independence of
the uniform region slope on the induced magnetic field strength.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
25
==PAGE:31==
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Radial position (mm)
1.95
1.975
2
2.025
2.05
B-Field (mT)
(a) Fm = 20A­t, ¯∇B = 9.29T/m
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Radial position (mm)
96.5
96.525
96.55
96.575
96.6
B-Field (mT)
(b) Fm = 400A­t, ¯∇B = 8.74T/m
Figure 4.14: The flux density distribution in the uniform region of the air­gap at two different
applied magnetic field strengths. Note that the mean gradient of the B­fields are relatively
similar.
As we increase the magnetising field strength the slope will remain near constant, from
this it can be deduced that this effect will be much more pronounced at lower levels. To
combat this the sense coil cap should be centred around the middle of the uniform region.
This, however, is not a realistic requirement, and this will need to be compensated for
numerically.
26
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:32==
5
Measurement Set­Up
5.1
Introduction
With a suitable magnetic yoke readily available and the measurement method selected,
the physical measurement set­up can be assembled. This chapter will deal with describing
each component of the system in detail.
5.2
Yoke
The yoke is made up of two main components, with a set of field coils to generate the
magnetising field, as seen in Figure 5.1. Most of the physical attributes and dimensions of
the yoke are known. However, as the yoke was manufactured in the 60s some information
about the system is unknown. Namely, the steel type of the yoke and pole pieces, and
the exact number of turns in each coil.
Yoke
Field
Coils
Sample
Pole
Pieces
Figure 5.1: A schematic diagram of the MH1020 yoke, with a sample placed between the
poles for scale.
Pole Pieces
The magnetising yoke assembly contains two identical pole pieces, each having replace­
able tapered end pieces. As stated, the material of these is unknown, but an educated
guess for this would be pure annealed iron or an electrical steel alloy. The tapered part of
the pole piece is 7.5cm long, and it tapers from 11cm in diameter to 8cm in diameter; the
removable section is 4cm long. The cylindrical part of the pole piece is 11cm in diameter
and 16.5cm long. Thus the cross­sectional area of the pole pieces ranges from 50.27cm2
to 95.03cm2. The upper pole piece can be moved up or down with the use of a manual
crank, seen at the top in Figure 4.11. The pole piece can be locked in place with a lever,
seen on the front of the yoke in Figure 4.11.
Yoke
The yoke is made up of one large loop with two holes at either end to fit the pole pieces.
Again the material is unknown. However, it seems to have been made by casting, which
may indicate iron rather than steel. The yoke, excluding the crank mechanism at the
top, is 48cm tall, 35cm wide, 18cm deep, and 5cm thick. Thus the minimum effective
cross­sectional area of the yoke will be approximately 90+90cm2 or 180cm2.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
27
==PAGE:33==
Field Coils
The two pole pieces are surrounded by one field coil each. Unfortunately the number of
coil turns is unclear, but is estimated to be around 200 in total across the two coils. The
coils are encased in a housing with an inner diameter of 11cm, outer diameter of 12.5cm,
and height of 11cm. The two coils are electrically connected in series, and together they
have a 9.6ΩDC resistance.
5.3
Sense Coils
From the available loudspeaker driver motor assembly components the pole plate, see
Figure 3.1, is selected, for its low profile and uniform geometry. The pole plates in the
Purifi driver line­up are up to 50.6mm in diameter, up to 4mm thick. With the coils needing
to be less than 4mm tall, and have an adequate number of turns, the inner coil diameter
had to be set to 52.6mm. As most of the testing was performed on samples from the
4” and the 6.5” drivers, which range from 28.24mm to 36.64mm in diameter, this is not
a major concern during the prototype testing. The outer coil diameter was chosen to be
62.2mm, such that there will be an adequate amount of space for the windings to fit within
the limits proposed in subsection 4.4.2.
The coils are wound on a 3D printed former made of thermoplastic, the cross cut schematic
of which can be seen in Figure 5.2. The coils were wound with 0.12mm diameter enam­
elled copper wire.
2.6
2.6
2.8
⌀ 52.6
⌀ 58.2
⌀ 62.2
⌀ 72
4.9
1.0
Figure 5.2: A cross cut schematic drawing of the 3D printed concentric sense coil formers.
All units are in mm. With the inner coil being wound around the former at 52.6mm, and
the outer coil at 62.2mm.
The inner and outer coils have approximately 77 and 162 turns each respectively, and the
whole assembly can be seen in Figure 5.3. Unfortunately the exact number of coil turns
is unknown, as an error was made during the winding procedure. This can be remedied
by applying a calibration procedure recommended in the IEC 60404­4 standard.
28
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.3: A picture taken of the sense coils in the coil former.
5.4
Data Acquisition
The measurement of the induced EMF of the sense coils is performed with the use of
a data acquisition system developed internally at Purifi, this will be referred to as the
Redbox. The Redbox was designed to provide an excitation signal to a loudspeaker driver
under test, through an internal amplifier. The Redbox also has two electrically balanced
input channels, with one designed to accept signals from measurement microphones,
and the other one designed to accept signals from a position sensor used in separate
measurement set­up.
Output
As the field coils provide a 9.6Ωload, which is very similar to the electrical load of a con­
ventional loudspeaker, the amplifier output can be connected directly to the field coils.
One drawback of the amplifier is that it is an audio grade amplifier, which has a DC pro­
tection stage built in. Fortunately, the DC protection only kicks in if a DC signal with a 12V
amplitude is detected. As the sense coils require a time­variant field, this should not pose
issues during measurements. Finally, the amplifier is voltage controlled and is supplied
with signals by a 24bit 96kHz DAC.
Input
The sense coils will be connected to the position sensor input channel, as the microphone
channel is specifically designed for condenser microphones and would require additional
processing steps. The input channels of the Redbox sample at a 24bits and 96kHz, and
have an input voltage limit of 25V. As the Redbox only has one available input for the
sense coils, the measurement with the two coils will have to be run twice. If the appropri­
ate precautions are taken to make the magnetic environment unaltered between the two
measurements, this should not cause any substantial discrepancies.
Processing
The Redbox is connected to a computer running MATLAB®. Here the output signal can
be precisely defined, and the input signals can be processed. The voltage of the output
signal is directly mapped to the amplitudes defined in MATLAB.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
29
==PAGE:35==
6
Methods
6.1
Introduction
With the physical measurement set­up defined, the numerical processing and signals
need to be outlined. This chapter deals with describing the signal processing, the numer­
ical processing, and the excitation signals used. This will be done by splitting the system
between the input and output stages. First the input stage with the field excitation signals
will be discussed. Then the output stage with the sense coil signal processing will be
discussed.
6.2
Field Excitation
The field excitation signal can be split into two halves. The first half, the demagnetisation,
is required to provide the measurement with a zero initial state. The second half provides
the signal for field excitation for the measurement.
6.2.1
Demagnetisation (De­Gaussing)
As the measurement system relies on integration, any constant components in the signal
will be undetectable. Therefore, with both the yoke and the sample prone to retaining
a level of magnetisation a demagnetisation, otherwise known as a de­gaussing, step is
required before the measurement begins.
In principle a de­Gaussing signal is very simple. A sinusoidal magnetic field with a decay­
ing amplitude is applied to the system. As the amplitude of the sinusoid decreases, given
it oscillates around 0, the magnetisation of the material in the system will decrease to 0,
this can be seen in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: The effect of a de­Gaussing signal on the BH curve of an arbitrary material
[1].
In practice it is best to have the de­Gaussing step run for a relatively long time. The
de­Gaussing sweep requires the sinusoid to decrease in amplitude steadily, allowing the
system to oscillate through several periods. Rushing this will merely induce eddy currents
in the materials and in turn a DC offset will form in the magnetisation of the system. This
will cause the rest of the signal to oscillate around this point, resulting in a non­zero initial
state for the measurement. Therefore, the frequency of the sinusoid must be low enough
30
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:36==
not to generate a significant amount of eddy currents in the materials, this is best to be
kept below 1Hz. Additionally, it is good practice to ramp the signal up to the maximum am­
plitude at the beginning, to reduce the high frequency components inherent to an impulse.
The voltage waveform of the de­Gaussing signal designed following these guidelines can
be described by
envelope(t) =
{
t
for 0 ≤t ≤t1
ent
for t1 < t ≤t1 + t2 and n = log10 (0.002)
t2
De­Gauss(t) = A · (envelope(t) · sin (ωt)),
(6.1)
where A is the desired peak amplitude of the signal, ω is the desired frequency of oscilla­
tion, and t is time. An example of this can be seen in Figure 6.2.
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Time (s)
-0.5
-0.25
0
0.25
0.5
Field Coil Current (A)
Figure 6.2: The current wave form of a de­Gaussing signal used in the measurement set­
up. An exponential decay was selected, as this it provides with the smoothest transition
to zero.
6.2.2
Excitation Signal for Measurement
The excitation signal for measuring the BH curves of the sample is applied following the
de­Gaussing step. The excitation signal was chosen to have two components: a signal to
measure the normal magnetisation curve, and one to measure the hysteresis loop. This
distinction is made to isolate the measurements of the two curves, and keep any induced
field effects from the hysteresis measurement, such as eddy currents, separate from the
normal curve measurement.
Normal Magnetisation Curve
The normal magnetisation curve can be measured via two methods, as described in sub­
section 2.3.2. The continuous measurement method was selected, as it requires the sim­
pler and quicker procedure of the two methods, and as this system is a proof of concept
this is preferable.
The signal selected for the continuous measurement of the normal curve is a raised half
cosine step function. This proved with the least amount of high frequency components.
As the Redbox’s output stage is voltage controlled the signal is applied in the voltage
domain, and it can be described by
half­cos­step(t) =
{
A · −cos (ωt)+1
2
for 0 ≤t ≤t1 and ω < 2πrad/s
A
for t1 < t ≤t2,
(6.2)
and the corresponding current drawn by the field coils can be seen in Figure 6.3.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
31
==PAGE:37==
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time (s)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Field Coil Current (A)
Figure 6.3: The current waveform for the normal magnetisation curve measurement. The
maximum current drawn is 2.07A, corresponding to a 10V excitation voltage.
The peak current plateau, seen in Figure 6.3, is added as to allow the magnetic system
to settle at the peak magnetisation level before the next signal is applied.
Hysteresis Loop
The hysteresis loop measurement makes use of the continuous method described in sub­
section 2.3.2. Here a simple sinusoidal signal is applied to the field coils. The current
drawn by the field coils can be seen in Figure 6.4, where the oscillations adjacent to other
signal components are omitted. For the measurement signal 10 cycles are applied over
the span of 150s, such that the system can settle in a steady cyclic state.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time (s)
-2
-1
0
1
2
Field Coil Current (A)
Figure 6.4: The current waveform for the stable oscillation for the hysteresis loop mea­
surement. The peak current drawn is 1.66A, corresponding to a 10V peak excitation
voltage. The frequency of oscillation is approximately 0.07Hz. The exact cause for the
distortion in the waveform near 0 has not been identified, however this should not cause
any issues.
6.2.3
Signal Combination
The three signal components are joined together to produce a total measurement se­
quence. The voltage waveform can be seen in Figure 6.5. A 30s silence was placed
before the signal as to isolate the measurement from the Redbox’s timing signal1. A 10s
of silence is added in between the de­Gausing signal and the normal curve measurement,
to allow for an adequate amount of data to be collected at zero to be used to set the inte­
gration constant. Finally, another 30s of silence was placed following the measurement,
1The Redbox sends an impulse to the output channels, and uses this as a timing marker to synchronise
the inputs with the outputs.
32
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:38==
as to allow for the monitoring of the system as it settles. The total signal can be described
by
Signal(t) =





















0
for 0 ≤t ≤t1
De­Gauss(t)
for t1 < t ≤t2
0
for t2 < t ≤t3
half­cos­step(t)
for t3 < t ≤t4
A · cos (ωt)
for t4 < t ≤t5 and ω < 2πrad/s
0
for t5 < t ≤t6,
(6.3)
and an example can be seen in Figure 6.5.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Time (s)
-10
-5
0
5
10
Field Coil Voltage (V)
Figure 6.5: The combined measurement sequence voltage waveform as described by
Equation 6.3.
With this sequence a near zero initial state can be invoked in the system for the measure­
ment of the normal magnetisation curve and hysteresis loop. The de­Gaussing step was
measured to bring the remnant magnetisation of the yoke down to 2mT, without a sample;
measured with a high precision gaussmeter in the air­gap.
6.3
Sense Coil signals
In the measurement sequence the data acquisition of the sense coil EMF runs throughout
the entire length of the input signal defined by Equation 6.3. With a typical peak EMF
recorded by the Redbox being 0.59V, the EMF measurement is significantly lower than
the Redbox’s upper limit of 25V, therefore some quantisation noise is expected. To combat
this the measured signals have to be filtered before they can be integrated and processed.
6.3.1
Filtering
To improve the processing performance the sample rate of 96kHz is excessively large
for signals that oscillate at less than 1Hz. With the magnetic properties of the system
introducing non­linearities, this higher frequency components into the measured signal,
an FFT should run to determine an appropriate sample rate to down­sample the signal to.
To down­sample the signal, it should first be filtered. This is done by means of a low­pass
filter, and its cut of frequency can be determined by the same FFT of the signal, seen in
Figure 6.6.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
33
==PAGE:39==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Frequency (Hz)
-100
-75
-50
-25
0
25
Signal Amplitude
(dB re: 1mV)
Figure 6.6: A single­sided FFT of EMF induced during a measurement sequence with the
signal described by Equation 6.3 exciting the field coils. Note that the signal components
only appear up to 7Hz.
From the FFT we can determine that no discernible signal components can be observed
above 7Hz. From this observation a 20th order Butterworth lowpass IIR filter is applied.
The half­power frequency of 10Hz selected as to preserve an adequate amount of the
high frequency components of the EMF. The FFT of filtered EMF signal can be seen in
Figure 6.7, however the effects of the filtering are more easily distinguishable in the time
domain plot of Figure 6.8.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Frequency (Hz)
-100
-75
-50
-25
0
25
Signal Amplitude
(dB re: 1mV)
Figure 6.7: A single­sided FFT of the EMF signal with a 20th order Butterworth IIR filter
with a half­power frequency of 10Hz applied.
193.05
193.06
193.07
193.08
193.09
193.1
Time (s)
-140.8
-140.7
-140.6
Amplitude (mV)
Figure 6.8: The time­domain representation of a short segment of the filtered EMF signal.
The black line is the unfiltered signal, and the white curve is the resulting filtered signal.
34
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:40==
After successfully filtering the signal, it can now be down­sampled to a more suitable
sample rate of 100Hz.
6.3.2
Numerical Processing
With the EMF signals filtered and down­sampled they can be integrated to produce usable
flux and flux density information, using Faraday’s law of induction in the form of Equa­
tion 2.5. First, the measured signal has to be split up into its individual measurement
stages: the normal magnetisation curve measurement, and the hysteresis loop measure­
ment. As the data is already time aligned with the input signal this can be done simply for
the normal curve measurement by selecting the data between t3 and t4. For the hystere­
sis curve measurement one period of the oscillating signal is selected towards the end of
its corresponding signal segment. This segment can be defined by
t1,h = t5 −3π
ω , and t2,h = t5 −π
ω,
(6.4)
where the h subscript denotes the hysteresis measurement, and ω is the angular fre­
quency of the oscillations used for the hysteresis measurement signal. This way the
system will have experienced eight stable oscillation cycles before the measurement is
made, additionally any non­oscillatory effects caused by the abrupt stop in the signal at
t = t5 will be omitted.
The silence region between t2 and t3 we be used as the reference point for the signal,
and the magnitudes of the following data points will be adjusted accordingly.
6.3.3
Calibration
As stated in section 5.3 the area­turns of the coils need to be calibrated for them to produce
reliable data. This procedure makes use of a hall­effect sensor based gaussmeter. The
sense coils are to be placed between the pole pieces of the yoke, without a sample, and
the gaussmeter is positioned such that the flux passing through the centre of the coils
can be measured. The signal described by Equation 6.3 is then applied to the field coils,
while both the EMF of the sense coils and the flux density through the hall­effect sensor
are measured. The EMF signal is then integrated to produce
∫
E = −(NA)B −c.
(6.5)
The two measurements are then compared between t2 and t6. Here a minimisation algo­
rithm is utilised to fit the values of NA and c, such that the two measurements align. The
cost function of the minimisation algorithm is defined by
f = ∥Bgauss −Bsense∥2
∥Bgauss∥2
,
(6.6)
which is the normalised squared Euclidean distance between the gaussmeter measure­
ment, and the sense coil measurement. It is important to note that c is not the remnant
magnetisation of the system. However since it has the units of nTm2, dividing it by NA
could produce the remnant magnetisation of the system. This can then be applied back
to the EMF signal in the form of
Bcorr = −1
NA(
∫
E + c),
(6.7)
to produce a corrected flux density measurement. By measuring the area of the coils,
and dividing NA by it, the number of coil turns can be found, albeit with some marginal
error. As the calibration is being performed in the time domain, this error can be attributed
to a combination of integration drift and error in the area measurement. With this the
integration drift is being compensated for.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
35
==PAGE:41==
6.3.4
Curve Calculation
With the calibration coefficient of the coils found and the data collected, filtered and seg­
mented, the curves can now be calculated. The first step is to calculate the B­field passing
through the gap between the coils, call this Bo. This can be done by
ϕi = Bi · Ai,
ϕt = Bt · Ao,
ϕo = ϕt −ϕi,
Bo =
ϕo
Ao −Ai
,
(6.8)
where the i subscript denotes the values associated with the inner coil, the o subscript
denotes the values associated with the area between the two coils, and ϕt and Bt are the
total flux and flux density measured by the outer coil respectively. From this the H­field in
Ao can be calculated by applying Equation 2.1, where µ = µ0. From this the flux passing
through the air between the sample and the inner coil can be found by
ϕi,air = Bo · (Ai −As) · k,
(6.9)
where k is a compensation factor that can be defined to compensate for the lower average
flux density in the area Ai −As, as discussed in subsection 4.4.2. Next the flux density,
and the J­polarisation, in the sample can be found by
ϕs = ϕi −ϕi,air,
Bs = ϕs
As
,
J = (Bs −Bo).
(6.10)
6.4
H­Field Estimation
When looking at the concentric coil method for measuring the H­field in the sample, as
proposed by the IEC 60404­4 standard, one could make the conceptual claim that the
magnetic field strength around the sample will not equal that inside it. Indeed, when
running a magnetostatic FEM simulation of the system, sweeping the field coil current from
0 to 2A, it can be observed that the H­field in the sample deviates from the H­field around
the sample. This is especially pronounced at higher applied magnetic field strengths, as
seen in Figure 6.9.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Field Coil Current (A)
0
20
40
60
80
H-Field (kA/m)
Ho
Hs
Figure 6.9: The difference in the H­field measured inside and outside the sample, in a
magnetostatic FEM simulation. Ho denotes the H­field outside the sample in the air­gap,
and Hs denotes the H­field within the sample.
36
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:42==
This deviation results in a distortion in the BH curve measurement, this can be demon­
strated by plotting the flux density in the sample against both the H­field in the sample,
and the H­field outside the sample. This distortion is shown in Figure 6.10
0
20
40
60
80
H-Field (A/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Ho
Hs
Figure 6.10: The same simulated B­field measurement plotted against the two H­field
measurements Ho and Hs, from Figure 6.9.
The deviation between the two H­fields is intrinsically dependent on the permeability of
the materials they pass through. Therefore this cannot be accurately compensated for by
applying a linear compensation factor. To perfectly compensate for this the permeability
of the material would be required, since this is effectively what is being measured this is
not possible. However, with the use of numerical processes a non­linear compensation
factor can be estimated.
Two methods have been identified for the purpose of compensating the H­field. One
method makes use of a FEM model of the measurement set­up. The other method makes
use of describing each magnetic component of the measurement set­up in terms of linear
and non­linear reluctances. Both methods make use of a minimisation algorithm to attain
an accurate estimate of the BH curve of the sample material.
6.4.1
FEM Method
This method makes use of the effects the sample material’s BH curve has on the H­field
outside the sample. In short if we know the shape of the BH curve formed by Bs and Ho
from the physical measurement set­up, then the BH curve formed by Bs and Hs can be
estimated from it. This can be achieved by taking a parametric representation of a BH
curve and adjusting its parameters until the BsHo curve in the simulation matches that of
the measurement.
Bezier Approximation
A normal BH curve can be described by four fundamental features. First, the initial per­
meability, µi, describes the slope of the normal BH curve near the origin. Second, the
pre­saturation linear region is often described by its maximum permeability, µmax; this
usually occurs at the knee point of the curve. Third, the saturation point of the material
occurs at the point at which the BH curve leaves the non­linear region, and enters the
linear saturation region, this is usually described by Bsat. Fourth, the differential perme­
ability of the linear saturation region, which is equal to 4π10−7 and is constant across all
ferromagnetic BH curves.
As the non­linear region of the BH curve is its most prominent and defining feature, for
the proposes of verifying the BH curves provided by the suppliers, µi can be disregarded
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
37
==PAGE:43==
for now. With the three features a simple parametric representation of a BH curve can be
constructed. This can be efficiently achieved through the use of a quadratic Bezier curve.
Bezier curves are most commonly used in computer graphics to create parametric curves
joining two points using a set of control points. A quadratic Bezier curve joins two points
with a third dictating the behaviour of its curvature, and it can be described by
⃗B(t, ⃗P1, ⃗P2, ⃗P3) =


t2
2(1 −t)t
(1 −t)2

·


⃗P1
⃗P2
⃗P3

,
0 ≤t ≤1,
(6.11)
where ⃗P1 and ⃗P3 are the start and end points of the Bezier curve, and ⃗P2 is the control
point determining the sharpness of the curve.
⃗P1 and ⃗P3 can be defined by the B­field value of the knee point and the saturation point
respectively. As µmax is the slope to the origin at the knee point, ⃗P1 can be defined by
µmax and Bk. As the linear region starting at Bsat can be described by
B = µ0H + Bc,
(6.12)
where Bc is the flux density offset. With this ⃗P3 can be defined by two values, Bsat and
Bc, and the H­coordinate of Bsat can be found by
Hsat = Bsat −Bc
µ0
.
(6.13)
Finally ⃗P2 can be described by the intersection point of the infinitely long lines on which
⃗P1 and ⃗P3 lay. The three points can then be defined by
⃗P1 = ( Bk
µmax
, Bk)
⃗P2 = (−
Bc
µ0 −µmax
,
µmaxBc
µ0 −µmax
)
⃗P3 = (Bs −Bc
µ0
, Bs)
(6.14)
Using this a BH curve can be parametrically represented by
Bfit =





µmaxH
for 0 ≤H < Hk
⃗B(t, ⃗P1, ⃗P2, ⃗P3)
for Hk ≤H < Hsat, and 0 ≤t ≤1
µoH + Bc
for Hsat < H ≤Hmax
(6.15)
Using this definition an example parametric BH curve of annealed pure iron compared to
its real BH curve can be seen in Figure 6.11
38
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:44==
0
10
20
30
40
50
H-Field (A/m)
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
B-Field (T)
Measured
Bezier Fit
Figure 6.11: A comparison between the measured and the parametric representation of
the BH curve of annealed pure iron using a Bezier curve. The plot is zoomed in on the
curve region, to show the accuracy of the Bezier fit.
To most accurately fit the Bezier representation of a BH curve, a minimisation algorithm
is employed. For which the cost function is defined by
f = ∥Bref −Bfit∥2
∥Bref∥2
,
(6.16)
where Bref is the reference B­field data, and Bfit is its Bezier approximation. As for
most minimisation algorithms it is important to have an appropriate starting point for the
parameters. Therefore it is recommended that the parameters for Bfit are first manually
fit.
FEM Fitting
With the Bezier approximate providing with an adequate parametric BH curve description,
it can be set to work estimating the H­field within the sample. This can be done through
exchanging
Bref −→Bs,meas
Ho,meas
Bfit −→Bs,sim
Ho,sim
(6.17)
in Equation 6.16 of the minimisation algorithm. Bfit will then be used in combination with
a generic definition for the H­field data to define the BH curve of the sample material in
the FEM simulation. The H­field component can be defined by
Hfit = 10a
for log10 Hmin ≤a ≤log10 Hmax,
(6.18)
where Hmin and Hmax can be freely determined to suit the task. The FEM simulation is
then run to sweep across a field coil current range producing a peak Ho greater than or
equal to the one measured by the physical set­up. Bs and Ho are then measured in the
simulation and returned to the minimisation algorithm cost function. Once the minimisa­
tion has reached a settling point, the difference curve between Hs,sim and Ho,sim can be
calculated. The difference curve can then me mapped to Ho,meas and subtracted from it
to produce a more accurate H­axis for Bs,meas.
Calibration
As stated in section 5.2 the magnetic properties of the yoke are unknown. This can be
solved by two methods. First, as the pole piece tips are the only component of the yoke
which should experience heightened levels of magnetic field intensity, and since the tips
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
39
==PAGE:45==
are replaceable, a new set of tips could be machined from a material with a well defined
BH curve. The second method would involve using the FEM fitting method in reverse
and estimating the BH curve of the yoke with using a reference sample with a known BH
curve.
The same algorithm described in subsubsection 6.4.1 can be used, except here Bfit and
Hfit will define the BH curve of the yoke, instead of the sample. With the sample BH
curve known, the BH curve of the yoke can be directly defined by the final estimates of
Bfit and Hfit.
6.4.2
Equivalent Reluctance Method
The FEM method described in subsection 6.4.1 is time intensive, especially if high levels
of accuracy are required. An alternative, less time intensive method makes use of lumped
element definitions of selected parts of the magnetic system. Recognising that the reluc­
tance of a material depends on its permeability, an equivalent magnetic circuit composed
of linear and non­linear reluctances can be constructed. Such a circuit can be seen in
Figure 6.12.
Fm
R1
R2
R3
R4
Figure 6.12: An equivalent circuit representation of the magnetic system of the measure­
ment set­up. Reluctances R1 and R3 are non­linear. R1 describes the reluctance of parts
of the yoke which lay on the same flux path as the sample. R3 describes the reluctance of
the sample. R2 and R4 are linear reluctances. R2 describes the parts of the yoke which
lay on the same flux path as the air­gap. R4 describes the reluctance of the air­gap.
First, R2 is selected to be a linear reluctance as the flux passing through it passes through
the air­gap. With this the flux will never, under typical conditions, get to the point as to
saturate the yoke in the areas R2 represents. Due to this R2 will always be insignificant
relative to R4 which is in the order of 106H­1, hence R2 can be assumed 0. R4 can be
determined with
R4 =
ls
µ0Ag
,
(6.19)
where ls is the height of the sample, hence the gap, and Ag is the area of the air­gap.
Next, R3 can be defined by
R3 =
ls
Bs
Hs As
,
(6.20)
where As is the cross­sectional area of the sample. Assuming we have the flux dependent
reluctance of R1, then, using the measurement of the fluxes passing through each part of
40
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:46==
the gap in the physical system, R3 can be estimated through
ϕo = ϕt
R1 + R3
R4 + R1 + R3
R3 = ϕo
ϕs
R4 −R1,
(6.21)
where ϕs and ϕo are the flux passing through the sample and the air­gap respectively.
Applying Equation 6.20 to the calculated R3 we can then determine Hs through
Hs = R3 · BsAs
ls
.
(6.22)
Calibration
As the reluctance of the yoke is most likely unknown, it can be determined by making a
measurement of a calibration sample and swapping R1 and R3 in Equation 6.20. It can be
assumed that R1 will not only be dependent on the flux passing through it, but the area of
the sample. The height of the sample should not affect R1 significantly. This is due to the
fact that ls translates directly to an increase in R3 and hence a decrease in ϕs. Additionally,
an change in ls will be indirectly proportional to a change in the effective magnetic path
length of the yoke. With the magnetic path length of the yoke being in the magnitude of
metres, a change is a couple millimetres can be deemed insignificant. Since As affects
the effective cross­sectional area of R1 more significantly, it should be accounted for. This
can be done by running a set of measurements with a range of calibration samples with
varying diameters. From this a trend can be estimated.
Unfortunately the BH curve of the yoke material cannot be simply extracted from its
equivalent reluctance, as the magnetic path length and the effective cross­sectional area
changes with the magnetising field. This is demonstrated in Figure 6.13.
(a) Bs = 1.32T
(b) Bs = 2.07T
Figure 6.13: A comparison of the simulated flux distribution in the pole piece between two
levels of Bs, before and during saturation. Note how the cross­sectional area at the top of
the pole piece which supplies the flux to the sample decreases as the magnetising field
increases.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
41
==PAGE:47==
7
Results & Discussion
7.1
Introduction
In this chapter the set­up and methods described in chapter 5 and chapter 6 will be put to
work and scrutinised for short comings, then solutions for these will be proposed. As this
system is a proof of concept many of the methods described could not be tested together.
Therefore the results of each method will be presented in isolation, and the steps needed
to allow the methods to cooperate with one another will be proposed.
7.2
Measurements with the Physical Set­Up
Applying the methods proposed in section 6.2 and section 6.3, the following results were
produced. As a proof of concept, this method shows promise with only a couple points to
scrutinise it on.
7.2.1
Results
Normal Magnetisation Curve Measurement
A measurement made of the normal magnetisation curve of a steel sample can be seen
in Figure 7.1. Unfortunately the normal magnetisation curve of the sample material is
not available. However for the time being this is not a problem, as the issues with the
method are clearly observable in Figure 7.1. The differential permeability of the BH curve
and the slope of the J­polarisation curve above saturation should be equal to 4π10−7 and
0 respectively. However, the differential permeability of the BH curve is 0.71 · 4π10−7,
and the slope of the J­polarisation curve is −0.29 · 4π10−7. Additionally, the maximum
permeability of the BH curve is negative, with µmax = −374.4µ0.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
H-Field in the Air-gap (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
B-Field and Polarisation (T)
Bs
Js
Figure 7.1: A normal magnetisation curve and its polarisation counterpart measured with
the methods described in section 6.2 and section 6.3. The sample used has a diameter
of 28.24mm, and a height of 5mm. Note that the J­polarisation curve should have a slope
of 0 after saturation, however here it does not.
42
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:48==
Hysteresis Loop Measurement
A measurement made of the hysteresis loop of during the same measurement sequence
used to measure the curve in Figure 7.1 can be seen in Figure 7.2. The same issues found
in the normal curve measurement can be found in the hysteresis loop measurement. Here
more is revealed. Firstly, it can be observed that the loop is not symmetric around the
origin, with there being a significant negative B­offset, and a positive H­offset.
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
H-Field in the Air-gap (kA/m)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
B-Field (T)
Figure 7.2: A hysteresis loop measurement following the methods described in section 6.2
and section 6.3. The sample used is the same as the one in Figure 7.1. Note that the
loop is not centred around the origin.
7.2.2
Discussion
These inaccuracies can be attributed to the calculation of the H­field in the air­gap, and
the use of it as the x­axis. As stated in subsection 4.4.2 the H­field in the air­gap is not
entirely uniform. Near the sample boundary a transition region exists to satisfy the bound­
ary conditions for transverse H­fields. When estimating the flux passing through the air
between the inner coil and the sample, the flux density in the middle of the uniform region
of the air­gap is used. In reality the flux density near the sample boundary will be lower
than that measured in the uniform region of the air­gap. By adjusting k in Equation 6.9
to 0.8915, in this instance, the differential permeability of the normal curve and the slope
of the polarisation curve above the saturation point becomes 4π10−7 and 0 respectively.
This, however, only significantly affects the saturation region of the curves.
Looking at the H­axis in Figure 7.1 and Figure 7.2, and comparing the range to the H­
axis of Figure 6.10, it becomes apparent that an error in either the calculation of Bo or
in the measurement of Bt is made. During the normal curve measurement sequence Bo
was calculated to be 0.823T at a field current of 1.911A. While in the FEM simulation at
the same current Bo is 0.09T. After reviewing the calibration procedure, no faults were
found, as dividing the NA factor produced by it for the outer coil by Ao produces a value
of 161.33, which is within one turn from the estimated 162 for that coil. This indicates that
an error must have been made during the measurement process with the outer coil.
Shifting our attention to the hysteresis loop measurement, the H­offset seen in Figure 7.2
can be attributed to the normal curve measurement’s excitation signal inducing a strong
remnant magnetisation in the magnetic system. The effects of which can be clearly seen
when looking at the time domain signal of Bt in Figure 7.3. This can be simply resolved by
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
43
==PAGE:49==
running the two measurements separately, or by placing a de­Gaussing signal in between
them.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Time (s)
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
B-Field (T)
Figure 7.3: The time domain signal of Bt, excluding the de­Gaussing step. A significant
B­field offset of 0.29T can be observed following the measurement.
Indeed when looking at a measurement made earlier in the development process, where
the field current is not held at a plateau after the half­cosine signal, almost no discernible
B­offset can be seen. This is show in Figure 7.4. This measurement signal was not used
in the final signal definition, as the peak magnetising field was deemed to be too small
at the time. In hindsight, when looking at Figure 7.4, even with the air surrounding the
sample being included in the B­field measurement, the sample can be observed to be
past its saturation point. Therefore Equation 6.2 should be adjusted such that the plateau
is reduced or fully removed.
-2
-1
0
1
2
Field Coil Current (A)
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
B-Field (T)
Figure 7.4: A B­field measurement made with the outer coil during a preliminary design
test. The inner coil was not measured with at this stage, therefore the x­axis is represented
by the field coil current. Note the symmetry around the origin, only a 0.025T difference
can be found between the absolute peak values of the two return points of the hysteresis
loop.
When looking at the H­offset in Figure 7.2 and the B­offset in Figure 7.3, it can be observed
that a due to a significant magnetisation in the positive direction, from the normal curve
measurement, the hysteresis measurement shows an offset in the negative direction.
This is counter intuitive as the positive half­cycle of the hysteresis measurement would
44
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:50==
be expected to be greater. This may be due to issues in the measurement set­up, but a
further investigation into this phenomenon may be required for a better understanding of
the source of it.
A handful of these errors could potentially be resolved by replacing the prototype sense
coils with a more optimised design. The sense coils could be constructed in a manner
similar to that seen in Figure 4.13. With this construction more coil turns could be wound,
as well as the coils would be better isolated from their environment. Through this the
number of coil turns and the coil area should be more precisely determined.
To increase the SNR of the EMF signals read by the Redbox, and reduce the need for
signal filtering, a chopper stabilised amplifier circuit could be added in the signal chain
between the coils and the Redbox. In this vein the two coils should be measured simul­
taneously, to negate any potentials errors due to measuring them separately.
Even though the Redbox provides the system with a high precision data acquisition sys­
tem and a source for the field current excitation, it has is not entirely appropriate for the
application. A more appropriate solution would have a current controlled output stage, or
even a flux density regulated current controlled output stage like the one used in [6]. This
system should have two input channels with lower maximum voltage levels, such that the
quantisation noise would be lower.
A smaller remark about the pole pieces would be that their surface is rather rough from
the years of use. This may introduce some small amount of error, which was not possible
to measure, as a new set of pole pieces have not been tested.
One of the greatest sources of error in this set­up is due to the use of Ho, and the difference
between Ho and Hs. With the numerical methods proposed in section 6.4 the errors due to
this could be remedied. However, due to the inherent errors in the physical measurement
system, the numerical methods cannot be applied effectively.
Finally, seeing past the errors and issues with which the measurement set­up is riddled,
this method provides a somewhat promising basis for further development.
7.3
Simulation Environment Testing of the Approximation
Methods
With the physical measurement set­up was not available for applying numerical methods,
therefore the FEM model was used to produce measurement data instead. As the mag­
netic properties of the yoke and pole piece material are unknown the numerical methods
were first tested in its calibration set­up described in subsubsection 6.4.1 and subsec­
tion 6.4.2.
7.3.1
Results
FEM Method
In a magnetic FEM simulation environment a sample measurement was first made. In this
measurement Bs, Bo, and Ho are measured. The BH curves of the yoke and the sample
are known, but will only be used for verification purposes. First the method was performed
with the calibration sequence, and the resulting BH curve can be seen in Figure 7.5. The
fitting algorithm shows to be effective in this case. However, when changing over to the
sample estimation sequence it becomes apparent that the method has some issues. This
can be observed in Figure 7.6.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
45
==PAGE:51==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure 7.5: The BH curve of the simulation yoke compared to the BH curve produced by
the calibration method described in subsubsection 6.4.1. To show the accuracy of the
method, the bend is zoomed in on.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure 7.6: The BH curve of the simulation sample compared to the BH curve produced by
the FEM method described in subsubsection 6.4.1. The Bezier curve was first manually
fit, as recommended in the method. Unfortunately, the minimisation algorithm could not
find a better parameter set in 10 iterations.
The algorithm was set­up to be limited to a total of 10 minimisation iterations, which is
certainly too low for such a procedure. The 10 iterations took approximately 15 minutes
to complete. Additionally, the quadratic Bezier approximation was found to be able to
describe some BH curves better than others, the examples for this can be seen in Ap­
pendix A.
Equivalent Reluctance Method
Similarly to the FEM method, the equivalent reluctance method was first tested in the
calibration sequence, as the reluctance of the yoke is unknown. A sample measurement
was made in a magnetic FEM environment, as in the FEM method, and the Bs, Bo, and
46
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:52==
Ho were extracted. Knowing the BH curve of the sample R1 was found, and it is shown
in Figure 7.7.
0
0.5
1
1.5
Flux s (kWb)
100
102
Reluctance R1 (mH-1)
Figure 7.7: The calculated equivalent non­linear reluctance of R1 vs. the flux passing
through it.
A second FEM measurement is made, with the BH curve of the sample material changed.
Here R1 is mapped to the new measurement of ϕs, and R3 was found using Equation 6.21.
From R3 the BH curve of the sample material can be estimated. This can be seen in
Figure 7.8 and Figure 7.9, where the BH curve of the sample is estimated for two different
materials. As can be seen, this method seems to provide a relatively good estimate for the
magnetic characteristics of the yoke, with it being able to almost perfectly estimate the BH
curve of an unknown material in Figure 7.8. However, Figure 7.9 reveals that the method
does not suit all BH curves. This method was tested on a set of four different materials, of
the four tests, three returned near identical BH estimates, while one returned an estimate
with errors around the saturation region. The results of the whole measurement set can
be seen in Appendix B.
0
50
100
150
200
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure 7.8: The BH curve estimate of a sample material compared to its real BH curve.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
47
==PAGE:53==
0
50
100
150
200
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure 7.9: The BH curve estimate of a new sample material compared to its real BH
curve. Here the method works less favourably.
7.3.2
Discussion
FEM Method
The shortcomings of the FEM method, and in effect its calibration, can be attributed to
a handful of factors. Firstly, the minimisation algorithm was not allowed to run for an
adequate duration to properly be able to set the Bezier parameters. This was done due
to time limitations. Ideally the algorithm should be allowed to iterate until it reaches a
minimum in the cost function. Secondly, the algorithm could be made more effective
and efficient. An investigation into the methods to do so would be required. Thirdly, the
Bezier approximation was shown to be limited in approximating all BH curves, as seen
in Appendix A. This could be remedied by increasing the number of parameters, hence
using a cubic Bezier curve. This would in­turn increase the number parameters of the
minimisation algorithm, which would result in even longer run times. The purpose of
this system is to verify the BH curves provided by the suppliers, and it is reasonable to
assume that the BH curves provided do not stray significantly from the real BH curve of the
material. This would provide a very good starting point for the minimisation algorithm. As
a proof of concept, however, the results provided by this method are promising, and with
further improvements this may provide a viable method for estimating the H­field within
the measured samples.
Equivalent Reluctance Method
The equivalent reluctance method is significantly less computationally intensive than the
FEM method. Even considering the fact that a set of calibration measurements would
need to be performed, in total this method would potentially result in less time consumed.
However, like the FEM method, it has its own shortcomings. As seen in Figure 7.9 it has
some error when estimating some BH curves. As the testing sample space, shown in
Appendix B, is quite limited, it is not possible to draw any real conclusions as to what the
source of this error is. Therefore, a further investigation into this method and the factors
governing its performance is required. Regardless, this method also seems to generate
promising results, which if further investigated could provide a relatively reliable H­field
estimation method.
48
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:54==
8
Conclusion
This thesis dealt with documenting the development process of a preliminary design and
proof of concept for a non­standard method for the magnetic characterisation of soft mag­
netic material samples. The physics governing the problem at hand, was first discussed,
and its nuances elaborated on. Thereafter the current state of the art, as well as other
instruments which were used for inspiration in the development process were introduced.
With having given a description of the type of samples the device would be required to
measure, the conceptual development of a magnetic yoke was started. The development
process was split in two halves: measurement, and processing.
Through the measurement system development process several design iterations were
conceptually scrutinised for their applicability in a soft magnetic permagraph device. Fi­
nally a magnetic yoke design was reached which was then adapted to match an existing
hysteresis graph yoke. A set of sense coils, connected to a data acquisition system, were
added to the magnetic system to complete the measurement set­up. This system proved
to be able to provide clean, but inaccurate, measurements. This could be attributed to a
handful of problems with the set­up, and errors made during the measurements. Following
the suggestions for improving the set­up, it could potentially produce relatively accurate
measurements.
During the development of the measurement system, a major flaw in the application of the
methods used by the IEC 60404­4 standard were identified. Namely the measurement
of the H­field within the sample. The H­field measurement methods for the permeagraph
version of the IEC 60404­4 standard all made measurements of the field outside the sam­
ple. This was shown to be an inaccurate approximate for the H­field within the sample.
To this end two estimation methods were proposed, in order to provide the measurement
system with a more accurate representation of the H­field inside the measured sample.
In conclusion both the measurement set­up and the numerical methods provided insight
into possible solutions to the problem presented. As a proof of concept the results of the
methods indicate that there is a potential path for further development which may result
in a definitive solution to measuring the magnetic properties of soft magnetic material
samples with dimensions which do not comply with the IEC 60404­4 standard.
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
49
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
B. D. Cullity and C. D. Graham. Introduction to magnetic materials. IEEE/Wiley,
2009.
[2]
Dr. Erich Steingroever and Dr. Gunnar Ross. Magnetic Measuring Techniques. MAGNET­
PHYSIK Dr. Steingroever GmbH, 2009.
[3]
Lumped­element model. Feb. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lumped-
element_model.
[4]
The Finite Element Method (FEM). Mar. 2016. URL: https://www.comsol.com/
multiphysics/finite-element-method.
[5]
D. Jiles. Introduction to Magnetism and Magnetic Materials. CRC Press, 2015.
ISBN: 9781482238907. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=z-UmEAAAQBAJ.
[6]
REMAGRAPH® C. MAGNET­PHYSIK Dr. Steingroever GmbH. 2022.
[7]
A.P. Chattock. “IX. On a magnetic potentiometer”. In: The London, Edinburgh, and
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 24.146 (1887), pp. 94–96.
DOI: 10.1080/14786448708628063. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/14786448708628063.
[8]
IEC 60404­4. Methods of measurement of d. c. magnetic properties of magnetically
soft materials. Standard. Geneva, CH: International Electrotechnical Commission,
2008.
[9]
URL: https://ssl.soken-jp.com/en/products/su60vf00000002io.html.
[10]
Direct Reading Iron Loss Tester DAC­IR­3. SOKEN ELECTRIC CO.,LTD. 2022.
[11]
Feb. 2022. URL: https://www.stresstech.com/knowledge/non-destructive-testing-
methods/barkhausen-noise-analysis/.
[12]
IEC 60404­5. Methods of measurement of the magnetic properties of magneti­
cally hard (permanent magnet) material. Standard. Geneva, CH: International Elec­
trotechnical Commission, 2015.
[13]
Hystograph HG 200. Dr. Brockhaus Messtechnik GmbH&Co. KG.
50
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:56==
A
Example Bezier Approximation Results
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure A.1: AISI 1006 Steel
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure A.2: AISI 1018 Steel
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
51
==PAGE:57==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure A.3: Pure Iron
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure A.4: Annealed Pure Iron
52
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:58==
B
Equivalent Reluctance Method Results
0
50
100
150
200
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure B.1: AISI 1006 Steel
0
50
100
150
200
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure B.2: AISI 1018 Steel
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
53
==PAGE:59==
0
50
100
150
200
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure B.3: Pure Iron
0
50
100
150
200
H-Field (kA/m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B-Field (T)
Bref
Bfit
Figure B.4: Annealed Pure Iron
54
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
==PAGE:60==
Non­Standard Method for the Magnetic Characterisation of Magnetically Soft Materials
55
==PAGE:61==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
