==PAGE:1==
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on
Helium LoRaWAN Network
Master Thesis
DTU Photonics
Department of Communication Technologies and System Design
==PAGE:2==
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Virendra Pawar
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Communication Technologies and System Design,
Brovej, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Communication
Technologies and System Design Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of LoRa and IoT
devices.
Virendra Pawar ­ s210244
Signature
Date
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The swift development of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies has created several
novel avenues for effective asset­tracking mechanisms. This abstract offers a concise
review of a tracking setup of IoT devices. This device is equipped with a GPS module
which provides the tracker’s location, and the technology used here is LoRaWAN to
transmit the data from the device to the Helium network. This network is the means of
communication between the device and the Backend.
This project utilizes the various Backend platforms, including Datacake and Microsoft
Azure. A large amount of data is generated from IoT devices, and to handle this large­
scale data a backend service is crucial for storing and visualizing it in a scalable and
secure form. Moreover, Scanning/Sniffing MAC addresses can transmit the location
details to the Google Cloud Platform through Geolocation API.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
[Martin Nordal Petersen], [Professor], [DTU Photonics]
[Anas Mohamad AL Shalyan], [Research Assistant], [DTU Photonics]
This Master thesis was prepared with the Department of Fotonics at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark. Under the supervision of Professor Martin Nordal Petersen, this
thesis was carried out between February 6, 2023 and August 21st, 2023.
I sincerely thank Professor Martin for his unwavering guidance, invaluable feedback,
and continuous support throughout my master’s thesis. His depth of knowledge and
insight have been instrumental in shaping this research.
Also, I would like to express my heartfelt appreciation to Anas Mohamad for his re­
markable contribution to procuring and managing the hardware requirements for the
project.
Finally, I am incredibly grateful to my family and friends for their continuous love and
support while undertaking this master’s thesis.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Internet of Things (IoT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Heltec 32 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
GPS ­ Neo 7N
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Features and Specifications:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.4
Comparision of GPS Neo 7N and 6M
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
LoRa
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
LoRa Charaterstics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
LoRaWAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Helium Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Hotspots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
Antenna’s Used in Helium Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.4
How Helium Network is helpful for IoT users
. . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
Datacake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.2
Microsoft Azure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.3
Google Cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Implementation
22
3.1
Hardware Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Battery Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
PCB Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Casing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Logic used in Main Firmware­Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Helium Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.7
Datacake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.8
Microsoft Azure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.8.1
Azure Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.8.2
Azure IoT Hub
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.8.3
Azure Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.9
Google cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
v
==PAGE:7==
4
Discussion
73
5
Future scope
76
5.1
Enhanced Analytics and Manitenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2
Integration with Smart Cities and IoT Ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.3
Green sustainable energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.4
Scalability and commercialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.5
Implementing Health sensors and functionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.6
User Experience and Mobile Application development . . . . . . . . . .
76
6
Conclusion
78
Bibliography
79
A Firmware code of the Project
81
A.1 Part A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
A.2 Part B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
A.3 Part C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In our rapidly changing world, the usage of bicycles is increased as a means of trans­
portation. The bicycle has become a symbol of sustainability, energy saving, and, now
more than ever symbol of maintaining good health. The reasons for using bikes in
contemporary society are listed below.
• Health and well­being: Riding a bicycle connects the human being to the phys­
ical self. Riding the bike regularly tones the muscles and performs good cardio­
vascular fitness.
• Community and Environmental stewardship: As people are interested in bik­
ing, the government is investing in the biking lanes, and society is embracing
cycling culture. Every step towards using bikes is a small victory against pollution
and climate change.
• Economic Efficiency: As in the current world, economic pressure is growing,
biking offers relief as there is zero fuel consumption, minimal maintenance, and
free parking almost everywhere. Bicycles are the best economic choice that dis­
plays financial wisdom and social consciousness.
With the rise of cycling comes an emerging need for vigilance against bike theft. As
in urban areas using bikes is growing, so does the risk of theft, and it is here that this
project rallies attention. Bike theft remains a significant problem. Existing solutions,
such as bike locks and surveillance cameras, have their limitations and, most of the
time, are ineffective. To solve this problem, this project proposes developing a bike
tracker which can be easily mounted on the bike and enables real­time tracking. Fur­
thermore, by integrating some sensors which can help detect temperature and motion
detection, this data can also be collected. The objective is to reduce bike theft and
increase the security of cyclists by providing a more reliable and effective way to track
bikes. This helps to see a reduction in bike theft rates.
However, the available bike tracking systems lack in some ways that must be ad­
dressed. These limitations consist of accuracy, communication range, and power con­
sumption. Furthermore, the system is complicated and expensive, making it inacces­
sible to a larger audience. In conclusion, there is a requirement for more efficient com­
munication channels and backend infrastructure to save and process the tracking data
effectively, and this will be essential in combating bike theft and also promoting sus­
tainable mobility.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
1
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Scope of project
The potential applications of a bike tracker on the Helium network include hardware
development, software development, data visualization, battery life optimization, and
theft detection. In the hardware development phase, a Microcontroller module that is
Heltec 32 and a GPS module would be used, possibly combined with a custom­printed
circuit board and 3D­printed case. The firmware code would then be developed to col­
lect GPS data and transmit it over the Helium network. The data then is visualized in
the Datacake and Microsoft Azure IoT hub and its Datacake maps, Azure maps inte­
gration provides the location information in the form of latitude, longitude, and accuracy
values. Battery life optimization is most important to build as the need is to build low
power requirements by identifying the most required features and focusing on designing
reliable, durable, and user­friendly to use and install the device.
Requirement specification that how this project should be built.
• Build a compact GPS tracker which can be mounted on a bike in a way that does
not affect the biker while riding.
• Use Helium network for communication of data from device to Backend.
• Create an integration from Helium console to Backend. This Backend could be
Microsoft Azure, Datacake, or Google Cloud.
• Wifi sniffing/scanning and sending the location detail to the Google Cloud.
• The device should have the feature of Sleep/wake­up functionality. It should func­
tion like when the biker is riding the bike: every 2 minutes, send the device loca­
tion, sleep, wake up in 2 minutes, send the new data, and go to sleep again.
• Battery backups that can be used here are Japcell lithium battery of 3.7V 1800mAh
or Li­lon battery of 3.6V capacity of 2.5Ah. These batteries are rechargeable or
disposable.
• To build this device which consists of Heltec 32, GPS Neo 7N, and some Sensor
to combine and mount this on PCB.
• Mounting the PCB board on the bike must print a 3D casing to protect the hard­
ware from various climates.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
2
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Outline
The content of the chapters is as follows:
Chapter 2­ Theory : This chapter explains the theory on the Microcontroller that is
used in this project, that is Heltec­32 pin diagram, the introduction to the LoRaWAN
protocol, and its architecture is plotted and explained. The GPS module that is NEO
7N module and 6M is compared and described. This section also talks about what
means of communication are used to transmit the data through the Helium network
and how it is helpful for IoT users. Finally, how Microsoft Azure carries out the Backend
section is mentioned here.
Chapter 3­ Implementation: Here in this Chapter, the author describes the steps used
to design the system and the results in aspects of all the sections, such as code results,
Helium console, and Backend.
Chapter 4­ Discussion: This chapter illustrates the challenges encountered during
the progression of this project. Also, a comparison between this project and the similar
devices that are available in the market.
Chapter 5­ Future scope: This section outlines the necessary work to carry forward
with the prototype system in the future. After thorough testing, the system can be built
for advanced solutions and should be incorporated as a product, and how it will help in
an actual scenario.
Chapter 6­ Conclusion: This chapter concludes all the findings of this report.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
This section covers the theory of the theory, technology, means of communication, and
the backend part of the project. In pursuit of this thesis, there will be a general expla­
nation of these technologies and how it is helpful for IoT users.
2.1
Internet of Things (IoT)
Figure 2.1: Tree structure of IoT [1]
Essentially, the idea revolves around linking any device’s ON/OFF switch to the internet.
This encompasses the vast range of home appliances like microwaves, ovens, wash­
ing machines, lights, main doorbells, also daily use devices such as mobile phones,
headphones, and smartwatches. It can also be extended to airplane jet engines or oil
rig drills. The giant connections of people to machines, people to people, or machine
to machine. [2]
”It’s about networks, it’s about devices, and its about data,” ­Caroline Gorski, the head
of IoT at ”Digital Catapult” [3].
In the case of broadcasting, IoT encompasses everything connected to the internet, but
it is increasingly being used to explain the objects that ”Talk” to each other. in simple
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
4
==PAGE:12==
words, the IoT is made up of devices from multiple sensors to communicate or transfer
data to smartphones, wearable, and visualization platforms.[4]
Above figure 2.1 illustrates in 2 steps.
Firstly, technology that can be made use of sensors such as an accelerometer, mag­
netometer, gyroscope, pressure, altimeter, temperature, etc., or embedded processing
such as a microcontroller and network processor, and connectivity, for example, Zig­
Bee, RFID, Cellular, GPS, Bluetooth/BLE.
In the second layer, software that can be used is DeviceHive, KAA, Mainflux, Microsoft
Azure, Datacke, Tableau, and Blynk applications. etc these platforms help in scaling,
storing, and visualizing the data.
Figure 2.2: Top 10 IoT use cases [5]
According to IoT analytics [5], the most used cases are Remote asset monitoring, Au­
tomation, Vehicle fleet management, and Location tracking as location tracking is glob­
ally adopted for 31%, which is been trending for the last few years. The application
relevant to this thesis is remote monitoring of the device. It can track the device and
communicate with it even when it is far from reach.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
5
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Hardware
This chapter illustrates the hardware components that are used in building this project.
2.2.1
Heltec 32
Figure 2.3: Heltec 32 [6]
Figure 2.4: Heltec 32 Pin configuration [7]
The field of electronics is continually advancing with the introduction of innovative tech­
nologies that accelerate development and prototyping. Among all other innovations,
Heltec 32 board is a pioneering tool that offers an efficient and reliable platform for us­
ing IoT devices. Based on the Espressif ESP32 chipset, this meticulously designed
board seamlessly integrates many functionalities into a single, compact module.[7]
The Heltec 32 board is widely known for its exceptional performance, built­in dual­core
processor, and wide­ranging compatibility tools. These range from simple processing to
data transmission of multiple sensors like patient and environment monitoring to com­
plex applications such as home automation, industrial applications, and robotics. Its
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
6
==PAGE:14==
Wi­Fi, Bluetooth, and LoRa capabilities enable communication over short and long dis­
tances. Furthermore, it has a built­in OLED display interface that provides visualization
for developers to check the debug result or display important information.
Heltec 32 board’s one of the most significant features is its Low power consumption. this
ensures the advantage for battery­powered devices where energy efficiency is crucial.
This board has significant support from the open source. Various library files are readily
available to use in software IDE’s, which supports developers to build small, large scale
projects. This has facilitated rapid prototyping, streamlined programming processes,
and accelerated innovation in IoT and embedded system development.
In conclusion, the Heltec 32 Board is a highly energy­efficient platform that gives unpar­
alleled flexibility and power. This project explores the board’s characteristics, working
features, capabilities, and applications and explains its effectiveness and adaptability
in the vast landscape of IoT and embedded systems development.
2.2.2
GPS ­ Neo 7N
Figure 2.5: Working of GPS [8]
The abbreviation of GPS stands for Global Positioning System. GPS is a satellite­based
navigation system that provides users with approximate locations: latitude, longitude,
and altitude. The GPS comprises a minimum of 24 satellites, which evolve around
the earth twice daily. In order to ensure the proper functioning of satellites and make
any necessary adjustments, ground satellites send signals to space satellites for man­
agement purposes. Handheld devices like smartphones, IoT devices that use GPS
units, and car navigation systems consist of GPS receivers. These receivers respond
to signals from space satellites. To determine the exact location of the asset, the GPS
receiver must be in contact with at least 3 satellites. With the help of these satellites,
the receiver calculates the distance between these 3, which is determined by how long
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
7
==PAGE:15==
it took for the messages to arrive. After this, it triangulates these distances to pinpoint
its exact location on the earth’s surface [9].
(QZSS) Quasi­Zenith Satellite System is a regional system for transmitting data with
the help of highly elliptical orbits over Japan and transmitting differential correction for
(GPS) Global Positioning System and other (GNSS) Global Navigation Satellite System
satellites. Japan developed this system because the existing navigation satellite did not
meet user requirements. The inadequacy of this system was due to obstacles such as
high buildings and mountains, which caused problems in reading the data from satellites
and other multiple issues [10],[11].
Figure 2.6: GPS Neo 7N [U­blox_2023]
Figure 2.7: Pin configuration of GPS Neo 7N [12]
The NEO­7N Gps module manufactured by U­blox, is the most commonly used global
positioning module with widespread use in navigation systems. As datasheets, tech­
nical documents provide the primary sources for this review, covering its specification,
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
8
==PAGE:16==
applications, and performance. U­blox’s NEO­7 series of GPS/GNSS modules is highly
respected due to its exceptional performance, high sensitivity, low power consumption,
and compact design. As a member of this series, the NEO­7N is a versatile GPS mod­
ule that offers top­quality positioning data [12].
2.2.3
Features and Specifications:
The NEO­7N module has essential features that is concurrent reception of GPS/QZSS,
GLONASS, consuming low power, and NEO­ 7N provides the accurate data in indoor
localization [13].
Figure 2.8: Pin configuration of GPS Neo 7N [13]
2.2.4
Comparision of GPS Neo 7N and 6M
U­blox, a leading company in the field of GPS technology, offers two high­performance
GPS modules, the GPS NEO­7N, and the GPS NEO­6M, which are widely used in var­
ious applications requiring precise global positioning data. These include navigation
systems, asset tracking, and drones. A comparison between the two modules reveals
that the NEO­7N represents an upgraded version of the NEO­6M, offering better sensi­
tivity and accuracy, resulting in more precise location tracking, especially in challenging
situations.
The NEO­7N module has more tracking channels than the NEO­6M. It can track more
satellites simultaneously, significantly improving positioning data’s accuracy and reli­
ability. In addition to GPS and QZSS support, the NEO­7N also supports GLONASS
and BeiDou. Adding these systems will give more options to use the satellites for mea­
surements, leading to better accuracy in positioning data [14].
Designed to consume less power than its predecessor, the NEO­6M, the NEO­7N is
an energy­efficient solution critical for battery­powered applications. Furthermore, the
NEO­7N has improved noise reduction capabilities, which enhance the module’s ability
to provide accurate positioning data even in environments with high radio frequency
interference.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
9
==PAGE:17==
NEO­7N offers advanced features that are not present in the NEO­6M, such as support
for Advanced Jamming and Interference Mitigation and A­GPS services like AssistNow
Online and AssistNow Offline. These features significantly reduce the time­to­first­fix
(TTFF), making the NEO­7N a more reliable and efficient GPS module than the NEO­
6M. The GPS NEO­7N and GPS NEO­6M are high­performance GPS modules u­blox
produces. As in the present scenario, technology is booming, and every technology
should be efficient and accurate in its way in global positioning of tracker must provide
fast and precise location, as comparison NEO 7N is faster than NEO 6M [12].
Detailed comparison [13]:
• As in contrast with NEO 6M, NEO­7N is more precise location tracking, especially
in remote places.
• Increased Number of Tracking Channels: The NEO­7N module features more
tracking channels than the NEO­6M, allowing it to track more satellites concur­
rently. This increased capacity contributes to improved positioning data accuracy
and reliability.
• Support for More Satellite Systems: While both modules support GPS and QZSS,
the NEO­7N also includes support for GLONASS and BeiDou. The inclusion of
these additional constellations can provide more accurate positioning data by in­
creasing the number of satellites available for measurements, especially in re­
gions where these systems have better coverage.
• The NEO­7N module is modified to consume less energy than its predecessor,
the NEO­6M. Because of this feature, the NEO­7N is a more practical choice, in
case of applications that consumes less battery power.
• Advanced Noise Reduction: The NEO­7N has improved noise reduction capabili­
ties compared to the NEO­6M. This improvement enhances the module’s ability to
provide accurate positioning data even in environments with high radio frequency
interference.
• Advanced Features: NEO­7N includes some advanced features not present in
the NEO­6M. For example, it supports Advanced Jamming and Interference Miti­
gation and A­GPS services like Assist Now Online and Assist Now Offline, which
can significantly reduce the time­to­first­fix (TTFF).
2.3
Technology
2.3.1
LoRa
The LoRa provides long­range and low power consumption, a low data rate, and secure
data transmission. LoRa is a spread spectrum that is patented modulation that is devel­
oped by Semtech [15] uses chirp spread spectrum(CSS) modulation. LoRa technology
can easily integrate with present networks and works on low­cost, works on low­power
technologies [16].
Modulation Technique: LoRa utilizes a modulation technique called Chirp Spread
Spectrum (CSS). This technique has been used in military and space communication
for decades due to its resistance to interference and ability to provide long­range com­
munication. By spreading the encoded information across a wider frequency band,
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
10
==PAGE:18==
signal robustness is enhanced.[16]
Low Power and Long Range: LoRa technology possesses a unique attribute that ex­
pertly balances power consumption and range, ultimately leading to exceptional cov­
erage of up to 15 kilometers in rural environments. Consequently, this innovation en­
ables devices to operate continuously for extended periods, even on modest battery
sources.[17]
Capacity: This particular system can efficiently handle many messages via a singular
base station. Its capabilities make it suitable for networks in densely populated areas.
2.3.2
LoRa Charaterstics
Several notable considerations exist when implementing a LoRa radio in a sensor net­
work. Firstly, due to the radio’s extensive range, which can span hundreds of meters
indoors and kilometers outdoors, networks can cover expansive areas without requir­
ing multiple hops to route data. In many instances, a single hop from each node to
the sink is sufficient to establish a reliable connection. Secondly, because transmis­
sions can occur on the same carrier frequency but with different spreading factors, they
are effectively orthogonal, allowing for the division of the channel into virtual subchan­
nels. Finally, even when multiple transmissions coincide with identical parameters, the
most vital transmission will be received with high probability, rendering concurrent mes­
sages nondestructive even when their contents differ. LoRaWAN takes advantage of
this feature, with all gateways simultaneously broadcasting beacons (with tight clock
synchronization via GPS) and end devices capable of demodulating the most robust
beacon.[16]
2.3.3
LoRaWAN
Figure 2.9: LoRaWAN Architecture [17]
LoRaWAN is a protocol for media access control (MAC) used in wide­area networks. It
enables low­powered devices to connect with internet­connected applications through
long­range wireless connections.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
11
==PAGE:19==
The LoRa network communication system is highly efficient in transmitting data over
long distances while operating on minimal power consumption. Explicitly it is built to
provide the requirements of Machine to Machine (M2M) and IoT applications, assuring
the security in data transmission. LoRa employs broadcast spectrum modulation, which
boasts similar low­power features as FSK modulation, making it an ideal choice for long­
distance communication. The LoRa Alliance consists of over 500 member companies,
and the network protocol has been renamed ”LoRaWAN”, which was invented by Cy­
cleo LoRaWAN. The first LoRaWAN outdoor gateway was created by Semtech IBM,
Actility, and Keeling, followed by Multitech with Conduit. The LoRa Alliance is an initia­
tive Semtech, Kerlink IBM, and Actility formed to establish global LoRaWAN standards.
In Thailand, the LoRaWAN frequency range is specified to be between 920­925 MHz,
which is an unlicensed frequency with a transmit power of no more than 20 dBm.[18],
[19]
The LoRaWAN system is composed of three essential components [19]:
• End device: The end­device is a low­power communication tool that interfaces
with a gateway. It does not require a specific gateway but can connect with any
available gateway.
• Gateway: The primary function of the Gateway is to receive packets transmitted
from LoRa devices, commonly referred to as End­devices, and efficiently forward
them to the Network Server.
• Network Server: The network server utilizes a packet elimination process to
eliminate duplicate packets while simultaneously sending packets to the intended
destination device. This feature permits the server that supports the different
application types, optimizing network performance and efficiency.
2.4
Communication
Effective communication is vital in this project.
The Helium network serves as the
means of transmitting the flow of data from device to backend of the project, enabling
seamless communication.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
12
==PAGE:20==
2.4.1
Helium Network
Figure 2.10: Basic block diagram of Helium system
[20]
The diagram presented above 2.10 outlines the operational structure of the Helium sys­
tem in conjunction with IoT devices. Helium employs radio access points that combine
a mining device with a wireless gateway, operating on the LoRa radio standard. The
primary function of these gateways is to facilitate communication between end devices,
such as IoT sensors and the server. Messages are sent between the end devices and
the server to achieve this.
Internet of Things (IoT) devices that make use of LoRa protocol possess a distinct
advantage on those that rely on other protocols such as WiFi, GSM, and Bluetooth.
Specifically, LoRa­enabled devices require no regular synchronization with the network,
significantly reducing energy consumption. The energy savings can exceed several
hundred percent when compared to other protocols [21].
The Helium network is a wireless network that utilizes a decentralized and peer­to­peer
to operate Internet of Things devices. It uses blockchain technology to encourage in­
dividuals, known as ’Hotspot owners’, to set up wireless gateways that mine Helium’s
cryptocurrency (HNT) and provide network coverage for IoT devices. The Helium Net­
work uses the LoRaWAN protocol, a low­power, long­range wireless platform commonly
used for IoT applications. Using the Helium Network, devices using this protocol can
access the internet without cellular plans, Wi­Fi, or broadband [20].
Hotspots are utilized to extend network coverage to IoT devices in both residential and
commercial settings. These devices also function as blockchain miners, incentivizing
owners with HNT tokens to provide and authenticate wireless coverage. As the device
is placed in a certain area and when the device tries to transmit the data, it is connected
to the nearby hotspot, and according to the signal strength of that Hotspot, the data is
exchanged [20].
IoT devices connect to the closest hotspots through the LoRaWAN protocol, similar to
how a mobile phone connects to a Wi­Fi network. Once connected, IoT devices can
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
13
==PAGE:21==
transfer their data over the network. Hotspots facilitate the transfer of device data to
the internet through the owner’s broadband connection. This network’s hotspots can
earn HNT cryptocurrency as a reward for their work in validating and relaying device
data. The amount of HNT made is directly proportional to the volume of device data
each hotspot manages. This motivates our hotspot operators to work as much device
data as possible, ultimately contributing to the network’s overall success and efficiency.
Hotspots can earn HNT cryptocurrency as a reward for validating and relaying device
data on the network. The more device data a hotspot handles, the more HNT it can
earn [21].
IoT device owners have to use data credits to pay for network usage. These data credits
are non­tradeable units of exchange on the Helium Network, which are converted from
HNT [20].
2.4.2
Hotspots
Figure 2.11: Helium coverage at DTU [22]
The above­shown figure 2.11 displays in the Helium Explorer dashboard and provides
the reach of the antennas that can be used as hotspots to connect the IoT devices.
In the same image, it also shows that two active hotspots are near to DTU Kongens
Lyngby [22] and [23].
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
14
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.12: Helium coverage at DTU [22]
The coverage of Helium hotspots that spread all over Copenhagen can be seen in this
image 2.12 and [22].
2.4.3
Antenna’s Used in Helium Network
Participation in the Helium network is open to everyone, as long as they have an end
device that is compatible with the appropriate frequency which is assigned depending
on particular country or continent. Frequency plan for Europe region is EU868 [20]
Figure 2.13: Directional antenna [20]
By incorporating stronger antennas in the area where most of the IoT devices are placed
or used for example smart cities, the strength of the radio signal can be significantly
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
15
==PAGE:23==
improved. Choosing the appropriate antenna type depends on the specific location
where the devices are placed. The most commonly used antenna type is a Directional
antenna, suited for locations with clear horizons 2.13, as it can transmit signals up
to 80 kilometers[20]. The range of signal propagation can be increased by using a
higher­class antenna. With the Helium network, establishing a physical infrastructure
that permits the smart devices to connect to the network and transmit or receive the
data can be both easy and cost­effective. This reduces the need to manage hardware
components and protocols.
2.4.4
How Helium Network is helpful for IoT users
In order to achieve widespread connectivity, the Helium network provides people and
businesses a reason to output the Helium Hotspots which would improve the city in
converting it to smart cities. Because of this the coverage of the network is increased
due to this it is more reliable to connect IoT devices, even in the areas that face problems
in connecting cellular and WiFi networks. One way to save money on IoT connectivity
is by using Helium’s peer­to­peer network instead of traditional cellular options. With
Helium, device owners can pay for network usage using data credits converted from
Helium’s native cryptocurrency (HNT)[21]. Deploying a device on the Helium Network
is straightforward, which helps IoT users avoid complex configurations and agreements
with traditional telecom providers. This will make the deploying procedure less complex
and accessible.
The Helium Network utilizes the LoRaWAN protocol, specifically designed for long­
range communication while consuming minimal power. These characteristics will help
IoT devices that rely on batteries. The Helium Network uses the security features of
blockchain technology to ensure that communication between IoT devices is secure and
tamper­proof. The Helium Network’s decentralized nature makes it highly scalable, able
to accommodate many devices without requiring significant infrastructure investment.
The network is compatible with any device that supports LoRaWAN, enabling a broad
range of IoT applications such as environmental monitoring, asset tracking, smart home
devices, and agricultural sensors. When using Helium, businesses, and individuals can
keep ownership and control of their IoT data [20].
2.5
Backend
Here this part, it is explained the collection of results from the Helium console and
representing and storing them in Datacake, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
16
==PAGE:24==
2.5.1
Datacake
Figure 2.14: Basic architecture of Datacake [24]
The above figure 2.14 explains the working of the Datacake. As it is seen that the
data from the sensor is forwarded to Datacake through HTTP or MQTT and in Data­
cake console decodes the sensor’s payload to application format and displays it on the
dashboard.[24]
Datacake is a versatile Internet of Things (IoT) platform that helps developers to use it
for backend purposes to manage their devices, transmit and receive the data to Data­
cake, and build custom workflow and applications around IoT data and it is built in such
a way that it is easily accessible for both newcomers and experts [25].
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
17
==PAGE:25==
The key features and characteristics of Datacake are listed below[25]:
• Device integration: Typically, Datacake supports global device connectivity and
supports its user­friendly approach to adding the device to its console and man­
aging them on its platform.
• Data visualization: The developers can custom­build their dashboard as Data­
cake provides. This comprises charts, graphs, tables, maps, and other visualizing
tools.
• Low­code environment: Datacake provides a low­code environment where users
can create workflows without extensive coding knowledge. Hence this gives an
advantage to developers to make easy interference with their IoT products.[24]
• Scalability: It is suitable for both small and large­scale projects its design is cre­
ated to adapt to the growing number of devices and the intricacy of the tasks at
hand.
• Collaboration and Access control: Datacake provides the tools to work to­
gether in teams which sets the different access levels regarding the stakeholders
in the teams.
• Asset tracking: It uses modern online maps and displays the real­time position
of the asset on interactive maps. The history of these asset routes traveled can
be witnessed in historical view directly on the map.
2.5.2
Microsoft Azure
Figure 2.15: Microsoft Azure
Microsoft has created a cloud computing service called Azure, enabling users to con­
struct, experiment with, distribute, and control applications and services via Microsoft­
run data centers. Azure provides software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service
(PaaS), and infrastructure as a service (IaaS) options. This also works with various
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
18
==PAGE:26==
programming languages, frameworks, tools, and Third­party systems and software.
Likewise, in this project, Azure is connected to the Helium network.[26]
Microsoft Azure supplies more than 200 services and products that cater to all the re­
quirements of IoT user’s AI + Machine Learning, Databases, Developer Tools, Azure
Maps, Identity, Internet of Things, Networking, Security, Storage, Application integra­
tion, and Web services. For developers who choose to use these services that perform
highly robust and efficiently, Azure ensures to choose businesses of all forms that make
use of cloud computing.
The services from Microsoft Azure are listed below:
• Azure IoT Hub: Azure IoT hub is a managed cloud service that serves as the
central hub for Bi­directional communication between the devices and IoT appli­
cations that it manages, basically cats as the communication bridge. This platform
provides secure communication between millions of IoT devices and the cloud­
hosted backend. These results facilitate improvement in robust IoT solutions.
These hubs are extensively used in smart cities as several IoT devices in the
same area may use the same hub [27].
• Azure Maps: Azure Maps is a geospatial service collection that uses mapping
data to provide geographical services to user applications. Azure Maps could
convert the GPS data from the NEO­7N module into visual map data for this bike
tracker project [28].
• Azure Functions: Azure Functions is a convenient server­less compute service
that executes event­triggered code without explicitly provisioning or managing
infrastructure. By creating a function that triggers whenever data arrives from the
Heltec ESP32 board into the IoT Hub, it can efficiently process the incoming data
in future use [29].
• Power BI: Power BI, developed by Microsoft, ensures tools that provide users to
generate the received data on advanced data visualization dashboard features.
It facilitates effortless access to crucial data, such as the assets’ location and
travel histories, providing valuable insights to support informed decision­making
processes [30].
• Azure Notification Hubs: Azure notification hub delivers a solution for trans­
mitting mobile push notifications throughout different platforms from a Backend
system. This feature is precious for alerting bike tracker users in the event of
theft or if the bike is transported beyond a designated geofence [31].
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
19
==PAGE:27==
2.5.3
Google Cloud
Figure 2.16: Basic architecture of Google Cloud [32]
Google Cloud Platform is a cloud computing service offered by Google. This ensures
various services, including storage options, networking capabilities, geolocation details,
and computing power, are possible only by Google infrastructure [33].
Google Cloud offers several tools and services which benefit IoT developers:
• Cloud IoT Core: This facilitates millions of IoT devices dispersed globally that
can connect and transfer data both ways. Google Cloud has its device managing
tool called the Google Cloud platform. This secures the connection between the
device and the backend for analyzing, visualizing, or storing data and many more
[33].
• Pub/Sub: This tool from Google Cloud handles data ingestion from numerous
IoT devices to Google Cloud Platform, where IoT developers can stream the data
from this platform for further processing [33].
• BigQuery: This allows for (SQL) Structured Query Language­like analysis over
large databases or datasets. This is related to when massive data is generated
or transferred to IoT devices [33].
• Security: Google Cloud Platform provides robust security for IoT applications.
This ensures data encryption during the bi­directional transmission [33].
• Geolocation API Call: Geolocation API is not a part of the Google Cloud Plat­
form. It is API that allows developers to retrieve the device’s or user’s geograph­
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
20
==PAGE:28==
ical location. This is used in Web applications to customize user experiences
based on location tracking [34].
Google Maps platform includes APIs like:
• Geocoding API: This converts the addresses into geographic coordinates and
vice versa [34].
• Places API: This searches for places within a specified area that provides infor­
mation about that specific place [34].
• Maps Javascript API: Integrating interactive maps with other Google services
into web applications [34].
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
21
==PAGE:29==
3
Implementation
3.1
Hardware Design
The hardware used here is Heltec WiFi LoRaWAN 32 board, an advanced version of
ESP32 microcontroller because Heltec 32 board has inbuilt LoRaWAN, Bluetooth, BLE,
and OLED display on it. This helps the developer reduce the design’s complexity and
the space on board. This project uses the onboard LoRa module, which connects Lo­
RaWAN gateways. A Li­lon battery of 3.6V capacity of 2.5Ah powers the board. These
batteries are rechargeable or disposable. Furthermore, the GPS neo 7M module is
connected to respective pins to receive the device location. If the user wants to power
the device with a 12V battery, then an adaptor (YWRobot M102B Power Module) can
also be integrated into this hardware which consists of an onboard regulator and it pro­
vides two 5V and 3.3V pins that can be used to power the device.
Figure 3.1: Hardware design
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
22
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Battery Life
In this prototype, the battery is a Li­lon cell 18650 2600mAh which powers up the Heltec
board. One of the project specifications is to function as Deepsleep/wake­up every 2
minutes. Accordingly, the calculation for power consumption is calculated and noted.
Figure 3.2: Visual representation for battery life
This prototype consumes 310­312mA of current in active mode, and in deep sleep mode
the consumption of the device is 16­18mA. So, therefore the calculation for the battery
capacity as follows:
Batterylife = Batterycapacity ÷ Loadcurrent
Batterylife = 2600mAh ÷ 310mA
BatteryLife = 8.23hours
This calculation is only if the battery is powered continuously without deepsleep/active
mode.
The visual representation of the graph 3.2 illustrates if the biker uses the bike for 2 hours
per day, then the consumption is 620mA. Accordingly, with this information, bikers can
use the device for 4 days, and the battery needs to be recharged after that, which takes
2­3 hours. The red line in the graph explains that the battery should be charged to its
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
23
==PAGE:31==
capacity of 2600mAh. This means bikers should charge the battery at most 7 times
monthly if the bike is used for 2 hours daily.
Now, if the device works on deepsleep/active mode, then the microcontroller is active
for 5 seconds, sends the bike’s location, and goes into deep sleep mode for 15 seconds.
This process keeps on repeating. Based on this, the battery life calculation varies.
Figure 3.3: Calculation of Battery life [35]
As in the above figure 3.3, it is verified how much battery consumption is made from the
device in both deepsleep/active mode as such, approximately for 29 hours the device
can be powered.
The total consumption can be significantly reduced with better implementation and more
efficient hardware. This would require a design change, custom PCB, and higher con­
straints over the transmitted data to have minimal current consumption.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
24
==PAGE:32==
3.3
PCB Design
The below PCB design is proposed to mount seamlessly entire hardware, reduce the
complexity and use less space to fix it on the bike. This compact design ensures that it
should not create any difficulty for bikers riding the bike.
Figure 3.4: Front face of PCB
Figure 3.5: Back face of PCB
Both the figures 3.4 and 3.5 is the visual representation of the components soldered on
PCB design.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
25
==PAGE:33==
3.4
Casing
Below is the casing designed for the hardware part of the project, which will be part
of future work. This helps to keep the hardware safe from wear and tear in all various
climates whenever the bike is in use. This is just a prototype, but in the future, if the
manufacturers build this so that nobody can tamper to steal or break it.
Figure 3.6: Total size of casing in Millimeters
Diagram 3.6 shows the height and width measured to build the casing.
Figure 3.7: Front view of casing
This figure 3.4 represents the front view body of the casing.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.8: Back view of casing
This image 3.8 gives a visual representation of the back view body of the casing.
Figure 3.9: Area and perimeter of casing
Picture 3.9 displays the total area calculated to place the hardware inside the casing.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
27
==PAGE:35==
3.5
Logic used in Main Firmware­Code
Figure 3.10: Logic for Firmware­Code
The Flow chart 3.10 illustrates the sequential steps that provide the logic in the code.
Firstly when the Heltec is initialized, sends the connect request to the Helium console
after it is acknowledged. Sensors and GPS get the data and transmit it on LoRa to the
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
28
==PAGE:36==
Helium console, and the microcontroller goes to deep sleep. This process is carried
out every two minutes.
3.6
Helium Network
This Chapter provides instructions on effectively adding a new device to the Helium
Console and utilizing it to receive packets from IoT devices. The Helium Console is a
cloud­based platform that enables users to manage and supervise cost­effective ap­
plications on the Helium Network efficiently.[20] Adding a new device to the Helium
Console requires a few steps that are mentioned below.
Figure 3.11: Working of Helium
The flow diagram 3.11 provides a detailed step­by­step explanation of how the helium
console operates. This is observed closely in this subsection.
Helium Console: This is an online management tool for device developers hosted
by Helium Foundation, which allows users to register, authenticate and manage their
devices on the Helium network. Additionally, the console offers pre­defined connec­
tions called Integrations that enable the device data to be routed via HTTP or MQTT or
directly to cloud services.
To add a new device to the console, log in to the Helium account and proceed to the
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
29
==PAGE:37==
Device tab. Afterward, select the ”Add New Device” option, as exemplified in the ac­
companying figure (3.12).
Figure 3.12: User Device attached
The above figure displays that the new device has been added to the console, and the
device’s name is LoRa 32 viru.
Figure 3.13: APP EUI Device EUI
When transmitting packets to the Helium console, including the Device EUI, App EUI,
and App key in the code is essential. These codes are referred to as Extended Unique
Identifiers (EUI) and necessitate conversion to ASCII code before it is used in the code.
The conversion process can be accomplished by utilizing the tab button adjacent to the
keys, as illustrated in figure 3.13.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.14: Code EUI
The visual representation identified as ”Figure 3.14” illustrates how the code can dupli­
cate the keys necessary for communication with the helium console device. The image
labeled as ”Figure 3.14” depicts how the code copies the keys for communication with
the helium console device.
Figure 3.15: Event Log in
After the EUI keys are matched and uploaded into a console, along with the code in the
Event log table, a Join request is sent. If the EUI keys are accurate, the console will
automatically approve the request. The microcontroller module sends packets to the
console, which are then displayed on the Event Log see Figure 3.15. The Event Log
also provides information on when the packets were sent and acknowledged.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.16: Console graph representation
Receiving of data from the microcontroller to the Helium console can be observed in
the aforementioned image 3.16
Figure 3.17: General information in Payload
The image 3.17 above represents a comprehensive overview of the payload transmitted
through a collaborative platform, encompassing the payload’s general information as
explained by payload size, number of ports connected, and device address information
displayed.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.18: Hotspot information in Payload
It has been noticed that the connected device is currently associated with a specific
number of Hotspots that are in nearby areas. This data is collected into the precise
Hotspot to which it is linked, and its signal frequency, spreading, time stamp, and
Hotspot name are available here in figure 3.18.
Figure 3.19: Integration information in payload
The integration messages show that the device is successfully connected to the Helium
console concerning time stamps. This is displayed in figure 3.19.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.20: Transmitting Uplink
Figure 3.21: Receiving data in payload
When the integration between the Helium console and microcontroller, the uplink mes­
sage (Hi) is sent from the serial monitor in reference figure 3.20 to the Helium console
debug message decoder 3.21
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.22: Result 1 in Helium Debug
Figure 3.23: Result 2 in Helium Debug
Both Figures convey 3.22 and 3.23 the result in the form of payload that is received
from the microcontroller, and this result is found in the debug section of the console.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.24: Adding Integration in console 1
This figure 3.24 My integration in the console provides various options to integrate with
other types of the backend. Such as in this project, integration is made with Datacake
and Microsoft Azure. Below figure 3.25 displays the downlink URL, downlink key, and
HTTP details of Datacake uploaded in the Helium console.
Figure 3.25: Adding Integration in console 2
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.26: Functions in Helium console
The function is a platform. Users can have the option to craft a personalized script to
cater to their unique needs. The resulting output is presented in the form of a payload.
This is witnessed in image 3.26.
Figure 3.27: Custom Script in Helium Console function 1
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.28: Custom Script in Helium Console function 2
Above both figure 3.27 and 3.28 shows the script written by the user to build the function
as required result should be received. The javascript consists of latitude, longitude, and
mac addresses that should be displayed in the payload.
Figure 3.29: :Flows attached in Helium console
The schematic diagram 3.29 depicts the interconnections within the Helium console
and gives a clear view of the data transmission between the console and the Backend.
The first process is to build the device in the helium console, which requires the De­
vice EUI ID, App EUI ID, and Application key to establish the connectivity between the
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
38
==PAGE:46==
microcontroller to the console. Following this, functions are used to decode the result
obtained in the console. subsequently, the result can be observed in the debug section,
where it is in the form of a payload 3.22, and 3.23. This data payload is transferred from
the function to the integration part to receive the data in the Backend section. Decoder
code is compiled in the function to design the payload. Thereafter, the Datacake is inte­
grated as a Backend. The Helium console transmits the data alone to Datacake. If the
user wants to share the data to Microsoft Azure, then flows in the Helium console need
to be changed accordingly. Thereafter, the data can be visualized in Azure. Hence,
this means Helium can only transmit the result one integration at a time.
Figure 3.30: Helium Coverage
The Helium console shows the coverage around the IoT devices, which can connect
to them and help transmit the data without delay. Figure 3.30 shows the connected
Hotspots to the user’s device and the connection status, signal strength, no of devices
connected to it, and the number of packets transmitted from the Hotspots.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.31: Alerts for Lost packets
The Alerts section shown figure 3.31 within the console gives the developers a timely
notification as the packets are dropped when the packets are transmitted. This enables
the developers to easily and quickly identify the dropped packets, which will help to
optimize the overall system performance.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
40
==PAGE:48==
3.7
Datacake
In this section, Backend part of the project is explained. To effectively showcase the
Backend results, the author selected Datacake to implement for the Backend part. Here
it is explained the process of creating a Datacake account, adding the device to the
account, and generating an API token. Ultimately, the goal is to visually represent the
data on the dashboard.
Figure 3.32: Flow diagram of Datacake
To get started with Datacake this flow diagram 3.32 helps to understand it.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.33: Creating a Datacake account
Figure 3.34: Adding a device step 1
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
42
==PAGE:50==
To successfully add a device to the Datacake platform, a specific procedure must be
followed. The first step is to add the device that will serve as a communication tool for
the project, selecting LoRaWAN as an option as illustrated in the image provided in the
above figure 3.34.
Figure 3.35: Selecting device step 2
Selecting the microcontroller used in the project is the most important to select for the
same in the Datacake product so that the microcontroller configures properly can be
witnessed in image 3.35.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.36: Adding Dev EUI in step 3
Next is to add the device EUI id, which is available from the Helium console, and need
to enter it in the device EUI block. As seen in image 3.36.
Figure 3.37: Selecting the plan in Step 4
Finally, the plan that suits the user according to the usage of data points and data
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
44
==PAGE:52==
retention needs to be selected. This is visible in 3.37 picture.
Figure 3.38: Creating a Datacake account
After completing all the steps of adding the product information, the device is created
that is seen in figure 3.38
Figure 3.39: Datacake API token
The API token is important for the connection of flows between the Helium console and
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
45
==PAGE:53==
Datacake seen in image 3.39, and this is generated only after the device is added to
the Datacake console.
Figure 3.40: Datacake Token is added to Helium Console
The Datacake Token is added to the Helium Console integration
Figure 3.41: Configuration code 1
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.42: Configuration code 2
The above both figures 3.41 and 3.42 pertain to the code written for configuring and
designing the payload that should be displayed in the result section of the Datacake.
Figure 3.43: Configuring fields
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
47
==PAGE:55==
It is crucial to ensure that the fields seen in picture 3.43 are designed to reflect the out­
come of the histogram. Pre­establishing the fields is recommended to ensure optimal
results. Furthermore, the data types utilized, recurring values, and timestamps of the
same values are important factors of fields to represent.
Figure 3.44: Debug log in Datacake config
The transmitted data from the Helium console is received in Datacake, which is further
built into the integration code to represent it in the form of a payload that is visible in the
debug log figure 3.44.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
48
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.45: Display of result in form of Graph
The configuration from the payload utilizes the fields generated by the user that data can
serve as the visual representation of the values received in a display picture 3.45, which
can be useful for analyzing and interpreting the data according to the transmission time.
Figure 3.46: Payload result
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
49
==PAGE:57==
The result received in the payload is seen in the debug log of Datacake in image 3.46.
Figure 3.47: Comparing the result
This compares the result from the serial monitor towards the right and the result from
the payload in Datacake towards the left in the above image 3.47.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.48: Final results on Dashboard
The Datacake dashboard displays the final result, showcasing the tracker’s location in
the GPS maps. Additionally, the MAC addresses that are sniffed by the asset that is
nearby to it are readily visible in 3.48 picture.
Figure 3.49: Mobile Dashboard
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.50: Mobile dashboard creating public link
It is easy to design the dashboard on a mobile device, and Datacake provides the option
of creating it directly, and it is possible to generate the public link of the tracker. This
link can be shared with the relevant authorities in associating bike theft cases, which is
referenced in images 3.49 and 3.50.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
52
==PAGE:60==
3.8
Microsoft Azure
Figure 3.51: Flow diagram of Azure
This Flow diagram 3.51 provides the steps to be followed to use Microsoft Azure, this
is carried out in detail in further sections.
Exploring the other ways of creating the Backend part of the project. Here Microsoft
Azure can also be created as one more option for visualizing the tracker’s location, but
as compared to Datacake, integration to maps Azure maps is much more complicated
and not that accurate regarding Datacake.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure 3.52: Integrating (Adding) the Azure IoT to Helium console
Proposing the integration from the Helium console is adding the Azure IoT hub integra­
tion, as visible in the above figure 3.52.
3.8.1
Azure Resources
Figure 3.53: Shared resource policy
To generate the shared access policy keys, should proceed with giving permissions to
the policy names this can be seen in picture 3.53. These policies are the access to
read, write, seamless device connection, and services provided to the integration.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3.54: Generating Primary keys
The primary key from Azure is required to generate a patch to the Helium console
integration that is obtained in image 3.54.
Figure 3.55: Azure main account
The primary key is augmented into the Helium console that is observed in 3.55. This
completes the integration between Helium and Azure.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 3.56: Creating the resource group
Figure 3.57: Azure main resource account
To use Microsoft Azure, its necessary Resource group 3.56 is a container that holds
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
56
==PAGE:64==
all the related resources of Azure in one section, such as the IoT Hub account, Azure
maps account, and IoT central application account. Figure 3.57 provides a view of all
resources that are managed by the main Azure account
3.8.2
Azure IoT Hub
Figure 3.58: Creating IOT hub Step 1
To develop and configure the IoT device to Azure, Step 1 is to create an account in the
IoT Hub observed in 3.58. Selecting the correct region is important for accuracy and to
avoid data acquisition delay.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure 3.59: Creating IOT hub Step 2
Step 2 in image 3.59 involves configuring the connectivity by selecting between public or
private access. If private access is selected, then the subscription fee will be charged.
Figure 3.60: Creating IOT hub Step 3
Moving to step 3 in picture 3.60, a user needs permission to manage the elements
within an instance to access IoT hub data APIs, and this is only possible by opting
shared access policy and Role Based Access Policy.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure 3.61: Creating IOT hub Step 4
Step 4 in image 3.61, naming tags to categorize resources, apply the same tag to multi­
ple resources and resource groups. Tags will automatically update if the user changes
the resources.
Figure 3.62: creating IOT hub 5
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
59
==PAGE:67==
Review all the information the developer provided, the subscription fee will be deter­
mined and billed accordingly, and the hub will be established based on this information.
This is visible in image 3.62.
Figure 3.63: creating IOT hub 6
The Hub deployment is completed, and the user can transmit the data as seen in figure
3.63.
Figure 3.64: Result graph in Azure 1
This Figure 3.64 refers to the result obtained in Azure. The graph on the left displays the
messages sent from the device to the cloud, and the graph towards the right explains
the number of devices connected to the cloud.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
60
==PAGE:68==
Figure 3.65: Result graph in Azure 2
Referring to figure 3.65, the left graph represents the total device data usage, and the
other graphs display the total number of messages used by the same device.
Figure 3.66: Result graph in Azure 3
There is a limit for transmitting the data messages that are 400000, as this limit is based
on the user’s choice of subscription plan. That is seen in figure 3.66
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
61
==PAGE:69==
3.8.3
Azure Maps
This Flow chart 3.67 illustrates the steps to create the Azure maps integration. The
in­depth details are observed in further sections.
Figure 3.67: Flow diagram for working of Azure Maps
Azure Maps is a collective suite of geospatial mapping services that enables developers
with the tools they require to create location­based assets. These services offer a wide
range of options to build web applications, including asset tracking, vehicle routing, map
generation, geolocation, and much more, with good efficiency, accuracy, and insight.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
62
==PAGE:70==
Figure 3.68: Creating an Azure Maps account in resource
According to the other resources in Azure, Azure maps have the same steps to create
an account referring figure 3.68.
Figure 3.69: Microsoft Azure maps deployment status
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
63
==PAGE:71==
After successfully creating Azure maps account, it is provisioned as an independent
account under one of the Azure resources referring image 3.69.
Figure 3.70: Independent Azure maps account is created
Figure 3.71: Display of account created
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
64
==PAGE:72==
The above figures (3.70) and (3.71) provide the information for creating the maps ac­
count.
Figure 3.72: Location received at Helium debug console
The location is received in the Helium console debug, and along with it, the signal
strength and name of the Hotspot that the device is using to transmit the packets to
Helium are seen and noted in image 3.72.
Figure 3.73: Location detected at Azure Maps
When the integration between the helium console to Azure resource and Azure maps
is successfully seen in image 3.73, the location details are sent as payload to helium
and later integrated into Azure maps where the location is located in the maps.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
65
==PAGE:73==
As the accuracy was not that great as compared to Datacake maps. In Azure maps,
the tracker movement was hoping when the asset moved from one place to another,
but in Datacake, the tracker movement was a smooth transition.
3.9
Google cloud
In situations where GPS coverage is limited, the projects use Google Cloud. Specifi­
cally, the Heltec 32 device is programmed to scan the surrounding area and find MAC
addresses, and when these MAC addresses are detected, Google Cloud is utilized to
find the location tracking in these challenging circumstances.
Figure 3.74: Flow diagram of Google Cloud
The working of Google cloud as related to this project can be observed in sequential
steps in figure 3.74.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
66
==PAGE:74==
Figure 3.75: Creating account
The first step is to create the project in the Google Cloud console platform. Here project
name created in Google Cloud is Lora 32 Viru this is seen in figure 3.75.
Figure 3.76: Selecting API and Service
Selecting the API services is essential to get the API token, and this ensures interaction
with the Google Cloud.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
67
==PAGE:75==
Figure 3.77: Geolocation API
To obtain the API token for the Geolocation, navigate to the API library and enable the
relevant selection.
Figure 3.78: Google API created
After the API key is generated, referring to this in image 3.78, this is loaded into the
code framework to transmit the received location to the Google Cloud project.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
68
==PAGE:76==
Figure 3.79: Map Management
Figure 3.80: Map ID details
Both figures 3.79 and 3.80 refer to create map management ID, this ensures the visu­
alization of the tracker.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
69
==PAGE:77==
Figure 3.81: Location acquired in serial monitor
The result in the Serial monitor 3.81elaborates that the MAC address that the Heltec
board sniffs are displayed in descending order depending on the signal strength.
Figure 3.82: Protecting API
The aforementioned image 3.82 outlines the procedure to secure the API by allocating
a unique key for individual users.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
70
==PAGE:78==
Figure 3.83: Cloud Dashboard Result
The graphical representation featured on the Google Cloud API Dashboard chronolog­
ically depicts the data received over time. The vertical axis gives the velocity at which
the data was obtained. The horizontal axis denotes the time at which the data was
received, referring to figure 3.83
Figure 3.84: Messages in API
In Figure 3.84 can be witnessed the number of messages that are received concerning
to latency in milliseconds.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure 3.85: Medain and Letancy result
The visual representation in the Traffic graph as data flows, the traffic is at 0.1 seconds
as the data is forced to be delayed for 0.1 seconds. Overall, after some time, the data
is achieved in 0.05 seconds. The value stays at zero in the center graph as zero errors
are received.
latency is measured as the delay in the arrival of packets at the destination end. That
is always measured in time units such as milliseconds. Median latency means, for
example, if the 40th percentile latency is 0.01 milliseconds, the spanner processed 40%
of requests in less than 0.01 milliseconds. This metric of calculation is called median
latency. All the explanation is referred from figure 3.85
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
72
==PAGE:80==
4
Discussion
The main issue in this project initially was receiving acknowledgment from the Helium
console when the device requested to join the network. This issue was due to poor
network coverage from the nearby Helium hotspots, and it was solved by increasing
the number of hotspots that surrounding to the device and help to increase the signal
strength. This can be seen in the below figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Hotspots signal strength
Framing the function code as per the resulting requirement to display in the payload of
the helium was challenging. figure 4.2
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
73
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.2: Received the data in payload as desired
On the other hand, creating the Resources in Microsoft Azure was difficult as it provides
the tools for each resource separately, and framing all the tools in one single Azure IoT
hub to make it on resource was problematic. figure 4.3
Figure 4.3: Resources from Azure central IoT
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
74
==PAGE:82==
Furthermore, when a device is added to the Datacake console for result visualization
on the dashboard, data preservation becomes challenging. The dashboard frequently
crashes or disappears. figure 4.4
Figure 4.4: Datacake dashboard
The rigorous procedure was to initiate the received location details into Google Cloud
Maps by making a call by geolocation API. Finally, the author only managed to represent
it as a visual graph representation because the Maps API could not integrate with the
google cloud platform. figure 4.5
Figure 4.5: Medain and Letancy result
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
75
==PAGE:83==
5
Future scope
5.1
Enhanced Analytics and Manitenance
The data which is recovered by riding patterns Machine learning algorithms can help
predictive analytics to anticipate the maintenance for the future. The data from the sen­
sors, such as temperature, humidity, and motion, can provide personalized suggestions
for the user for optimal bike performance and comfort.
5.2
Integration with Smart Cities and IoT Ecosystem
The authorities can access the real­time data, which helps provide theft control and
recovery. The bike tracking system can be integrated into the large infrastructures
of smart cities, providing connections with traffic signals, weather stations, and public
transportation systems.
5.3
Green sustainable energy
Introducing solar energy features, such as providing the small solar panel with a tracker,
improves the system’s long battery life and reduces the work of changing the battery
when it runs out the charge. Providing the ability to monitor real­time energy usage and
receive a recommendation for improving efficiency could be extremely beneficial.
5.4
Scalability and commercialization
In designing a system, it is very important to consider its scalability to make easy ap­
plications in commercial areas. Also, the bike rental companies, which is the potential
avenue for collaboration, could associate partnering with the bike manufacturers to
merge tracking technology into upcoming bike models.
5.5
Implementing Health sensors and functionality
Blending in the health tracking platforms with the biking activity gives a valuable chance
for the bikers to gain insights into their day­to­day health information, such as blood
pressure and calories burnt, by biking done in every mile. This data can be used to
inform personal health goals and build exercise routines, which will lead to improved
health outcomes.
5.6
User Experience and Mobile Application
development
Creating a mobile application that provides information on bike tracking, health infor­
mation, and bike statistics on the go. Integrating the navigation systems that notify the
change in route recommendations based on the traffic and if any construction work is
under process.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
76
==PAGE:84==
Taking inspiration and analyzing the limitations of existing devices available in the cur­
rent market [36], the future scope of this project can be extended to make the product
more efficient, robust, and user­friendly.
For example,
• Apple AirTags can only be configured with I­Phones. Android phones can not
function with AirTags.
• Few other trackers only work on Bluetooth, which is unreliable.
• Other trackers may need the subscription to enable the continuous flow of location
data.
• Tile tracker relies on other tile users to find missing bike
This project focuses on the aspects of the Helium network for communication. This
commercially benefits the people who install the Helium Hotspots at their premises and
the network provider.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
77
==PAGE:85==
6
Conclusion
To sum up, building a compact GPS tracker that is easily mounted onto the bike was
successfully achieved.
Additionally, a system for transmitting data from the Heltec
board to the Helium console was established. Further, this result was visualized in the
Backend part of Datacake and Microsoft Azure. Finally, acquiring the MAC address and
transmitting the location of that address to the Google Cloud Platform through calling
Geolocation API was noted and noted.
The prototype managed to have built­in deep sleep/wake­up functionality. Also, achiev­
ing battery consumption in both deep sleep/wake­up fields is calculated and verified.
Ultimately, the choice between Microsoft Azure and Datacake depends on the level of
detail the user requires. Azure has vast resources for each field, ensuring accuracy,
efficiency, and robustness in concluding the results. On the Other hand, Datacake is
user­friendly. Developers benefit from using all the tools in one grid. creating the visual
representation and sharing it with the public or partners in the projects is easy.
Finally, values that can be obtained from this project:
• Security for bike theft is reliable for some extinct.
• If the bike gets stolen, this device can assist in locating it with the help of law
enforcement.
• Collaboration with Bike manufacturing companies to merge the tracker technology
in the bikes.
• As it’s hard to maintain multiple IoT devices in smart cities. Helium Network makes
it easy to stabilize the communicating data of all Devices.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
78
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
[1]
Elgar Fleisch et al. “What is the internet of things? An economic perspective”. In:
Economics, Management, and financial markets 5.2 (2010), pp. 125–157.
[2]
Jacob Morgan. “A simple explanation of’the internet of things’”. In: Retrieved
November 20 (2014), p. 2015.
[3]
DigiCatapult. DigiCatapult. Accessed: dd­mm­yyyy. 2023. URL: https://www.
digicatapult.org.uk/.
[4]
Matt Burgess. “What is the Internet of Things? WIRED explains”. In: WIRED ex­
plains (2018).
[5]
Author Name. Title of the Webpage. Accessed: dd­mm­yyyy. 2023. URL: https:
//iot-analytics.com/top-10-iot-use-cases/.
[6]
Heltec Automation Datasheets Info. Heltec WIFI kit 32nbsp; (V2). URL: https:
//heltec.org/project/wifi-kit-32/.
[7]
Unknown. ESP32 LoRa Heltec V2 with Display Pinout Diagram. Accessed: 16­
08­2023. 2023. URL: https://escapequotes.net/esp32-lora-heltec-v2-with-display-
pinout-diagram/.
[8]
Last minute engineers Last Minute Engineers. In­depth: Interface ublox NEO­6M
GPS module with Arduino. June 2022. URL: https://lastminuteengineers.com/
neo6m-gps-arduino-tutorial/.
[9]
Ahmed El­Rabbany. Introduction to GPS: the global positioning system. Artech
house, 2002.
[10]
Satoshi Kogure, Yasuhiko Kawazu, and Takeyasu Sakai. “Quasi­Zenith Satellite
System”. In: Position, Navigation, and Timing Technologies in the 21st Century:
Integrated Satellite Navigation, Sensor Systems, and Civil Applications 1 (2020),
pp. 187–204.
[11]
Antoine Grenier et al. “A Survey on Low­Power GNSS”. In: IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials (2023).
[12]
U­Blox NEO 7N. URL: https://content.u-blox.com/sites/default/files/products/
documents/NEO-7_ProductSummary_%28UBX-13003342%29.pdf.
[13]
U­blox. Neo­7m GPS module. July 2023. URL: https://hub360.com.ng/product/
neo-7m-gps-module/.
[14]
U­blox 6 GPS modules. URL: https://content.u- blox.com/sites/default/files/
products/documents/NEO-6_DataSheet_%28GPS.G6-HW-09005%29.pdf.
[15]
semtech. What is Lora. URL: https://www.semtech.com/lora.
[16]
Martin Bor, John Edward Vidler, and Utz Roedig. “LoRa for the Internet of Things”.
In: (2016).
[17]
The Things Network. LoRaWAN Architecture. Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL:
https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/docs/lorawan/architecture/.
[18]
Jetmir Haxhibeqiri et al. “A survey of LoRaWAN for IoT: From technology to ap­
plication”. In: Sensors 18.11 (2018), p. 3995.
[19]
Pradeeka Seneviratne and Pradeeka Seneviratne. “Introduction to LoRa and Lo­
RaWAN”. In: Beginning LoRa Radio Networks with Arduino: Build Long Range,
Low Power Wireless IoT Networks (2019), pp. 1–22.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
79
==PAGE:87==
[20]
Pavel Dzhunev. “Helium Network­Integration of Blockchain Technologies in the
Field of Telecommunications”. In: 2022 13th National Conference with Interna­
tional Participation (ELECTRONICA). IEEE. 2022, pp. 1–4.
[21]
URL: https://docs.helium.com/home/about-helium.
[22]
Helium. Helium Blockchain Explorer. Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL: https:
//explorer.helium.com/.
[23]
URL: https://docs.helium.com/iot/hotspots/.
[24]
IoT Creators. Datacake Documentation. Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL: https:
//docs.iotcreators.com/docs/datacake.
[25]
Datacake. Datacake ­ IoT Platform. Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL: https:
//datacake.co/.
[26]
Nico Vermeir. “A Tour of. NET 6”. In: Introducing. NET 6: Getting Started with Bla­
zor, MAUI, Windows App SDK, Desktop Development, and Containers. Springer,
2022, pp. 1–20.
[27]
Microsoft. IoT Concepts and IoT Hub. Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL: https:
//learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/iot-hub/iot-concepts-and-iot-hub.
[28]
Microsoft. About Azure Maps. Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL: https://learn.
microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-maps/about-azure-maps.
[29]
Microsoft. Azure Functions Overview ­ C. Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-overview?pivots=
programming-language-csharp.
[30]
Microsoft. What is Power BI? Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL: https://powerbi.
microsoft.com/en-us/what-is-power-bi/.
[31]
Microsoft. Notification Hubs Push Notification Overview. Accessed: 16­08­2023.
2023. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/notification-hubs/notification-
hubs-push-notification-overview.
[32]
Intellipaat. What is Google Cloud? Accessed: 16­08­2023. 2023. URL: https://
intellipaat.com/blog/what-is-google-cloud/.
[33]
Ekaba Bisong and Ekaba Bisong. “An overview of google cloud platform ser­
vices”. In: Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google
Cloud Platform: A Comprehensive Guide for Beginners (2019), pp. 7–10.
[34]
Google Cloud. Deploying an API using API Gateway. Accessed: 16­08­2023.
2023. URL: https://cloud.google.com/api-gateway/docs/deploying-api.
[35]
All About Circuits. Battery Lifetime Calculator. Accessed: 2023­08­21. All About
Circuits. 2023. URL: https : / / www . allaboutcircuits . com / tools / battery - lifetime -
calculator/.
[36]
Cycling Weekly. Find Your Stolen Bike with a GPS Tracker. Accessed: 16­08­
2023. 2023. URL: https://www.cyclingweekly.com/group-tests/find-your-stolen-
bike-with-a-gps-tracker-165579.
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
80
==PAGE:88==
A
Firmware code of the Project
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
81
==PAGE:89==
Code for the transmission of the data from the
device to helium console and configured to the
backend section that is Datacake and Microsoft
Azure
Virendra Pawar
August, 2023
==PAGE:90==
A.1
Part A
1
/*This is Master thesis project by Virendra Pawar s210244
2
*
3
* Department of Communication Technology and System Design at
4
* Technical Ubiversity Denmark.
5
*
6
* Thesis Supervisor Prof. Martin Nordal Petersen.
7
*
8
* This is part A of the project , code works as asset tracker transmitting
the data from Heltec wifi 32(V2) to helium console and
9
* this Helium console is configured to Datacke which acts as a Backend
that stores data in it and user can
10
* visualize the data on its dashboard.
11
12
13
*/
14
15
#include <TinyGPSPlus.h>
16
17
#include <SoftwareSerial.h>
18
19
#include <WiFi.h>
20
21
#include "LoRaWan_APP.h"
22
23
#include <Adafruit_Sensor.h>
24
#include <DHT.h>
25
#include <DHT_U.h>
26
27
28
#define loraThreshold 15000
29
30
#define DHTPIN 13
// Digital pin connected to the DHT sensor
31
#define DHTTYPE DHT11
// DHT 11
32
DHT_Unified dht(DHTPIN , DHTTYPE);
33
uint32_t delayMS;
34
35
36
// WIFI
37
const int maxNetworks = 5;
38
39
struct WiFiNetwork {
40
String SSID;
41
uint8_t BSSID[6];
42
};
43
44
struct SensorData {
45
float latitude;
46
float longitude;
47
float altitude;
48
float hdop;
49
int satellites;
50
float temperature;
51
float humidity;
52
};
53
54
WiFiNetwork wifiNetworks[maxNetworks];
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
1
==PAGE:91==
55
SensorData sensorData;
56
57
int numNetworks = 0;
58
int wifiFound = 0;
59
60
// GPS defines
61
static const int RXPin = 4, TXPin = 5;
62
static const uint32_t GPSBaud = 9600;
63
64
// LORA Params
65
/*license for Heltec ESP32 LoRaWan , quary your ChipID relevant license:
http://resource.heltec.cn/search */
66
uint32_t license[4] = { 0x25F07DD1 , 0xCD6E3392 , 0x8059C78E , 0xF9118685 };
67
68
/* OTAA para*/
69
uint8_t devEui[] = { 0x60, 0x81, 0xF9, 0x7B, 0xC0, 0x91, 0xB6, 0xA7 };
70
uint8_t appEui[] = { 0x60, 0x81, 0xF9, 0xEF, 0xCC, 0x5B, 0xE3, 0x49 };
71
uint8_t appKey[] = { 0x1E, 0xAB, 0x2B, 0x66, 0x73, 0x0D, 0xCB, 0x01, 0x22,
0x18, 0xDE, 0x43, 0xAF, 0xDF, 0x20, 0x74 };
72
73
/* ABP para*/
74
uint8_t nwkSKey[] = { 0x15, 0xb1, 0xd0, 0xef, 0xa4, 0x63, 0xdf, 0xbe, 0x3d,
0x11, 0x18, 0x1e, 0x1e, 0xc7, 0xda, 0x85 };
75
uint8_t appSKey[] = { 0xd7, 0x2c, 0x78, 0x75, 0x8c, 0xdc, 0xca, 0xbf, 0x55,
0xee, 0x4a, 0x77, 0x8d, 0x16, 0xef, 0x67 };
76
uint32_t devAddr = (uint32_t)0x007e6ae1;
77
78
/*LoraWan channelsmask , default channels 0-7*/
79
uint16_t userChannelsMask[6] = { 0x00FF, 0x0000, 0x0000, 0x0000, 0x0000, 0
x0000 };
80
/*LoraWan region , select in arduino IDE tools*/
81
LoRaMacRegion_t loraWanRegion = ACTIVE_REGION;
82
/*LoraWan Class, Class A and Class C are supported*/
83
DeviceClass_t loraWanClass = CLASS_A;
84
/*the application data transmission duty cycle.
value in [ms].*/
85
uint32_t appTxDutyCycle = 15000;
86
/*OTAA or ABP*/
87
bool overTheAirActivation = true;
88
/*ADR enable*/
89
bool loraWanAdr = true;
90
/* Indicates if the node is sending confirmed or unconfirmed messages */
91
bool isTxConfirmed = true;
92
/* Application port */
93
uint8_t appPort = 2;
94
/* Max Trials */
95
uint8_t confirmedNbTrials = 4;
96
97
// The TinyGPSPlus object
98
TinyGPSPlus gps;
99
100
// The serial connection to the GPS device
101
SoftwareSerial ss(RXPin, TXPin);
102
103
// Downlink Parameters
104
String LoRa_data;
105
uint16_t num = 0;
106
bool LoRaDownLink = false;
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
2
==PAGE:92==
107
uint32_t LoRadonwlinkTime;
108
109
void setup() {
110
Serial.begin(115200);
111
ss.begin(GPSBaud);
112
print_wakeup_reason();
113
114
delay(100);
115
116
dht.begin();
117
init_DHT();
118
119
Mcu.setlicense(license);
120
121
delay(100);
122
Mcu.begin();
123
delay(100);
124
125
126
deviceState = DEVICE_STATE_INIT;
127
Serial.println();
128
Serial.println(F("Sats HDOP
Latitude
Longitude
Fix
Date
Time
Date Alt
Course Speed Card
"));
129
Serial.println(F("
(deg)
(deg)
Age
Age
(m)
--- from GPS ----
"));
130
Serial.println(F("
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"));
131
}
132
133
void loop() {
134
smartDelay(0);
135
switch (deviceState) {
136
case DEVICE_STATE_INIT:
137
{
138
#if (LORAWAN_DEVEUI_AUTO)
139
LoRaWAN.generateDeveuiByChipID();
140
#endif
141
LoRaWAN.init(loraWanClass , loraWanRegion);
142
break;
143
}
144
case DEVICE_STATE_JOIN:
145
{
146
LoRaWAN.join();
147
break;
148
}
149
case DEVICE_STATE_SEND:
150
{
151
clearAppData();
152
prepareTxFrame(appPort);
153
LoRaWAN.send();
154
deviceState = DEVICE_STATE_CYCLE;
155
break;
156
}
157
case DEVICE_STATE_CYCLE:
158
{
159
// Schedule next packet transmission
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
3
==PAGE:93==
160
txDutyCycleTime = appTxDutyCycle + randr(-APP_TX_DUTYCYCLE_RND ,
APP_TX_DUTYCYCLE_RND);
161
LoRaWAN.cycle(txDutyCycleTime);
162
deviceState = DEVICE_STATE_SLEEP;
163
break;
164
}
165
case DEVICE_STATE_SLEEP:
166
{
167
LoRaWAN.sleep(loraWanClass);
168
break;
169
}
170
default:
171
{
172
deviceState = DEVICE_STATE_INIT;
173
break;
174
}
175
}
176
}
177
178
// This custom version of delay() ensures that the gps object
179
// is being "fed".
180
static void smartDelay(unsigned long ms) {
181
unsigned long start = millis();
182
do {
183
while (ss.available())
184
gps.encode(ss.read());
185
} while (millis() - start <= ms);
186
}
187
188
static void printFloat(float val, bool valid, int len, int prec) {
189
if (!valid) {
190
while (len-- > 1)
191
Serial.print('*');
192
Serial.print(' ');
193
} else {
194
Serial.print(val, prec);
195
int vi = abs((int)val);
196
int flen = prec + (val < 0.0 ? 2 : 1);
// . and -
197
flen += vi >= 1000 ? 4 : vi >= 100 ? 3
198
: vi >= 10
? 2
199
: 1;
200
for (int i = flen; i < len; ++i)
201
Serial.print(' ');
202
}
203
smartDelay(0);
204
}
205
206
static void printInt(unsigned long val, bool valid, int len) {
207
char sz[32] = "*****************";
208
if (valid)
209
sprintf(sz, "%ld", val);
210
sz[len] = 0;
211
for (int i = strlen(sz); i < len; ++i)
212
sz[i] = ' ';
213
if (len > 0)
214
sz[len - 1] = ' ';
215
Serial.print(sz);
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
4
==PAGE:94==
216
smartDelay(0);
217
}
218
219
static void printDateTime(TinyGPSDate &d, TinyGPSTime &t) {
220
if (!d.isValid()) {
221
Serial.print(F("********** "));
222
} else {
223
char sz[32];
224
sprintf(sz, "%02d/%02d/%02d ", d.month(), d.day(), d.year());
225
Serial.print(sz);
226
}
227
228
if (!t.isValid()) {
229
Serial.print(F("******** "));
230
} else {
231
char sz[32];
232
sprintf(sz, "%02d:%02d:%02d ", t.hour(), t.minute(), t.second());
233
Serial.print(sz);
234
}
235
236
printInt(d.age(), d.isValid(), 5);
237
smartDelay(0);
238
}
239
240
static void printStr(const char *str, int len) {
241
int slen = strlen(str);
242
for (int i = 0; i < len; ++i)
243
Serial.print(i < slen ? str[i] : ' ');
244
smartDelay(0);
245
}
246
247
static void prepareTxFrame(uint8_t port) {
248
/*appData size is LORAWAN_APP_DATA_MAX_SIZE which is defined in "
commissioning.h".
249
*appDataSize max value is LORAWAN_APP_DATA_MAX_SIZE.
250
*if enabled AT, don't modify LORAWAN_APP_DATA_MAX_SIZE , it may cause
system hanging or failure.
251
*if disabled AT, LORAWAN_APP_DATA_MAX_SIZE can be modified , the max value
is reference to lorawan region and SF.
252
*for example , if use REGION_CN470 ,
253
*the max value for different DR can be found in MaxPayloadOfDatarateCN470
refer to DataratesCN470 and BandwidthsCN470 in "RegionCN470.h".
254
*/
255
smartDelay(5000);
256
//while (ss.available())
257
//
gps.encode(ss.read());
258
printInt(gps.satellites.value(), gps.satellites.isValid(), 5);
259
printFloat(gps.hdop.hdop(), gps.hdop.isValid(), 6, 1);
260
printFloat(gps.location.lat(), gps.location.isValid(), 11, 6);
261
printFloat(gps.location.lng(), gps.location.isValid(), 12, 6);
262
printInt(gps.location.age(), gps.location.isValid(), 5);
263
printDateTime(gps.date, gps.time);
264
printFloat(gps.altitude.meters(), gps.altitude.isValid(), 7, 2);
265
printFloat(gps.course.deg(), gps.course.isValid(), 7, 2);
266
printFloat(gps.speed.kmph(), gps.speed.isValid(), 6, 2);
267
printStr(gps.course.isValid() ? TinyGPSPlus::cardinal(gps.course.deg()) :
"*** ", 6);
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
5
==PAGE:95==
268
Serial.println();
269
sensors_event_t event;
270
dht.temperature().getEvent(&event);
271
if (isnan(event.temperature)) {
272
Serial.println(F("Error reading temperature!"));
273
} else {
274
sensorData.temperature = event.temperature;
275
Serial.print(F("Temperature: "));
276
Serial.print(sensorData.temperature);
277
Serial.println(F("°C"));
278
279
}
280
// Get humidity event and print its value.
281
dht.humidity().getEvent(&event);
282
if (isnan(event.relative_humidity)) {
283
Serial.println(F("Error reading humidity!"));
284
} else {
285
sensorData.humidity = event.relative_humidity;
286
Serial.print(F("Humidity: "));
287
Serial.print(sensorData.humidity);
288
Serial.println(F("%"));
289
}
290
sensorData.latitude = gps.location.lat();
291
sensorData.longitude = gps.location.lng();
292
sensorData.altitude = gps.altitude.meters();
293
sensorData.hdop = gps.hdop.hdop();
294
sensorData.satellites = (int)gps.satellites.value();
295
296
scanStoreWifiMAC();
297
298
299
/*unsigned char *puc;
300
puc = (unsigned char *)(&latitude);
301
appDataSize = 16;
302
appData[0] = puc[0];
303
appData[1] = puc[1];
304
appData[2] = puc[2];
305
appData[3] = puc[3];
306
307
puc = (unsigned char *)(&longitude);
308
appData[4] = puc[0];
309
appData[5] = puc[1];
310
appData[6] = puc[2];
311
appData[7] = puc[3];
312
313
puc = (unsigned char *)(&hdop);
314
appData[8] = puc[0];
315
appData[9] = puc[1];
316
appData[10] = puc[2];
317
appData[11] = puc[3];
318
319
puc = (unsigned char *)(&satellites);
320
appData[12] = puc[0];
321
appData[13] = puc[1];
322
appData[14] = puc[2];
323
appData[15] = puc[3];
324
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
6
==PAGE:96==
325
if (wifiFound) {
326
appDataSize = 46;
327
puc = (unsigned char *)(&wifiNetworks[0].BSSID);
328
appData[16] = puc[0];
329
appData[17] = puc[1];
330
appData[18] = puc[2];
331
appData[19] = puc[3];
332
appData[20] = puc[4];
333
appData[21] = puc[5];
334
335
puc = (unsigned char *)(&wifiNetworks[1].BSSID);
336
appData[22] = puc[0];
337
appData[23] = puc[1];
338
appData[24] = puc[2];
339
appData[25] = puc[3];
340
appData[26] = puc[4];
341
appData[27] = puc[5];
342
puc = (unsigned char *)(&wifiNetworks[2].BSSID);
343
appData[28] = puc[0];
344
appData[29] = puc[1];
345
appData[30] = puc[2];
346
appData[31] = puc[3];
347
appData[32] = puc[4];
348
appData[33] = puc[5];
349
350
puc = (unsigned char *)(&wifiNetworks[3].BSSID);
351
appData[34] = puc[0];
352
appData[35] = puc[1];
353
appData[36] = puc[2];
354
appData[37] = puc[3];
355
appData[38] = puc[4];
356
appData[39] = puc[5];
357
358
puc = (unsigned char *)(&wifiNetworks[4].BSSID);
359
appData[40] = puc[0];
360
appData[41] = puc[1];
361
appData[42] = puc[2];
362
appData[43] = puc[3];
363
appData[44] = puc[4];
364
appData[45] = puc[5];
365
}*/
366
367
storeValueToAppDataArray(&sensorData.latitude , sizeof(sensorData.latitude
));
368
Serial.print("latitudedataSize= "); Serial.println(sizeof(sensorData.
latitude));
369
370
storeValueToAppDataArray(&sensorData.longitude , sizeof(sensorData.
longitude));
371
Serial.print("longitude= "); Serial.println(sizeof(sensorData.longitude))
;
372
373
storeValueToAppDataArray(&sensorData.hdop, sizeof(sensorData.hdop));
374
Serial.print("hdop= "); Serial.println( sizeof(sensorData.hdop));
375
376
storeValueToAppDataArray(&sensorData.satellites , sizeof(sensorData.
satellites));
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
7
==PAGE:97==
377
Serial.print("satellites= "); Serial.println(sizeof(sensorData.satellites
));
378
379
if (wifiFound) {
380
storeValueToAppDataArray(&wifiNetworks[0].BSSID, sizeof(wifiNetworks
[0].BSSID));
381
Serial.print("BSSID= "); Serial.println(sizeof(wifiNetworks[0].BSSID));
382
383
storeValueToAppDataArray(&wifiNetworks[0].BSSID, sizeof(wifiNetworks
[1].BSSID));
384
storeValueToAppDataArray(&wifiNetworks[0].BSSID, sizeof(wifiNetworks
[2].BSSID));
385
storeValueToAppDataArray(&wifiNetworks[0].BSSID, sizeof(wifiNetworks
[3].BSSID));
386
storeValueToAppDataArray(&wifiNetworks[0].BSSID, sizeof(wifiNetworks
[4].BSSID));
387
}
388
storeValueToAppDataArray(&sensorData.temperature , sizeof(sensorData.
temperature));
389
Serial.print("temperature= "); Serial.println(sizeof(sensorData.
temperature));
390
391
storeValueToAppDataArray(&sensorData.humidity , sizeof(sensorData.humidity
));
392
Serial.print("humidity= "); Serial.println(sizeof(sensorData.humidity));
393
394
395
for (int i = 0; i < appDataSize; i++) {
396
Serial.print(appData[i], HEX);
397
Serial.print(" ");
398
}
399
Serial.print(" ");
400
Serial.print("AppDataSize= ");
401
Serial.println(appDataSize);
402
}
403
404
void scanStoreWifiMAC() {
405
delay(1000);
406
Serial.println("Scanning for WiFi networks...");
407
numNetworks = WiFi.scanNetworks();
408
409
if (numNetworks == 0) {
410
Serial.println("No networks found.");
411
wifiFound = 0;
412
} else {
413
wifiFound = 1;
414
if (numNetworks > maxNetworks) {
415
numNetworks = maxNetworks;
416
}
417
418
for (int i = 0; i < numNetworks; i++) {
419
wifiNetworks[i].SSID = WiFi.SSID(i);
420
memcpy(wifiNetworks[i].BSSID, WiFi.BSSID(i), 6);
421
}
422
423
printf("Found %d WiFi networks and their MAC addresses", numNetworks);
424
}
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
8
==PAGE:98==
425
}
426
427
void printBSSID(uint8_t *bssid) {
428
for (int i = 0; i < 6; i++) {
429
Serial.print(bssid[i], HEX);
430
if (i < 5) {
431
Serial.print(":");
432
}
433
}
434
Serial.println();
435
}
436
437
void downLinkDataHandle(McpsIndication_t *mcpsIndication) {
438
LoRa_data = "";
439
Serial.printf("+REV DATA:%s,RXSIZE %d,PORT %d\r\n", mcpsIndication ->
RxSlot ? "RXWIN2" : "RXWIN1", mcpsIndication ->BufferSize ,
mcpsIndication ->Port);
440
Serial.print("+REV DATA:");
441
for (uint8_t i = 0; i < mcpsIndication ->BufferSize; i++) {
442
Serial.printf("%d", mcpsIndication ->Buffer[i]);
443
LoRa_data = LoRa_data + (String)(char)mcpsIndication ->Buffer[i];
444
}
445
LoRaDownLink = true;
446
LoRadonwlinkTime = millis();
447
num++;
448
Serial.println();
449
Serial.print(num);
450
Serial.print(":");
451
Serial.println(LoRa_data);
452
}
453
454
void print_wakeup_reason() {
455
esp_sleep_wakeup_cause_t wakeup_reason;
456
wakeup_reason = esp_sleep_get_wakeup_cause();
457
switch (wakeup_reason) {
458
case ESP_SLEEP_WAKEUP_EXT0: Serial.println("Wakeup caused by external
signal using RTC_IO"); break;
459
case ESP_SLEEP_WAKEUP_EXT1: Serial.println("Wakeup caused by external
signal using RTC_CNTL"); break;
460
case ESP_SLEEP_WAKEUP_TIMER: Serial.println("Wakeup caused by timer");
break;
461
case ESP_SLEEP_WAKEUP_TOUCHPAD: Serial.println("Wakeup caused by
touchpad"); break;
462
case ESP_SLEEP_WAKEUP_ULP: Serial.println("Wakeup caused by ULP program
"); break;
463
default: Serial.printf("Wakeup was not caused by deep sleep: %d\n",
wakeup_reason); break;
464
}
465
}
466
467
void storeValueToAppDataArray(const void *value, int dataSize) {
468
unsigned char *puc = (unsigned char *)value;
469
//Serial.print("dataSize= "); Serial.println(dataSize);
470
for (int i = 0; i < dataSize; i++) {
471
appData[appDataSize] = puc[i];
472
appDataSize++;
473
}
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
9
==PAGE:99==
474
}
475
476
void clearAppData() {
477
memset(appData , 0, sizeof(appData)); // Clear the appData array
478
appDataSize = 0; // Reset appDataSize to zero
479
}
480
481
void init_DHT() {
482
sensor_t sensor;
483
dht.temperature().getSensor(&sensor);
484
Serial.println(F("------------------------------------"));
485
Serial.println(F("Temperature Sensor"));
486
Serial.print(F("Sensor Type: "));
487
Serial.println(sensor.name);
488
Serial.print(F("Driver Ver:
"));
489
Serial.println(sensor.version);
490
Serial.print(F("Unique ID:
"));
491
Serial.println(sensor.sensor_id);
492
Serial.print(F("Max Value:
"));
493
Serial.print(sensor.max_value);
494
Serial.println(F("°C"));
495
Serial.print(F("Min Value:
"));
496
Serial.print(sensor.min_value);
497
Serial.println(F("°C"));
498
Serial.print(F("Resolution:
"));
499
Serial.print(sensor.resolution);
500
Serial.println(F("°C"));
501
Serial.println(F("------------------------------------"));
502
// Print humidity sensor details.
503
dht.humidity().getSensor(&sensor);
504
Serial.println(F("Humidity Sensor"));
505
Serial.print(F("Sensor Type: "));
506
Serial.println(sensor.name);
507
Serial.print(F("Driver Ver:
"));
508
Serial.println(sensor.version);
509
Serial.print(F("Unique ID:
"));
510
Serial.println(sensor.sensor_id);
511
Serial.print(F("Max Value:
"));
512
Serial.print(sensor.max_value);
513
Serial.println(F("%"));
514
Serial.print(F("Min Value:
"));
515
Serial.print(sensor.min_value);
516
Serial.println(F("%"));
517
Serial.print(F("Resolution:
"));
518
Serial.print(sensor.resolution);
519
Serial.println(F("%"));
520
Serial.println(F("------------------------------------"));
521
}
522
523
void setup() {
524
pinMode(LED_BUILTIN , OUTPUT);
525
}
526
527
void loop() {
528
digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN , HIGH);
529
delay(1000);
530
digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN , LOW);
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
10
==PAGE:100==
531
delay(1000);
532
}
Listing A.1: Arduino Code
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
11
==PAGE:101==
Code for the Scanning the WiFi and sending the location to the Google Cloud by Ge­
olocation API
A.2
Part B
1
/*This is Master thesis project by Virendra Pawar s210244
2
*
3
* Department of Communication Technology and System Design at
4
* Technical Ubiversity Denmark.
5
*
6
* Thesis Supervisor Prof. Martin Nordal Petersen.
7
*
8
* This the part B of the project , code works scans the wif address and
transmits the location of it to the Google cloud
9
by calling geolocation API call and the result can be visualized in the
graph.
10
11
12
*/
13
#include <WiFi.h>
14
#include <HTTPClient.h>
15
#include <ArduinoJson.h>
16
17
#define WIFI_SSID "Y5420"
18
#define WIFI_PASSWORD "asdfghjkl"
19
#define GOOGLE_API_KEY "AIzaSyABwdXzNAB2sVccZp -qvGJoygjWucMq_gQ"
20
21
void setup() {
22
Serial.begin(115200);
23
24
WiFi.begin(WIFI_SSID , WIFI_PASSWORD);
25
26
while (WiFi.status() != WL_CONNECTED) {
27
delay(1000);
28
Serial.println("Connecting to WiFi...");
29
}
30
31
Serial.println("Connected to WiFi");
32
}
33
34
void loop() {
35
int n = WiFi.scanNetworks();
36
if (n == 0) {
37
Serial.println("No networks found");
38
} else {
39
Serial.print(n);
40
Serial.println(" networks found");
41
42
StaticJsonDocument <1024> jsonBuffer;
43
JsonArray access_points = jsonBuffer.createNestedArray("
wifiAccessPoints");
44
45
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
46
JsonObject ap = access_points.createNestedObject();
47
ap["macAddress"] = WiFi.BSSIDstr(i);
48
ap["signalStrength"] = WiFi.RSSI(i);
49
ap["channel"] = WiFi.channel(i);
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
12
==PAGE:102==
50
}
51
52
char payload[1024];
53
serializeJson(jsonBuffer , payload);
54
55
HTTPClient http;
56
http.begin("https://www.googleapis.com/geolocation/v1/geolocate?key=" +
String(GOOGLE_API_KEY));
57
http.addHeader("Content -Type", "application/json");
58
int httpResponseCode = http.POST(payload);
59
60
if (httpResponseCode >0) {
61
String response = http.getString();
62
Serial.println(httpResponseCode);
63
Serial.println(response);
64
} else {
65
Serial.print("Error on sending POST: ");
66
Serial.println(httpResponseCode);
67
}
68
69
http.end();
70
}
71
72
delay(5000);
73
}
Listing A.2: Arduino Code
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
13
==PAGE:103==
Code used for constructing the payload function in the Helium Console
A.3
Part C
1
This is the code built for the Master thesis project by Virendra Pawar,
student number s210244.
2
This code is used for constructing the payload function in the Helium
console.
3
4
function Decoder(bytes, port) {
5
6
latitude = (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(0, 4))).toFixed(6);
7
longitude = (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(4, 8))).toFixed(6);
8
hdop = (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(8, 12))).toFixed(2);
9
satellites = (bytesToInt(bytes.slice(12, 16))).toFixed(2);
10
mac1= (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(16, 21))).toFixed(2);
11
mac2 = (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(21, 26))).toFixed(2);
12
mac3 = (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(26, 31))).toFixed(2);
13
mac4 = (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(31, 36))).toFixed(2);
14
mac5 = (bytesToFloat(bytes.slice(36, 41))).toFixed(2);
15
return {
16
Latitude:
17
latitude ,
18
Longitude:
19
longitude ,
20
HDOP:
21
hdop,
22
Satellites:
23
satellites ,
24
MAC1:
25
mac1,
26
MAC2:
27
mac2,
28
MAC3:
29
mac3,
30
MAC4:
31
mac4,
32
MAC5:
33
mac5,
34
};
35
}
36
37
function bytesToFloat(bytes)
38
{
39
//LSB Format (least significant byte first).
40
var bits = bytes[3]<<24 | bytes[2]<<16 | bytes[1]<<8 | bytes[0];
41
var sign = (bits>>>31 === 0) ? 1.0 : -1.0;
42
var e = bits>>>23 & 0xff;
43
var m = (e === 0) ? (bits & 0x7fffff)<<1 : (bits & 0x7fffff) | 0x800000
;
44
var f = sign * m * Math.pow(2, e - 150);
45
return f;
46
}
47
48
function bytesToInt (bytes) {
49
var value = 0;
50
for (var i = bytes.length - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
14
==PAGE:104==
51
value = (value * 256) + bytes[i];
52
}
53
return value;
54
}
Listing A.3: Arduino Code
Functional Prototype of Bike Tracker on Helium LoRaWAN Network
15
