==PAGE:1==
MODELING OF A MEMBRANE
CHROMATOGRAPHY UNIT WITH LIMITED
DATA
Magnus Lykke Poulsen
Master thesis, 30 ECTS
s183850
4. August 2023
DTU Chemical Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Supervised by:
Jens Abildskov
Jesper Frandsen
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This master thesis confronts the difficulties involved in modelling membrane chro-
matography using limited data with a focus on how data analysis can be used to do
unconventional data preprocessing to create better data for parameter estimation. At
first different system dispersion models are successfully implemented and evaluated, as
these are an integrated part of a model for a membrane chromatography unit. This
was followed by the data analysis which identified different aspects of the system and
data, such as obvious extra-column dispersion, the elution peak being pH dependent,
and a lack of impurity data. The models used consisted of the symmetrical Roper-
Lightfoot model as the system dispersion model and the equilibrium dispersive model
as the column model. For the adsorption kinetic model, two models were needed due
to the limited information in the data. For the loading phase, the data was limited
therefore the multicomponent Langmuir isotherm was used, while for the elution phase,
there was a clear dependency on pH therefore the mobile phase modulator Langmuir
isotherm was used. For data preprocessing different methods were used with the most
unique being a modified Beer-Lambert expression using complex data relations to de-
termine an absorption value needed for data conversion. Three parameter estimations
were performed.
The first estimates the system dispersion and column parameters,
using the relative absorbance during the loading phase. Second estimates the multi-
component Langmuir parameters, using the analytical data obtained by densitometry
analysis. And the third estimates the mobile phase modular Langmuir parameters, us-
ing the modified Beer-Lambert expression. Overall the data limitations were overcome
in the parameter estimations, with each showing good results upon comparison to the
data. Thus the final result is a model which is capable of adequately describing the
experimental membrane system, especially when considering the inconsistency in the
data. However, the limitations of the model due to the preprocessing steps and limited
data are yet to be examined as the parameter estimations and subsequent model would
have to be compared to several experiments. This master thesis was thereby able to
provide interesting insight into the challenges and possible approaches available when
a modelling membrane chromatography system with limited data.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This 30 ECTS point Master thesis was written over the 6 months period from January 23th
2023 to August 04th 2023, and concludes a two-year education to obtain an M.Sc. Eng.
degree in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering. The work was done at the Process and
Systems (PROSYS) Engineering Center in the Department of Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The supervisors were Associate
Professor Jens Abildskov, and PhD student Jesper Frandsen.
I would like to thank my supervisors for their guidance and support throughout the project.
I have appreciated our weekly meetings where their feedback and advice have been critical
to me in continuously shaping the master thesis during the period. In addition, I would like
to thank PhD student, Dan Ngyuen Pham, for providing the dataset used throughout the
thesis.
Magnus Lykke Poulsen
Date
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Membrane chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.2
Early discoveries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.3
Present basic modelling of membrane chromatography . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.4
Difference between membrane and column chromatography . . . . .
5
2.2
Simulated moving bed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Problem statement
9
3.1
Data for modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Membrane chromatography theory
11
4.1
System dispersion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.1
Simple dispersion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1.2
Roper-Lightfoot model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.3
Zonal rate model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Column model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Adsorption kinetic models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Recreation/Implementation of system dispersion models
20
6
Data and meta-data analysis
26
6.1
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.1
Variation in operating parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.2
Experimental information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.1.3
Analytical information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2
Meta-data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2.1
Experimental data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2.2
Analytical data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iii
==PAGE:5==
6.2.3
Data quality checks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Data exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.4
Data discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Model setup
41
7.1
CADET model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Parameter estimation
44
8.1
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2
System dispersion and column parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2.1
Comparison of system dispersion models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2.2
Parameter estimation with multiple experiments . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.3
Sample application adsorption parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.4
Elution adsorption parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.4.1
Absorption variable/Data preprocesseing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.4.2
Setup and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.5
Final model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
9
Discussion and conclusion
59
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
10 References
63
iv
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
Biox
Fermentation batch number x
CADET Chromatography Analysis and Design Toolkit (Python)
CSTR Continuously stirred tank reactor
NSGA Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm
PFR
Plug flow reactor
SAW setup CADET setup for the sample application and wash step
scFv
Single-chain variable fragment
TMB True moving bed
ZRM
Zonal rate model
Subscripts and superscripts
s
Elution component
0
Feed/start
a
Reactor before membrane
b
Reactor after membrane
i
Component
j
Inlet specification/General sum notation
k
Zone in the zonal rate model
m
Number of tank inlets
in
Ingoing stream
out
Outgoing stream
SD
System dispersion model
Symbols
∆tsa
Time length of the sample application step
Dax
Axial dispersion coefficient
H0
Null hypothesis
Ka
Equilibrium constant
ka
Adsorption rate constant
v
==PAGE:7==
kd
Desorption rate constant
ka0
Modulator adsorption constant
kd0
Modulator desorption constant
mb
Amount bound variable
mr
Amount regeneration variable
msw
Amount elution variable
msw
Amount sample application + wash variable
qmax
Maximum binding capacity
qscFv
Binding capacity variable
td
Time lag
s
u
Interstitial velocity
Yb+u
Bound+unbound yield variable
Yb
Bound yield variable
A
Absorbance (Beer-Lambert law)
CV
Column volume
c
Concentration
H
Number of components
K
Number of radial membrane zones
L
Total length of the membrane
l
Optical path length
MB
scFV mass balance variable
N
Number of observations
P
Purity variable
Q
Volumetric flow rate
L
s
q
Concentration bound to the solid phase/Binding capacity
t
Time
s
V
Volume
L
z
Axial coordinate
Greek letters
β
Constant describing the ion-exchange characteristics
vi
==PAGE:8==
ϵ
Mass absorption coefficient
ϵl
Composite absorption variable, ϵl = ϵl
λi
Constant describing the hydrophobicity characteristics - negative
µ
Mean value
ϕ
Flow fraction
τ
Residence time
ε
Porosity of the membrane
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The development, manufacturing, and marketing of biopharmaceuticals is a multi-billion
dollar industry that uses biotechnological processes to produce pharmaceuticals in living
cells[1].
The use of living cells presents a challenge when separating and purifying the
product in the downstream processing as the liquid from the fermentation tends to contain
a complex mixture of organic and inorganic compounds. Another challenge comes from
the biopharmaceuticals themself as they can be proteins, nucleic acids, or cells which all
have large and complex structures that can easily degrade if not handled under proper
conditions. Furthermore when producing pharmaceuticals a strict set of rules, has to be
followed to ensure the product is safe and effective for the intended use. This leads to the
downstream being a complex process that requires several separations processes. All this
means that the downstream is a substantial cost in the manufacturing process as it can
account for up to 80% of the total manufacturing cost. One of the most expensive process
steps is chromatography. Presently the most used method for doing chromatography is
the packed-bed column which uses expensive resin beads that need to be carefully handled
within the column. Some chromatography steps are so expensive that they can account for
up to 60% of the cost in the downstream processing[2].
Due to the high cost of doing column chromatography, it is important to continuously
optimize current chromatography technologies to reduce cost via economy of scale. One
such emerging technology is membrane chromatography which was developed in the 1980s
with the goal of reducing the intraparticle diffusion limitations seen in packed-bed columns.
As the name implies this was achieved with a membrane design, which utilized a different
pore structure than traditional beads to overcome this limitation.
Although due to its
limited binding capacity membrane chromatography never saw the success it was expected
to get in its early days. A renewed interest in membrane chromatography for the separation
of biomolecules such as proteins, plasmid DNA, and viruses, started in the early 2000s when
research showed that membrane chromatography was capable of having a greater capacity
than traditional chromatography for the separation of large biomolecules. This is due to
the biomolecules being so large that they have trouble entering the traditional porous beads
and once inside they have difficulty moving around and can cause a blockage in the pores,
thus they only easily adsorps to the outside of the beads which is a very inefficient use
of the beads surface area. For membranes, the pore size is much larger, which results in
the mass transfer within the membrane being mainly by convective flow. This practically
removes the mass transfer limitation which gives the molecules better access to the binding
sites. While membrane chromatography has gained increased interest in research, it is still
lacking in terms of continuous chromatography as there is almost no research about it.
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
In this section, the concept of membrane chromatography is explained as well as how it
differs from the more traditionally used packed-bed chromatography. In a comparison be-
tween the two methods the benefits and disadvantages of using membrane chromatography
are examined. Another subject in this section is continuous membrane chromatography.
As membrane chromatography is still an emerging technology it is still lacking in research
focusing on how to do it continuously.
2.1
Membrane chromatography
Membrane chromatography was developed to overcome some of the limitations of tradi-
tional chromatography which is performed by packing a column with porous beads. Some
drawbacks associated with traditional chromatography are slow diffusive mass transport,
high-pressure drops, and bead compressibility[3]. Currently, membrane chromatography is
mostly used for flow-through applications as a polishing step in bioprocesses[4] although
this report will mainly focus on using it for the separation of large biomolecules.
2.1.1
Concept
Membrane chromatography is a chromatography method that uses a porous membrane
module as its stationary phase. The membrane consists of a matrix of interconnected pores
to create a filter for molecules to pass through. As membrane chromatography is generally
specialized for large biomolecules the pores are much larger compared to the traditional
porous beads which results in better accessibility to the binding sites[3].
As the solute
molecules can flow through these pores most of the mass transfer from the bulk fluid to
the binding site is through convective transportation. The other mass transfer is through
film diffusion as the molecules have to transfer across a thin film layer to interact with the
binding site, although this is in many cases negligible[5]. The mass transfer is therefore
absent of pore diffusion for membrane chromatography. Another important flow aspect is
the flow pattern across the membrane module, generally given as axial, radial and axial-
radial flow, which is decided by the module configuration. Examples of commonly used
configurations in membrane chromatography are disc, spiral wound and hollow fibre module
configurations[3].
To make the membrane functional it is coated with a process-dependent ligand or functional
group which interacts with the target molecule. Generally, there are two types of mem-
brane chromatography: ion exchange membrane chromatography and affinity membrane
chromatography. For ion exchange membrane chromatography the membrane is function-
alized with a functional group that has either anion or cation exchange functionalities[6].
For affinity membrane chromatography the membrane is functionalized with a ligand that
specifically binds to the target molecule, such as a monoclonal antibody or a specific protein.
2
==PAGE:11==
2.1.2
Early discoveries
The origin of what is called membrane chromatography today is hard to pinpoint, as
other techniques have shared the same name.
However modern membrane chromatog-
raphy started around the early 1990s, where it quickly started to gain traction. An early
example of the principle of membrane chromatography was introduced by Afeyan et al.[7] in
1990 as perfusion chromatography. The aim of this new technique was to reduce resistance
from mass transfer in stagnant mobile phases, while still maintaining high capacity and
being operational at reasonable pressure conditions. This was achieved by using a porous
particle with large pores, resulting in the solute entering the particle through a combination
of convective and diffusional transport, thus creating the perfusive particle, a flow-through
particle. Afeyan et al.[7] noted for perfusion chromatography that the column could also
be packed with non-porous particles or a membrane. This concept was further expanded
on by Briefs and Kula[8] in 1992 by using a stack of microporous membranes being one
of the earliest mentions of membrane chromatography. The modelling of the membrane
column proposed in this article is fairly close to how most membrane columns are cur-
rently modelled. Here they also found that axial dispersion is the dominant band-spreading
mechanism. Similar results were made by Frey et al.[9] in 1992, when they examined the
dispersion effect in membrane chromatography. Here they noticed that the extra-column
band broadening was more significant for the shorter column.
When researching the inconsistency between theoretical and reported plate heights Roper
and Lightfoot[10] in 1995 made a considerable contribution in modelling extra-column dis-
persion. They noted that extra-column contributions to band broadening in effluent profiles
are significant. Thus to model the extra-column effects in the system they placed and fit-
ted an exponentially modified Gaussian consisting of a continuously stirred tank reactor
(CSTR) in series with a plug flow reactor (PFR) to the columns peripherals. With this
model, they proved that the influence of extra-column broadening can not be neglected
when estimating the plate height.
Although what they more fundamentally proved for
membrane chromatography was the importance of modelling extra-column dispersion. This
gave rise to the system dispersion model, which models the extra-column effects and has
become an inherent part of membrane chromatography modelling. The model proposed by
Roper and Lightfoot[10] has later become known as the Roper-Lightfoot model and while
the model has seen some slight modifications it is fundamentally the same model still in
use. And even though a new and more accurate system dispersion model has been created
the Roper-Lightfoot model still sees plenty of use due to its simple yet effective approach.
2.1.3
Present basic modelling of membrane chromatography
In terms of mechanistic modelling of the membrane, it generally includes two parts, a chro-
matography column model and a system dispersion model. Column models typically bear
a strong semblance to models from traditional column chromatography, as they are either
identical or slightly modified to account for the differences between the two methods. Typ-
3
==PAGE:12==
ically the column models used for membrane chromatography are simpler models such as
the equilibrium-dispersive model[11]. This model is a simplification of the more comprehen-
sive general rate model, which is a comprehensive model of mass transfer which considers
a variety of mass transfer and kinetic factors[12]. While the equilibrium-dispersive model
was not created for membrane chromatography it makes two assumptions which make it
very suitable. First is that the adsorption-desorption process is very fast, thus the phase
system is always very close to equilibrium. Second is that contributions of all the non-
equilibrium effects can be explained by the single dispersion coefficient. The effect of this
second assumption is that the model basically ignores the presence of the intraparticle pores.
Therefore all pore-related expressions are removed along with film diffusion, which inciden-
tally is similar to what is seen in membrane chromatography. An important part of the
column model is the kinetic equation, which controls the mass transfer between the liquid
and solid phase. There is a varying degree of complexity between the available adsorption
kinetic models. One of the simplest and most widely used adsorption kinetic model is the
Langmuir model[13]. Although the Langmuir model is great for general use, several more
specialised adsorption models have been created for specific uses. For large biomolecules
adsorption models such as the steric hindrance model and the spreading model exist[14].
The steric hindrance is mainly applicable for large molecules where the occupation of a
binding site will prevent binding for some of the adjacent binding sites due to the steric
hindrance effect. The spreading model was specifically designed for proteins as it takes into
account that proteins can change orientation or conformation after binding.
The need for the system dispersion model stems from the configuration of the membrane
module which has a low length-to-diameter ratio.
This can result in solute dispersion
in the hold-up volume having a considerable contribution to the band broadening of the
sample peaks. Different system dispersion models have been proposed for describing the
extra-column dispersion effects. Currently, all the common system dispersion models use a
combination of PFRs and CSTRs. One of the most popular system dispersion models is the
aforementioned Roper-Lightfoot model[10]. This model no longer relies on an exponentially
modified Gaussian but instead places a PFR before the column model and a CSTR before
and after the column model to describe the external volume. Models with a linear sequence
of interconnected PFR and CSTR in series with the membrane, such as the Roper-Lightfoot
model, were for several years the only available models. The limit of models with this linear
approach was found to be due to their assumption of homogeneity over membrane cross-
sections, which is difficult to achieve due to the low length-to-diameter ratio[5]. Therefore
they are incapable of accounting for inhomogeneous flow patterns inside the membrane that
attribute to band broadening. To describe these inhomogeneous flow patterns, the non-
linear multi-zone approach zonal rate model (ZRM) was proposed[15, 16]. While different
ZRM configurations exist they all divide the external volume and membrane stack into
several radial zones. Having multiple radial zones therefore better captures the contribution
of the various flow pathlengths within the membrane to the band broadening. Furthermore,
ZRM can be applied to membrane modules with either axial or radial flow.
4
==PAGE:13==
2.1.4
Difference between membrane and column chromatography
Membrane chromatography differs from column chromatography mainly in how mass trans-
fer happens from the bulk fluid to the binding site. As column chromatography uses porous
beads in which intraparticle diffusion is necessary to gain access to the full volume of
the beads, proper access to the binding site is reliant on pore diffusion. However large
biomolecules tend to bind only to the surface of these beads which results in a much lower
dynamic binding capacity compared to smaller biomolecules that have access to the whole
bead[17]. Membranes with their larger pore sizes are able to overcome this limitation, as
most mass transfer from the bulk fluid to the binding site happens through convective flow.
The difference in pore structure between membrane chromatograpy and packed bed chro-
matography is seen Fig. 1. Furthermore, as diffusional limitations are minimal membranes
are able to remain effective even for larger biomolecules with diffusion coefficients orders
of magnitude less than smaller biomolecules[18]. Under these conditions, membrane chro-
matography is able to outperform column chromatography in terms of dynamic capacity,
flow rate, and pressure drop[6, 17, 18]. Yang et al.[6] compared the difference in the per-
Figure 1: The pore structure in membrane chromatography and packed bed chromatography.
formance of an anion-exchange membrane when separating two proteins with noticeably
different sizes. Their work demonstrated that chromatographic membranes have a high
capacity for large biomolecules and a low capacity for small biomolecules. In a comparison
between membranes and conventional beads, they noted that the advantage of using mem-
branes increased significantly as the size of the biomolecule increased. They hypothesized
that mass transfer was not rate-limiting and that the broadening of the elution curve was
mainly contributed by mixing in the flow system. Teeters et al.[18] studied how an anion-
exchange membrane could be characterized for use when separating very large biomolecules
by using plasmid DNA as their reference. They noted that in comparison with beds packed
with conventional porous beads, membrane chromatography performed much better for
separating plasmid DNA. Membrane chromatography had a significantly larger capacity, it
remained effective even for very large biomolecules which had high diffusion coefficients, its
5
==PAGE:14==
inherent bed height was much less, and they confirmed the absence of the mass transfer
limitation. Endres et al.[17] also studied how an anion-exchange membrane could be used
for separating plasmid DNA, and compared it with beds packed with conventional porous
beads. They noted that membrane chromatography had a significantly larger dynamic ca-
pacity and could be operated at significantly higher flow rates. In their experiments, they
used protein and endotoxin as natural impurities. Here they noted that due to how much
bigger plasmid DNA is than protein and endotoxin it was still possible for small amounts of
impurities to bind to a surface that was close to saturation of plasmid DNA. Although this
behaviour was less prevalent than for porous beads, they commented that it may be im-
possible to reach final product specifications using only an ion-exchange membrane. Lastly,
they also noted that there was no mass transfer limitation to the rate of binding.
Apart from the improved mass transfer membrane chromatography also bring other benefits
in how it is operated. It can be operated at higher flow rates which decreases the processing
time. It uses a shorter bed height which decreases the pressure drop reducing the pumping
requirements. It has a smaller unit dead volume which lowers buffer consumption[4, 18, 19].
Membrane chromatography also has some benefits in how it can be implemented. As the
membranes are modular they are more easily scalable. It is possible for a unit to be single-
use or disposable which removes some of the problems and costs associated with packed
beads. It reduces the extensive costs associated with packing the columns and validating
them. It avoids bed compaction. It requires less extensive cleaning and sanitization as it
is disposable. It further reduces the number of buffers and volume of buffers as there is no
resin storage[4, 17, 20].
2.2
Simulated moving bed
Simulated moving bed (SMB) is a continuous chromatographic technique that traditionally
uses a series of packed bed columns to achieve a more efficient separation compared to batch
chromatography by imitating countercurrent flow between the stationary solid phase and
the mobile liquid phase. By imitating counterflow an SMB unit gets the associated benefits
with it such as lower capital and operating costs[21].
The SMB was developed in the 1960s for the petrochemical industry where its first indus-
trial application was for hydrocarbon separation. Its application was quickly expanded to
sugar separation, although it took until the 1990s before it started to gain attention in
the fine chemistry application, where it became particularly popular in the separation of
enantiomers[13, 22].
2.2.1
Concept
The principles of an SMB unit come from the analogous true moving bed (TMB) configu-
ration seen in Fig. 2. This is a four-section TMB which is the most common configuration
used. A TMB unit revolves around running a chromatographic column continuously with a
6
==PAGE:15==
counterflow between the liquid phase and the solid adsorbent. This will result in an overall
better performance compared to the typical way of batch-wise operation with one moving
phase and one stationary phase[22].
Figure 2:
A true moving bed
(TMB) unit for continuous adsorp-
tive separations.
This enables the more retained components to move with
the solid flow and the less retained components to move
with the fluid flow thus achieving separation. The four-
section setup has a minimum of four columns, two inlet
ports, two outlet ports, and two recycles.
While there
can be multiple columns in each section, the system will
typically be described based on the sections labelled from
1 to 4, which are dependent on the port distribution. All
columns are connected to their two neighbours by fluid
and solid flow connections which go in opposite directions.
Thus the flow in the system consists of a cyclic fluid flow
and a cyclic solid flow and as all ports are placed on the
fluid flow connection between two sections liquid is either
added or removed through these ports.
The two inlet
ports are the feed, placed between sections 2 and 3, and
the desorbent make-up, placed between sections 4 and 1.
The two outlet ports are the extract, placed between sec-
tions 1 and 2, and the raffinate, placed between sections 3
and 4. It is in the extract stream that the more retained
components exit while the less retained components exit
in the raffinate stream. Lastly, the two recycles are the
fluid flow recycle, going from sections 4 to 1, and the solid
flow recycle, going from sections 1 to 4.
For a four-section TMB unit, there are only four operating
parameters, one for each section. These are the flow-rate
ratio for each section, which is the ratio between the spe-
cific liquid flow rate for each section to the constant solid
flow rate of the system. To ensure complete separation
these parameters need to be chosen such that several con-
ditions are satisfied. In terms of the actual separation, it
should only happen in sections 2 and 3. Here the condi-
tions must be such that none of the less retained components exit section 2 in the solid flow
and none of the more retained components exit section 3 in the fluid flow. This is achieved
by choosing the flow-rate ratios in these sections based on the adsorption isotherm, although
it is required that the flow-rate ratio of section 3 is larger than for section 2 to ensure feed
is added. For sections 1 and 4 their main role is to ensure that no components enter the
recycles such that they only consist of the desorbent. The flow-rate ratio in section 1 is
usually only bound to a lower value based on a simple adsorption parameter, independent
of the rest of the system, as it just needs to be large enough that all components bound to
7
==PAGE:16==
the solid phase go to the liquid phase. However as any increase in this ratio is controlled by
the amount of desorbent added, there is an economic incentive to keep it as low as possible.
The flow-rate ratio in section 4 is similar in that it only needs to be slow enough that all
components in the liquid phase are bound to the solid phase. But unlike section 1, the
flow-rate ratio typically has both a lower and an upper bound with the upper bound being
dependent on a variety of factors such as feed conditions, adsorption parameters and flow-
rate ratios in sections 2 and 3. Approaching the upper bound is beneficial as it correlates
with more feed being added to the system. Thus with this setup, each section serves a
different purpose to ensure good and efficient separation.
The setup in an SMB unit is fairly similar, although since it is not practically possible to
move the solids it uses a stationary solid phase, and has, therefore, no solid flow connections
and only one recycle, the fluid flow recycle. To replicate the fluid-solid counterflow it uses
a port-switching technique where all ports are moved one column in the fluid flow direction
on a timed basis imitating the movement of the stationary solid phase. While an SMB unit
is not able to reach a true steady state due to the continuous shifting of the inlet and outlet
ports, it will eventually reach a cyclic steady state with a consistent output in the outlet
ports.
8
==PAGE:17==
3
Problem statement
As mentioned has membrane chromatography been of interest in the separation of large
biomolecules. A range of experiments has shown that for biomolecules that weigh more
than 250 kDa membrane chromatography is able to consistently outperform column chro-
matography in both binding capacity and throughput. Although, since it is still an emerging
technology there is still a lack of proper advanced models for explaining the complex behav-
ior seen in membrane chromatography. Subsequently, little research has been done on how
to integrate it with more advanced continuous operation setups to increase the efficiency of
the process.
Therefore the first part of the project is to model and simulate a membrane chromatography
unit using a cation-exchange membrane separate single-chain variable fragments from its
fermentation broth. The initial part of this will concern replicating figures from literature to
gain better insight into how these membranes are modelled and doing a data and meta-data
analysis for experimental and analytical data from multiple experiments. A model capable
of describing the membrane system will be made, and using the data multiple parameter
estimation will be done to estimate missing values in the model.
The second part involves using the developed model for the membrane to create a simulated
moving bed system. Since a simulated moving bed using membrane chromatography has
not yet been seen in the literature, what is required will be investigated to see if it is possible
with the developed model. Furthermore, as there is no data available for a simulated moving
bed system using membrane chromatography, any simulations done can only be evaluated
based on different performance parameters such as purity, yield, and throughput.
Due to complications, the thesis ended up focusing on the first part, and how modelling
could be done with inadequate data.
3.1
Data for modelling
The data needed for modelling stems from colleagues at DTU who have done a range
of experiments.
Although currently, it is unknown if they are sufficient for modelling.
Therefore a data and meta-data analysis will be done, both for a better understanding of
the data and to determine if more experimental work might be needed.
3.2
Project plan
The start date for the project was 23. January 2023 and the hand-in date is 4. August 2023.
The time allocation for the different subtasks is shown in the project plan seen in Fig. 3. In
the project plan, the 3 drafts which are to be handed in for feedback on the current state
of the report are also scheduled. Lastly, weekly meetings with supervisors Jens Abildskov
and Jesper Frandsen are held throughout the entire project. Due to medical reasons, the
hand-in date was changed from the 14. July to 4. August.
9
==PAGE:18==
Week
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Background
MC understandment
Reproduce figures
Idea generation
Data and meta-data analysis
Membrane modeling
Start modeling
Improve models
Experimental work
Modeling SMB
Define model
Simulations
Finishing report
Draft hand-in
Figure 3: Project plan shown by a Gantt chart.
10
==PAGE:19==
4
Membrane chromatography theory
For a model to be suitable for a membrane chromatographic system, it must account for both
the relevant adsorption kinetics and transport phenomena occurring within the membrane,
as well as flow non-idealities from external elements. For modelling the membrane unit
similar models to traditional column chromatography are generally applicable. The external
flow non-idealities stem from the ancillary systems located between the feed tank and a
detector unit after the membrane column, such as pumps, valves, fittings, etc. For smaller
membrane systems the overall volume of these elements ranges from being similar to the
volume of the membrane column to being considerably larger. Thus the response of the
system can be affected by the collective flow non-idealities in these ancillary systems, making
the general assumption of pure plug flow behaviour in external elements unreliable. For
modelling these elements a system dispersion model is used. For modelling a membrane
system the two models can be set up as seen in Fig. 4, where the system dispersion model
used is a simple system dispersion model, which is described further in Section 4.1.1.
Figure 4: Schematization with a simple system dispersion model describing the system dispersion
in a membrane chromatographic system.
4.1
System dispersion model
System dispersion models are typically defined based on the main flow non-idealities being
due to mixing volumes and dead volumes. Where and how the mixing volumes affect the
system can generally be divided into two. First, is the mixing happening outside of the
membrane column in the ancillary systems. The placement of these mixing volumes is from
the feed tank to the inlet of the column and from the outlet of the column to the detector.
Second, is the mixing at the column distributor and collector which happens due to the high
diameter-to-height ratio of a membrane stack, which results in inadequate flow distribution
in the column before the feed solute enters the membrane stack. For modelling these mixing
volumes different CSTR configurations are used depending on what model fits the system
best. While dead volumes, like mixing volumes, are present throughout the system they are
typically lumped together as their contribution is a time lag. This is possible as the only
effect of the time lag is that the system’s response will be seen later than expected in the
detector unit. Thus the standard practice is to use a single PFR to model the lumped dead
11
==PAGE:20==
volumes.
For modelling the system dispersion effect there are currently three models used in the
literature, the simple dispersion model, the Roper-Lightfoot model and the zonal rate model.
These all use a single PFR but different configurations of CSTRs. All three of these models
will be described further below. The models will be formulated based on the membrane
having axial flow, as this is the same flow as the examined membrane chromatography unit,
and the system being a single component, since in system dispersion models the different
components rarely interact with each other. Lastly, it should be noted that in the literature
the PFR isn’t placed consistently beside any specific units in any of the models. While the
PFR can’t necessarily be placed arbitrarily it has for all three models a certain degree of
freedom in where it can be placed in the model. Thus it would appear that it is often placed
based on the author’s personal preference.
4.1.1
Simple dispersion model
This system dispersion model only utilises a single CSTR to model all mixing volumes in
the system. This is theoretically the simplest possible system dispersion model which takes
into account the flow non-idealities coming from mixing volume and dead volume. While
this model is nameless in literature, it will for this paper be called the simple dispersion
model.
The simple dispersion model which consists of a single PFR and CSTR before the membrane
stack, is a very lumped approach to modeling the system dispersion effects. This has some
benefits in that it keeps the model very simple and results in a system dispersion model
with few parameters to estimate. Although since it lumps all dispersion effects together
indiscriminately it is not capable of differentiating between the dispersion effects before and
after the membrane stack.
For modelling the simple dispersion model with a PFR first followed by a CSTR the following
formulas can be used. As the PFR only needs to account for the time lag in the system, it
is described by a simple piecewise function, Eq. 1.
cPFR
out
=
(
0
for
t < td
c0
for
t ≥td
(1)
Here t is the time variable, c0 is the feed concentration and td is the time lag caused by the
dead volumes, which is equal to the residence time in the PFR defined as td = VPFR/Q,
where VPFR is the volume of the PFR and Q the total volumetric flow rate. This relation
between td and VPFR is relevant as literature alternates between using residence time and
volume when doing parameter estimating on the models.
12
==PAGE:21==
The change in concentration in the CSTR follows its standard mass balance relation, Eq. 2.
dcCSTR
out
dt
=
Q
VCSTR
(cCSTR
in
−cCSTR
out
)
(2)
Here cCSTR
in
and cCSTR
out
are the concentration entering and exiting the CSTR respectively.
Lastly is the relation between the concentration exiting the PFR and entering the CSTR,
Eq. 3.
cCSTR
in
= cPFR
out
(3)
For the concentration exiting the system dispersion model and entering the membrane the
notation cSD will be used for linear PFR/CSTR sequence and cSD,k for the zonal rate model
with k defining the zone. In this case, the concentration entering the membrane is equal to
the concentration exiting the CSTR, cSD = cCSTR
out
.
When doing parameter estimation for this model, only two parameters, one for each unit,
need to be estimated: the PFR volume and CSTR volume.
4.1.2
Roper-Lightfoot model
The Roper-Lightfoot model slightly expands on the simple dispersion model by using two
CSTRs, one on each side of the membrane stack. By not lumping all dispersion effects
together this configuration gives a more accurate model as the dispersion effects on either
side of the membrane can now be considered.
When modelling the Roper-Lightfoot model the same equations as for the simple dispersion
model are initially used, Eq. 1-3.
Furthermore, the second CSTR after the membrane
follows Eq. 2. To differentiate between the two CSTRs the notation a for the CSTR before
the membrane and b for the CSTR after is used, with this the concentrations are now
called cCSTR,a
in
and cCSTR,b
in
. The only new formula is for the concentration at the inlet
of the second CSTR, which follows Eq. 4, as it is equal to the concentration exiting the
membrane.
cCSTR,b
in
= cmembrane
out
(4)
Here cmembrane
out
is the concentration exiting the membrane. Lastly, the concentration leaving
the CSTR after the membrane is now the final product concentration leaving the system.
For parameter estimation of this model, there is one more parameter to estimate, such
that it is now 2, VCSTR,a, and VCSTR,b.
A common approach in literature to simplify
parameter estimation is to assume axial symmetry in the system dispersion before and after
the membrane, thus the volume of the two CSTRs are set equal to each other, VCSTR,a =
VCSTR,b. Doing so results in what is typically a more exact model than the simple dispersion
model while still only having to estimate two parameters.
13
==PAGE:22==
4.1.3
Zonal rate model
The zonal rate model is different from the previous models in that it divides the mem-
brane module and the external hold-up volumes into zones. Unlike models with a linear
PFR/CSTR sequence which has to assume uniform radial flow distribution at both ends
of the membrane, the zonal approach accounts for inadequate flow distributions within the
column. The inadequate flow distribution is at the inlet and outlet of the membrane mod-
ule and is caused by its high diameter-to-length ratio. The inadequate flow distribution
in turn causes inhomogeneous flow patterns within the membrane which will contribute by
increasing the band broadening.
While different configurations exist for the zonal rate model all divide the membrane into
zones with a corresponding CSTR on both the distributor and collector side. The CSTRs
are then connected in a configuration and defined such that the solute dispersion in a zone
is larger the further the zone is from the centre of the column. While in theory there is
no set limit on how many zones can be used, two zones have multiple times in literature
been able to describe the system dispersion effect noticeably better than the linear models.
Thus the number of zones can be kept fairly low to not overcomplicate the model[5, 16].
As this approach divides the membrane into individual zones which can’t transfer mass
transfer between them, it is only possible due to radial dispersion being negligible because
of the pore structure in membranes.
Worth noticing is it that the configuration in the
Roper-Lightfoot model is the same as some 1-zone zonal rate model configurations.
Two main configurations of the zones are seen. There is the standard flow distribution and
collection, seen in Fig. 5, and the diagonal flow distribution and collection, seen in Fig. 6. As
Figure 5: 3-zone zonal rate model with standard flow distribution.
seen in both figures zonal rate models use residence time instead of volume for the CSTRs.
Thus they use the mass balance equation based on residence time seen in Eq. 5.
dcCSTR
out
dt
= cCSTR
in
−cCSTR
out
τ
(5)
Furthermore, the CSTRs with multiple inlets on the collector side in Fig. 5, are described
14
==PAGE:23==
by the expanded equation seen in Eq. 6.
dcCSTR
out
dt
=
m
X
j=1
cCSTR
in,j
τj
−cCSTR
out
m
X
j=1
1
τj
(6)
Here m is the number of tank inlets with cCSTR
in,j
and τj being the concentration and residence
time contribution from inlet j. The zonal rate models can still use the PFR equation from
Eq. 1 as it is already based on the residence time. While this is all fairly similar to the
Figure 6: 3-zone zonal rate model with diagonal flow distribution.
models with a linear PFR/CSTR sequence the zonal rate models also need to consider how
the flow rate through each zone may contribute to band spreading.
Using the 3-zone standard flow distribution configuration in Fig. 5 the flow relations are
defined as follows. To describe the fraction of the total volumetric flow passing through
membrane zone k a set of flow fractions, ϕk, are defined. Thus the volumetric flow passing
through membrane zone k is defined as Qk = ϕkQ. Due to mass conservation, the flow
fractions must follow ϕ1 +ϕ2 +ϕ3 = 1 such that the zone flow rates gives Q1 +Q2 +Q3 = Q.
Next, for the first tank on the collector side let ϕ1b,1 and ϕ1b,2 denote the flow fraction of
the inlet from the membrane and previous tank respectively and let ϕ2b,1 and ϕ2b,2 be the
same for the second tank. As these flow fractions also have to follow mass conservation they
are also equal to one, ϕ1b,1 + ϕ1b,2 = 1 and ϕ2b,1 + ϕ2b,2 = 1. The flow fractions through the
membrane zones can then be defined based on the flow fractions for the first and second
tank, ϕ1 = ϕ1b,1, ϕ2 = ϕ1b,2ϕ2b,1 and ϕ3 = ϕ1b,2ϕ2b,2. Although there are a total of seven
total fractions they are so interconnected that with knowing either ϕ1 and ϕ2 or ϕ1b,2 and
ϕ2b,1 the other five can be determined.
For the two CSTRs with multiple inlets on the collector side expressions for the individual
inlets residence times are needed for Eq. 6. The correlation between the tank and inlet
residence times used in Eq. 6 is set up as 1/τ1b = 1/τ1b,1+1/τ1b,2 and 1/τ2b = 1/τ2b,1+1/τ2b,2.
Using the residence time for the inlet in the first CSTR as an example its residence times
can be defined as τ1b,1 = VCSTR,1b/(ϕ1b,1Q1b). Then as the residence time of the first CSTR
is defined as τ1b = VCSTR,1b/Q1b it gives the following relationship between the two tanks
15
==PAGE:24==
τ1b,1 = τ1b/ϕ1b,1. As this is applicable for both inlets in both tanks the inlet residence times
are equal to τ1b,j = τ1b/ϕ1b,j and τ2b,j = τ2b/ϕ2b,j for j ∈[1, 2].
For parameter estimation of this model, the number of parameters to estimate depends
on the number of zones.
The parameters for a model with K radial membrane zones
are the time lag, td, the residence time of all CSTRs on both sides of the membrane,
τa = (τ1a, ..., τKa) and τb = (τ1b, ..., τKb), and all but one flow fraction, ϕ = (ϕ1, ..., ϕK−1).
The last fraction ϕK is determined from PK
k=1 ϕk = 1. This gives a total of 3K parameters
to estimate. To reduce the number of residence times in the model, axial symmetry can be
applied, similar to the Roper-Lightfoot model, effectively removing τb from the parameter
estimation (i.e. τ1a = τ1b, τ2a = τ2b, and τ3a = τ3b). With axial symmetry, there are only
2K parameters to estimate.
For the math behind the diagonal flow distribution configuration, see Fig. 6, it will not be
presented entirely. The only extra requirement is that the residence time needs to increase
from τ1a to τKa and likewise from τ1b to τKb with K still denoting the number of membrane
zones.
This will ensure that solute dispersion increases the further a zone is from the
centre of the column as the configuration setup seen in Fig. 6 does not differentiate between
the zones. For the parameter estimation, there are two more residence times to estimate,
compared to the standard flow distribution configuration as there are two more CSTRs.
This gives 3K + 2 parameters to estimate or 2K + 1 parameters to estimate when axial
symmetry is applied, making it a slightly more complex model for parameter estimation.
4.2
Column model
The most commonly seen column model for membrane chromatography in literature is the
equilibrium-dispersive model. This model is a simplification of the comprehensive general
rate model through two major assumptions. It assumes that the solid and liquid phase is
always close to equilibrium and it ignores the presence of intraparticle pores. The second
assumption is that the contributions of axial dispersion and of the finite rate of the mass
transfer kinetics can be lumped into a dispersion coefficient. This assumption makes the
equilibrium-dispersive model similar to a general rate model without pores. For membrane
chromatography where the pore size is much larger and mass transfer within the mem-
brane pores is dominated by convective transportation, this is fairly fitting as mass transfer
inside the membrane behaves somewhat like the bulk fluid in traditionally packed bed chro-
matography. The equilibrium-dispersive model for component i can be seen in Eq. 7. This
equation works under the assumption that the porosity and interstitial velocity are uniform
throughout the membrane.
∂ci
∂t + 1 −ε
ε
∂qi
∂t + u∂ci
∂z = Dax,i
∂2ci
∂z2
(7)
Here ci is the concentration in the mobile phase and qi is the concentration bound to the solid
phase for component i, which varies in time, t, and the axial coordinate, z. Furthermore,
16
==PAGE:25==
ε is the porosity of the membrane, u is the interstitial velocity, and Dax,i is the axial
dispersion coefficient of component i. If the axial dispersion coefficient is independent of
the component, it will be Dax. Another common assumption is that there is no accumulation
inside the membrane since the product mass binding constitutes such a small fraction of
the total mass going through the membrane that it can be neglected in the mass balance.
For system dispersion models with CSTRs after the column, having a consistent inlet flow
rate is convenient as it does not add unnecessary complexity.
While the boundary conditions are somewhat dependent on the method used they are often
defined as Danckwerts boundary conditions, seen in Eq. 8 and 9. These conditions account
for the axial dispersion at the front surface of the membrane and mixing at the exit of the
membrane.
uci −Dax,i
∂ci
∂t = uci,SD
for z = 0, t > 0
(8)
∂ci
∂z = 0
for z = L, t > 0
(9)
Here L is the total length of the membrane and ci,SD is the concentration of component i
entering the membrane from the system dispersion model. The initial condition is usually
a specific concentration throughout the column for each component. Typically the concen-
tration is 0 g/l for binding components, such as the product and impurities, both in the
bulk fluid and for the bound state. The only concentrations which are typically above 0
g/l are for salts, acids, and bases when a salt- or pH-dependent adsorption kinetic model is
used.
4.3
Adsorption kinetic models
The adsorption kinetic model is the part of the column model which describes the component
binding and desorption. Thus it is an integral part of the model as it describes the principles
of chromatographic separation. A plethora of adsorption models have been made, although
for this paper, only two will be presented, the multi-component Langmuir and the mobile
phase modulator Langmuir, since these will be used later. The multi-component Langmuir
is likely the most used adsorption kinetic model and has been the basis for multiple other
models, with the mobile phase modulator Langmuir being an example of this. The multi-
component Langmuir kinetics, see Eq. 10, uses a competitive approach where the solutes
compete for adsorption sites on the stationary phase. It uses the monolayer assumption,
which is that the surface of the stationary phase consists of a single molecular layer on
which adsorption can occur. This means that the adsorbent surface has a finite number
of adsorption sites available. These sites are identical and independent of each other and
each is able to accommodate one molecule of solute. Other basic assumptions are that the
interactions between different solutes are negligible and that the adsorption is reversible.
In other words, the adsorption of one solute doesn’t affect the adsorption of the others, and
17
==PAGE:26==
a solute can both adsorb and desorb from the stationary phase.
qi =
qmax,iKa,ici
1 +
H
P
j=1
Ka,jcj
(10)
Here H is the number of components, qmax,i is the maximum binding capacity and Ka,i is the
equilibrium constant for component i. The equilibrium constant is given as Ka,i = ka,i/kd,i
with ka,i and kd,i being the adsorption and desorption rate constants. The column model
uses the differential of qi which is given by differentiating Eq. 10.
For a system of N
components, the differential equation becomes Eq. 11.
dqi
dt = ka,iciqmax,i

1 −
H
X
j=1
qj
qmax,j

−kd,iqi
(11)
Mobile phase modulator Langmuir is used in ion-exchange chromatography, where it mostly
describes salt-induced elution. Thus, it uses Langmuir kinetics to describe the competitive
adsorption and desorption between components, seen in Eq. 11, but adds an elution compo-
nent, usually salt, which affects the retention of the components[23]. This is done by having
an expression for the adsorption and desorption coefficients dependent on the concentration
of the elution component, see Eq. 12 and 13.
ka,i = ka0,ieγics
(12)
kd,i = kd0,icβi
s
(13)
Here cs is the concentration of the elution component, and ka0,i and kd0,i are the modulator
adsorption and desorption constants. βi is a constant which describes the ion-exchange
characteristics and γi is a constant which describes the hydrophobicity characteristics. Note
that the value of γi is negative, γi < 0. As the elution component is considered to be inert,
see Eq. 14, it has little effect on the Langmuir kinetics in the binding phase.
dqs
dt = 0
(14)
During the binding phase, the concentration of the elution component is low thus the
adsorption and desorption rate constants are approximately ka,i ≈ka0,i and kd,i ≈0. Solutes
bound to the stationary phase during the binding phase will therefore be retained until the
concentration of the elution component starts to increase. Meanwhile as the concentration of
the elution component increases during the elution phase adsorption decrease and desorption
increase as ka0,i decrease by a factor eγics and kd0,i increase by a factor cβi
s . The expression
18
==PAGE:27==
for the mobile phase modulator Langmuir can be seen in Eq. 15.
dqi
dt = ka0,ieγicsciqmax,i

1 −
H
X
j=1
qj
qmax,j

−kd0,icβi
s qi
(15)
19
==PAGE:28==
5
Recreation/Implementation of system dispersion models
The different system dispersion models are implemented by using parameters from the
literature to recreate their respective breakthrough curves. This is done to validate the
different models by confirming that they are correctly implemented. The implementation is
done in Python using the Chromatography Analysis and Design Toolkit (CADET) which
is a platform for chromatographic modelling. Most of the implementations are under non-
binding conditions and for these, only the dispersion effects within the system will affect
the behaviour of the breakthrough curve. Furthermore, for all implementations, the system
has axial flow in the membrane and a single component. All the recreated figures will also
have a set of points which are extracted from the original figures experimental data using
the WebPlotDigitizer tool. With the way this tool works some of these points are bound
to be slightly erroneous, although the points are still good indicators of how similar the
behaviour of the recreated breakthrough curve is to the original.
The first replication is of Figure 5a in von Lieres et al.[15]. Here there is actually no mem-
brane and the system consists only of a PFR and a CSTR in series thus it is similar to
the simple dispersion model without a membrane column. The recreation is seen in Fig. 7.
When comparing the original and reproduced results the behaviour of the breakthrough
Figure 7: Reproduction of figure 5a from von Lieres et al.[15]. Uses the simple dispersion model
without a membrane.
curve is almost identical with regards to the points. Both have this very sudden start to the
breakthrough curve followed by the simulated data behaving similarly to the experimental
data. Looking closely the reproduced result even appears to cross the experimental break-
through curve in the same places as in the original results. Thus using the parameters from
the article it was possible to successfully implement a simple dispersion model without a
membrane.
The next replication is of Figure 8b and 8d from Dimartino et al.[24]. Here the system dis-
20
==PAGE:29==
persion model used is the simple dispersion model with a membrane column. Furthermore,
it is under binding conditions, so adsorption kinetics will also influence the breakthrough
curve. The recreation of both figures is seen in Fig. 8. Upon comparison, it is clear that
(a) u = 58 cm/h, c0 = 1.05 mg/ml
(b) u = 290 cm/h, c0 = 2.15 mg/ml
Figure 8: Reproduction of figure 8b (left) and 8d (right) from Dimartino et al.[24].
there is a discrepancy between the original and reproduced breakthrough curves as the
reproduced results are much further from the points. For Fig. 8a the initial part of the
breakthrough curve deviates strongly from the original. It lacks the initial curvature seen
in the original and is very delayed, as the reproduced breakthrough curve starts almost
half a minute later when comparing it to the experimental points. Although it gives a de-
layed linear part of the breakthrough curve, the gradient of the linear part seems somewhat
similar to the original figure.
The breakthrough part is also somewhat similar between
the reproduction and the original. For Fig. 8b the breakthrough curve barely looks like
the original. Both the initial part and the breakthrough part lack the curvate seen in the
original. Furthermore, where the breakthrough part in the original figure is somewhat close
to the experimental points the reproduced result is visibly much further from the points
giving a much worse fit. Although, this could partially be contributed to the linear part in
the reproduction being considerably steeper than for the original figure. Overall, both of
the replicated figures, seem to lack a substantial amount of solute dispersion compared to
their original counterparts.
As solute dispersion under binding conditions is not as heavily decided by the CSTR volume
and axial dispersion coefficient the discrepancy could be attributed to other things than a
problem with the system dispersion model. Due to the discrepancy between the results, all
parameters were double-checked to ensure that the correct values were used for the model’s
PFR, CSTR and column. No differences regarding unit conversion or value were found in
the parameters used and the parameters from the article. As the article gives an analytical
expression of the membrane inlet concentration, see Eq. 16, it is for the simple system
dispersion model the same as an analytical expression for the system dispersion model, as
21
==PAGE:30==
it only has units before the membrane.
ci,SD =
(
0
when t0 ≤t < td + t0
c0,i =
h
1 −exp

−
Q
VCST R (t −(td + t0))
i
when td + t0 ≤t
(16)
Here t0 is the start time of the binding phase, and only the part of the expression describing
the binding phase is used. This equation can be compared to the numerical solution for
the membrane inlet concentration from the CADET model simulation. Using the operating
conditions for Fig. 8b the comparison in Fig. 9 was made. Here it is seen that the concen-
Figure 9: Comparison between the analytical expression in Dimartino et al.[24] (blue dots) and
the numerical solution given by CADET (black line) for the membrane inlet concentration. Done
at the operating conditions for figure 8d.
tration from the analytical expression and the numerical solutions is practically identical.
Thus the implemented system dispersion model seems to be working as intended, and the
problem is in the model’s membrane column. For deviations in the membrane column, two
possible explanations were found. First is that, although Dimartino et al.[24], were fairly
detailed in their documentation, some of the adsorption kinetic parameters weren’t explic-
itly stated, or stated in such a way that it was uncertain as to what the actual value used
was. Second is that the article makes some alterations to the column model with regards
to the adsorption kinetic model used. Although as they state that it represents the core
of the equilibrium-dispersive model it should be the same as what is done in CADET even
though the math isn’t exactly replicated.
The next replication is of Figure 5a from Ghosh et al.[5]. Here both the Roper-Lightfoot
model and the standard zonal rate model with 2 zones are used under non-binding condi-
tions. The recreation is seen in Fig. 10. The reproduction with the Roper-Lightfoot model
appears to behave identically to the Roper-Lightfoot model in the original figure. The op-
posite can be said for the reproduction with the zonal rate model as it is far from similar
22
==PAGE:31==
Figure 10: Reproduction of figure 5a from Ghosh et al.[5].
to its counterpart. The reproduction is a relatively bad fit for the experimental data as
it seems to overshoot the relative concentration for the whole breakthrough curve. Two
possible reasons for the difference have been noted. First is that the article mentions using
the molecular diffusion coefficient instead of the axial dispersion coefficient, although it does
not directly give a value for this parameter, so it was estimated based on the link given when
mentioned. Second, the volumetric flow rate at the inlet of the system is given based on
the column volume, but the column volume is only implied not explicitly stated. Although
since one is a column parameter and the other influence the whole system, if these were
incorrect the Roper-Lightfoot model should not have worked as intended with the with the
same values so it is unlikely related to these reasons. The problem is therefore likely with
the zonal rate model. No apparent problem could be found, it could be related to how the
zonal rate model was implemented or it could be some erroneous parts of the article, such
as values for system dispersion parameters or zonal rate model connections.
Interestingly is it that an initial error in the model setup in Python was able to create
a similar breakthrough curve for the zonal rate model in the original figure as seen in
Fig. 11. In this setup, both the inner and outer CSTRs have the same volume, which was
set to the volume of the outer CSTRs given in the article. Based on this it would appear
that the breakthrough curve in Fig. 10 is lacking in solute dispersion in the inner zone
for it to match the original figure. Due to the ambiguous results from the Ghosh et al.[5]
reproduction another reproduction was deemed necessary to verify the implemented zonal
rate model. For this purpose figure 4a from Francis et al.[16] was chosen as it used the
same standard zonal rate model with 2 zones. Furthermore, the setup also uses the same
membrane chromatography capsule, the Mustang Q XT5, thus there was little difference
between this model and the previous one. The recreation is seen in Fig. 12.
Although the zonal rate model that was implemented used the same setup for this figure it
was able to nicely replicate the results seen in the original figure. The reproduced break-
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 11: Reproduction of figure 5a from Ghosh et al.[5].
through curve fitted the experimental points nicely, and any small difference between them
is more likely to be due to the tool used to extract the points than the zonal rate model.
Having such an exact replica would indicate that the zonal rate model was correctly imple-
mented. This means that the discrepancy between the reproduced results in Fig. 10 and
the original figure is likely due to an error in the article.
Through the reproductions, all three system dispersion models were successfully imple-
mented at least once giving satisfactory replicas. Though there were two reproductions
which didn’t give the expected results, one was shown that it was not related to the system
dispersion model and for the other, the exact same model was shown to work for another re-
production. Although the reasons for these inaccurate reproductions were not found, some
possible explanations were looked into. The last possible explanation for both of these in-
accurate reproductions is that the models used were not as similar to the models used in
CADET as they appeared to be.
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 12: Reproduction of figure 4a from Francis et al.[16].
25
==PAGE:34==
6
Data and meta-data analysis
A dataset consisting of experimental and analytical data from multiple membrane chro-
matography experiments has been obtained. Based on this data the membrane chromatog-
raphy setup used in these experiments is to be modelled. As the membrane module used is a
new non-commercial membrane several parameters are still unknown, thus a crucial part of
modelling is parameter estimation. For the parameter estimation CADET-Match, which is
a parameter estimation and error modelling library for CADET, is used. Thus the objective
of the data analysis is to better understand the dataset and identify what parts can be used
for parameter estimation. A better understanding of the chromatographic setup itself and
its different characteristics will also act as support when choosing what model to use later.
6.1
Data description
The dataset comes from multiple in-house experiments performed using the same setup.
The only consistent change in the setup was the frequent change of the stacked membranes
within the module. Although any small differences there could be between the membrane
stacks are assumed negligible, they are treated as if they were identical to each other.
Part of the experiments was to see how variation in different operating parameters would
affect the system’s behaviour. Four different operating parameters were varied in the ex-
periments although only one operating parameter was changed from its standard operating
conditions per experiment. The four varied operating parameters are pH, residence time,
column load and feed concentration.
As aforementioned the dataset consists of two data types, experimental and analytical.
The experimental data includes a variety of instrument measurements, volume steps, and
volume fractions collected. The data points for the instrument measurements are collected
at increments of added volume, while the two others are event data given at specific values of
volume added. This data is stored in a CSV file for each experiment thus the experimental
data consists of multiple CSV files. The analytical data comes from densitometry analysis,
and consist of the mass of the product in the volume fractions collected and the purity of
the elution, as well as multiple derived data points. This data is stored in four tables in a
PowerPoint presentation, with each table containing the results for the different variations
of a specific operating parameter.
6.1.1
Variation in operating parameters
When varying the operating parameters in the experiments only one parameter is varied
per experiment, while the rest are operated at standard operating conditions. The standard
operating conditions are a pH of 5.5, a residence time of 1 min, a column load of 11.1 mg,
and a feed concentration of either 555.7 mg/l or 395.0 mg/l depending on what is varied.
The variation from standard operating conditions and how the variation is implemented is
26
==PAGE:35==
as follows for the four parameters. For pH, four different variations are tested, with a pH of
4.0, 4.5, 5.0, and 6.0. The variation happens by adjusting the pH in the equilibrium buffer
and the sample, although how is not stated. For residence time, four variations are tested,
with 0.2, 0.5, 1.5, and 2.0 min. The variation happens by adjusting the flow rate during the
sample application to match the specific residence times. For column load, three smaller
variations are tested, with 2.75, 5.50, and 8.25 mg. The variation happens by adjusting
how much volume is added during the sample application. For concentration, only two
variations are tested, with 250 and 350 mg/l. The variation happens by diluting with the
fermentation medium BFM21 until the specific concentrations are reached. While it makes
sense that concentration only had variations with smaller concentrations tested, it is odd
that a larger column load was not tested, mainly due to how the data behaves at these four
column loads.
6.1.2
Experimental information
To better understand the data, the experimental setup also needs to be understood. Al-
though the data comes from in-house membrane chromatography experiments there are still
some unknowns regarding its specifics. For controlling the purification the ¨Akta Pure system
was used. The column used was the Diba Omnifit™EZ Chromatography Columns with One
Fixed and One Adjustable Endpieces. For the membrane used, it was a new non-commercial
membrane thus not all aspect of it is known. The membrane type is cation-exchange using
the ligand MCPA. The setup uses a stack of 12 cylindrical membranes with a diameter of
1 cm and a total bed height of 0.325 cm giving a column volume of 0.255 ml.
The product is a single-chain variable fragment(scFv), which is produced by fed-batch
fermentation. Due to the amount of sample needed two fed-batch fermentation was made.
The first batch (Bio1) had a purity of 83.0% and a concentration of 555.7 mg/l, and the
second batch (Bio2) had a purity of 83.9% and a concentration of 395.0 mg/l. Bio1 was
used for the experiments with variations in pH, column load, and feed concentration, while
Bio2 was only used for the experiments with variations in residence time.
The purification consists of 6 steps, with the most important being sample application,
wash, and elution as the separation happens in these. The steps follow:
Equilibration→Sample application→Wash→Elution→Equilibration→Regeneration
Apart from the product solute, three buffers are used, the equilibration, elution, and regen-
eration buffer. These are used at their respective step, and although not explicitly stated
the wash appears to use the equilibration buffer. The exiting stream is collected in three
fractions based on the step, the first fraction is the sample application and wash, the sec-
ond fraction is the elution, and the third fraction is the regeneration. All three fractions go
through the densitometry analysis.
27
==PAGE:36==
6.1.3
Analytical information
Densitometry analysis is used for quantifying the amount of scFv for test samples from both
the fermentation batches and the exiting streams in the steps of sample application plus
wash, elution and regeneration. For the separation of the test samples SDS-PAGE was used
and to quantify the concentration and purity western blotting was utilised. For quantifying
the test samples, a standard curve from 25 µg/ml to 100 µg/ml of pure E. coli scFv were
made. When comparing the fermentation samples with the standard curve, four samples
from each fermentation were diluted 10, 20, 30 and 40 times. A western blot was made
with the standard curve and the four samples from each fermentation. Next, the software
ImageLab (BioRad) was used to quantify the concentration and purity of the fermentation.
While it is known that the experimental samples were done in a similar fashion it isn’t
explicitly stated from the description of the data. Additional quantification was performed
for the fermentation samples with capillary electrophoresis.
6.2
Meta-data description
The meta-data description is to provide more detailed information about the variables,
which is meant to identify which variables are useful and which are not. Furthermore, some
simple data cleaning in the form of handling missing values and checking the data quality
was performed during the meta-data description. However, when looking for missing values
none were found, thus handling missing values was left out of the data cleaning.
6.2.1
Experimental data
There are one independent variable and six dependent variables in the experimental data.
The independent variable is the volume added to the system. For the six dependent vari-
ables, there are four instrument measurements and two event data. The instrument mea-
surements are absorbance, conductivity, pH, and pressure difference while the event data is
run log and volume fraction. While the event data is documented by the ¨Akta pure system,
what sensors and instruments are used for the instrument measurements is unknown.
The independent variable is as the name implies how much volume has been added to
the system, which unit of measurement is milliliter, ml. It is zeroed to when the sample
application start, thus it is a continuous interval value. Although since the system starts
with equilibration before the sample application it ranges from -2.55 ml to the total volume
added. For changes in pH and residence time, the total volume added is around 30.3 ml and
38.3 ml respectively. When varying the concentration and column load the total volume
added during sample application changes, thus it becomes dependent on the change. The
full range of volume added is only really used for the instrument measurements. Here the
volume added is given in uniform increments specific to both the instrument measurement
and experiment. Thus the instrument measurements do not typically have the same number
of data points.
28
==PAGE:37==
The instrument measurements are all continuous numerical variables and all but pressure
difference is measured at the outlet of the system. The absorbance variable is the measure-
ment of how much light is absorbed by the solution. It is a ratio variable, for which the
unit of measure is milli-absorbance unit, mAU. While the instrument used is not known the
measurements of absorbance are done at a wavelength of 280 nm. The conductivity variable
is the measurement of the solution’s ability to conduct electricity. It is also a ratio variable
for which the unit of measure is milli-Siemens per centimetre, mS/cm. The pH variable is
the measurement of how acidic/basic the solution is. It is an interval variable, without a
unit of measure. The pressure difference is the only derived variable as it is calculated by
subtracting the pressure at the outlet of the column from the pressure at the inlet of the
column. Thus it is a measurement of how much the pressure drops from the inlet to the
outlet of the membrane column. It is also an interval variable, with the unit of measure
megapascal, MPa.
The event data are both discrete nominal variables, which are related to a change the
¨Akta pure system makes in the process. The run log variable is given as adsorption steps
and describes at which volume added the feed changes to start a step, equilibration, sample
application, wash etc. As all experiments perform the adsorption steps in the same order, the
steps and their order in the run log are always the same, although there will be differences
in at what volume added they are initiated. The volume fraction variable describes the
start of a collection interval in which all of the solution exiting the system is stored in
the same container.
The interval lasts until a new collection interval is started.
The
variable has two possible outcomes, either it is a numbered fraction or a waste fraction.
The numbered fractions are the ones collected with the fraction number increasing after
each new fraction, thus if a waste fraction is between two numbered fractions a number will
be skipped. Solution exiting the system during a waste fraction simply exits the system
without being stored, with waste fractions simply being denoted ’waste’ in the data. The
numbered fractions generally follow two volume fractions during the sample application,
one volume fraction during the wash and one volume fraction during the elution.
6.2.2
Analytical data
There are four independent variables and five derived variables in the analytical data, see
Table 1. The four independent variables all stem from densitometry analysis, with three of
them being the mass exiting the system in the steps of sample application + wash, elution
and regeneration and the last one being the purity of the elution. As the ImageLab software
seems to give concentration and not mass, it is likely that the masses are derived from the
concentration and volume in their respective steps. The derived variables are the amount
bound to the membrane, the mass balance of scFV, the binding capacity, the bound yield,
and the bound + unbound yield. In each data table, these are given for all variations.
The masses exiting the system are all continuous ratio variables, all given in the unit of
measure milligram, mg. The amount sample application + wash variable is the quantified
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 1: Variables in the analytical data.
Variable
Type
Unit
Symbol
Amount sample
application + wash
Independent
mg
msw
Amount elution
Independent
mg
me
Amount regeneration
Independent
mg
mr
Amount bound
Derived
mg
mb
scFv mass balance
Derived
mg
MB
Binding capacity
Derived
mg/ml
qscFv
Bound yield
Derived
%
Yb
Bound + unbound
yield
Derived
%
Yb+u
Purity
Independent
%
P
mass of scFv exiting the system in the sample application and wash steps. Similarly, the
variables amount elution and amount regeneration are the quantified mass of scFV exiting
the system in the elution and regeneration step respectively. The purity variable is the ratio
of scFv to the total protein content in the elution step. It is a continuous ratio variable,
given in percentage.
The derived variables are all derived from the three variables describing mass exiting the
system. The symbols used in the expression of the derived variables can be seen in Table 1.
All the derived variables are continuous ratio variables. The amount bound variable is the
amount of mass exiting the system in the elution and regeneration step, given in the unit
of measure milligram, mg. The expression for amount bound can be seen in Eq. 17.
mb = me + mr
(17)
The scFv mass balance variable is the total amount of mass exiting the system, given in
the unit of measure milligram, mg. The expression for scFv mass balance can be seen in
Eq. 18.
MB = msw + me + mr
(18)
The binding capacity variable is the mass of scFv bound to the membrane in proportion
to the column volume, given in the unit of measure milligram per millilitre, mg/ml. The
expression for binding capacity can be seen in Eq. 18, with CV being the column volume.
qscFv = mb
CV
(19)
The bound yield variable is the portion of the scFv bound to the membrane which exits the
system during the elution step. It tells about the efficiency of the elution and is given as a
30
==PAGE:39==
percentage. The expression for bound yield can be seen in Eq. 20.
Yb = 100 · me
mb
(20)
The bound + unbound yield variable is the ratio of scFv exiting the system during the
elution step to the total amount of scFv exiting the system. Along with purity, it is the
most useful variable to determine the efficiency of the separation. It is given in percentage.
The expression for bound + unbound yield can be seen in Eq. 21
Yb+u = 100 · me
MB
(21)
6.2.3
Data quality checks
The data quality checks focus on outlier detection, consistency checks and other oddities.
For the experimental data, it was fairly simple as there were no obvious outliers or oddities,
which couldn’t be partly explained by the used operating conditions. However, due to the
sheer amount of data points in the experimental data, it is possible that something comes up
during data exploration. As for the analytical data, the quality check led to some incoherent
findings. One finding was that in the table with variation in the residence time, the scFv
mass balance variable was exactly 11.10 mg for all five variations, which means that the
mass balance is the exact same as the column load. This is odd since for the other three
experiments the exact value for the column load was not seen once, with most of the scFv
mass balances varying within ± 0.17 mg. These perfect mass balances make it very likely
that the densitometry data has been manipulated in some kind of way. Another oddity for
the residence time was seen when comparing its data with the pH, feed concentration and
column load data, as the amount regeneration variable values were all larger than any value
for the variable in the other data. This could stem from the experiments with variations in
residence time using a different fermentation batch than the others.
Another finding was that for the experiment with variation in pH where pH is 5.5 and for
the experiment with variation in feed concentration where the concentration is 556 mg/l,
the data was the exact same both for the experimental and analytical data. As both of these
are technically still operating at the standard operating conditions, it is not that big of a
problem though. Although this means that they both share an outlier as the amount sample
application + wash variable is suspiciously high compared to the other concentration data
and column load data. In comparison, it had a value of 2.47 mg which is more than 1.0 mg
larger than any of the other values. Interestingly enough is that it ends up having a similar
value for the amount eluted variable as the other concentration data since these have an
atypically large value in the amount regeneration variable, which can also be considered an
outlier.
The last finding was two outliers in the column load data in the scFv mass balance variable
when the column load was 8.25 mg and 11.1 mg. In the case of the load being 8.25 mg the
31
==PAGE:40==
mass balance gave 9.12 mg. This can mainly be contributed to a very high amount eluted
variable of 8.23 mg, resulting in the amount bound variable being 8.28 mg, which is more
product mass than what was added to the column. In practice, this is obviously impossible.
For the case of the load being 11.1 mg the mass balance gave 10.42 mg. Similarly to the
previous case, this is also mainly contributed to the amount eluted variable however here it
is very small with a value of 9.17 mg. For both these cases the amount sample application +
wash variable and the amount regeneration variable give similar values to what is expected,
thus some kind of erroring must have occurred in the densitometry analysis when quantifying
the amount eluted variables for these two experiments.
In terms of consistency check, all but the pH data were fairly consistent when comparing the
data with the same variation. Although there were some outliers and oddities within the
variation, the analytical data was consistently more coherent within the different variations
than when comparing across variations. For the pH data, the reason it was inconsistent can
be contributed to how ion-exchange chromatography is heavily influenced by the pH value.
6.3
Data exploration
For the data exploration, the objective was to better understand the characteristics of
the system. Thus visualisations and summary statistics are used to gain insight into the
underlying trends of the system along with any possible dependencies to the varied operating
parameter. The outcome of the data exploration is that the data which is usable and the
premise for the modelling is identifiable from the end result.
The first part of the exploratory data analysis looks at the general behaviour of the system,
by looking at the experimental data for three experiments. The experiments chosen are
the two experiments performed under standard operating conditions (load = 11.1 mg and
concentration = 556 mg/l) and the experiment where pH is varied to 4.5. For these three
experiments the measured absorbance, conductivity, and pH are to be visualised. As the
absorbance is proportional to the concentration of the product and the different impurities
it is useful in giving an overall understanding of the mass transfer within the column. The
conductivity and pH are important in that they are a defining factor in how well the different
compounds bind to the cation-exchange membrane.
The first visualisation is of the measured absorbance as a function of added volume seen in
Fig. 13. Starting with the behaviour in the sample application step all three experiments ex-
hibit very similar breakthrough curves, with no significant differences between their shapes.
The only small difference is that the absorbance for the varied pH appears to be slightly
higher after the linear part of the breakthrough curve. For the wash step, all three exper-
iments start with identical drops in absorbance, although they each seem to approach a
different plateau after. The difference in the varied pH is somewhat expected as changes
in pH can contribute to changing adsorption kinetics for a cation-exchange membrane or
could cause structural changes in the proteins in the solution. During the elution step, it
can be seen that the absorbance peak of the varied pH is much smaller compared to the
32
==PAGE:41==
Figure 13: Measured absorbance for two experiments under standard operations and one experi-
ment with a pH of 6.0. The vertical lines represent in order the start of the steps; sample application,
wash, and elution.
peaks for the two standard operation conditions. The two peaks are initially alike in their
steep increases however it can be seen that one peak goes noticeably lower and drops a
bit faster. As in theory, the two standard operations should be almost identical the small
differences in the wash and elution steps are likely caused by differences in the system, such
as membrane wear and feed differences. Although, altogether the differences between the
two standard operations are not large enough to cause further concern.
In terms of what contributes to absorbance tendencies in the different steps, the following
has been hypothesised. The high absorbance seen between the start of the sample applica-
tion step and the elution step is likely from impurities in the feed, as based on the analytical
data almost all of the product is to be bound to the stationary phase during sample appli-
cation and wash. Thus the decrease in the drop gradient around the middle of the wash
is most likely from impurities with a weak binding to the stationary phase, therefore they
will slowly desorb during the wash. For the peak in absorbance during the elution step the
analytical data says that most of it should be the product as all three elutions have a purity
of above 90%.
The next visualisation is of both the measured conductivity and pH as a function of added
volume seen in Fig. 14.
For both conductivity and pH, it is seen that after the start
of the three major steps, the same delays are seen before the system reacts for all three
experiments as in the absorbance figure, Fig. 13. For conductivity in Fig. 14a, the most
noticeable part is the consistent difference in the measured conductivity between the two
standard operations, as they are only similar during the sample application even though
they should be alike throughout the process. Furthermore, as the equilibration buffer used
before and after sample application has been stated to have a conductivity of 17 mS/cm it
is strange that neither is even close to this. As there is the same difference in conductivity
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Measured conductivity.
(b) Measured pH.
Figure 14: Measured conductivity and pH for two experiments under standard operations and one
experiment where the pH was 6.0. The vertical lines represent in order the start of the steps; sample
application, wash, and elution.
before and after the sample application between the two standard operations it indicates
that the instrument is at least consistent. Thus it could be that the conductivity instrument
has poor accuracy or is not calibrated properly. The conductivity for the varied pH seems
to be analogous to ’standard 2’, with the difference caused by the different pH values of the
solutions. This is further supported by both having the same conductivity during elution,
in which the pH is the same for the two. Although there are some inconsistencies with
conductivity it does not appear to be that important for the product, as the large increase
from the sample application step to the wash step does not seem to affect the binding at
all. For pH in Fig. 14b the system acts pretty much as expected. There are no noteworthy
differences between the two standard operations and the pH values are around 5.5 for sample
application and wash and for elution around 8.5. The only thing worth noticing is that even
though the fermentation feed and equilibration buffer is supposed to have the same pH value
however this is barely an issue.
From all three figures, there are some repeated tendencies. First is the similar delay in all
three figures after the wash and elution step is started for all three experiments. This can
likely be contributed to extra-column dispersion effects, as the delay is noticeably larger
than the column volume of 0.255 ml. As the length-to-diameter ratio is fairly low for the
membrane (≈1/3) it is to be expected that extra-column band broadening is significant.
Next is that after the different steps are started some kind of unexpected behaviour is seen
in all three figures. For absorbance in Fig. 13 it is a bump after the wash step is started as
the absorbance slightly increases and small oscillations after the elution step is started. For
conductivity in Fig. 14a it is a slight decrease just before the steep increase after the elution
step is started. For pH in Fig. 14b it appears to overshoot the measured pH each time
the pH changes after the sample application and the wash step is started. Comparing the
peculiarities of the three figures it can be seen that while the oddities in the conductivity
34
==PAGE:43==
and pH have a slight delay after the steps start, the oddities in the absorbance are almost
instantaneously after the step change. This would indicate that the peculiarities in the
conductivity and pH are caused by how their instruments function, as it is only observed
after the dead volume of the extra-column dispersion. For the absorbance, the peculiarities
are likely contributed to valve switching in the ¨Akta pure system, as the quick response
could be caused by a moment with a different volumetric flow rate.
As the membrane is of the cation-exchange type, the effect of pH on the system is of interest.
To examine this effect the measured absorbance and efficiency variables: bound yield, bound
+ unbound yield, and purity, for some of the different experiments with variation in pH
were visualised, see Fig. 15. The experiment with a pH of 6.0 was found to be faulty in the
experimental data, as it appeared that the wrong CSV file had been given, thus it has been
omitted from the absorbance plot. For the measured absorbance in Fig. 15a the experiments
(a) Measured absorbance for four experiments with
different pH. The vertical lines represent in order
the start of the steps; sample application, wash, and
elution.
(b) Efficiency variables: bound yield, bound + un-
bound yield, and purity, for all experiments with
variation in pH.
Figure 15: Measured absorbance and efficiency variables for the different experiments with varied
pH.
with a pH of 4.5, 5.0, and 5.5 acted somewhat similarly in the sample application step, while
the experiment with a pH of 4.0 becomes considerably larger. Similarly in the wash, the
same three experiments acted similarly, as all three had a slight delay before the drop
in absorbance.
The experiment with a pH of 4.0 on the other hand starts the drop in
absorbance almost immediately after the system changes from the sample application step
to the wash step. This is fairly strange as it could imply that the extra-column dispersion
effect changes at this pH which is not actually possible. Finally, for the elution, there is a
clear difference between what has been an efficient sample application and what has not, as
there is a clear difference between the experiments with a pH of 4.0 and 4.5 when compared
to the experiments with a pH of 5.0 and 5.5. For the first two, the elution peak is very
small indicating that almost no product was bound during the sample application, while for
the last two, it is a typically large peak indicating a good separation was achieved. This is
35
==PAGE:44==
further supported by the efficiency variables in Fig. 15b, where the bound + unbound yield
variable is almost zero for the experiments with a pH of 4.0 and 4.5, while decent for the
experiments with a pH of 5.0 and 5.5. With such a low value for the bound + unbound yield
variable the experiments with a pH of 4.0 and 4.5 basically no product was removed during
elution. Furthermore, these two experiments had a lower purity in the elution than the
purity of the feed, which means that operating at these low pH values would be worse than
just letting the feed right through. For the three other experiments the experiment with
a pH of 6.0 while having the highest purity variable had a substantially smaller bound +
unbound yield value when compared to the other two. Comparing the last two experiments,
pH of 5.0 and 5.5, the standard operation with a pH of 5.5 is slightly better as it has a
slightly higher bound + unbound yield and purity variable.
Next, the mean and standard deviation of the efficiency variables for all operating parameter
variations, except pH, is calculated, see Table 2.
Here the consistency within each variation
Table 2: Summary statistics for variables bound yield, bound + unbound yield, and purity for the
different variations in operating conditions.
Variation
Variable
Mean
Standard deviation
Population
Yb
92.87 %
3.95 %
Yb+u
78.40 %
1.61 %
Concentration
P
96.27 %
1.42 %
3
Yb
98.10 %
1.58 %
Yb+u
87.95 %
1.74 %
Load
P
94.65 %
0.91 %
4
Yb
84.64 %
3.14 %
Yb+u
73.44 %
3.41 %
Residence time
P
89.98 %
1.30 %
5
becomes fairly obvious as the standard deviations are relatively small, but the mean for the
same variable across different variations varies perceptibly. Comparing the means between
the variations that used Bio1 (concentration and pH) with the variation that used Bio2
(residence time), the concentration and pH variation outperforms the residence time on all
variables. This could indicate that the two batches, Bio1 and Bio2, are not very similar
in their non-product composition even though they had similar purities. The difference
in concentration between the two batches is also unlikely to be the cause as the average
concentration in the three experiments with varied concentrations is at 385 mg/L which
is slightly smaller than the concentration of Bio2, and the concentration variation still has
considerably higher means for all efficiency variables.
Similar to pH it is wanted to see how changes to the residence time affect this system
as this means changing the volumetric flow rate. The absorbance for three experiments
with the different residence times of 0.2, 1, and 2 min is visualised in Fig. 16.
As the
three experiments have almost identical absorbances throughout the process the effects of
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 16: Measured absorbance for three experiments with different residence times. The vertical
lines represent in order the start of the steps; sample application, wash, and elution.
variations in residence time within the range of 0.2 min to 2 min is negligible on the system.
Next, the effect of changes in the concentration and load on the system is of interest, as
the system should be somewhat unaffected by changes to these. The absorbance elution
profile and efficiency variable for the different variations of these two can be seen in Fig. 17.
Starting with the elution peaks they are not very symmetrical as peak tailing can be seen
for all of them. For the elution profiles, it is only the variations of the concentration that
acts peculiarly, as the loads’ elution profiles share a similar peak in different proportions.
This is to be expected for the load variations since different amounts of the product have
been bound during sample application. For the variation where concentration is 556 mg/l
the elution peak is different as it has considerably less peak tailing compared to both the
other concentration variations peaks and the load variations peaks. Meanwhile, the peaks
for the two other variations where the concentrations are 250 mg/l and 350 mg/l are fairly
similar to each other, and they look like a slightly lower version of the peak for a load of
11.1 mg. What causes the peak tailing is not clear from this data. However, based on
the different load peaks being proportionally similar the peak tailing should not stem from
overloading the column. Likewise, it is unlike that it comes from impurity interference, as
the purity is very high and the wash step should have removed most of them. Thus, an
informed guess would be that it is related to the adsorption kinetics or ionization effect, as
both of these should contribute similarly to the elution peak for all seven experiments.
In terms of the bound + unbound variable and purity variable both for the concentration
and load variations there are no clear indications that they have a noticeable dependency
on the value of the variation. For the bound yield variable there is a slight increase as the
variation increase for both concentration and load, although for load the increase is so little
that this trend could be due to the small random errors in the densitometry analysis. The
concentration is likely increased from the difference in the amount sample application +
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Absorbance during the elution steps for the
three experiments with different concentrations.
(b) Efficiency variables for the three experiments
with different concentrations.
(c) Absorbance during the elution steps for the
three experiments with different loads.
(d) Efficiency variables for the three experiments
with different concentrations.
Figure 17: Absorbance during the elution step and efficiency variables for the experiments with
different concentrations and loads.
wash variable and the amount regeneration between the different variations, which has been
covered in section 6.2.3, the reason behind this sudden increase.
Lastly, whether or not the two fermentation batches, Bio1 and Bio2, are similar enough to
each to be considered from the same statistical population. For this, the efficiency variables
are used, with sample 1 being for Bio1 with the two variations concentration and load
and sample 2 being for Bio2 with the variation residence time. These three variations are
chosen as they have all shown to give similar efficiency variables within their respective
variations. The pH variation was left out as its different results were all over the place,
which is not useable in the comparison. Each efficiency variable will be tested based on the
null hypothesis.
H0 : µ1 = µ2
38
==PAGE:47==
To test the null hypothesis the scipy.stats.ttest ind function from the Python package SciPy
is used. The function calculates the T-test for the mean of two independent samples. A
T-test is chosen as the population in each sample is small. The results from the function
are the t-statistic and p-value. The significance level is set to 0.05, which means that the
t-critical value of the null hypothesis should be around ± 2.00. For the rejection of the
null hypothesis to fail the t-statistic should be closer to zero than the t-critical value such
that the p-value becomes larger than 0.05. Furthermore, the 95% confidence interval is
calculated. The result of this can be seen in Table 3.
Table 3: Result from the independent t-test with p-value and whether or not the null hypothesis
is true based on a significance of 0.05.
Variable
t-statistic
p-value
Confidence interval (95%)
Null hypothesis
Yb
4.89
6.29 · 10−4
(6.26, 16.17)
Rejected
Yb+u
3.68
4.28 · 10−3
(4.48, 16.36)
Rejected
P
6.14
1.10 · 10−4
(3.43, 7.29)
Rejected
For all three efficiency variables, it can be seen that at a significance level of 0.05, they are
statistically different from each other. Thus Bio1 and Bio2 are likely to be so different from
each other that parameter estimation from one
6.4
Data discussion
The data analysis has shown some different behaviours of the membrane system and given
a better idea of what data is available, which is useful for the modelling phase. In the data,
there were found some tendencies which need to be accounted for within the model. For the
variation in operating parameters, the system behaviour was distinguishably different only
when the pH during sample application was varied. Looking at the four varied operating
parameters, pH is the only parameter which should mainly affect the adsorption kinetics,
while residence time and column load should mainly affect the column model. This leaves
feed concentration as the only one having an obvious connection to both models, however,
most adsorption kinetics models would give very similar results at the three varied concen-
trations as they have generally low values. For the adsorption kinetics, it would therefore
seem that they are dependent on pH which is further supported by the elution peaks start-
ing when pH increases. The opposite is seen for conductivity where the large increase in
conductivity during the wash step does not seem to cause any major changes in the adsorp-
tion kinetics. With regard to the extra-column dispersion, there was a clear delay before the
absorbance, conductivity and pH started changing after a new step was initiated. A system
dispersion model is therefore necessary for the model. Furthermore, as the collection in the
¨Akta pure system didn’t take dead time from extra-column dispersion into account it may
have affected the densitometry results, as it would technically collect a small part of the
previous step each time. This is most easily seen in Fig. 17a and 17c where the absorbance
is slowly decreasing before the big elution peak, which would indicate that something is still
39
==PAGE:48==
eluting during the last of the wash step which is then collected in the elution fraction.
However, this wouldn’t be much of a problem if the composition of the solution was better
specified, as the absorbance measurements represent the solution as a whole. Because of
this, there is no exact product data for the sample application, as the experimental data is
for all components, and the densitometry analysis gives a collected amount for the sample
application and wash step. For describing the binding during this phase the most useful
data is in the variation of loads analytical data as the amount variables can be seen as
measured at different volumes added. However, since there are only four variations of load
it is a limited data set, which is not compatible with CADET-Match. Furthermore, without
any measurements of impurities, it is only practically possible to create a model for a single-
component system. This in turn would make it hard to use data from experiments with
Bio1 as feed and experiments with Bio2 as feed together in the parameter estimation as the
difference seen between them can not be accounted for in a model for a single-component
system. Without a parameter to bridge the difference between the two batches, the parame-
ter estimation will likely give an unsatisfactory midpoint between them. Thus only using the
data from experiments with Bio1, while limiting, is likely the right approach. Although due
to how little the data depicts the behaviour of the system during sample application when
the pH is varied, the experiments with variation in pH may not be used either. Without the
experiments with variation in pH and resident time, only the experiments with variation
and concentration and load are left with a total of seven experiments. Even though these
seven experiments were deemed the most suitable, there was still plenty of inconsistency
among the experiments, which needs to be addressed during the parameter estimation. A
possible explanation for the noticeable difference between the experiments using Bio1 not
yet mentioned is product degradation, as the experiments were conducted over several days.
Lastly, independent of what variables are used, for the experimental data to be useable in
CADET-Match it needs to be preprocessed. This will be necessary as the volume added
needs to be converted to a time-based unit. The absorbance also needs to be converted to
concentration, which can be done using the Beer-Lambert law. While conductivity could
also be converted to concentration it is unlikely it will be used. Due to the unavoidable
inconsistencies in the data and that converting the data with limited information is a ne-
cessity, the data would under normal circumstances not be suitable for modelling purposes.
While this makes sense as it was not the original purpose of the data, it results in this thesis
having to model a membrane chromatography system based on inadequate data. Thus the
data preprocessing will have to get the most out of the data such that it represents the
system as well as possible.
40
==PAGE:49==
7
Model setup
First, the column model and the system dispersion model are chosen, as these are pretty
straightforward. For the column model the equilibrium dispersive model from Eq. 7 is used
as it is good at modelling membrane chromatography. Furthermore, it is the only suitable
column model in CADET for membrane chromatography. For the system dispersion model,
the symmetric Roper-Lightfoot model is chosen. It is chosen rather than the asymmetric
Roper-Lightfoot model as it has one less parameter to estimate and above the simple dis-
persion model as it tends to give slightly better results with the same amount of parameters
to estimate. The three system dispersion models will be compared during the parameter
estimation, however, the outcome of this comparison will not contribute to what system
dispersion model is chosen.
For the adsorption kinetics, two models will be used, the first model will be used during
the sample application and wash steps while the second model will be used during the
elution step. This is done due to the inadequate data, which is not sufficiently describing
the concentration changes of the product during the sample application and wash step. To
simplify the first model such that it is usable with the data pH and conductivity is assumed
to have no effect.
Thus for the first model the multicomponent Langmuir from Eq. 11
is used. The second model needs to be able to replicate the elution peak starting when
pH begins to increase. CADET however does not have a pH-dependent adsorption kinetic
model, therefore the best alternative is deemed to be the mobile phase modulator Langmuir
from Eq. 15. While not perfect, is it able to react to an increase in a modulator component,
similar to the increase in pH. Although it will not be able to account for any critical pH
value which when exceeded changes the adsorption kinetic to greatly increases desorption.
However, with the available data, this is deemed the best approach.
With this, a model suitable for a membrane system, the data, and CADET is made. Worth
noticing is that the limiting factor amongst these three is the data, as a more complex model
would not be sensible, since the data isn’t accurate enough to support it. Furthermore, some
assumptions might be made about the data behaviour in the parameter estimation, which
may not be entirely accurate. Therefore, a simpler model is preferred as it gives a good
estimate of the system behaviour, without risking overfitting due to unnecessary model
complexity.
7.1
CADET model
Two setups have to be created in CADET for the model, a quasi-single-component setup
for the sample application and wash step (SAW setup), and a two-component setup for
the elution step (elution setup). Luckily, for both setups, the unit operation setup is the
same. Based on the proposed model the unit operation setup in CADET is seen in Fig. 18.
Starting with the inlet and outlet they are simple units which give the concentrations in and
out of the system. The inlet describes the concentrations entering the system which follows
41
==PAGE:50==
a simple constant coefficient for inlet concentration. The outlet describes the concentrations
exiting the system, by logging the exiting concentrations. While the CSTR expression in
Figure 18: The Roper-Lightfoot setup with the corresponding unit operation used in CADET for
each unit.
CADET is a bit different as it is able to account for a binding model and reactions, without
the terms for these from the expression, so only mixing happens, gives the same equation as
in Eq. 2. Both the CSTR before and after the column model are set to follow this expression.
Lastly, for the lumped rate model without pores unit operation in CADET which is used for
both the PFR and column model, certain parameters can be manipulated so it represents
both an ideal PFR and the equilibrium dispersive model. Similar to the CSTR expression,
the expression for the lumped rate model without pores is able to account for reactions,
however, if the expressions for reaction are removed, it becomes the equilibrium dispersive
model seen in Eq. 7. CADET also uses the Danckwerts boundary conditions in Eq. 8 and
9 for the unit operation. Next, to make it an ideal PFR the porosity is set to 1 and the
axial dispersion coefficient is set to 0. Thereby the stationary phase is removed making
the superficial and interstitial velocity the same, and without axial dispersion, there is no
mixing and backflow.
The SAW setup is a quasi-single-component system as it has to contain the modulator
component for the elution setup to work.
For both setups in CADET, the modulator
component had to be set to component 0 making the product component 1. However, as
the SAW setup uses the multicomponent Langmuir model, it is possible for the modulator
component to not contribute to the product expression. This is done by making it inert,
ka,0 = 0, and giving it an initial solid concentration of 0 g/l, q1 = 0 at t = 0. The same is
done for the elution setup, but as it uses the mobile phase modulator Langmuir the way it
is set up in CADET the product uses the concentration of the modulator component as cs
in the expression. Furthermore, the modular component is set to have no bound states in
CADET making it absolutely impossible for it to bind in the simulation.
As CADET works by numerically solving the system, parameters related to this, such as
column discretization and timepoints where the solution is evaluated, needs to be defined.
For column discretization, itwas needed for the PFR and column model. Both models were
42
==PAGE:51==
discretized with 100 axial discretization cells, as this was found to be sufficient, without
increasing simulation time unnecessarily. In terms of the time points, a constant amount of
timestamps were used between start and finish no matter how long this time interval is for
both setups. For the SAW setup, 526 timestamps were used, and for the elution setup, 401
timestamps were used. The elution setup uses fewer timestamps as the time of the elution
step is considerably shorter than the collected time of the sample application and wash step.
Another aspect is that all parameters need to be given in the same unit format, which for
this simulation is kilogram, meter and minutes. While CADET prefers molar concentration
instead of mass concentration and seconds instead of minutes, the use of mass concentration
will sufficewhile the use of minutes should have no effect at all.
The initial conditions in the SAW setup are that in the bulk solution there is a trace of
the modulator component and no product, c = (0.01, 0), and for the column model, there
is nothing bound to the solid phase, q = (0, 0) at t = 0. For the elution setup, the initial
conditions are equal to the state of the last point of time in the SAW setup. Therefore for
the elution setup to run it needs the SAW setup to run, so it can provide a state vector.
This is also why a trace amount of the modular component in the first up is necessary as
setting it to zero during the SAW setup makes the elution setup unable to start. Because
of this when the SAW setup is run without having to provide a state vector for the elution
setup, it can be used as a true single-component system. Achieving a single-component
system is simply done by removing all values for the modulator component in the various
parameters. This is used for quicker simulation times for the early parameter estimation.
Last is the different inlet concentration when a new step is started. The initial inlet con-
centration for the SAW setup is for the sample application step and is 0.01 kg/m3 for the
modulator component, and for the product it varies as the variations in concentration are
used, however, at the standard operating conditions it is 556 kg/m3. For the wash step,
the inlet concentration does not change for the modulator component, only for the product
which stops being fed, so its inlet concentration is set to 0 kg/m3. As the wash step is part
of the SAW setup CADET makes the concentration switch during the simulation. For the
elution setup, the initial concentration of the product is still 0 kg/m3 as nothing is fed, and
the initial concentration of the modulator component increases to 7.04 kg/m3. This value
is chosen based on the molarity of the phosphate buffer in the elution buffer, as some kind
of estimate was needed for its concentration.
The model parameters known are severely lacking with a total of 12 parameters missing,
and others given as a rough estimate. The only known parameters for the model are the
volumetric flow rate, column length, column radius, and feed concentration of the product.
Although with the model defined parameter estimation can begin.
43
==PAGE:52==
8
Parameter estimation
As there are 12 parameters which are to be estimated multiple parameter estimations will
be necessary. A total of three parameter estimations will be made, in such an order that
a parameter found in an earlier parameter estimation will be used in a subsequent pa-
rameter estimation. For the first parameter estimation, the missing system dispersion and
column parameters will be estimated. These are the PFR volume, CSTR volume, mem-
brane porosity and axial dispersion coefficient. For the second parameter estimation, the
multicomponent Langmuir parameters for the SAW setup will be estimated.
These are
the adsorption rate constant, equilibrium constant and maximum binding capacity. For
these two parameter estimations, the SAW setup will be used as a true single-component
system, as the elution step is not used in either of the estimations. For the last parame-
ter estimation, the parameters for the mobile phase modulator Langmuir isotherm used in
the elution setup will be estimated. These are the adsorption rate constant, equilibrium
constant, maximum binding capacity, ion-exchange constant, and hydrophobicity constant.
For the first and last parameter estimation, the CADET-Match was used. CADET-Match
uses Python dictionaries to store the data values for parameter estimation since several
parts are needed for CADET-Match to run. First is a CADET model representing the
system, which creates an HDF5 file when run. The model setup has already been defined
in the previous section. Then there is the path to the CADET client and base directory, as
well as a path to the result directory which creates a folder where the results are stored.
Next are the parameters which are to be fitted, which are stored in individual dictionaries.
These must include the location of the parameter to fit in the model, how the variable
is to be transformed and the index of component and bound state. Depending on what
transformation is chosen other values are also needed.
Next is the experiment dictionary, which defines what kind of fitting is used. It includes the
data file which is to be fitted, the location in the model which is to be compared to the data,
the HDF5 file, a name for the experiment, and a feature. The feature is a dictionary itself
describing how to score the fitting and the name of the feature, with additional values such
as a start and stop time of a time slice possible to add on. The score will then only look
within the time slice. A score worth noticing is the score called ’shape’ which prioritises
the shape between the simulation and experimental data being accurate. It is possible for
CADET-Match to use multiple experiments for parameter estimation though each of them
will then need a unique name, and if operated at different conditions a new HDF5 file.
Lastly, there is the search method defining the search strategy for parameter estimation.
During the search, a Pareto front is created. While the search method does not require
additional inputs, it is possible to take the final Pareto front and refine it with gradient
descent.
All the different parts are stored meticulously in dictionary form before being
transformed into a JSON file. The JSON file is then used to initiate the parameter estima-
tion in CADET-Match. The output of the parameter estimation is a CSV file with multiple
good solutions, from which the best solution will be objectively chosen for its values.
44
==PAGE:53==
For the second parameter estimation the scipy.optimize.curve fit function from the Python
package SciPy is used as CADET-Match is not usable with the data used.
8.1
Data preprocessing
As the experimental part of the dataset generally contains poor data structure, unnecessary
variables, incompatible units, and different operating conditions multiple steps were taken to
make the data usable. Due to the structure of the data in the CSV files for the experimental
data, the three variables, absorbance, its corresponding volume added and the run log, had
to be manually extracted from these files, and inserted in a new CSV file. This was done for
the three CSV files for the experiments with variation in concentration and the four CSV
files for the experiment with variation in load.
For all these new CSV files, the variable for the volume added had to be converted to a
time-based variable. This was done by dividing the volume added variable by the volumetric
flow rate, 0.255 ml/min. As the volume added variable was given in the unit millilitre no
further unit conversion was needed.
For the first parameter estimation, it was assumed that the breakthrough curve seen in the
sample application is happening under non-binding conditions. With this assumption, the
system dispersion and column model parameters can be found, as any band broadening will
be from these two models. As the absorbance has a lot of values in the thousands it is not
really suitable to use directly as it is given in CADET. Therefore it was made dimensionless
by dividing it with the maximum measured absorbance, making it range from 0 to 1. This
was done for all seven experimental CSV files.
For the second parameter estimation, the amount bound variable for the four different vari-
ations in load was supposed to be used. However, during the data analysis, two of the values
were found to be outliers therefore an alternative approach was made. This approach is
based on the concentration of the fermentation batches being the most thoroughly quantified
concentration, the ¨Akta pure system being very precise, and the amount sample application
+ wash variable being consistent in its increase between the variations of load. Thus a value
equivalent to the amount bound was found by subtracting the amount sample application
+ wash variables from their respective load value. The load value equals the mass expected
to be added to the system during the experiment based on the concentration of the fer-
mentation batch and the volume the ¨Akta pure system adds. The comparison between
the amount bound variable and the equivalent value from the alternative approach can be
seen in Fig. 19. Here the alternative amount bound is much more linear for the alternative
approach when compared to the amount bound variable from the data. Based on the figure
it would appear that the system follows a linear loading behaviour of the product for the
operating conditions of all four variations of load. If this is true, the alternative approach
for the amount bound value should be more suitable for the parameter estimation. Lastly,
to finish the data processing the data was converted from mass bound to binding capacity
by dividing it with the column volume. The time of this data was also special as it was set
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 19: Comparison between the two different approaches to quantify the amount bound during
the sample application and wash step. The red line is by using the data directly from the densito-
metry analysis and the green line is for the alternative approach.
to run from 0 min to the start of the elution step, which would vary for each load, as they
had different volumes added.
For the last parameter estimation, the elution step needs to be converted from absorbance
to concentration. For this the Beer-Lambert law will be used, A = ϵcl. Here A is the
absorbance, ϵ is the mass absorption coefficient, and l is the optical path length. As ϵ and
l are assumed to be constant for all experiments they will be collected into the composite
absorption variable, ϵl. It is this composite variable which needs to be determined to be able
to convert the absorbance to concentration. Although Beer-Lambert is originally given in
molar proportions and not mass the modification should still be functional in representing
the Beer-Lambert law.
For finding the absorption variable, ϵl, it is assumed that the elution consists of pure product,
thus all contribution to the absorbance of the elution peaks comes only from the product.
While this assumption is not entirely true as shown by the purity variable, the lowest purity
for all concentration and load variations is 93.3%, which means that it should be a feasible
approach. Although since the product concentration is not known for a single point during
the elution the Beer-Lambert expressions will be modified to better express the relationship
between absorbance and concentration. The modified expression integrates both sides of the
Beer-Lambert law in the time interval from the start to the end of the elution data, giving
R
A dt =
R
ϵl c dt. As the absorption variable is independent of time it becomes
R
A dt =
ϵl
R
c dt. While the integral of A over the elution can be calculated from the data, there is
nothing in the data that makes it possible to integrate the concentration during the elution.
Instead, it will be substituted by an equivalent expression that uses both experimental and
analytical data, The expression is
R
c dt = Yb+u∆tsac0. The expression is based on the
constant feed concentration during the sample application step, c0, multiplied by the time
46
==PAGE:55==
length of the sample application step, ∆tsa is equal to the integral of the concentration
fed during the sample application. Then when multiplied by the bound + unbound yield
variable, Yb+u, in the analytical data, which is the fraction of the product that is eluted,
it gives an expression that should be equal to the integral for the concentration during the
elution. Thereby the modified Beer-Lambert expression becomes
R
A dt = ϵl Yb+u∆tsac0.
Next, before the experimental data is usable the absorbance during the elution step will be
slightly manipulated to reduce noise and make the different absorbance profiles slightly more
similar. The first thing done is that the dead time of the system is accounted for by making
the start time of the elution data the start of the elution step plus the dead time from the
system dispersion model. This is done due to the strange tendencies seen in the absorbance
at the start of the elution in the data analysis. Next is that the smallest absorbance in the
elution step is made equal to zero and subtracted from the other absorbance measurements.
However, since the dead time is based on the PFR volume the absorption variable can not
be found before a value for the PFR volume has been estimated in the first parameter
estimation.
8.2
System dispersion and column parameters
For the first parameter estimation the column parameters, porosity and axial dispersion
coefficient, and the system dispersion parameter, PFR volume and CSTR volume, are to
be found. This is done by using the breakthrough curve seen in the sample application
step from five experiments as data in the parameter estimation. As the breakthrough is
unlikely to be from a single component, the axial dispersion coefficient is assumed to be
independent of the components. Furthermore, a comparison between the simple dispersion
model, asymmetrical Roper-Lightfoot model and symmetrical Roper-Lightfoot is made, to
see how varied degrees of complexity in the system dispersion model will affect the different
parameters.
8.2.1
Comparison of system dispersion models
First for the setup in the comparison between the three system dispersion models. The data
used for these was the standard operating experiment from the concentration of 556 mg/l.
The minimum and maximum allowed value for each parameter can be seen in Table 4.
These define an interval for which the parameter estimation can only manipulate values
within its range. For the asymmetrical Roper-Lightfoot the same range was given for both
CSTR volumes, and for the symmetrical Roper-Lightfoot the CSTR volumes are set equal
to each other so only one varies.
The score used is called ’shape front’ and is a modified shape score which only looks at the
front of a peak, which is suitable for breakthrough curves. For the search method, a non-
dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA) was used with a population of 15 and followed
by refinement with gradient descent. The result of doing these parameter estimations for
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 4: The minimum and maximum allowed value for each of the parameters in the comparison
of system dispersion models parameter estimation.
Parameter
Min
Max
ε
0.30
0.70
Dax [m2/min]
1 · 10−10
1 · 10−6
VPFR [m3]
1 · 10−7
3 · 10−6
VCSTR [m3]
1 · 10−8
1 · 10−6
each system dispersion model in CADET-Match is seen in Table 5. Here the axial dispersion
Table 5: The parameter values from the chosen solution for each of the system dispersion models.
System dispersion
model
ε
Dax [m2/min]
VPFR [m3]
VCSTR,a [m3]
VCSTR,b [m3]
Simple dispersion
0.70
1.00 · 10−6
8.00 · 10−7
3.15 · 10−7
N/A
Asymmetrical
Roper-Lightfoot
0.56
3.34 · 10−10
7.16 · 10−7
1.80 · 10−7
2.42 · 10−7
Symmetrical
Roper-Lightfoot
0.70
3.03 · 10−7
6.91 · 10−7
2.05 · 10−7
Same as
VCSTR,a
coefficient is the most interesting, as it is highest for the simple dispersion model and smallest
for the asymmetrical Roper-Lightfoot model, which is the most complex of the three models.
Thus, it would appear that as the system dispersion model complexity increases and the
extra-column dispersion becomes better described the axial dispersion coefficient becomes
almost negligible. For the other three parameters, no similar large difference between the
models was seen. For the porosity two of the models had the maximal allowed value, which
could imply that the membrane has a high porosity, although it could just be for this specific
experiment. Next, the PFR volume was pretty much the same between the three models,
with a slightly higher value for the simple dispersion model but nothing out of the ordinary.
Last is the CSTR volume which is considering the two Roper-Lightfoot models having two
CSTRs, considerably smaller for the simple dispersion model. Furthermore, according to
the asymmetrical model, the extra-column dispersion should be more prevalent after the
membrane.
To visualise how well these models with the best fitting values actually compare to the
data Fig. 20 was made. While difficult to see the two Roper-Lightfoot models act almost
identical to each other, with very little of the green line protruding behind the blue line.
When comparing the simple dispersion model to the two Roper-Lightfoot models it lacks
the capability to describe the dispersion at the frontal part of the breakthrough curve.
Although after the frontal part, the two models act fairly similarly with basically equal
accuracy. So using the symmetrical Roper-Lightfoot model seems to be a safe choice as it is
slightly better than the simple dispersion model and virtually identical to the more complex
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 20: Comparison of the breakthrough curve between the three system dispersion models and
the experimental data.
asymmetrical Roper-Lightfoot.
8.2.2
Parameter estimation with multiple experiments
The setup for this parameter estimation was pretty much the same as for the previous
parameter estimating. Changes include different maximum and minimum allowed values
and the use of data from five experiments. The experimental data used was for the four
load variation and the standard operating experiment from the concentration of 556 mg/l.
These were chosen because they should have been operated under identical conditions, and
since even for the smallest load variation the breakthrough curve was still clearly observable,
the difference in total volume added is unimportant. The maximum and minimum allowed
values can be seen in Table 6. As this was done after previous parameter estimations, the
Table 6: The minimum and maximum allowed value for each of the parameters in the parameter
estimation based on five experiments.
Parameter
Min
Max
ε
0.25
0.70
Dax [m2/min]
1 · 10−9
1 · 10−6
VPFR [m3]
4 · 10−7
2 · 10−6
VCSTR [m3]
8 · 10−8
7 · 10−7
ranges of most parameters were made slightly smaller for the parameter estimation to be
more effective.
The result of the parameter estimation was two noticeably better results when compared
49
==PAGE:58==
to the rest, with one found by the NSGA search method and the other found by gradient
descent. The resulting parameter value from the parameter estimation with CADET-Match
can be seen in Table 7.
Interestingly enough is that for both of the system dispersion
Table 7: The parameter values for the two best solutions from the parameter estimation using five
experiments.
Method
ε
Dax [m2/min]
VPFR [m3]
VCSTR [m3]
Evolutionary
algorithm
0.30
8.07 · 10−7
8.77 · 10−7
2.17 · 10−7
Gradient descent
0.65
5.61 · 10−7
7.50 · 10−7
2.21 · 10−7
parameters, the two solutions are in somewhat agreement while for the column parameters
they vary, especially for the porosity, where they are at different ends of the allowed variable
range.
To visualise how well the two solutions fit the data and to see the variation it had to fit too
in the data, Fig. 21 was made with the experiments with a load of 5.5 mg and 8.25 mg and
the experiment with a concentration of 556 mg/l showing the variation in data. As seen in
Figure 21: Comparison between the two best solutions from the parameter estimation with five
experiments. Breakthrough curves are from the experiments with a load of 5.5 mg and 8.25 mg and
the experiment with a concentration of 556 mg/l.
the figure there is a noticeable amount of variation between the experiments, which means
that the two solutions, while substantially better than the others given by CADET-Match,
are not able to fit all experiments well. Choosing what solution to use in future parameter
estimations was fairly open, as the two solutions had a similar performance across the five
experiments. Therefore it was partially left to personal preference from which the gradient
descent solution was chosen over the evolutionary algorithm. It was preferred as the higher
porosity was deemed more realistic, and it seemed to fit better in the last part of the
50
==PAGE:59==
breakthrough curve.
8.3
Sample application adsorption parameters
The second parameter estimation was as mentioned done using the scipy.optimize.curve fit()
function instead of the CADET-Match package, The curve fit function uses non-linear least
squares to fit a function to data.
This was necessary as the alternative amount bound
variable could not be properly represented in the CADET format as no average solid con-
centration or mass in the column is available as output. So while the curve fit function
is set up to use CADET for the simulation of the system, the output from CADET goes
through some manipulation to represent the binding. This manipulation includes taking
the average of the concentration of the product in the solid phase and in the bulk solution
in the membrane column, and the concentration of the product in the CSTRs. These are
all multiplied by the unit operations size, where the membrane column concentrations are
further multiplied by the appropriate fraction of the porosity. And lastly, they are collected
into a single value, which is divided by the column volume giving a value that represents
the binding capacity calculated in the analytical data. This gives a vector consisting of the
concentration of product bound to the stationary phase at different times.
For the objective function, a point for each of the four data points was needed. For this, four
simulations were run with each matching the conditions for a load experiment. From these
simulations, the manipulated output from CADET would be calculated and the last value
used giving four points that represent the binding capacity which the curve fit function uses
to fit the data. Similar to before minimum and maximum allowed values were defined for the
parameter estimation, see Table 8. Compared to CADET-Match the parameter estimation
Table 8: The parameter values for the two best solutions from the parameter estimation using five
experiments.
Parameter
Min
Max
ka [m3/kg/min]
1 · 10−5
10
Ka [m3/kg]
1 · 10−5
1 · 105
qmax [kg/m3]
1 · 10−5
1 · 103
with the curve fit function was considerably faster. The minimum and maximum allowed
values were therefore found by continuously increasing the range when a boundary value
was given in the results until it didn’t give a boundary value.
The reason for using the equilibrium constant, Ka, for the parameter estimation, which is
not actually used in the expression in Eq. 11, instead of the desorption constant, kd, is that
ka and kd are coupled. So if kd is used there exists a large number of ka and kd values with
equally good results, which would increase runtime and give a lot of suboptimal results.
Using Ka a definite value is found for the coupling, and the ka is able to explore its search
range more freely.
51
==PAGE:60==
The solution of the parameter estimation using the curve fit function is a single best result.
The result is seen in Table 9, along with the calculated desorption rate constant. While
Table 9: The resulting parameter values from the parameter estimation using the curve fit function.
Parameter
ka [m3/kg/min]
Ka [m3/kg]
qmax [kg/m3]
kd [1/min]
Value
1.249 · 10−2
158.6
593.6
7.875 · 10−5
the adsorption rate constant and equilibrium constant have realistic values the maximum
binding capacity seems a bit high, which is likely due to the values being given in mass
and not molar units as usually seen. Considering that the scFV product has a mass of
25.7 kDa it will consequently have a molar weight of 25.7 kg/mol, bringing the maximum
binding capacity down to 23.1 mol/m3, which is more within the expected range.
For
the two others, the conversion to the more normally seen units gives that the adsorption
rate constant is 5.35 · 10−3 m3/mol/s and the equilibrium constant is 4.08 · 103 m3/mol.
The low adsorption rate constant value would indicate that the adsorption process occurs
fairly slowly, although as the equilibrium constant is very high adsorption is still far more
favourable than desorption. The equilibrium constant value being very high is sensible as
during the loading phase of ion-exchange chromatography there is almost no desorption.
The comparison between the fitted parameters and the data is visualised in Fig. 22. The
slightly odd look of the figure stems from the step change from sample application to wash,
as the binding during sample application is identical for all simulations. In terms of fit,
Figure 22: Comparison between the data (red dots) and simulations (black line) using the param-
eters from the curve fit solution.
the parameter estimation seems very successful as all the lines end on top of a data point.
With a fit this good the manipulated CADET output used in the objective function should
be somewhat representative of the systems adsorption behaviour. Although by using the
52
==PAGE:61==
average concentrations in the column there is a possibility that the parameters do not
properly describe the actual difference in concentration within the column.
8.4
Elution adsorption parameters
For the final parameter estimation the five parameters adsorption rate constant, equilibrium
constant, maximum binding capacity, ion-exchange constant, and hydrophobicity constant
from the mobile phase modulator Langmuir isotherm are to be estimated in CADET-Match.
As this parameter estimation uses all the estimated parameters from previous parameter
estimations its accuracy is partially reliant on their accuracy. Adding on that the elution
data shows more dissimilarity between the different experiments, compared to the data used
in the other parameter estimations, the fits are not expected to be as good. Although first,
the data preprocessing of the elution data is to be finished.
8.4.1
Absorption variable/Data preprocesseing
With the PFR volume found the data preprocessing can be finished for the elution data.
The missing parameter was the absorption variable, ϵl, in the modified Beer-Lambert law,
R
A dt = ϵl Yb+u∆tsac0. To estimate this the rest of the values has to be determined first.
Both the feed concentration and bound + unbound variable are given, while for the time
length of the sample application, it is easy to calculate from the run log variable in the
experimental data. Thus the biggest challenge is to determine the definite integral of the
absorbance over time. The composite trapezoidal rule is used on the data points to approx-
imate the definite integral as seen in Eq. 22.
Z t1
t0
A(t) dt ≈1
2
N
X
j=1
(tj −tj−1)[A(tj−1) −A(tj)]
(22)
Here A(t) is the absorbance at a specific time value, t, N is the number of observations,
and j is the index of the observation. Furthermore, t0 and t1 are the start and end time
of the elution step, with the start time given as the start of elution in the run log plus the
dead time from the PFR volume, 2.94 min.
Using this approach the values for the absorbance and concentration integral and the ab-
sorption value seen in Table 10 were calculated for each experiment with variation in con-
centration and load. For the adsorption value, it can be seen that it decreases for both
variations the higher the value of the variation is. This is somewhat expected from the
load variations as the noise seen at the start of the elution step will contribute more to
the absorbance area for the lower peaks. However, while the difference is much smaller for
the concentration variations, it is odd that there even is a discernible difference, as there
is nothing in the conversion expression or analytical data that supports this trend. Based
on these values the experiments chosen for the parameter estimation were the two load
53
==PAGE:62==
Table 10: Calculated values for the absorbance area, concentration area, and absorption value for
each concentration and load experiment.
Experiment
Absorbance area [min]
Concentraiton area [kg min/m3]
ϵl [m3/kg]
Concentration
250 mg/l
7887.8
33.56
235.01
350 mg/l
8024.8
34.74
230.99
556 mg/l
7287.0
33.48
217.65
Load
2.75 mg
2693.6
9.33
288.84
5.50 mg
4921.1
19.22
256.03
8.25 mg
6560.3
29.54
222.09
11.10 mg
8588.2
38.38
223.79
variations with 15 mg and 20 mg, and the two concentration variations with 350 mg/l and
556 mg/l, as these had the smallest absorption value. A low absorption value was deemed
desirable, as it appears to indicate that there is less noise from the absorbance. Therefore
based on the absorption value for the four experiments used in the parameter estimation,
an absorption value of 222 [m3/kg] was used to convert the absorbance to concentration.
With the elution profile given in concentration, the data preprocessing has been finished.
8.4.2
Setup and results
For this parameter estimation since a modulator component was used, the CADET model
needed to be for two components. Furthermore, as two different adsorption kinetic models
were used, the model needed to use both the aforementioned SAW setup and elution setup,
with the results from the elution setup being used in the parameter estimation.
The setup in CADET-Match was fairly similar to the one for the first parameter estimation,
with the main difference being the use of the shape score, as the data this time is a peak.
Furthermore, the use of the adsorption rate constant and the equilibrium constant from the
second parameter estimation was repeated to once again avoid the coupling between the
adsorption and desorption rate constant. The minimum and maximum allowed value for
the five parameters can be seen in Table 11.
The results of the parameter estimation can be seen in Table 12. Most noteworthy is that
the hydrophobicity constant is almost zero, which means that according to the parameter
estimation, there are basically no hydrophobic interactions.
Comparing the adsorption
rate constant, equilibrium constant and maximum binding capacity to the values found for
sample application and wash steps adsorption kinetic model, some unexpected things are
seen. First is that while the elution step is supposed to favour desorption, its adsorption
rate constant and equilibrium constant is actually higher than for the step where adsorption
is favoured. This is likely due to desorption mainly being controlled through the increase
54
==PAGE:63==
Table 11:
The minimum and maximum allowed value for each of the parameters in the last
parameter estimation.
Parameter
Min
Max
ka [m3/kg/min]
1 · 10−5
100
Ka [m3/kg]
1 · 10−2
1 · 105
qmax [kg/m3]
1
1 · 103
β [kg/m3]
1 · 10−3
25
γ [m3/kg]
−1 · 103
0
Table 12: The resulting parameter values for the elution adsorption kinetic model from the pa-
rameter estimation performed with CADET-Match.
Parameter
ka [m3/kg/min]
Ka [m3/kg]
qmax [kg/m3]
β [kg/m3]
γ [m3/kg]
Value
0.131
229.2
69.86
3.82
−1.1 · 10−11
in the concentration of the modulator component by the ion-exchange constant, β. Thus
during the elution, the model will favour adsorption until the modulator component starts
increasing, which is how it is supposed to be. The maximum binding capacity on the other
hand is substantially smaller for the elution profile, however as parameters describing the
desorption are likely the main contributors to the parameter estimations results, it is likely
just a value which fits nicely without any deeper meaning. The same could be said for
the adsorption rate constant as it is not part of the desorption term in the mobile phase
modulator Langmuir expression, Eq. 15, either, however in the parameter estimation it is
coupled to the desorption rate constant through the equilibrium constant.
The resulting model is compared to the data in Fig. 23. In terms of the general behaviour
of the model, it seems to be able to accurately time the start of the peaks and the following
peak tailing of all experiments but the concentration variation of 556 mg/l, the elution
profile of which was already deemed a bit odd in the data analysis, so it is to be expected.
What is maybe more interesting is that only for the experiment with a lower concentration,
concentration variation 350 mg/l in Fig. 23c, the system was able to properly replicate
the peak height. While this could be because the adsorption variable calculated for this
experiment was slightly larger than the used value in the data preprocessing it is unlikely.
Upon comparing the difference between the actual peak height and the simulated peak
height, the difference is just too big for the other experiments for the adsorption variable to
account for this. Another thing worth noticing between the lower concentrations simulation
result and data is the front of the peak. While this simulation is the worst at estimating the
start time of the peak it is also the model that is the most parallel to the front of the peak.
This seems to stem from this peak being the most symmetric, which is likely the result of
the lower concentration.
Several things are seen when comparing the model to the data for the other three experi-
ments in Fig. 23. For all three simulations, the height of the peak is substantially lower and
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Comparison between the simulation and data
for the two standard operations experiments.
(b) Comparison between the simulation and data
for the experiment with a variation in load of 8.25
mg.
(c) Comparison between the simulation and data
for the experiment with a variation in concentration
of 350 mg/l.
Figure 23:
Comparison between the simulation and data for all four experiments used in the
parameter estimation.
has a much smoother top, compared to the experimental data. For the two load variations,
the model is not able to account for how quickly the concentrations increase at the front of
the peak. While the parameter estimation might need to make compromises for each exper-
iment to give a better overall fit it is odd how badly it estimates these three peak heights.
The most logical answer to this is that it is physically impossible for the model to make the
peaks any higher, due to some kind of limitations. The most likely limitations are with the
choice of adsorption kinetic model. It can be that the mobile phase modulator Langmuir
is not the proper model for describing the elution profile, or it can be that the Langmuir
model used to describe the adsorption phase does not distribute the product concentration
properly throughout the membrane. Considering the peak of the lower concentration sim-
ulation reaching an appropriate height, it could also be that the concentration of 556 mg/l
56
==PAGE:65==
is too high for the system causing some kind of overloading, which the model is not capa-
ble of accounting for. Although the model had some problems with the top of the peaks,
considering the amount of data used to reach the model and how well it fits the front and
back of the peaks its performance can be considered satisfactory.
8.5
Final model
With all parameter estimations finished a final model has been made. This model is to be
examined with the concentration variation of 250 mg/l which was not represented in any of
the data used in the parameter estimations. For this, the final model was simulated with a
product feed concentration of 250 mg/l. The results of the simulation can be seen in Fig. 24.
Considering this experiment was not part of any parameter estimation it overall behaes as
(a) Model output for the product concentration of
the exiting stream during the sample application
and wash step when a concentration of 250 mg/l
was used.
(b) Comparison between the simulation and data
for the experiment with a variation in concentration
of 250 mg/l.
Figure 24: Simulation results from the final model, when the feed product concentration is 250
mg/l.
expected, however, certain aspects in both figures are worth highlighting. For the sample
application and wash step, it is seen that most of the product is bound, which is expected for
an ion-exchange membrane system as during the loading phase adsorption should be very
favourable. What is more surprising is that the highest concentration exiting the system
is only around 0.035 which is only 14% of the feed concentration which means that the
column is still far from saturation. For the elution profile, the simulation behaves similarly
to when the concentration was 350 mg/l, see Fig. 23c, with regards to the data. The main
difference is a shift in the simulation peak with regards to the data peak as in Fig. 24b the
front peak of the simulation is close to the data while the back of the peak is late in its
descent. However, this is not as surprising since the difference seen in Fig. 17a between the
elution data for the two concentrations matches the shift in the peak. Apart from the peak
in the data being a little crooked, comparing the height of the simulation and data peaks
57
==PAGE:66==
it is seen that the data is considerably lower, with a noticeably larger gap than when the
feed concentration was 350 mg/l. As the system is supposed to behave fairly similarly at
all concentrations it is odd that the simulated peak height decreases compared to the data
peak height as the feed concentration decreases. Although due to the many assumption and
conversion methods in the data preprocessing it is possible that one of these has created
this relation between simulated peak height and feed concentration. Another possibility is
that during the second parameter estimation for the adsorption kinetic model in the sample
application and wash all the data came from experiments with the same concentration.
Furthermore comparing the amount variables from the load experiments used to create the
data with the amount variables in concentration it can be seen that slightly more is eluted in
the load data than the concentration data. This might coincidentally have made the model
prone to handling the concentration variations in an unwanted way. These probable causes
are all speculation, and the data could also be the cause, since the data application may
not have been suitable. Considering the results from the different parameter estimations
and the lack of better data the final model is deemed to be viable for describing the system.
However, practically it should only serve as a temporary model until better data can be
collected. The foundation for defining a better model is however already available as much
of the current approach can be modified to fit similar types of data.
58
==PAGE:67==
9
Discussion and conclusion
While the original purpose of the thesis was to model a membrane chromatography unit and
use this model to create a simulated bed model, due to complications the thesis ended up
focusing on how to model a membrane chromatography system with inadequate data. In the
literature, there was not found anything about modelling a membrane chromatography unit
with inadequate data. Therefore, the unconventional modelling methods are not based on
anything previously seen and put emphasis on how to convert the data to something usable
with parameter estimation while still remaining representative of the system. Considering
the comparisons of the results from the different parameter estimations and their respective
data used, the final model is deemed viable for the system. Thus it has been shown that
it is possible to model a membrane chromatography system with inadequate data by using
unconventional methods when preprocessing the data and by adjusting the method used
for parameter estimation to fully utilise the available data. While the final model is viable
it should only serve as a temporary model, as the model is likely to be more influenced by
the fermentation batch used in the experiments than the product itself.
While the final model was not as satisfactory as initially hoped, the approach for the
modelling was meticulous and well thought out, which undoubtfully helped in making the
model viable.
The first part of the modelling consisted of reproducing different system
dispersion models from the literature, to better ascertain their accuracy and to validate
the implementation, as one of them was to be chosen for the model. Using the parameters
from the literature the different system dispersion models were all successfully replicated. In
terms of accuracy, the ZRM was the best, however, this came at the cost of more parameters
to estimate. Although the ZRM was the best, it is not really beneficial to use for inadequate
data, since it can not account for the inconsistency in the data. Thus, in this case, it would
just end up resulting in more parameters to estimate.
Next, the data analysis helped with a better understanding of the data and the model.
First, in the data exploration, it was verified that the membrane system acted as expected.
From the experimental data, it was clear that a system dispersion model was needed as
there was a noticeable band broadening on the breakthrough curves. Looking at the ex-
perimental and analytical data collective, it could be seen that the adsorption kinetics of
the product in the system followed what is expected in an ion-exchange system, as there
was high adsorption during the loading phase and high desorption during the desorption
phase. Furthermore, there was a clear delay in the elution peaks indicating that some kind
of modulator component affected it.
The data exploration also helped define what data was usable. A limiting factor in the
data was the lack of information regarding the impurities. This meant that it would not
be possible to use the final model in an SMB design, as it would not be possible to model
the impurities which are to be separated. Another problem with the data was the lack of
information about the product during the sample application step as no direct information
was available. In terms of what data was usable, the experiments with variations in pH
59
==PAGE:68==
during sample application were quickly deemed unusable and excluded as the results were
all over the place due to the large pH increments.
The experiments with variation in
residence time used a different fermentation batch than the other experiments, which gave
a noticeable difference in its analytical data. Therefore a t-test was used to compare the
residence times data to the data from experiments with variations in concentration and
load. Here it was shown that there was a statistical difference and the residence time data
was also excluded. While excluding the residence time, might limit the range at which the
final models can be applied, the possibility that the difference stemmed from a difference in
the composition of the impurities between the two batches was the deciding factor, as this
could not be modelled.
This left the data from the experiments with variation in concentration and load as the
utilised data. Even though this data was chosen as the most suitable there were still plenty
of inconsistencies between the different experiments. Due to this inconsistency and how
much of the data needed to be converted, the data can be considered unsuitable for general
modelling purposes.
For the model setup, the knowledge gained during the data analysis was to be translated into
a model. As the data was somewhat troublesome the model should be as simple as possible.
Therefore for the system dispersion model, the symmetrical Roper-Lightfoot model was
chosen, as it required the least amount of parameters to estimate. Due to the lack of data
for the product during the sample application, it was decided that two adsorption kinetic
models were to be used. One was for the sample application and wash step, which was to
be simple due to the limited data. For this purpose, the standard Langmuir isotherm was
chosen. The other was for the elution step as there was more data available for this step,
and it needed to be dependent on a different component, thus it had to be more complex
than the other. Here the mobile phase modulator Langmuir isotherm was chosen. While
using two different adsorption kinetic models are not truly representative of the system it
is necessary due to the limited data.
The parameter estimation was where all the previous work was cumulated. The first param-
eter estimation is for the system dispersion and column parameters. The data preprocessing
for this was making the absorbance relative so that the breakthrough curve seen in the ab-
sorbance measurement could be used.
The first part of this parameter estimation was
for three system dispersion models with a linear PFR/CSTR sequence which were then
compared. The most noteworthy parts of this comparison were that the symmetrical and
asymmetrical Roper-Lightfoot models gave almost identical results and that the estimated
value for the axial dispersion coefficient decreases as the complexity of the system dispersion
model decreases. When doing the parameter estimation of the actual parameters, the two
search methods NSGA and gradient descent were able to give results whose fit was statisti-
cally similar, even though their porosity and axial dispersion coefficient values were visibly
different from each other. This points out one of the difficulties when doing parameter
estimation with inconsistent data, as there will be a lot of solutions which will give similar
good results. Looking at the variation seen between the experimental breakthrough curves
60
==PAGE:69==
in Fig. 21, it is understandable how this happens.
For the second parameter estimation, the analytical data was used along with CADET in
an unconventional manner to find the parameters for the adsorption kinetic model in the
sample application and wash step. As the analytical data is fairly broad, the simulation had
to use a cumulated approach as the total mass in the system was combined to estimate the
binding capacity. While this approach was able to give a very good fit to the data, it is a very
loose approach for estimating how the membrane module is loaded as the solid concentration
gradient within the column is entirely overlooked. While this was likely to affect the last
parameter estimation it was the only possible approach with the data available. This is
also a great example of how the data is limiting the parameter estimation, as the lack of
product data during sample application meant that CADET-Match could not be used, and
instead the curve fit function had to be used with a much simpler objective function.
For the last parameter estimation, everything was combined to determine the parameters for
the adsorption kinetic model in the elution step. This included the two-component CADET
model with both the SAW and elution setup, all the parameters previously estimated, the
elution profiles from the experimental data, and the most complex conversion of a variable
by far. The modified Beer-Lambert expression, used for the conversion from absorbance to
concentration gave decent results, considering the amount of data used for a single experi-
ment and its sensitivity to noise in the absorbance. Before the last parameter estimation,
the model was already very reliant on the two previous parameter estimations. Add to this
the excessive amount of data preprocessing necessary, and this parameter estimation truly
had to deal with all the inaccuracies the model could have accumulated. Furthermore, the
elution profiles were by far the data with the most variation when compared to the data used
in the other parameter estimations. All this is likely the reason the results for this param-
eter estimation are the worst statistically. However, upon comparing the simulated model
with the data the model was able to accurately describe certain parts of the behaviour of
the elution profile, such as the start time of the elution peak and the peak tailing. This was
also seen when comparing the model with the elution profile of an experiment which was
not used in any of the parameter estimations, as the model was able to decently replicate
the elution profile. Thus it was concluded that the model was capable of describing the
membrane chromatography system, although it has to be acknowledged that it is unlikely
it will perform as well as seen in this thesis for new experiments. This also highlights how
limited the resulting model from this unconventional modelling approach for inadequate
data is, as it is possible that the model would be unviable should the fermentation batch
used for feed have different compositions.
9.1
Future work
Future works should either focus on conducting experiments which can validate the data
or focus on doing experiments whose data can help give a more exact model. Creating an
SMB model which uses a membrane column as its columns could also be of interest for
61
==PAGE:70==
future work, although with the current model proposed multiple steps have to be taken
before this becomes reachable. For validating the data, the experiments that yielded the
data used in this thesis should be repeated. As it would not be possible to perfectly recreate
the fermentation batches repeating the experiment would give an indication of the impact
of the fermentation batch on the data. It would also be interesting to repeat an experiment
with the same operating conditions multiple times to get an indication of the data accuracy,
as the only repeated experiment in the current data does not give two identical data files.
Furthermore, it would be possible to look at how the size of the dataset would affect
modelling with the unconventional methods seen in this thesis.
In terms of doing different experiments, future work should focus more on modelling the
membrane chromatography system with conventional methods. As most of the parameters
found in the parameter estimations can be estimated without actually doing a full run of
the system, the parameter estimation can be done for fewer parameters at a time with more
accurate data. Experiments such as the pulse injection experiment which can be combined
with the method of moments to find the system dispersion or column parameters and the
experiment where a breakthrough curve under non-binding conditions is made which can
then be fitted to find the same parameters are just examples of possible experiments. The
adsorption kinetic parameters can be estimated from equilibrium data that can also be
found independently of the chromatography system itself. If the impurities in the system
are successfully modelled it would even be possible to create a model that can be used in
an SMB design.
62
==PAGE:71==
10
References
[1]
M. Kesik-Brodacka. “Progress in biopharmaceutical development”. In: Biotechnology
and Applied Biochemistry 65.3 (May 2018), pp. 306–322.
[2]
A. S. Rathore et al. “Re-use of protein a resin: Fouling and economics: Large-scale
implementation of Protein A chromatography offers several challenges.” In: BioPharm
International 28.3 (2015), pp. 28–33.
[3]
X. Yang et al. “Towards next generation high throughput ion exchange membranes
for downstream bioprocessing: A review”. In: Journal of Membrane Science 647 (Apr.
2022).
[4]
C. Boi. “Membrane chromatography for biomolecule purification”. In: Current Trends
and Future Developments on (Bio-) Membranes: Membrane Processes in the Pharma-
ceutical and Biotechnological Field. Elsevier, Jan. 2019, pp. 151–166.
[5]
P. Ghosh et al. “Zonal rate model for axial and radial flow membrane chromatography.
Part I: Knowledge transfer across operating conditions and scales”. In: Biotechnology
and Bioengineering 110.4 (Apr. 2013), pp. 1129–1141.
[6]
H. Yang et al. “Purification of a large protein using ion-exchange membranes”. In:
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 41.6 (2002), pp. 1597–1602.
[7]
N. B. Afeyan et al. “Flow-through particles for the high-performance liquid chro-
matographic separation of biomolecules: perfusion chromatography”. In: Journal of
Chromatography A 519.1 (1990), pp. 1–29.
[8]
K. G. Briefs and M. R. Kula. “Fast protein chromatography on analytical and prepara-
tive scale using modified microporous membranes”. In: Chemical Engineering Science
47.1 (1992), pp. 141–149.
[9]
D. D. Frey et al. “Dispersion in stacked-membrane chromatography”. In: Journal of
Chromatography A 603.1-2 (1992), pp. 43–47.
[10]
D. K. Roper and E. N. Lightfoot. “Estimating plate heights in stacked-membrane
chromatography by flow reversal”. In: Journal of Chromatography A 702.1-2 (1995),
pp. 69–80.
[11]
S. Golshan-Shirazi and G. Guiochon. “The Equilibrium-Dispersive Model of Chro-
matography”. In: Theoretical Advancement in Chromatography and Related Separa-
tion Techniques 383 (1992), pp. 35–59.
[12]
E. von Lieres and J. Andersson. “A fast and accurate solver for the general rate
model of column liquid chromatography”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering
34.8 (Aug. 2010), pp. 1180–1191.
[13]
C. Migliorini et al. “Design of simulated moving bed multicomponent separations:
Langmuir systems”. In: Separation and Purification Technology 20.1 (2000), pp. 79–
96.
63
==PAGE:72==
[14]
H. Yang and M. R. Etzel. “Evaluation of three kinetic equations in models of protein
purification using ion-exchange membranes”. In: Industrial and Engineering Chem-
istry Research 42.4 (2003), pp. 890–896.
[15]
E. von Lieres et al. “Model based quantification of internal flow distributions from
breakthrough curves of flat sheet membrane chromatography modules”. In: Chemical
Engineering and Technology 33.6 (2010), pp. 960–968.
[16]
P. Francis et al. “Zonal rate model for stacked membrane chromatography. I: Charac-
terizing solute dispersion under flow-through conditions”. In: Journal of Chromatog-
raphy A 1218.31 (2011), pp. 5071–5078.
[17]
H. N. Endres et al. “Evaluation of an ion-exchange membrane for the purification of
plasmid DNA”. In: Biotechnology and Applied Biochemistry 37.3 (June 2003), pp. 259–
266.
[18]
M. A. Teeters et al. “Adsorptive membrane chromatography for purification of plasmid
DNA”. In: Journal of Chromatography A 989.1 (Mar. 2003), pp. 165–173.
[19]
H. L. Knudsen et al. “Membrane ion-exchange chromatography for process-scale an-
tibody purification”. In: Journal of Chromatography A 907.1-2 (2001), pp. 145–154.
[20]
A. A. Shukla and U. Gottschalk. “Single-use disposable technologies for biopharma-
ceutical manufacturing”. In: Trends in Biotechnology 31.3 (2013), pp. 147–154.
[21]
J. Seader et al. Separation Process Principles: With Applications Using Process Sim-
ulators, 4th Edition, EMEA Edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[22]
M. Mazzotti et al. “Optimal operation of simulated moving bed units for nonlinear
chromatographic separations”. In: Journal of Chromatography A 769.1 (1997), pp. 3–
24.
[23]
D. Karlsson et al. “Model-based optimization of a preparative ion-exchange step for
antibody purification”. In: Journal of Chromatography A 1055.1-2 (2004), pp. 29–39.
[24]
S. Dimartino et al. “A validated model for the simulation of protein purification
through affinity membrane chromatography”. In: Journal of Chromatography A 1218.13
(Apr. 2011), pp. 1677–1690.
64
