==PAGE:1==
Detection of illicit waste disposal sites from
satellite images using machine learning
MScEng Business Analytics
Master Thesis
DTU Business Analytics
Department of Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Student name:
Matteo Sabadin
Student number:
s212980
Thesis title:
Detection of illicit waste disposal sites from satellite images
using machine learning
Date:
July 2023
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must in­
clude the customary bibliographic citation, including author at­
tribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Chip visualization from this thesis project.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Management, Akademivej, Bygning 358,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark, www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months with the supervision of COWI
Consultancy at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfillment for
the degree ”Master of Science in Engineering in Business Analytics”.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of Image Analysis
and Deep Learning.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With rapid population growth and urbanization, annual waste generation is ex­
pected to increase by 73% from 2020 levels to 3.88 billion tons in 2050. In low­
income countries, over 90% of waste is often disposed of in unregulated dumps,
often openly burned, leading to serious health, safety, and environmental conse­
quences. Managing waste properly is therefore essential for building sustainable
and livable cities, but it is difficult to characterize and solve the problem because of
the challenges that law enforcement agencies face in locating informal dumpsites.
In this master thesis project from the Danish Technical University (DTU), the image
segmentation U­NET deep learning architecture was trained to detect dumpsites
and waste disposal sites in Moldova from Sentinel­2 satellite imagery collected
by the European Space Agency between 2017 and 2018. The target data used
consisted of polygons geometries collected in 2013, obtained from the Global Ad­
visory Department and the Artificial Intelligence Community of COWI consultancy,
which supervised the project.
The U­NET Deep Learning architecture proved to be successful in detecting dump­
sites and predicting the location of multiple sites using test data from Southern
Moldova. Using the 12 Sentinel­2 bands as training data, a Segmentation Dice
Score of 0.1958 was obtained by the model, which detected a dumpsite in 21% of
the locations in the test set and can be deployed to a global scale. A road­based
probability map was then created to increase the probability of a landfill predic­
tion, based on its distance from the road network. Although the resulting model
did not improve the performance in the test set, a relevant improvement was ob­
tained in the deployment of the model to the train set, demonstrating the potential
of this setup for image segmentation from publicly available satellite imagery and
geographic data.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Mikkel Thorhauge, Associate Professor, DTU. Thesis Supervisor.
Raphaël Payet­Burin, Water management specialist, COWI. Thesis Supervisor.
Alysha Chamadia, PhD student, DTU. General support.
Roberta Polimeni, Mathematical Engineer, DTU. General support.
Christian Nicolai Nielsen, Civil Engineer, DTU. Creator of this thesis template.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Remote sensing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Sentinel­2 program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Deep Learning for Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Projects in the field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Data
13
3.1
Moldovan dumpsite polygons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Satellite imagery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Road Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Model
23
4.1
The U­Net Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Discussion
27
5.1
Model A: Road segmentation for model evaluation . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Model B: Dumpsite segmentation from RGB bands . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Model C: Dumpsite segmentation from 12 bands . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Model D: Dumpsite segmentation from 12 bands and a road­based
probability map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Conclusions
37
Bibliography
39
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
According to the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), an estimated
11.2 billion tonnes of solid waste is produced and collected every year worldwide,
which contributes to about 5% of the global amount of greenhouse gas emis­
sions [1]. Ineffective disposal of waste or lack of collection systems can produce
air pollution as well as water and soil contamination. Open landfills can cause
drinking water contamination, infections, or transmit diseases to the nearby pop­
ulation. Dangerous substances, electronic waste, and industrial garbage pollute
the ecosystems and create a toxic environment for nature and human activities in
the area [1]. The World Bank states that when looking forward, global waste is ex­
pected to grow to 3.40 billion tonnes by 2050, more than double of the population
growth over the same period. The total quantity of waste generated in low­income
countries is expected to increase by more than three times by 2050. East Asia
and the Pacific region is generating most of the world’s waste, at 23%, while the
Middle East and Northern Africa are producing the least in absolute terms, at 6%.
However, the fastest growing regions are Sub­Saharan Africa, South Asia, Mid­
dle East, and North Africa. In these regions, by 2050, total waste generation is
expected to double or even triple. In these regions, more than half of waste is
currently openly dumped, and the trajectories of waste growth will have vast im­
plications for the environment, health, and prosperity, thus requiring urgent action
[2].
Globally, around 37% of waste is disposed into landfills. While 8% is being man­
aged through sanitary landfills equipped with landfill gas collection systems, open­
dumping constitutes approximately 31% of waste disposal. Recycling and com­
posting efforts recover about 19% of waste, while approximately 11% undergo in­
cineration for final disposal. Proper waste management, such as controlled land­
fills or advanced facilities, is mostly only done by high­ and upper­middle­income
countries. On the other hand, lower­income countries tend to rely on open dump­
ing, with about 93% of the total waste being disposed of in open dumpsites, as
opposed to only 2% in high­income countries. Here, 36% of waste ends up being
recycled or composted, and 22% ends up being incinerated, a method predom­
inantly used in countries with high capacities, substantial incomes, and limited
land resources [2].
While finding preventive solutions represents a great challenge, clearing and cleans­
ing existing landfills is also a matter of great concern for governments, waste man­
agement companies, and citizens. The ability to measure the dumpsites’ location,
size, and growth over time, would enable governmental agencies to plan cleaning
operations and enforce control over the sites.
1.1
Project description
The objective of this thesis project, carried out between January and July 2023,
was to create a dumpsite detection model able to identify landfills from publicly
1
==PAGE:10==
available satellite imagery and geographic data. For this purpose, a deep learning
framework for image segmentation was deployed on Sentinel­2 satellite imagery
and other geographical data sources, to train a model that can autonomously lo­
cate the landfill sites. The project was carried out with the support of the Global
Advisory department and the Artificial Intelligence Community of COWI consul­
tancy. COWI A/S is an international consulting group, specializing in engineering,
environmental science, and economics, with headquarters in Lyngby, Denmark.
It has been involved in more than 50,000 projects in 175 countries and has ap­
proximately 7,300 employees [3]. The COWI Global Advisory Department par­
ticipated in the definition of the objectives and strategy and provided data and
support throughout the entire duration of the project.
The entire software setup has been hosted in the High­Performance Computing
(HPC) infrastructure at DTU, where different approaches and methods were an­
alyzed and tested. The chosen architecture was the U­NET, Deep Learning Seg­
mentation Model, while the data was obtained from the satellite imagery collected
from public data sources. The training data was collected from the Sentinel­2
satellite program, from the Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) platform of the
United Nation Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and
from the Global Advisory department at COWI.
Four different models were created: Model A, Model B, Model C and Model D.
Model A was implemented to assess the overall quality of the model architecture
by predicting road segmentation masks from satellite imagery. Model B used RGB
satellite images to predict segmentation masks of dumpsite locations. Model C
included 9 additional bands to the training data used in Model C. Model D included
a road location­based probability map, in addition to the 12 Sentinel­2 bands used
in Model C.
In Chapter 2, a review of the existing techniques in the field of image segmentation
and remote sensing, with a focus on the Sentinel­2 satellite program, is discussed.
In Chapter 3, the data used for this project and the data preparation approach is
presented. Choices and considerations made during the project development for
the data preparation layer are discussed in this chapter.
In Chapter 4, the chosen U­NET model architecture and the overall deep learning
framework is examined. Modification of the model parameters and differences
from other existing projects are discussed in this chapter.
In Chapter 5, a comparison of performance of the various models is discussed,
and the various results obtained are presented.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
In this chapter, a description of the current techniques used in remote sensing and
deep learning image segmentation is presented, together with the most relevant
projects in the area of dumpsite detection.
2.1
Remote sensing
Remote sensing consists of acquiring land and urban information from a distance.
Space agencies like the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
or the European Space Agency (ESA) observe our planet via satellites and aircraft
equipped with remote sensors that detect and record reflected or emitted energy
[4]. Remote sensing is commonly deployed in agriculture, forestry, and geology to
map vegetation changes and growth, or to monitor how natural or artificial agents
affect the environment. Urban planning and land use analyses are other fields
where aerial or satellite imagery is used extensively to obtain specific insights
from large geographic areas. A remote sensing product is often represented by a
picture, where the real location of each pixel is identified by a set of coordinates
defined according to a specific coordinate system, of which the most famous one
is the GPS coordinate system, also referred to as WGS84 or Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM). In Figure 2.1, an example of a remote sensing product is pre­
sented. The image represents a standard 100 × 100 km2 area, also known as tile,
taken in 2017 over Central Moldova, by the famous Sentinel­2 satellite program
of the European Space Agency.
Electromagnetic energy travels in the form of waves with different wavelengths
and frequencies through the atmosphere and the vacuum of space. Instrumenta­
tion can detect various forms of electromagnetic energy coming from the ground,
and collect the values corresponding to each different wavelength detected [4].
These different wavelengths, also called bands, can be studied to gather specific
knowledge of the surface analyzed, for example analyzing the Vegetation Index or
the Moisture Index, used to study vegetation health, that correspond to the 703nm
and 945nm wavelengths, respectively.
There are three parameters that define each Remote Sensing product: Spectral
Resolution, Spatial Resolution, and Temporal Resolution. The different spectral
bands collected refer to the Spectral Resolution of the image. The Spatial Reso­
lution refers to the size of the smallest feature that can be detected by a satellite
sensor or displayed in a satellite image and is represented by the number of pix­
els per area in an image. Finally, the Temporal Resolution describes the temporal
frequency for which two consequent images of the same location are taken [5].
Most of the remote sensing products collected from public and private satellites or
airplanes are quite expensive, especially when considering high­resolution prod­
ucts. Costs range from a few hundred to thousands of dollars for a few stan­
dard 100×100 km2 images. There are although some publicly available products,
that space agencies have made available to the public free of charge. Among
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Example of a remote sensing product. 110 × 110 km2 area in Central
Moldova. Source: Sentinel­2 satellite program, 2017.
these, the product with the highest resolution available is the satellite imagery
collected by the Copernicus Sentinel­2 mission of the European Space Agency
(ESA), which was chosen as the main data source for this project, and is de­
scribed in section 2.2.
2.2
The Sentinel­2 program
The Copernicus SENTINEL­2 mission, launched in 2015, consists of a constel­
lation of two polar­orbiting satellites, which aims at monitoring variability in land
surface conditions, and Earth’s surface changes [6].
The satellites collect images at different wavelengths, and pre­processed them
in ESA servers before making them available to the public. Earth is divided into
a predefined set of tiles, defined in UTM/WGS84 projection and using a 100 km
step. The final product of the Sentinel­2 program, is the atmospherically corrected
Surface Reflectance (SR) images, each composed of 110 × 110 km2 tiles in car­
tographic geometry (UTM/WGS84 projection) [7].
The temporal resolution of the Sentinel­2 imagery, which corresponds to the re­
visit frequency of the satellite to a particular location, is 5 days [8]. The spatial
resolution of Sentinel­2 is dependent on the particular spectral band, each one
of them corresponding to a different wavelength collected by the instrumentation,
and ranges between 10 and 60 meters. In Table 2.1, an overview of the wave­
length and spatial resolution of the available bands is presented.
B04, B03, and B02 correspond to Red, Green, and Blue bands, respectively. To­
gether, they can be used to recreate an image in True Color, which can be used
for visual inspection of a tile as it is the closest there is to the realistic colors that
4
==PAGE:13==
Band name
Code
Wavelength (nm)
Bandwidth (nm)
Resolution (m)
Coastal aerosol
B01
442.3
20
60
Blue
B02
492.5
65
10
Green
B03
560.0
35
10
Red
B04
664.5
30
10
Vegetation Red Edge
B05
703.9
15
20
Vegetation Red Edge
B06
740.2
15
20
Vegetation Red Edge
B07
782.5
20
20
NIR
B08
832.8
115
10
Narrow NIR
B8A
864.7
20
20
Water vapour
B09
945.1
20
60
SWIR
B11
1613.7
90
20
SWIR
B13
2202.4
180
20
Table 2.1: Sentinel­2 bands overview.
would be observed by the human eye. Other bands can be used to highlight
specific characteristics of a ground segment, for example, B11, B8A, and B02
are called Agriculture Bands, and are normally used for large­scale monitoring of
agricultural crops [9].
2.3
Deep Learning for Image Segmentation
According to IBM, ”Deep learning is a subset of machine learning, in which neu­
ral networks attempt to mimic the human brain through a combination of data
inputs, weights, and bias. These elements work together to accurately recognize,
classify, and describe objects within the data. Deep neural networks consist of
multiple layers of interconnected nodes, each building upon the previous layer to
refine and optimize the prediction or categorization. These algorithms can ingest
and process unstructured data, like text and images, and it automates feature
extraction, removing some of the dependency on human experts” [10].
When considering the topic of digital image processing and computer vision, the
process of partitioning a digital image into multiple image segments is called im­
age segmentation. These segments, also called image regions or image objects,
are identified by a set of pixels with specific characteristics. An example of ap­
plication could be the recognition of the area occupied by a dog in a picture or
the selection of the speeding car’s plate from the video frame of a street camera.
Usually, the goal of segmentation is to simplify the representation of an image into
something that is more meaningful and easier to analyze [11]. As a result of this
technique, a single label will be assigned to each pixel of an image, based on a
predicted value that represents the probability of that pixel belonging to that label
group. In Figure 2.2, a representation of image segmentation of an aerial picture
is presented.
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), is a Neural Network especially designed
to operate on imagery data and Natural Language Processing thanks to its ability
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Example of image segmentation of aerial imagery over the city of
Dubai. Left: Sample Training Data Input Image. Right: Output Mask. Source:
[12].
to find patterns in the data while reducing its dimensionality. CNNs are based on
a set of subsequent layers, which purpose is to optimize the model parameters
by applying filters that affect the behavior of the geometric elements and patterns
in the data. The main elements that characterize a layer are the Convolution, the
Pooling, and the Activation Function, briefly introduced in this section.
The Convolution consists of a dot product between two numerical matrices. The
first one is a restricted portion of the data coming from the output of the previ­
ous layer, while the second is the filter (kernel) that corresponds to the learning
parameters of the model. The size of these matrices is defined by the model. In
Figure 2.3, a visualization of the convolution between the input data, a matrix 5×5
colored in blue, and the kernel of size 3 × 3, represented in dark blue, is shown.
The output of this convolution is a 3 × 3 matrix, represented in gray.
A convolution with a 3×3 kernel would naturally reduce the size of the data by a unit
per dimension. In order to avoid this reduction, the Padding can be applied. The
Padding refers to the addition of a set of identical pixels of value zero all around
the borders of the matrix, which permits to maintain the same dimension after
the convolution, without loss of information. During the convolution, the kernel
extracts information from the data, that will then be used by the model to update
the parameters, and eventually make predictions.
The second element is the Pooling, which reduces the dimensionality of the pre­
vious matrix by performing specific operations, in order to increase the compu­
tational velocity of the training model. Performing Max Pooling of size 2 × 2 for
example, would only keep the highest value among each group of 2 × 2 nearby
pixels, as can be seen in Figure 2.4. When performing Max Pooling, the Stride
parameter refers to the number of pixels that will be skipped when applying a filter.
A unitary Stride means that the filter will move one pixel at a time.
6
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a convolution operation between two matrices. Input
data: 5 × 5 matrix (light blue). Kernel: 3 × 3 matrix (dark blue). Output: 3 × 3
matrix (gray). Source: [13]
Figure 2.4: Visualisation of Max Pooling of size 2 × 2. Source: O’Reilly Media.
7
==PAGE:16==
Different activation functions can be used in CNNs to create non­linearity, for ex­
ample when transforming a probability value associated with a pixel (e.g.: 0.5)
into a specific object label (e.g.: Dog). The most widely used are the Sigmoid
function, the Hyperbolic function, and the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU).
When the input data is not mono­dimensional, for example in the case of RGB
images that have three dimensions (also called ”channels”), the convolution is
performed separately for each dimension, and the output is then combined into a
single channel. Multiple filters can be used to produce multiple outputs, increasing
the number of channels in the following layer.
2.5
Projects in the field
Deep learning has been extensively applied to aerial imagery and satellite pic­
tures, mainly due to the high amount of unstructured data that characterize such
applications. In [14], Robin Cole (PhD, Cambridge) collected hundreds of exam­
ples of applications of deep learning techniques that use satellite imagery. Among
these, [15] performs semantic segmentation using the popular Python library, Py­
torch, and the U­NET architecture, to classify each pixel of 72 1­meter resolution
satellite imagery of Dubai (UAE), into 6 classes: water, land, road, building, vege­
tation, and unlabeled. [16] uses the U­Net architecture built using the Tensorflow
2.0 Python library, to perform Semantic Segmentation of the ISPRS dataset, con­
sisting of aerial imagery with sub­meter pixel resolution [17]. [18] performs image
segmentation on Sentinel­2 imagery, to detect which regions in Ivory Coast rep­
resent cocoa plantations.
In the field of dumpsites detection, Anupama Rajkumar [19] used sub­meter reso­
lution satellite imagery to correctly detect landfills locations in Germany, Hungary,
Serbia, India, and Brazil, proving the potential of dumpsite detection from Very
High Resolution (VHR) satellite imagery. For what concerns lower resolutions,
Caleb Kruse et al. [20] used segmentation techniques to detect dumpsites lo­
cations on a global scale, from Sentinel­2 public imagery. Their work is briefly
described in section 2.5.1 and used as starting point for this thesis project. In
Section 2.5.2, a feature importance study is briefly introduced to discuss the im­
portance of additional data sources in the field of dumpsite detection.
In the next section, the most relevant projects in the field of Object Detection and
Image Segmentation applied to satellite imagery are briefly introduced.
2.5.1
Dumpsite detection from Sentinel­2 imagery
In their work, Caleb Kruse et al. [20], created an architecture composed of a Pixel
Classifier and a Patch Classifier, that work together to identify dumpsites using a
semi­supervised distillation approach. As a result of their work, they managed to
locate dumpsites that were not already recorded in public databases, creating the
first comprehensive dataset on the distribution and characteristics of plastic ag­
gregation and waste sites within Southeast Asia by remote sensing. In Figure 2.5,
a description of the methodological pipeline used in their project is shown.
In their work, they started from a pixel classifier, that evaluates every pixel in the
sub­tiles, creating a heatmap of predicted waste locations. At the same time,
8
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: Major stages of methodological pipeline in project [20].
Figure 2.6: Example of imagery of a dumpsite location, taken from project [20].
Left: Maxar satellite imagery. The dumpsite area is identified by the red line. Left:
Sentinel­2 satellite imagery (RGB) of the same location.
an image (patch) classifier is convolved across the scenes with a stride width
of 8 pixels. This generates a set of patch­based predictions for the presence of
waste. Using the Patch classifier, the model is able to consider spatial information
(shapes) in addition to the spectral information (colors), that would otherwise be
disregarded by the model. As an example, by using this procedure, the model was
able to correctly label pixels of greenhouses, that had been wrongly predicted
to be dumpsites by the pixel classifier alone. The architecture used, follows a
semi­supervised approach, meaning that each prediction is then re­used by the
model itself in a semi­supervised distillation process, adding the newly discovered
dumpsites to the dataset used for training.
In Figure 2.6, an example taken from the paper [20], representing a dumpsite
location. On the right side, the RGB image obtained from the Sentinel­2 program
is used for training and deployment of the model. On the left side, an image of the
same location obtained from Google Maps, using the Maxar sub­meter resolution
satellite imagery, which is not available free of charge, is shown. The added red
line identifies the edges of the dumpsite location.
It is clear how the spatial resolution of the Sentinel­2 imagery is not enough for
a human eye to detect dumpsites, especially if they are of small dimensions. It
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.7: Zonal statistics of five variables and their contributions to illicit dump­
site occurrence, resulted from project [21].
is relevant to point out that only a tridimensional image (RGB) can be interpreted
by a human eye without data manipulation, while for the model, each image is a
multidimensional matrix of pixels, where each Sentinel­2 band corresponds to a
different dimension. The data used for training, therefore, contains more informa­
tion than the information displayed in the picture on the right side of Figure 2.6.
A second relevant result described in this paper is that waste aggregations are
found to be often nearby or adjacent to waterways. More than half of the sites are
within 750 m, and 19% are within 200 m of a waterway. This highlights the role of
these areas as a potential link between terrestrial waste aggregations and aquatic
plastic pollution. The dependence between dumpsite and water bodies proximity,
if proven correct, could potentially be used to improve the probability estimation
of a pixel to represent a dumpsite, or used in a patch classifier approach, where a
probability is associated with each patch depending on the characteristics of the
landscape in that area.
2.5.2
Feature importance of additional data
In their paper, Nima Karimi, Kelvin Tsun Wai Ng et al. [21], investigate what the
most relevant aspects in the development of an illegal dumpsite are, in the area of
Saskatchewan, Canada. In particular, they study the relationship between Illegal
Dumpsites and their adjacency to pre­existing landfills, the proximity to Highways,
and the Land Surface Temperature (LST), Formaldehyde Total Column (HCHO)
and Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) levels in the same location. In Figure 2.5,
the zonal statistical contribution to the occurrence of an illicit dumpsite of the stud­
ied features is shown, where a higher average membership indicates a greater
contribution in the identification of the dumpsite for that feature, while the stan­
dard deviation represents its spatial sensitivity.
10
==PAGE:19==
As a result of this study, it is suggested to use Land Surface Temperature and
proximity to highways as parameters for landfill identification, due to their high
average membership and relevant spatial sensitivity. The creation of a model
that uses additional data to affect the model probability appears therefore as a
potentially relevant framework to implement in a dumpsite detection system.
11
==PAGE:20==
12
==PAGE:21==
3
Data
Three different data sources have been used to carry out this project. A dataset of
over 300 polygon geometries covering the Moldovan area was shared by COWI.
This dataset has been used as a target variable to train and test the deep learning
model. The training data was obtained from the Sentinel­2 downloaded imagery,
and pre­processed to obtain smaller standardized matrices representing the aerial
imagery, which were then used to train and deploy the model. The road informa­
tion was obtained from the Nasa platform, processed in QGIS, and then used as
a target variable in the second version of our model. In the next sections, each
data source and the data preparation performed are discussed.
3.1
Moldovan dumpsite polygons
The dumpsite polygons were created in 2013, and provided by COWI. The vec­
tor data is composed of geometries representing the geo­locations of landfills in
Moldova. In Figure 3.1, the QGIS software has been used to visualize the pro­
vided dataset. The polygons can be identified by the small magenta areas in the
map, each one of them delineates the location and area covered by a dumpsite.
The underlying map is only added for contextualization.
As described in section 2.2, the Sentinel­2 imagery has a maximum spatial reso­
lution of 10 meters, meaning that each pixel will represent only 100 square meters.
Assuming a dumpsite to be 10’000 square meters, then only 100 pixels will iden­
tify the entire information related to the dumpsite. In Figure 3.2, an example of an
average­sized dumpsite outside the town of Sacareni, Moldova, is shown. The
image on the right is a QGIS map visualization where the dumpsite is identified in
magenta and covers an area of around 4’500 square meters. The picture on the
left is an Airbus (Maxar Technology, 2023) aerial image taken from Google Maps,
depicting the same location.
Two issues were identified with this data source. The first one is related to the size
of the dumpsites in relation to the spatial resolution available for the Sentinel­2 im­
agery. Since the smallest dumpsites are identified only by a few hundred pixels,
it is extremely difficult for a model to extract relevant information from them. The
second issue is related to the fact that while the dumpsites locations were cre­
ated in 2013, the Sentinel­2 data collection program started in 2017, and the data
selected for this project was collected between 2017 and 2018. Cleaned land­
fills, or changes in size after 2013 are therefore not taken into account, affecting
negatively the performance of the model.
The geometries were loaded by the Python script as a shapefile object and then
used to create the binary masks that represent the target variables of the segmen­
tation model, each one consisting of a binary 1­dimensional matrix with (TRUE,
FALSE) values, that assumes the value TRUE only when it is overlapping a dump­
site polygon geometry. In Figure 3.3, an example of the binary mask, obtained
from a dumpsite polygon of around 6’500 square meters, is reported together with
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Visualisation of polygons geometries representing the dumpsites’ lo­
cations (red), using QGIS software over default map. Location: South­Western
Moldova.
Figure 3.2: Example of a dumpsite location. Left: Image from Google Maps,
Airbus, Maxar Technologies, 2023. Right: Dumpsite polygon geometry over QGIS
map, 2013. Location: Sacareni, Moldova.
14
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Example of a dumpsite location mask and corresponding aerial image.
Left: Binary mask with one dumpsite area identified in yellow. Right: Grayscale
image of the B03 band from Sentinel­2 imagery of the same location. A red circle
has been added to highlight the dumpsite position. Location: Central Moldova.
its corresponding Sentinel­2 image at the same location. Similarly to Figure 2.6,
is not possible to identify the dumpsite location by simply looking at the picture,
which corresponds to a gray scale visualization with a 10­meter resolution of the
B02 Sentinel­2 band.
3.2
Satellite imagery
As described in section 2.2 and section 3.1, the Sentinel­2 imagery consists of a
database of 110 × 110km2 tiles covering the whole world, comprised of multiple
bands with a spatial resolution between 10 and 60 meters, depending on the band
considered. In the next sections, the satellite data acquisition and processing
steps are described.
3.2.1
Tiles selection and download
Initially, the polygon geometry of the Moldovan border and the index names of
the corresponding tiles were obtained from Google Earth Engine, a database of
geospatial data with analysis capabilities [22]. As can be seen in Figure 3.4, 10
tiles, identified by the colorful rectangles, overlay the Moldovan territory and the
relative dumpsites. As can be seen in the picture, the tiles’ edges do not appear
straight, or symmetric, because the image is a 2­dimensional representation of a
curved object.
The relevant tiles were then obtained using the available Sentinel­2 API, through
the sentinel2tools Python library [23]. Only tiles with cloud cover percentage and
missing pixels percentages below 1% of the total were considered. Since the
dumpsites polygons were created in 2013, only data between 2017 (the starting
time of the data collection program) and 2018 was selected, in order to find a rea­
sonable balance between the amount of data necessary to train the model and the
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.4: Visualization of the Moldovan border (brown), with overlapping tiles
(rectangles) and dumpsites polygons (blue), obtained by extracting the borders
from the various data sources.
discrepancies between the most recent images and the 2013 dumpsite polygons.
For each tile, all available bands were requested: B01, B02, B03, B04, B05, B06,
B07, B08, B8A, B09, B11, and B12. As a result, 96 folders were downloaded,
each one of them containing all the data available according to the parameters
used, relative to one of the 5 largest tiles at different moments in time.
Each folder contained 12 GeoTIFF images, representing all obtainable bands.
The Red, Green, and Blue bands can be used to obtain a True Color Image, or
TCI, that is the closest representation to what the human eye would see if exposed
to the scene. In Figure 2.1, an example of a TCI tile is shown. The downloaded
tiles were then fed to the data processing layer.
Each band carries specific information about the observed land. B01 is commonly
used to detect aerosol in the air, composed of microscopic particles created by air
pollution and vapor. This can be used to detect dumpsites as they might produce
fine particulate matter and release them into the air. B02 and B04 can be used for
the distinction of soil and vegetation and to identify artificial constructions. B03,
B04, B05, B06, and B07 can be used to detect various information related to
vegetation and dead foliage. As dumpsites are usually located in open fields,
these bands can be used to gather information on the vegetation growing in its
immediate surroundings and use it as a parameter that helps in the identification of
dumpsites. B08 and B08A are useful to detect shorelines and biomass content,
as well as vegetation, while B09 is useful to detect water vapor. B11 and B12
16
==PAGE:25==
are commonly used to detect both moisture indexes and geological features, that
could for example collect information on the moisture levels in the ground, helping
in the detection of dumpsites [24], [9].
3.2.2
Data preparation layer
The data processing layer iterated over the file system by accessing each folder
and then performing various actions to the downloaded data to prepare it for the
model training. In this section, each action performed by the data processing layer
in each downloaded folder is described.
As described in Table 2.1, the different bands can have three different resolutions:
10, 20, or 60 meters. The first action of the data processing layer was therefore to
homogenize the bands to the highest resolution available: 10 meters. In order to
do this, the popular Bi­linear Interpolation was applied to 20 and 60 meters bands,
homogenizing all 12 tiles to the 10­meter resolution.
The 110 × 110km2 tiles, composed by 11000 × 11000 pixels were too big to be sent
directly into a deep learning model, as the high number of parameters would have
resulted in long computational time and high memory usage. For this reason, the
tiles were divided into multiple smaller images called chips, each one of them of
dimension 512 × 512 pixels, that corresponded to a good trade­off between the
average size of a dumpsite and the requirement of the input data defined by the
model architecture. The image on the left in Figure 3.3 represents one single
chip. By reducing the chip dimension further, the risk was of loose generalization,
as the model might not have been able to contextualize the information coming
from the dumpsite with the information related to the environment around it. As
a result, each band was represented by a set of chips (GeoTIFF files) that were
eventually combined to create the final product. Each chip corresponding to the
same location in each band was then combined into a single object, resulting in
a 12­dimensional matrix of float32 values, where each dimension represented a
different band.
The target masks were then created, by defining a 1­dimensional boolean matrix
of the same dimension as the chips, where TRUE corresponded to the location
of a dumpsite as identified by the 2013 dumpsite polygons shapefile. In order to
reduce the number of computations and memory usage of the model, only those
chips containing at least one pixel of a dumpsite were kept. This approach led to
an accepted loss in generalization, as the model was not training on all data, but
only on the chips that contained a dumpsite and their surrounding.
All bands have values ranging between 0 and 10’000. For this reason, Pixel Stan­
dardisation was applied to each chip dimension, to scale the values of each pixel
so that they have zero mean and unit variance, in order to improve the model per­
formances. In Figure 3.5, an overview of the optimized version of the processing
layer is described.
In Figure 3.6, the 12 Sentinel­2 bands are shown for the same chip location. It
can be seen as different features of the landscape are highlighted by the different
wavelengths.
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.5: Optimized data preparation layer, scheme overview. Input: Geotiff
files with downloaded bands; Shapefile with dumpsite polygons. Output: Training
chips and target masks for segmentation model.
3.3
Road Data
In a different implementation of the model, the original dumpsite masks were re­
placed with road segmentation masks to prove the ability of the model to train
on Sentinel­2 imagery. This was assumed to be a simpler task as the location
of the roads could be easily identified by the human eye alone in the satellite im­
agery. The road data was initially obtained from the Humanitarian Data Exchange
(HDX), an open platform managed by the United Nations Office for the Coordina­
tion of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). The downloaded data was a dataset of line
geometries representing the location of roads in the Moldovan territory, collected
in 2020. The data was processed using QGIS and transformed into polygons,
centered over the location of the lines, with a common width of 20 meters. The
size was chosen as an acceptable trade­off between the width of the narrowest
country roads and the widest highways in the country. Figure 3.7 shows a repre­
sentation of the mask and the corresponding chip. The location of the main roads
can be seen with bare eyes in the image on the right, which is obtained from the
RGB bands (B02, B03, B04) of the Sentinel­2 program.
As it was introduced in Section 2.5.2, Nima Karimi, Kelvin Tsun Wai Ng et al.
presented in their work how Highways and LST are relevant parameters in the
detection of a landfill [21]. The proximity to a road, is a parameter widely known in
the field of dumpsite detection, as people tend to transport waste by car or other
means of transportation before dropping it in an illicit dumpsite. Remote areas, far
away from the road network, are therefore expected to have a lower occurrence
of dumpsites. By associating a probability to each pixel location, based on its dis­
tance from the road network, would result in a probability map that could be used
in the training of the model. At the same time, cities areas do not usually contain
landfills, even though they contain a high number of streets. The probability map
should therefore account for these clusters, and properly assign a lower proba­
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.6: Visualization of the 12 bands on one 512×512 chip in Central Moldova.
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.7: Example of a road location mask and corresponding aerial image.
Left: Binary mask with road areas identified in yellow. Right: Merged RGB bands
from Sentinel­2 imagery of the same location. Location: Central Moldova.
Figure 3.8: Representation of the steps followed to create the road­based proba­
bility maps. From Left to Right: (1) Original Road Mask for a chip located in Central
Moldova, (2) Probability map based on roads, (3) Probability map of clusters of
roads, and (4) Final probability map.
bility in proximity of cities and town. The approach followed to create a simple
road­based probability map is shown in Figure 3.8.
The first image on the right represents a road segmentation binary mask for a
Chip located in central Moldova. A Gaussian filter with σ = 20.0 was applied to
the mask, to obtain a probability map where higher values, identified by lighter
pixels, are assigned in proximity of roads. Three road clusters can be seen in the
picture, representing small urban areas. In the third figure, the locations of these
clusters are highlighted by applying a Gaussian Filter with σ = 30.0 to the original
mask, and then performing a matrix multiplication with the resulting matrix itself,
to increase the focus on the highest values, that identify the clusters. The two ma­
trices obtained are then subtracted one to the other, after multiplying the second
for a factor defined by the ratio between the maximum values of the two matrices,
to even out the absolute values obtained after the application of the filters. The
fourth image represents the final result. It can be seen how higher probabilities
20
==PAGE:29==
are associated to pixels close to a road, while the three towns represent areas
with the lowest probability. Although the values were not properly optimized, they
were tested on multiple extreme cases to assure their ability to create the desired
road probability map. In Section 5.4, the final model implementation is discussed,
where training data is created using the road probability maps obtained with this
method.
21
==PAGE:30==
22
==PAGE:31==
4
Model
Two classes of deep learning algorithms are commonly used to detect objects in
a picture: Image Segmentation Models and Object Detection Models. The first
approach focuses on predicting which set of pixels belongs to specific types of
objects, while the second one aims to produce bounding boxes around the identi­
fied objects in the picture [25]. Both could be used to detect dumpsites, although
Segmentation models allow for better explainability and visualization of the results.
For this reason, this approach was chosen to predict the dumpsites’ locations from
Sentinel­2 imagery in the Moldovan territory. Among the Segmentation Models,
the U­NET architecture has been proven a successful approach in many different
applications, including image segmentation from satellite imagery, as described
for example in [15] and [16]. In the next sections, a description of the U­NET ar­
chitecture chosen for this project, the model parameters, and the model settings
are presented.
4.1
The U­Net Architecture
The U­Net architecture, initially introduced by Olaf Ronneberger et al. in their
paper ”U­Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation” [26],
is a Neural Network based on Convolutional Layers and an encoder/decoder ar­
chitecture. It is divided into a contracting path that reduces the dimensionality of
the input layer and an almost symmetric expansive path that outputs the resulting
segmentation map. In Figure 4.1, the architecture scheme is reported, as it was
presented in the original paper [26]. The U shape from which it takes its name
can be seen in the picture.
The input layer is a 512 × 512 × 12 input image in the form of a 12­dimensional
matrix of float32 values. The contracting path is based on double convolutions with
a kernel of size 3 × 3 and unit padding, to which the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
is then applied. The original network was created to perform segmentation on
images where the main objects were at the center of the picture, while in this case
a dumpsite could be located anywhere within the image frame. For this reason,
the unit padding has been added to the original model, to maintain the height
and width of the matrix after applying the 3 × 3 convolution, to avoid the loss of
information contained in the edges of the chips. Downsampling is performed by
a 2 × 2 max pooling operation with stride 2, which doubles the number of feature
channels at each step.
The symmetrically opposite process is carried out in the expansive path, as 2 × 2
convolution (up­convolution) is performed on the data at each layer, halving the
number of feature channels. Concatenation with the correspondingly cropped
feature map from the contracting path is then performed. The cropping is due to
the loss of border pixels in every convolution. The 3 × 3 convolution and a ReLU
activation function are then applied to the data. The final layer performs a 1 × 1
convolution, mapping each dimension to the necessary number of classes.
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: U­net architecture in the (example for 32x32 pixels in the lowest reso­
lution). Each blue box corresponds to a multi­channel feature map. The number
of channels is denoted on top of the box. The x­y­size is provided at the lower left
edge of the box. White boxes represent copied feature maps. The arrows denote
the different operations. Figure and caption are obtained from the original paper:
[26].
24
==PAGE:33==
The skip connection in each layer of the Network permits the transferring of in­
formation from the encoder to the decoder part of the network. These skip con­
nections enable the recovery of spatial information lost during max pooling in the
encoder path and stabilize the gradient updates and convergence [27].
The loss function in the U­NET architecture is calculated at a pixel level, to turn the
Segmentation problem into a classification problem, where every pixel is classified
into the desired number of classes using the Softmax function. The type of loss im­
plemented is the Dice Loss, which measures the similarity between the predicted
segmentation mask and the binary ground truth. The Dice Loss is calculated by
the formula presented in equation 4.1, where the second term corresponds to the
Dice Score. In the formula, the Intersection is the element­wise product between
the ground truth and the predicted masks, the Union is the element­wise sum of
the two masks, and ϵ is a small constant to avoid divisions by 0.
Dice Loss = 1 −2 · Intersection
Union + ϵ
(4.1)
This architecture had shown great results in other projects, as described in sec­
tion 2.5, including applications with satellite imagery of higher resolution. Its gen­
eral reliability and documented capacity to extract patterns from pixel data were
the basis behind the selection of this architecture for this application. In Chap­
ter 5, the application of this model, the settings used, and the obtained results are
thoroughly discussed.
25
==PAGE:34==
26
==PAGE:35==
5
Discussion
A total of 4 different models were trained using the U­NET architecture and Satel­
lite imagery.
As a starting point, a simpler approach was carried out to assess the quality of
the model’s architecture. The road segmentation map discussed in Section 3.3
was used as a target variable for image segmentation to evaluate the model per­
formance. The model was able to properly identify the most important roads from
the imagery even with a simple setup, as presented in Section 5.1.
Once the quality of the architecture was confirmed, the first approach to detect
dumpsites was to use Red, Green, and Blue (RGB) bands from the Sentinel­2
imagery, which are the bands with the highest resolution and the closest repre­
sentation of what the human eye would observe. The data used proved to be
insufficient, most likely due to the low Spectral resolution of the inputs channels.
The model is discussed in Section 5.2.
Additional bands were then added to the imagery to increase the amount of infor­
mation that could be used in the segmentation. This approach resulted to be the
most successful, managing to detect 21% of the dumpsites in the test set. The
model is discussed in Section 5.3.
In the fourth model implemented, the road probability map discussed in Sec­
tion 3.3 was added as an additional dimension to the chips, to help the model iden­
tify the dumpsites using each pixel distance from the road network. This model
managed to predict 18% of the test set, and is discussed in Section 5.4.
5.1
Model A: Road segmentation for model
evaluation
The first model implemented used all the available 12 bands of the Sentinel­2 im­
agery to perform image segmentation on the 512×512 multidimensional Moldovan
chips.
The target variables for this model were the Road Data segmentation
masks, discussed in Section 3.3. This approach was carried out to test the model
architecture using a simpler detection problem than the detection of landfills. Road
segmentation is considered to be an easier task because of the characteristic
shape of the target variables, which makes them more identifiable. The largest
roads can in fact be easily detected by the naked eye from the RGB bands of the
Sentinel­2 imagery. The model was trained on 3’855 chips located in different
parts of the 5 main tiles of Moldova, collected between the years 2017 and 2018.
Training and validation sizes were 3470 and 385 respectively, while the batch size
was set to 32 chips. Three training processes were run with learning rates of 1e−3,
1e−4, and 1e−5, all of them for 20 epochs. The learning rate of 1e−3 resulted to be
too large for this application, while the other two rates returned very similar results.
In Figure 5.1, the Training Loss and the Dice Score of the model with learning rate
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: Visualization of the Loss and Dice Score behavior during the 20
epochs of training of Model A, with 1 target class and 1e−5 learning rate. Left:
Train Loss. Right: Dice Score. X­axis: Steps.
1e−5, are reported. The two values stabilized after only 7 epochs of training. The
Dice Score calculated on the training set predictions returned a value of 0.5039.
The model was then deployed both on the training set and a test set obtained
from the 35TPL tile, located in Southern Moldova, which was not included in the
training data. In this case, the Dice Score resulted to be 0.4489, slightly lower
than the value calculated for the predictions on the training set, as expected. In
Figure 5.2, the results of three model deployments are reported on test data. Each
row represents a different location. The columns, from left to right, represent the
Ground truth, the RGB representation of the 12­dimensional chip, and the pre­
dicted mask. Even though the predictions appear quite noisy, the model managed
to segment the locations of most of the roads in the masks. In the second chip,
some non­existent roads are detected on the sides of the image, probably caused
by the shape of the agricultural fields, while in the third location, the model does
not identify the road grid located on the upper side of the chip, that can not be
identified by the naked eye.
The model results could be improved much further by treating roads differently
based on their type. Highways and dirt roads, for example, have different charac­
teristics but were considered to have the same width (20m) when creating the poly­
gon geometries, and are therefore indistinguishable from the model perspective.
Regardless of the poor data preparation, the model architecture proved to be effi­
cient in creating the segmentation masks using the 12 bands from the Sentinel­2
imagery and was therefore used for the dumpsite segmentation task, as described
in the next sections.
5.2
Model B: Dumpsite segmentation from RGB
bands
The second model implemented consisted of RGB images of dimension 3×512×
512, where the three channels of the input tensors correspond to the Red, Green,
and Blue bands obtained from the Sentinel­2 data. The main reason that led to
this approach was that segmentation models are usually trained on pictures taken
with images commonly available on public datasets, that are usually made of RGB
images. The weights of a different pre­trained model could therefore be used as
28
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.2: Visualization of 3 results of the deployment of Model A on test data.
Each row represents a different location. The columns, from left to right, represent
the Ground truth, the RGB representation of the 12­dimensional chip, and the
predicted mask.
29
==PAGE:38==
a starting point for the model training, potentially saving time and resources by
capitalizing on famous models setups, given the same input sizes. To prove its
potential, the model was trained on 11’215 chips, with a training size of 10’094, a
validation size of 1’121, and a batch size of 32. The weights were initialized using
the results from the popular Carvana Image Masking Challenge from Kaggle [28].
The learning rate was set to 1e−4, and the training was carried out for 40 epochs.
The Training Loss and the Dice Score indicated that the model was not able to
learn from the data over time, as they remained very close to 1 and 0, respectively,
even with the initialized weights. The three RGB bands are therefore considered
to be insufficient data for the segmentation of dumpsites. In the next section, the
third implementation of the model, using all 12 Sentinel­2 bands, is described.
5.3
Model C: Dumpsite segmentation from 12
bands
Model C was trained using the 12­dimensional chips of size 12 × 512 × 512, repre­
senting all 12 bands from the Sentinel­2 imagery, to predict the dumpsites poly­
gons binary masks. 11’215 chips in different locations around Moldova, taken at
different times between 2017 and 2018, were used as the training set. The train­
ing size was set to 10’094, while the validation size was set to be around 10% of
the size of the training: 1’121. A batch size of 32, which corresponds to the batch
size used in the original U­NET paper, was the highest number that could be used
given the memory limits of the computational setup and was therefore not modi­
fied. After a few attempts with different values, the model seemed to train well with
a learning rate of 1e−4, a value commonly used in similar applications. Although
the purpose of this model is to predict only one type of object (the dumpsites),
the number of classes was initially set to 2, for the model to produce two different
probabilities for each pixel: the probability of it representing a dumpsite, or repre­
senting anything else. After 200 epochs of training, the model was deployed on
its training dataset to check its performance. Of the total 11’215 chips, not a single
True pixel was detected. This behavior is probably caused by the fact that from the
perspective of the model, the probability of a pixel belonging to the background
is always higher than the probability of it belonging to a dump site. Therefore,
when applying the Softmax function to classify the pixel, all pixels are classified
as Background. It is relevant to notice that usually when training a segmentation
model the main object to detect covers a great part of the image frame, while in
our case it is only a few pixels in the image. The Optimizer, therefore, maximizes
the Dice Score by classifying all pixels in the chip as background pixels, with a
minimal error for the few pixels in the frame that represent dumpsites.
To solve the issue just described, the model training was carried out with the same
setup and only one target class. The Loss and the Dice Score values resulting
from the training are reported in Figure 5.3. It can be seen how the loss function is
slowly decreasing over time, reaching values around 0.6 over the end, while the
Dice score keeps increasing over time.
After 200 epochs, the model was deployed to the training set for an initial eval­
uation of its performance. Of the total 11’215 chips used for training, the model
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.3: Visualization of the Loss and Dice Score behavior during the 200
epochs of training of Model C, with 1 target class and 1e−4 learning rate. Left:
Train Loss. Right: Dice Score. X­axis: Steps. The plots were obtained from the
”Weights and Biases” visualization platform.
created 4’916 masks with at least 1 True pixel, corresponding to 44% of the total
chips. By visual inspection of the resulting masks, it can be seen that most of
them were correctly predicted. Figure 5.4 represents a visualization of 3 results
of the deployment of Model C on training data. Each row represents a different lo­
cation. The columns, from left to right, evaluation represent the Ground truth, the
RGB representation of the 12­dimensional chip, and the predicted mask. From
the figure, it can be seen how the 5 dumpsites in the first and second locations
were correctly identified by the model, while one of the 2 dumpsites in the third
location was not detected. By visual inspection of the RGB images, it is almost im­
possible to identify any of the existing dumpsites. The Dice Score was calculated
over all the predictions to objectively evaluate and compare the model, resulting
in 0.4567.
The model was then deployed on previously unseen data, obtained from tile 35TPL,
located in the southern part of Moldova, that was not used to train the model. Of
333 chips, only 119 contained at least 1 True pixel (35%), although most of them
were false positives. The Dice Score calculated on the 333 chips returned 0.0785,
much lower than the previous result. Although it is expected to obtain a lower Dice
Score when deploying the model on test data, the new Dice Score appears to be
extremely low compared to the one obtained on training data, or the one obtained
from the deployment of Model A on the test set. One possible reason for this re­
duction in performance could be overfitting of training data, due to the high number
of epochs. Different saved checkpoints at previous epochs were tried, and it was
discovered that the best­performing model on test data was after only 40 epochs,
resulting in a Dice Score of 0.1958 on the test set. This model managed to cor­
rectly identify at least one dumpsite in 21% of the test chips. In Figure 5.5, three
different test locations with their corresponding ground truth and prediction masks
are reported.
In the picture, it can be seen how the model successfully predicted the location
of three dumpsites in these locations, even though it detects a second dumpsite
on the first chip, and is not able to detect the entire extension of the dumpsite
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.4: Visualization of 3 results of the deployment of Model C on training
data. Each row represents a different location. The columns, from left to right,
represent the Ground truth, the RGB representation of the 12­dimensional chip,
and the predicted mask.
32
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: Visualization of 3 results of the deployment of Model C on test data.
Each row represents a different location. The columns, from left to right, represent
the Ground truth, the RGB representation of the 12­dimensional chip, and the
predicted mask.
33
==PAGE:42==
in the second location. It is important to consider the possibility that the area of
the dumpsite was partially cleaned after 2013, and its extension was reduced by
the time the Sentinel­2 imagery was taken, or that the polygon representing the
dumpsite extension also includes the surrounding area, a consideration that can
be made for any other dumpsite location in the dataset. In any case, the model
managed to correctly segment the pixels at the center of the dumpsite areas,
proving its potential in dumpsite detection applications.
In the next section, the fourth and last implementation of the model is described,
this time including additional data in the input chips.
5.4
Model D: Dumpsite segmentation from 12
bands and a road­based probability map
Model C performed well on the test data, obtaining a Dice Score of 21% after 40
epochs. The model was then modified to include additional data, based on the
work of Nima Karimi, Kelvin Tsun Wai Ng et al. [21], discussed in Section 2.5.2.
For the training of Model D, the input data was therefore modified to include one
additional dimension, consisting of the road­based probability maps described in
Section 3.3. The same approach as the one described in Section 5.3 for Model
C, was carried out for Model D, using the same datasets for training and testing,
consisting, this time, of chips of dimension 13×512×512. In Figure 5.6, the Train­
ing Loss and the Dice Score behavior over time are shown. After 200 epochs,
the model performed better on training data, with a Dice Score of 0.6936, corre­
sponding to a 50% increase compared to the Dice Score of Model C. Once again
the model was overfitting on the training data, and the best results on the test set
were obtained after 40 epochs, with a Dice Score of 0.1429 on the same 35TPL
tile used for testing on the other models. Model D managed to correctly identify at
least one dumpsite on 18% of the total test locations, slightly worsening the results
from Model C on test data by not being able to detect 9 dumpsites that were de­
tected by Model C. In Figure 5.7, three results from the model deployment on test
data are reported. While in the second location, the dumpsite appears to be in an
area of high probability according to the probability map, the same thing can not
be said for the first and third locations, and it is possible that the map parameters
were not properly optimized.
Although the additional data appeared to have slightly reduced the accuracy of the
model, the increase in accuracy on the training set can not be ignored. There is
a great difference between the training set and the test set sizes, due to the lack
of available target data and, therefore, it is possible that the test accuracy was
reduced on Model D only because of specific characteristics of the location in the
test set, while the much more robust training set appeared to perform better with
the use of additional data. Further analysis is required to truly assess the value
of adding Road data probability maps to satellite imagery in dumpsite detection.
Another important factor to consider is the fact that the parameters used in the
creation of the probability maps were not optimized, and their quality was only
assessed by visual inspection. What can be safely determined, however, is the
ability of the U­NET image segmentation architecture to predict the location of
34
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.6: Visualization of the Loss and Dice Score behavior during the 200
epochs of training of Model D, with 1 target class and 1e−4 learning rate. Left:
Train Loss. Right: Dice Score. X­axis: Steps.
Figure 5.7: Visualization of 3 results of the deployment of Model D on test data.
Each row represents a different location. The columns, from left to right, repre­
sent the Ground truth, the RGB representation of the 12­dimensional chip, the
predicted mask, and the correspondent road­based probability map.
35
==PAGE:44==
dumpsites, by using the 12 bands from the Sentinel­2 imagery, and the additional
road probabilities.
36
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusions
Open dumping constitutes a significant environmental and health problem, that
is at risk of worsening due to the global increase in waste generation and the
great challenges that governments and law enforcement agencies face in locat­
ing and assessing the extension of illicit landfills. Deep learning techniques could
be applied to remote sensing products to autonomously detect the sites and no­
tify the parties involved. In this thesis project in a collaboration between DTU and
COWI Consultancy, the U­NET Deep Learning Model for image segmentation
was trained to detect Moldovan landfills locations, using 12 bands of the satellite
imagery obtained from the Sentinel­2 satellite program from the European Space
Agency (ESA), and a custom probability map based on road network geometries,
obtained from the Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) platform of the United Na­
tions Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
Four models were developed and tested on the same data, corresponding to 333
raster images of approximately 25km2 located in Southern Moldova, in order to
compare their performance. A summary of the results is reported in Table 6.1.
Model A was trained to produce road segmentation, an easier task than dumpsite
detection, to assess the quality of the architecture. A simple implementation of
the model proved its ability in performing image segmentation using the 12 bands
obtained from the Sentinel­2 imagery.
In order to capitalize on pre­trained networks, Model B was created to perform
dumpsite segmentation using only the three RGB bands on Sentinel­2. The model
did not manage to learn from the training, and the approach was therefore aban­
doned.
The 12 bands were used as training data in Model C. After 40 epochs, the de­
ployment of the model on test data proved the ability of this architecture to detect
dumpsites by applying image segmentation. With a Dice Score of 0.2, the model
correctly identified a dumpsite location in 21% of the sites in the test set.
A road­based probability map was created and added to the training data, to help
the model in the segmentation task. The probability map showed higher values
in the proximity of roads, but a low probability in the proximity of towns and cities,
as expected for the occurrence of illicit dumpsites. The resulting Model D per­
formed better than Model C on training data but had a similar performance on
test data, managing to detect at least one dumpsite in 18% of the dumpsite lo­
cations in the test set. The additional value brought by the probability map could
not be properly assessed, mostly due to the low number of dumpsite locations in
the test set, imposed by the low quality of the available data for such applications.
The increase in model performance in the deployment over the train set, how­
ever, showed potential in the applications of geographic­based probability maps
for dumpsite segmentation.
37
==PAGE:46==
Model
Input
data
Segmentation
Target
Prediction
classes
lr
Batch
size
Epochs
Dice Score
(Training)
Dice Score
(Test)
Test Chip
ACC %
Model A
12 bands
Roads
1
1e−5
32
20
0.5039
0.4489
100%
Model B
RGB bands
Dumpsites
1
1e−4
32
40
0.0000
0.0000
0.0%
Model C
12 bands
Dumpsites
2
1e−4
32
200
0.0000
0.0000
0.0%
Model C
12 bands
Dumpsites
1
1e−4
32
40
0.2356
0.1958
21%
Model C
12 bands
Dumpsites
1
1e−4
32
200
0.4567
0.0785
12%
Model D
12 bands
+ road maps
Dumpsites
1
1e−4
32
40
0.2707
0.1429
18%
Model D
12 bands
+ road maps
Dumpsites
1
1e−4
32
200
0.6936
0.00309
1%
Table 6.1: Model results summary.
As a result of this study, an Image Segmentation model that can be deployed on
a global scale using publicly available data sources was produced, and its predic­
tion ability was confirmed by its deployment in Southern Moldova. Furthermore,
this project introduced a successful framework to perform data preparation on
Sentinel­2 satellite imagery, and its deployment with custom probability maps on
the U­NET convolutional architecture, to perform object detection through deep
learning image segmentation techniques.
38
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
UNEP. Solid waste management. June 2023. URL: https://www.unep.org/
explore-topics/resource-efficiency/what-we-do/cities/solid-waste-management.
[2]
World Bank. Trends in Solid Waste Management. June 2023. URL: https://
datatopics.worldbank.org/what-a-waste/trends_in_solid_waste_management.
html.
[3]
COWI. Facts and figures ­ the quick version. Sept. 2016. URL: https://www.
worldbank.org/en/topic/urbandevelopment/brief/solid-waste-management.
[4]
NASA. What is Remote Sensing? July 2023. URL: https://www.earthdata.
nasa.gov/learn/backgrounders/remote-sensing.
[5]
SAGE. Satellite applications for Geoscience Education. July 2023. URL:
https://cimss.ssec.wisc.edu/sage/remote_sensing/lesson3/concepts.html.
[6]
ESA. SENTINEL­2 MISSION GUIDE. July 2023. URL: https://sentinel.esa.
int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-2.
[7]
ESA. SENTINEL­2 USER GUIDE. July 2023. URL: https://sentinel.esa.int/
web/sentinel/user-guides/sentinel-2-msi/product-types/level-2a.
[8]
ESA. SENTINEL­2 Spatial Resolution. July 2023. URL: https://sentinel.esa.
int/web/sentinel/user-guides/sentinel-2-msi/resolutions/spatial.
[9]
GIS Geography. Sentinel 2 Bands and Combinations. July 2023. URL: https:
//gisgeography.com/sentinel-2-bands-combinations.
[10]
IBM. How Deep Learning works. July 2023. URL: https://www.ibm.com/
topics/deep-learning.
[11]
Linda Shapiro. Computer Vision. Prentice­Hall, 2000.
[12]
Andrew Joseph Davies. “Semantic Segmentation of Aerial Imagery Using
U­Net in Python”. In: Towards Data Science (2022).
[13]
Mayank Mishra. “Convolutional Neural Networks, Explained”. In: Towards
Data Science (2023).
[14]
Robin Cole. satellite­image­deep­learning. July 2023. URL: https://www.
satellite-image-deep-learning.com/.
[15]
Amirhossein Heydarian. “U­Net for Semantic Segmentation on Unbalanced
Aerial Imagery”. In: Towards Data Science (2021).
[16]
Maher Sebai. U­Net for Semantic Segmentation on Unbalanced Aerial Im­
agery. July 2023. URL: https://github.com/mrsebai/aerial-tile-segmentation.
[17]
ISPRS. The ISPRS data set collection. July 2023. URL: https://www.isprs.
org/data/.
[18]
Antoine Spahr. Detecting Cocoa Plantation in Ivory coast. July 2023. URL:
https://github.com/antoine-spahr/Cocoa_plantations_detection.
[19]
Anupama Rajkumar. “Introducing a Novel Very High­Resolution Dataset of
Landfills and Waste Dumps”. In: Towards Data Science (2021).
[20]
Caleb Kruse et al. “SATELLITE MONITORING OF TERRESTRIAL PLAS­
TIC WASTE”. In: Cornell University, Computer Science (2022).
[21]
K.T.W. et al. Karimi N.; Ng. “Mapping and Prioritizing Potential Illegal Dump
Sites Using Geographic Information System Network Analysis and Multiple
Remote Sensing Indices”. In: Earth (2022).
39
==PAGE:48==
[22]
Google. Earth Engine. July 2023. URL: https://earthengine.google.com/.
[23]
Quantum Mobile Software. SENTINEL2TOOLS: SIMPLE LIB FOR DOWN­
LOADING SENTINEL­2 SATELLITE IMAGES. July 2023. URL: https : / /
quantumobile.com/rd-blog/sentinel2tools-simple-lib-for-downloading-sentinel-2-
satellite-images/.
[24]
Sentinel Hub. Sentinel­2 Bands. July 2023. URL: https://custom- scripts.
sentinel-hub.com/custom-scripts/sentinel-2/bands/.
[25]
Thorsten Hoeser and Claudia Kuenzer. “Object Detection and Image Seg­
mentation with Deep Learning on Earth Observation Data: A Review­Part
I: Evolution and Recent Trends”. In: Remote Sensing 12.10 (2020). ISSN:
2072­4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12101667. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-
4292/12/10/1667.
[26]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation”. In: (2015), pp. 234–241.
[27]
Nikolas Adaloglou. “Intuitive Explanation of Skip Connections in Deep Learn­
ing”. In: (2020).
[28]
Kaggle. Carvana Image Masking Challenge. July 2023. URL: https://www.
kaggle.com/c/carvana-image-masking-challenge.
40
==PAGE:49==
41
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Bygning 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk/
