==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
M.Sc Thesis Report
Implementation of Asset Tracking using
Internet of Things (IoT)
Author
Author:
Supervisor:
Shirisha Reddy Chintaguntla(s210130)
Lars Dittmann
A thesis submitted as partial requirement for the degree of
Master of Science in the
Center of Telecommunication
Department of Photonics Engineering
August 6, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Abstract
The rapid development of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies has opened up new
possibilities for efficient asset-tracking systems. This abstract presents an overview of an
asset-tracking implementation utilizing Narrowband IoT (NB-IoT) and Long Term Evolution
for Machines (LTE-M). The proposed system aims to enhance the tracking and management
of assets by leveraging the capabilities of these low-power wide-area networks (LPWAN)
technologies.
The implementation starts with the deployment of a network infrastructure that
consists of NB-IoT and LTE-M base stations, enabling seamless connectivity with asset-
tracking devices. These devices, equipped with GPS or other location-tracking technologies,
collect real-time data about asset whereabouts, including position, and time. The low-power
consumption of NB-IoT and LTE-M ensures extended battery life for the tracking devices,
allowing for prolonged asset monitoring without frequent recharging or battery replacement.
To handle the large-scale data generated by the asset tracking devices, a cloud-based backend
system called Azure Cloud is employed. The backend system receives and processes the data,
storing it in a scalable and secure manner.
i
==PAGE:3==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Acknowledgement
I, Shirisha Reddy Chintaguntla would like to express my deepest gratitude to all
those who have supported and encouraged me throughout this journey of completing my
master’s thesis.
First and foremost, I am immensely grateful to my thesis advisor, Prof. Lars Dittmann,
who is a great instructor, responsive, motivator, and kind-hearted person, and also thankful
for unwavering guidance, continuous encouragement, and knowledge-sharing and academic
support, which has broadened my understanding of the subject matter.
I would like to thank Radheshyam Singh our Ph.D Fotonik student, who supported
me in understanding and executing the step-by-step procedure of the project. I also want to
say thanks to my friend Drona Ghimire, who helped me to use the power profiler kit II to
measure the power consumption of the device.
Special thanks go to my family for their unconditional love, unwavering belief in my
abilities, and constant motivation. Their support has been the driving force behind my aca-
demic pursuits.
Lastly, I would like to thank all the researchers, authors, and contributors whose work
and publications formed the foundation of my research.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Contents
Contents
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
I
Nomenclature
II
1
Introduction
1
2
LPWAN Technology
5
3
Experimental setup for Asset Tracking
22
4
Data Acquisition using Azure IoT hub (Cloud Platform)
40
5
Asset Tracking using NB-IoT and LTE-M Technologies
59
6
Comparison of Two Technologies
87
7
Conclusion
89
8
Appendix
91
References
108
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1
IoT Basic Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Comparison of Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Architecture of LTE NB-IoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Stand-Alone Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
In-Band Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6
Guard-Band Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
7
Architecture of LTE-M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
LTE CAT M1 and NB-IoT Deployment modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
9
Arduino MKR NB 1500 Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
10
Neo 7N GPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
11
Neo 7N GPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
12
Power Profiler Kit II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
13
Power Splitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
14
Overall Experimental Setup for Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
15
List of AT commands used for configuration of module . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
16
Sarapassthrough AT commands Serial Monitor output
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
17
Sarapassthrough AT commands Arduino code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
18
Flow chart for the configuration of the device
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
19
User Selecting the Radio Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
20
Switch case for choosing Radio technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
21
Working of SetRAT and apply Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
22
Output for Choosing technology as NB-IoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
23
Output for choosing the technology as LTE-M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
24
Architecture of MQTT Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
25
Generation of Self Signed SHA key
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
26
First step Creating a resource . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
27
Internet of Things and IoT hub . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
28
Adding Product details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
29
Deployment is in process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
30
Deployment Process Completed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
31
Go to Resource option to create a device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
32
Devices option to create new IoT Device and add a device to Device list . . .
50
33
Device ID is created and signed by Self-signed SHA1 key . . . . . . . . . . .
51
34
The new entry ArduinoMKRNB1500 added in the Device ID page . . . . . .
52
35
Adding all required parameters in the Arduino secrets library . . . . . . . . .
52
36
Publishing GPS data from device to Azure IoT hub . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
37
GPS data received in the Azure cloud shell from the Device
. . . . . . . . .
54
38
Message to device on Device ID page . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
39
The message sent from Azure IoT hub to the module . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
40
The message received and viewed in the serial monitor of Arduino IDE
. . .
56
41
Overview of the number of messages used and that are sent from device to
Azure cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
I
==PAGE:6==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
List of Figures
42
Overview of Device to Cloud messages and connected Devices. . . . . . . . .
57
43
Overview of total number of IoT Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
44
Satellite Ranging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
45
GNSS Satellites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
46
Output of GPS data when connected to NB-IoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
47
Measuring Power consumption when the module is connected to NB-IoT Net-
work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
48
Measuring Power consumption while publishing a message to Azure Cloud
.
67
49
Measuring Power consumption while sending GPS DATA to cloud . . . . . .
67
50
Output of GPS data in Serial Monitor when connected to NB-IoT . . . . . .
69
51
Measuring Power Consumption While asset is connected to the NB-IoT Net-
work and moving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
52
Multiple Locations of GPS while tracking the Asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
53
Finding Signal Strength connected to NB-IoT Network . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
54
Received Signal Strength indicator (RSSI) value in dBm and the possible
signal strength values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
55
RSRP and RSRQ range of values with corresponding Signal Strength . . . .
74
56
Finding Signal Strength connected to NB-IoT Network . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
57
Finding the location of the Asset when connected to LTE-M . . . . . . . . .
76
58
Measuring Power Consumption of asset when connected to LTE-M . . . . . .
77
59
Measuring Power Consumption while collecting GPS data
. . . . . . . . . .
77
60
Measuring Power Consumption while the asset is publishing message using
MQTT protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
61
Serial Monitor output of Location of Moving Asset using LTE-M Network . .
79
62
Measuring Power Consumption when the Asset is connected to LTE-M and
moving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
63
Measurinng Power Consumption while asset moving . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
64
Finding Signal Strength when the device is connected to LTE-M Network . .
82
65
Finding and tracking the location of an asset using GPS visualizer . . . . . .
83
66
Location of an asset using Google Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
67
Implementation of python code for finding Address of the location . . . . . .
85
68
The Addresses of Multiple Locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
II
==PAGE:7==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Summary of NB-IoT and LTE-M Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
Specifications and features of Arduino MKR NB 1500 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Specifications and features of Neo 7N GPS Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Specifications and features of Power Profiler kit II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
I
==PAGE:8==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
3GPP Third Generation Partnership Project
AMQP Advanced Message Queuing Protocol
API
Application Programming Interface
AT
Attention
BPSK Binary Phase Shift Keying
CSQ Cell Signal Quality
DUT Device Under Test
ECC Elliptic Curve Cryptography
eMTC enhanced Machine-Type Communication
EPS Evolved Packet System
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
GPS Global Positioning System
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications
HLR Home Location Register
HSS home Subscriber Server
HTTP hyper Text Transfer Protocol
IoT
Internet of Things
LAN Local Area Network
LoRaWAN Long Range Wide Area Network
LPWAN Low Power Wide Area Network
LTE-M Long Term Evolution for Machines
LTE Long Term Evolution
MCL Maximum Coupling Loss
MME Mobility Management Entity
MQTT Message Queuing Telemetry Transport
II
==PAGE:9==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Nomenclature
NB-IoT Narrow Band Internet of Things
NFC Near Field Communication
NMS Network Management System
OFDMA Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access
OSS Operational Support System
PAN Personal Area Network
PCRF Policy and Charging Rules Function
PDN Packet Data Network
PGW Packet Network Data Gateway
PPK II Power Profiler Kit II
PRB Physical Resource Block
QAM Quadrature Amplitude Modulation
QoE Quality of Experience
QoS
Quality of Service
QPSK Quadrature Phase Shift Keying
RFID Radio Frequency Identification
RSRP Reference Signal Received Power
RSRQ Reference Signal Received Quality
RSSI Received Signal Strength Indicator
S-GW Serving Gateway
SAS Shared Access Signature
SC-FDMA Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access
SCRF Service Capability Exposure Function
SHA Secure Hash Algorithm
UE
User Equipment
UMTS Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
III
==PAGE:10==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Nomenclature
URAT UMTS Radio Access Technology
VPN Virtual Private Network
WAN Wide Area Network
Wi-Fi Wireless-Fidelity
IV
==PAGE:11==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
1
Introduction
In today’s fast-paced and interconnected world, effective management and tracking of
assets have become critical for organizations across various industries. Whether it is track-
ing valuable equipment, monitoring the movement of goods in the supply chain, or ensuring
compliance with regulatory requirements, having real-time visibility and control over assets
is essential for optimizing operations and maximizing efficiency. To address these challenges,
the implementation of asset tracking systems using IoT (Internet of Things) technologies has
emerged as a promising solution.
This thesis report focuses on the implementation of asset tracking using two promi-
nent IoT technologies: NB-IoT (Narrowband Internet of Things) and LTE-M (Long-Term
Evolution for Machines). NB-IoT and LTE-M are cellular-based communication technolo-
gies specifically designed for low-power, wide-area IoT applications. They provide reliable
connectivity, extended coverage, and efficient power consumption, making them ideal for
asset-tracking scenarios.
The objective of this thesis is to explore the practical implementation of asset tracking
using NB-IoT and LTE-M technologies and differentiate two technologies in terms of power
consumption and signal strength with respect to stationary and moving assets when con-
nected to the NB-IoT and LTE-M Technologies.
Figure 1: IoT Basic Architecture
[1]
Page 1 of 111
==PAGE:12==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The figure (1) represents the basic architecture of an IoT. IoT stands for Internet of
Things. IoT is about the interconnection of computing devices and objects via the internet
and enabling them to send and receive data.
The IoT Architecture is broadly divided into three sections:
• Sensors or Devices : Sensors play a fundamental role in collecting and measuring
data from the physical world. They are devices that detect and respond to physical
or environmental stimuli, converting them into electrical signals that can be processed
and transmitted for further analysis and action.
• Gateway of IoT: It is a crucial component that serves as a bridge between IoT devices
or sensors and the internet or a larger network. It acts as an intermediary, facilitating
communication, data exchange, and management between IoT devices and the cloud
or other central systems.
• Data Processing and Analytics : Data processing refers to the manipulation and
transformation of raw data into a more meaningful and usable format and Data analyt-
ics involves extracting insights, patterns, and actionable information from the processed
data [1].
Motivation for the Project
The motivation behind implementing asset tracking using IoT technologies like NB-IoT
(Narrowband Internet of Things) and LTE-M (Long-Term Evolution for Machines) for the
following reasons
1)Enhanced Visibility and Control: Asset tracking enables organizations to have
real-time visibility and control over their valuable assets.
By utilizing IoT technologies,
companies can monitor the location, status, and condition of their assets at any given time.
This helps prevent theft [2], loss, or misplacement of assets, leading to improved operational
efficiency.
2) Cost Reduction: Asset tracking can lead to cost savings by optimizing asset utiliza-
tion. With IoT-enabled tracking devices, businesses can accurately locate assets and avoid
unnecessary purchases or rentals of equipment that may already be available within their
inventory. It also helps in reducing downtime and maintenance costs by enabling proactive
maintenance and timely servicing of assets.
3)Compliance and Regulatory Requirements:
Certain industries, such as health-
care, pharmaceuticals, and transportation, have strict compliance and regulatory require-
ments related to asset management and tracking. Implementing IoT technologies for asset
tracking can help organizations meet these requirements efficiently and accurately, ensuring
Page 2 of 111
==PAGE:13==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
compliance with regulations and minimizing the risk of penalties or legal issues.
4)Data-driven Decision Making: IoT-enabled asset tracking generates a wealth of
data that can be leveraged for informed decision-making.
5)Scalability and Flexibility: IoT technologies like NB-IoT and LTE-M are designed
to support large-scale deployments and provide wide coverage and connectivity. This scala-
bility and flexibility allow organizations to track assets across multiple locations, both indoors
and outdoors, without relying on traditional wired infrastructure. It enables businesses to
expand their asset-tracking capabilities as their operations grow or change.
Overall, implementing asset tracking using IoT technologies like NB-IoT and LTE-M
offers numerous benefits, including improved asset visibility, cost reduction, streamlined
operations, compliance adherence, data-driven decision-making, and scalability. These ad-
vantages make it an attractive solution for organizations seeking to optimize their asset
management processes.
Aim of the Project
The project aims to implement asset tracking using IoT technologies, specifically NB-
IoT (Narrowband Internet of Things) and LTE-M (Long-Term Evolution for Machines). The
primary objective is to develop a system that enables real-time monitoring, tracking, and
management of assets utilizing these IoT technologies.
To begin with, connecting and attaching the device to NB-IoT and LTE-M Networks
securely and then finding the real-time location of an asset using Neo 7n module and then
monitoring the location of the asset in Google Maps of GPS visualizer software. next, finding
the address of the location of the asset and then then the GPS data is collected and delivered
to the Cloud service platform called Azure IoT hub.
After successfully setting up the data transmission pipeline for both NB-IoT and LTE-
M, proceed with verifying, testing, and comparing these two technologies such as NB-IoT
and LTE-M in terms of Stationary and Moving assets with the following parameters.
1) Power Consumption.
2) Signal Strength of the Network coverage.
Page 3 of 111
==PAGE:14==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Structure of the Project
This project is documented in seven chapters and they are organized as follows: Chapter
1 gives a short description of the introduction section gives a brief description of the topic
and also explains the motivation behind the selection of the topic. Chapter 2 elaborates on
LPWAN technologies: NB-IoT and LTE-M. Chapter 3 gives information about the Exper-
imental setup required for Asset Tracking that includes modules used in the project, the
configuration of the modules using AT commands, and a flow chart for the configuration of
the module.
Chapter 4 elaborates on Data acquisition using Azure Cloud, a short description of
MQTT protocol, configuring and adding the board to the Azure IoT hub, and also an in-
teracting board on Azure IoT Core. Chapter 5 explains Asset Tracking using NB-IoT and
LTE-M Technology, which includes visualizing GPS data in a GPS visualizer, finding the
address of a location using GPS coordinates, and measuring power consumption and signal
strength when connected to NB-IoT and LTE-M technology in terms of stationary and mov-
ing assets.
Chapter 6 is about the comparison of two technologies such as NB-IoT and LTE-M tech-
nology in terms of stationary and moving assets tracking. Finally, In Chapter 7 Conclusion
of this report is presented Also, a brief discussion about achievable future work, investiga-
tion, and improvements are mentioned.
Page 4 of 111
==PAGE:15==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
2
LPWAN Technology
LPWAN (Low-Power Wide Area Network) technologies are wireless communication pro-
tocols designed to enable long-range, low-power connectivity for Internet of Things (IoT)
devices. These technologies are optimized for applications that require low data rates, long
battery life up to 10+ years, and extended coverage areas as well as uploading data to the
cloud. LPWAN technologies are particularly suitable for connecting devices in remote or
hard-to-reach locations where traditional cellular network technologies such as GSM, 3G,
4G, and LTE may be impractical or costly [3].
The City wireless cellular networks such as Zigbee, WIFI, Bluetooth, and Z-wave. These
technologies are operated by network providers and work well within buildings and basements
and with good coverage. The Technologies 3G,4g, LTE Technologies provide data connection
in the Licensed spectrum, but cannot be used for sending IoT data to the cloud. However,
with the rapid development of information technology, individual communication needs have
increased dramatically.
In recent times, there has been a growing trend toward adopting low-power, wide-area,
and long-range IoT communication connections. While traditional IoT development using
cellular mobile communication technology is based on the widespread infrastructure of mobile
cellular networks, it comes with certain drawbacks such as high costs and power consump-
tion. With regard to it, the main application scenario of the communication network is still
human-to-human communication.
To meet the need for long-range IoT communication connections, LPWAN (low-power
Wide-Area Network) technology has emerged. LPWAN has the characteristics of low band-
width, long range, low power consumption, and a large number of connections.
• Strong Coverage: LPWAN technologies can provide connectivity over several kilo-
meters, allowing devices to communicate over large areas.
• Great Power Efficiency : LPWAN devices are designed to operate on low power,
enabling extended battery life that can last for upto 10 years.
• Cost-Effective: LPWAN technologies often utilize unlicensed spectrum, reducing in-
frastructure costs and making it more affordable for widespread deployment.
• Scalability (Massive Scale:
LPWAN networks can support a large number of
devices, making them suitable for applications with thousands or even millions of con-
nected devices.
Page 5 of 111
==PAGE:16==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
• Versatility: LPWAN technologies can be applied to a wide range of IoT use cases,
from smart cities and agriculture to asset tracking and environmental monitoring.
• Bandwidth: With sufficient bandwidth, LPWAN networks can transmit data over
several kilometers, enabling wide coverage and connectivity in remote areas. A broader
bandwidth allows for higher data rates and improved signal quality over long distances
[4].
These characteristics make LPWAN technologies well-suited for IoT applications that
require long-range, low-power connectivity in various industries.
LPWAN Technologies
LPWAN Technologies are divided into two types depending on operating frequencies
such as Licensed Spectrum and Unlicensed Spectrum. The LPWAN Technologies such as
NB-IoT (Narrow band IoT) and Long Term Evolution-category M (LTE-CAT-M) operate at
a Licensed frequency band, the same as LTE mobile communication. whereas s LoRaWAN
and SigFox operate at unlicensed frequency bands in ISM ( Industrial, Scientific, and Medi-
cal) bands [5].
These Technologies are further divided into two categories such as Cellular and non-
cellular IoT technologies. Examples of cellular IoT technologies are NB-IoT (Narrowband
IoT), LTE-M (Long-Term Evolution for Machines), and upcoming 5G-based IoT solutions.
Examples of non-cellular IoT technologies are LoRaWAN, SigFox, Ingenu, Dash7, Zigbee,
and Z-Wave [6].
NB-IoT (Narrowband IoT): It provides reliable connectivity, deep indoor penetra-
tion, and improved security. NB-IoT is often used for applications such as smart metering,
smart agriculture, environmental monitoring, and asset tracking.
Example: A utility company using NB-IoT to remotely monitor and manage water or elec-
tricity consumption.
LTE-M :It is a cellular IoT technology designed to provide low-power, wide-area con-
nectivity for IoT devices. It operates on existing LTE networks, offering improved coverage,
power efficiency, and support for large-scale deployments. LTE-M is particularly suitable for
applications that require moderate data rates, extended battery life, and reliable connectiv-
ity.
Example: LTE-M enables real-time monitoring and tracking of valuable assets across wide
geographical areas.
Page 6 of 111
==PAGE:17==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The figure (2) depicts overview of the LPWAN and other technologies.
Figure 2: Comparison of Technologies
[7]
LoRaWAN (Long Range Wide Area Network): It offers long-range connectivity
(up to several kilometers) and low power consumption, making it suitable for applications
like smart cities, industrial automation, agriculture, and asset tracking.
Example: A city deploying a network of sensors to monitor parking spaces and optimize
parking availability.
SigFox: It provides low-cost, low-power, and long-range connectivity for IoT devices.
Sigfox is commonly used in asset tracking, supply chain management, and environmental
monitoring applications.
Example: A logistics company using Sigfox to track the location and condition of goods
during transportation [5].
Page 7 of 111
==PAGE:18==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
NB-IoT Technology
According to the Annual report 2021, there will be 29.3 billion connected devices by
2023 and also expected number of devices connected will increase by 9 percent to 27 billion
connections in the year 2025. This translated into an increase in the number of connections,
so network carriers have to invest in providing an infrastructure to support ever-growing
demand. To meet the above requirements, Technologies such as 5G, NB-IoT (Narrow-Band
Internet of Things), and LTE-M (Long term Evaluation for Machine Type Communication)
have been developed. [8]
The first digital cellular technology called 2G (Second generation) provides good voice
Quality, Improved security, and good spectral efficiency. Other technologies such as 3G, 4G
Provides good faster data rates, internet browsing, and broadband.
After the Evolution of IoT in the year 2005, 3GPP (Third Generation Partnership
Project) is a global collaboration that develops standards for mobile telecommunications
and Machine type communications in releases 10 to 12 ([9]). This network technology was
developed by 3GPP Release 13 Following the emergence of SigFox and LoRaWAN as cutting-
edge technologies catering to the connectivity needs of IoT, the concept of extended Machine
Type Communications (eMTC) has arisen. eMTC introduces enhanced network coverage
and increased connection density, resulting in a more dependable and stable communication
environment for IoT applications.
Belonging to the realm of Low Power Wide Area (LPWA) networks, the NB-IoT network
is a mobile technology that precisely targets the diverse connectivity requirements of IoT de-
vices. Emphasizing low power consumption, narrow bandwidth, and expansive coverage, this
specialized communication technology is tailored to cater exclusively to the unique demands
of IoT devices. and these devices support equipment with low data transfer volumes over
long periods of time, particularly in hard-to-reach locations. Since 2016, NB-IoT stands as a
wireless communication standard designed to facilitate the seamless exchange of small data
packets among numerous IoT devices, minimizes power consumption, and By extending its
coverage to areas lacking conventional mobile technology, NB-IoT significantly enhances the
range of connectivity in such locations. This expansion ensures that IoT devices in remote
or underserved regions can still establish reliable communication links and remain integrated
with the larger network infrastructure
NB-IoT has the ability to connect to established mobile networks seamlessly. There are
some improvements made such as improved positioning, higher data rates, lower latency,
and support for massive IoT deployments in releases 14,15,16 ([10]), ([11]).
The working functionality of NB-IoT is legacy LTE (Long-term Evaluation Technol-
ogy). Security (Authentication and Encryption) and Low Latency are inherited from LTE
Technology. one of the applications of NB-IoT is Smart City Parking Management System.
In urban areas, parking management can be a significant challenge. To address this issue, a
Page 8 of 111
==PAGE:19==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Smart City Parking Management System can be implemented using NB-IoT technology.
The Smart City Parking Management System utilizing NB-IoT showcases how the tech-
nology can provide reliable data transmission with low latency (NB-IoT’s latency is sufficient
for transmitting parking occupancy data reliably and promptly) and strong security, cover-
age (NB-IoT’s extended coverage range ensures that even remote or underground parking
areas can be monitored effectively) and ensuring efficient parking management and enhanc-
ing the overall user experience.
In addition to this, NB-IoT provides prioritized QoS mechanisms, NB-IoT aims to ensure
a positive QoE for IoT applications and users. The technology is well-suited for applications
where low data rates, extended battery life, and wide-area coverage are more critical than
high bandwidth or real-time responsiveness [12].
NB-IoT Physical Layer
The physical layer of NB-IoT (Narrowband Internet of Things) is based in LTE, which
is mentioned in Release 13 and it is responsible for the transmission and reception of data
over the air interface. It defines the modulation, coding, and signal characteristics used
for communication between the NB-IoT devices (UEs) and the base station (eNodeB). The
number of LTE bands available for NB-IoT deployment includes 14. In Europe, band 3 (1800
MHz), band 8 (900 MHz) and band 20 (800 MHz) are selected. The NB-IoT bandwidth is
180 kHz.
In the downlink transmission of the NB-IoT physical layer, Orthogonal Frequency-
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) and Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) modu-
lation techniques are employed, with a sub-carrier frequency of 15 kHz.
For the uplink
transmission, either QPSK or Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modulation is used along
with the Single-Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access (SC-FDMA) technique. The
uplink transmission scheme includes both single-tone and multi-tone transmissions.
For the single-tone transmission scheme in the uplink, sub-carrier spacings of 3.75 kHz
and 15 kHz are utilized, catering to low-rate and power-efficient IoT terminals. In the multi-
tone transmission scheme, a sub-carrier spacing of 15 kHz is adopted.
NB-IoT offers enhanced coverage capabilities compared to LTE, with a maximum cou-
pling loss (MCL) of up to 20 dB higher than LTE. This enables NB-IoT to provide coverage
even in challenging scenarios, such as underground environments, where the maximum cou-
pling losses can reach up to 164 dB. To achieve such extended coverage, significant changes
have been made in the NB-IoT design. These include employing repetition of transmissions,
with 128 re-transmissions in the uplink and 2048 re-transmissions in the downlink, enhanc-
ing coverage and reliability. Furthermore, the NB-IoT system also explores semi-static link
Page 9 of 111
==PAGE:20==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
adaptation and dynamic spectrum access to further enhance coverage capabilities [10]
Overall, these design considerations and modifications in the NB-IoT physical layer aim
to provide robust connectivity, extended coverage, and power efficiency for IoT applications,
meeting the specific requirements of NB-IoT deployments.
NB-IoT Network Infrastructure
The figure (3) illustrates the Network architecture of NB-IoT. NB-IoT Network archi-
tecture is inherited from conventional LTE Network Architecture with some optimizations
that are required to support Massive IoT Devices for data transmissions.
Figure 3: Architecture of LTE NB-IoT
[13].
NB-IoT Architecture is similar to the LTE network consisting of two main parts, par-
ticularly the Access Network and Evolved Packet System (EPS) Core Network [14].
1)Access Network :- Access Network is responsible for accessing the Network and
base stations or eNodeB′s are transceiver stations that are used to transmit and receive data
from IoT devices. The range of NB-IoT transmission is approximately 1 km in urban areas
and approximately 10 km in rural areas.[13].
Page 10 of 111
==PAGE:21==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The user plane is similar to traditional LTE using the serving gateway (SGW) and Packet
Data Network Gateway (PGW).
2)Core Network - Evolved Packet System (EPS):- At the Core network both
the user plane and control plane, some other optimizations are done to support IoT appli-
cations.The Service Capability Exposure Function (SCEF) serves as a specialized solution
catering specifically to machine-type data. It plays a pivotal role in delivering non-IP data
packets through the control plane while facilitating essential functions such as authentica-
tion, authorization, discovery, and access to network capabilities. In essence, SCEF acts as
a crucial interface for network services related to machine-type communications [13].
According to the 3GPP standard specifications, there are two major Network attach
options to support the connectivity of NB-IoT devices:
1. Attach with PDN (Packet Data Network) connection:- The UE (User Equip-
ment) is required to establish the Packet Data Network connection as it is the attach proce-
dure by IP connection. This has been the case for all 3GPP EPS (Evolved Packet System)
releases up to Release 13. This way of connection is not useful in the case of small battery
devices, because every time when device wants to attach to the network using IP that con-
sumes more power [15].
2. Attach without PDN connection:- This is a new capability that has been intro-
duced in Release 13 of 3GPP to allow User Equipment supporting CIoT (Cellular Internet
of Things) optimizations to remain attached to the network without a Packet Data Network
connection, which may be useful for cases where huge numbers of devices will keep a con-
nection inactive for a very long duration of time and transmit data over it. When a User
Equipment is attached without a Packet Data Network connection that means without an
IP connection, In that scenario, only SMS services are available for any data transmissions,
and applications are constrained [15]. In NB-IoT, the data can be transferred and applicable
using TCP ( Transfer Control Protocol) and UDP (User datagram Protocol) protocols [15].
Data Transmission in NB-IoT
In uplink data transmission data packet is transmitted from end-device such as devices
or sensors to Core Network (EPS). In downlink transmission, the data message transfer takes
place from the core network or application server to an end device. On the control plane,
the uplink data is transferred to MME ( Mobility Management Entity) through eNodeB
or base station. from MME, the data either be transferred via Serving Gateway (SGW)
or to the Packet Data Network Gateway (PGW) and then data packets are delivered to
the application server. The path followed is by using IP packets. for sending non-IP data
packets, the node such as Service Capability Exposure Function (SCEF) is used and then
data is delivered to an application server [13].
Page 11 of 111
==PAGE:22==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Deployment Modes
The operating frequency of NB-IoT is 180 kHz, which is equal to one PRB (Physical
Resource Block) of LTE. NB-IoT Deployment depends on the allotment of carrier block. It
can be deployed in three modes such as (1) Stand-Alone operation (2) In-band operation
and (3) Guard-Band operation.
Stand-Alone Operation :- The figure (4) represents the Stand-Alone operation. In
Stand-Alone deployment, NB-IoT can occupy one GSM channel (200 kHz). In this mode, one
or more GSM carriers are replaced with NB-IoT. This deployment mode efficient re-farming
of GSM carriers for IoT.
Figure 4: Stand-Alone Operation
[16]
In-Band Operation :- The figure (5) represents the In-Band operation. In this mode,
NB-IoT uses one PRB (Physical Resource Block) of the LTE carrier i.e. 180 kHz. NB-IoT
is allowed to transmit in this allotted resource block. Sharing of PRBs between NBIoT and
LTE allows for more efficient use of the spectrum and a seamless increase in NB-IoT capacity
as more devices are added to the network.
Page 12 of 111
==PAGE:23==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 5: In-Band Operation
[16].
Guard-Band Operation :- The figure (6) represents the Guard-Band operation. In
guard-band operation, NB-IoT is deployed in the guard band of an LTE carrier and Based
on the unused RB(Resource Block) within an LTE carrier’s guard band.
Figure 6: Guard-Band Operation
[16].
Security in NB-IoT
The security features (Authentication and encryption) of NB-IoT are inherited from
LTE Network, as specified by 3GPP standards. All NB-IoT devices are having inbuilt SIMs,
which contain highly secure integrated circuits and hold a 128-bit unique symmetric key.
This key is saved in EPS (Evolved Packet System) core network. Sim cards support the
additional security capabilities that can be used by IoT services.
Page 13 of 111
==PAGE:24==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
A Network operator uses existing provisioning infrastructure as a secure channel, that
installs, validates, and updates the security credentials that are safely built into a sim card.
When any device is connected between the mobile operator′s public network infrastructure
and the customer′s enterprise network. then it is not connected to a secure network. In
order to provide a secure connection to enterprise networks, using a secure protocol such as
Internet Protocol security (IPsec) that creates a VPN is used [17].
Some Applications of NB-IoT
NB-IoT is the better option for application that requires low power, excellent coverage,
and deep penetration, and for sending a vast number of IoT messages, better QoE and QoS,
and Low Latency. For Example, NB-IoT can be used for the following applications as
Asset Tracking: NB-IoT enables real-time tracking and monitoring of assets, such as
shipping containers, vehicles, equipment, and inventory. It provides accurate location in-
formation and can help optimize logistics and supply chain operations. Huawei, a major
technology company, has been involved in NB-IoT projects for vehicle tracking. They offer
solutions that combine NB-IoT connectivity with GPS tracking to enable real-time location
monitoring and fleet management capabilities.
Smart Metering: NB-IoT can be used for smart metering in utilities such as water, gas,
and electricity. It enables automated meter reading, remote monitoring, and efficient man-
agement of resources. Kamstrup is a leading provider of smart metering solutions which
is located in Denmark. They offer NB-IoT-enabled smart meters that enable utilities to
remotely collect energy consumption data, monitor power quality, and improve grid man-
agement. Their solutions support interoperability and scalability [18].
Some Limitations of NB-IoT
1)NB-IoT is mainly designed for IoT devices which are stationary or low-mobility. It
may not provide robust support for highly mobile devices that frequently traverse different
cells or move at high speeds. The handover process may not be efficient enough to maintain
continuous connectivity in such scenarios.
2) During a handover between NB-IoT cells, there can be a temporary interruption
in the device’s connectivity. This interruption can lead to data loss or service disruption,
especially for applications that require continuous or real-time communication.
3) Roaming refers to the ability of a device to maintain connectivity while moving
between different cellular networks. NB-IoT’s limited handover support can impact the de-
vice’s ability to seamlessly roam across different networks, limiting its roaming capabilities
and global interoperability.
Page 14 of 111
==PAGE:25==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
LTE-M Technology
LTE-M stands for Long Term Evolution Machine Type Communication and it is one of
the LPWAN (Low Power Wide Area Network) technology. It is a type of 4G cellular network,
which is specifically designed for the Internet of Things that comes in two main versions such
as Cat-M1 and Cat-M2. LTE-M (Long Term Evolution for Machines) is a cellular technology
specifically designed to meet the requirements of the Internet of Things (IoT). It is part of
the LTE family of standards developed by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).
LTE-M provides a reliable, efficient, and cost-effective solution for connecting a wide range
of IoT devices, offering extended coverage, improved battery life, and enhanced data rates
compared to traditional cellular technologies.
LTE-M is characterized by its ability to support IoT applications with diverse connec-
tivity needs. It enables efficient communication for devices that require moderate data rates,
extended battery life, and reliable coverage, making it suitable for a variety of IoT use cases
in industries such as agriculture, healthcare, asset tracking, smart cities, and industrial au-
tomation.
With LTE-M, devices can communicate over existing LTE networks, leveraging the in-
frastructure already in place. This allows for seamless integration and widespread adoption
of the technology. LTE-M utilizes licensed spectrum, ensuring secure and interference-free
connectivity for IoT devices.
One of the key advantages of LTE-M is its ability to provide better coverage, both in-
doors and outdoors, compared to other cellular technologies. It can penetrate obstacles such
as walls and floors, enabling connectivity in challenging environments. This makes LTE-M
ideal for applications that require reliable connectivity in remote or hard-to-reach areas.
LTE-M also offers improved power efficiency, allowing IoT devices to operate for ex-
tended periods on a single battery charge. This is crucial for devices deployed in remote or
inaccessible locations where frequent battery replacement or recharging is impractical.
Furthermore, LTE-M supports voice capabilities, enabling voice services for IoT appli-
cations that require voice communication, such as alarm systems or voice-enabled devices.
As LTE-M is part of the evolving LTE standard, it benefits from ongoing advancements
and enhancements introduced by the 3GPP. These enhancements aim to further improve data
rates, reduce latency, enhance positioning accuracy, and support massive IoT deployments,
ensuring LTE-M remains at the forefront of IoT connectivity [19]
Page 15 of 111
==PAGE:26==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
LTE-M Physical Layer
The physical layer of LTE-M (Long Term Evolution for Machines) is also based on LTE
technology, similar to NB-IoT. LTE-M, which is part of the LTE standard, is optimized for
IoT applications that require moderate data rates, improved coverage, and extended battery
life.
Bandwidth and Frequency: LTE-M utilizes a bandwidth of 1.08 MHz, which is
larger than the 180 kHz bandwidth of NB-IoT. The frequency bands allocated for LTE-M
deployments vary globally, with different bands chosen for different regions. For example, in
Europe, bands 3 (1800 MHz), 8 (900 MHz), and 20 (800 MHz) are commonly used for LTE-M.
Modulation Techniques: Similar to NB-IoT, LTE-M employs modulation techniques
for both downlink and uplink transmissions.
For the downlink, Orthogonal Frequency-
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) and Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) modu-
lation are used. In the uplink, LTE-M supports both QPSK and Binary Phase Shift Keying
(BPSK) modulation, combined with the Single-Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access
(SC-FDMA) technique.
Sub-Carrier Spacing: LTE-M uses a sub-carrier frequency of 15 kHz, similar to NB-
IoT. However, specific sub-carrier spacings vary depending on the transmission scheme. For
the single-tone transmission scheme in the uplink, sub-carrier spacings of 3.75 kHz and 15
kHz are utilized, catering to low-rate and power-efficient IoT terminals. In the multi-tone
transmission scheme, a sub-carrier spacing of 15 kHz is adopted.
Coverage and Robustness: LTE-M is designed to provide enhanced coverage ca-
pabilities compared to traditional LTE. It achieves this by supporting a higher Maximum
Coupling Loss (MCL) of up to 20 dB compared to LTE. The MCL measures the maximum
path loss that the system can tolerate while maintaining an acceptable level of performance.
With this improved MCL, LTE-M can provide coverage in challenging scenarios, including
underground environments where path loss can be significant [20].
Transmission Repetition: To enhance coverage and reliability, LTE-M incorporates
repetition of transmissions.
In the uplink, it employs 128 re-transmissions, while in the
downlink, it uses 2048 re-transmissions. This repetition technique helps mitigate the effects
of fading and interference, improving the overall robustness of the communication link.
Power Efficiency: LTE-M, like NB-IoT, focuses on achieving extended battery life for
IoT devices. By employing power-saving mechanisms and optimizing transmission param-
eters, LTE-M aims to minimize energy consumption and maximize the operational lifetime
of IoT devices.
Overall, the physical layer of LTE-M incorporates modifications and optimizations to
Page 16 of 111
==PAGE:27==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
meet the specific requirements of IoT applications, providing improved coverage, robust con-
nectivity, and power efficiency. By leveraging the capabilities of LTE technology, LTE-M
offers a reliable and scalable connectivity solution for a wide range of IoT use cases.
LTE-M Network Infrastructure
The figure (7) represents the Architecture of LTE-M. The LTE-M architecture is based
on the LTE (Long Term Evolution) cellular network architecture. It shares many similarities
with LTE, with some specific enhancements and optimizations to cater to the requirements
of IoT devices.
Figure 7: Architecture of LTE-M
[21]
The LTE-M (Long Term Evolution for Machines) architecture is based on the LTE
(Long Term Evolution) cellular network architecture. Here is an overview of the LTE-M
architecture:
• User Equipment (UE): The User Equipment refers to the IoT devices or endpoints
that connect to the LTE-M network. These devices are typically low-power and have
limited computational capabilities. Examples of UEs include sensors, meters, trackers,
and other IoT devices.
Page 17 of 111
==PAGE:28==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
• eNodeB (eNB): The eNodeB is the LTE-M base station that communicates with
the UEs. It handles functions such as radio resource management, scheduling, and
control of the radio interface. The eNodeB is responsible for managing the wireless
connectivity and handling the data exchange between UEs and the core network.
• Evolved Packet Core (EPC): The EPC is the core network architecture of LTE-M.
It consists of the following several key components:
• Mobility Management Entity (MME): The MME manages the mobility of UEs in
the LTE-M network. It handles functions such as UE authentication, security, tracking
area updates, and handovers.
• Serving Gateway (S-GW): The S-GW acts as a gateway between the LTE-M net-
work and external networks, such as the Internet or private networks.
It handles
functions such as packet routing, forwarding, and mobility anchoring.
• Packet Data Network Gateway (PDN-GW): The PDN-GW connects the LTE-M
network to external packet data networks, allowing UEs to access services and resources
in those networks. It manages IP address assignments and performs packet inspection
and filtering.
• Home Subscriber Server (HSS): The HSS stores and manages subscriber-related
information, including user profiles, authentication, and authorization data. It pro-
vides authentication and authorization services for UEs in the LTE-M network.
• Network Management System (NMS): The NMS is responsible for the over-
all management and monitoring of the LTE-M network.
It includes functionalities
such as network planning, configuration management, fault management, performance
monitoring, and security management. The NMS ensures the smooth operation and
optimization of the LTE-M network.
• Operations Support System (OSS): The OSS supports the operational aspects
of the LTE-M network, including service provisioning, billing, customer management,
and network performance analysis. It provides tools and interfaces for network opera-
tors to manage their LTE-M deployments efficiently.
Page 18 of 111
==PAGE:29==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The LTE-M architecture leverages the existing LTE infrastructure, allowing for seamless in-
tegration and coexistence with other LTE technologies. It provides efficient connectivity for
IoT devices, offering extended coverage, improved power efficiency, and support for a wide
range of IoT use cases.
It is worth noting that specific deployments and network configurations may vary based
on the network operator’s preferences and the requirements of the IoT applications being
served [21].
Deployment Modes
LTE-M (Long Term Evolution for Machines) can be deployed in In-band mode only.
In-Band: In this deployment mode, LTE-M operates within the same frequency bands
as the existing LTE network. It utilizes the same spectrum resources as LTE as shown in the
figure (8), allowing for efficient use of available frequencies. In-Band deployment simplifies
network configuration and provides seamless integration with the existing LTE infrastruc-
ture. LTE-M and LTE devices can coexist within the same frequency band, sharing the
resources and benefiting from the extended coverage and improved connectivity provided by
LTE-M [22],([23]) .
Figure 8: LTE CAT M1 and NB-IoT Deployment modes
[22]
In LTE-M, it can be deployed in only one mode called In-band mode and uses the LTE
Carrier i.e 180 kHz and the most suitable deployment mode for their LTE-M networks to
Page 19 of 111
==PAGE:30==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
ensure efficient and reliable connectivity for IoT devices [22].
Security in LTE-M
LTE-M and NB-IoT are secure by design because they use licensed spectrum and cellu-
lar standards that provide built-in security features such as encryption, authentication, and
integrity protection. Some of these features are:
1)Network Access Security: This ensures that only authorized devices can access the
network and prevents eavesdropping or tampering of data. Network Domain Security: This
protects the network nodes and functions from attacks or misuse by applying firewalls, anti-
malware and intrusion detection systems.
2)User Domain Security:- This secures access to user devices and applications by using
SIM cards, PIN codes and biometrics.
3)Application Domain Security: This safeguards the data and services provided by ap-
plications by using end-to-end encryption, digital signatures and certificates [17].
Some Applications of LTE-M
1)LTE-M can be utilized for remote security and surveillance systems, including video
monitoring, access control, and alarm systems. It enables real-time video streaming, reliable
communication between security devices, and remote management of security infrastructure.
2)LTE-M enables real-time tracking and monitoring of assets such as vehicles, containers,
equipment, and shipments. It provides accurate location information, remote monitoring of
sensor data (e.g., temperature, humidity), and enables efficient supply chain management
and logistics optimization [24].
Some limitations of LTE-M
1)Increased Power Consumption: Compared to technologies like NB-IoT or LP-
WAN, LTE-M tends to have higher power consumption due to its more complex modulation
schemes and higher data rates. This can impact the battery life of IoT devices, particularly
those deployed in remote or battery-constrained environments.
2)Limited Coverage in Some Scenarios:-Although LTE-M provides improved cov-
erage compared to traditional LTE, there may still be areas where signal propagation is
challenging. Remote or underground locations, or areas with significant obstacles, may ex-
perience reduced coverage or signal degradation [25] .
Page 20 of 111
==PAGE:31==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Table 1: Summary of NB-IoT and LTE-M Technologies
The table (1) shows the summary and difference between two technologies such as
NB-IoT and LTE-M in terms of Frequency, modulation techniques and uplink, downlink
bandwidths, battery life, and coverage etc.
Page 21 of 111
==PAGE:32==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
3
Experimental setup for Asset Tracking
The Modules used in this project are Arduino MKR NB 1500, Neo 7n and Power profiler
for finding the location of an asset using NB-IoT and LTE-M technologies.
Modules used in this Project
1)Arduino MKR NB 1500
The figure (9) represents the Arduino MKR NB 1500 module, and it is another modified
device of the Arduino MKR family which offers network connectivity. This board provides
narrowband communication for IoT-related devices. Arduino MKR NB 1500 has become an
integral part of the development in most of the automation and embedded projects. This
board is an open-source platform which means we can modify the hardware and software of
the board according to our requirements. It is manufactured by Arduino, an Italian company
based in Ivrea, Italy. In this project, Arduino MKR NB 1500 acts as an Asset.
Figure 9: Arduino MKR NB 1500 Layout
[26]
The MKR NB 1500 supports LTE Cat-M and NB-IoT technologies, offering flexibility
in choosing the appropriate network for connectivity. It operates using different frequency
bands depending on the region. Specifically, the module supports bands 3, 8, 20, and 28.
This module can be used in most of the areas of Asia, Europe, South America, and North
America. It has a 32 bit-Microcontroller and Crypto Chip which is known as ATECC508A.
This crypto chip encrypts and decrypts IoT messages securely for different applications and
it can securely protect up to 16 keys, Data, and certificates [26].
Page 22 of 111
==PAGE:33==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The Arduino MKR NB 1500 contains a module called uBlox SARA-R410M-02B used for
narrowband connectivity. It can connect to the bands of the IoT LTE cellular technologies
such as LTE-M, NB-IoT, and EGPRS networks. Arduino MKR NB 1500 can be used to
send and receive data from cloud-based platforms. It also interfaces a micro-sim with the
board, which helps to connect the devices to the cellular network securely as the sim card
contains the 128-bit unique symmetric key [26].
The table (2)represents the features and specifications of the Arduino MKR NB 1500.
Table 2: Specifications and features of Arduino MKR NB 1500
[26]
2) Neo 7N
The figure (10) and (11) represents the front and back sides of NEO 7N GPS Module.
The u-blox NEO-7N module is a GPS (Global Positioning System) module that provides
accurate positioning and navigation capabilities. It can be used worldwide as it supports
multiple satellite systems, including GPS, GLONASS, and BeiDou.
Page 23 of 111
==PAGE:34==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 10: Neo 7N GPS
Figure 11: Neo 7N GPS
It is Manufactured by U-Blox. The u-blox NEO-7 series of standalone GNSS modules
offer outstanding performance, integration capabilities, and flexible connectivity options.
With high sensitivity, low power consumption, and a compact form factor, these modules
are particularly well-suited for industrial applications with strict size and cost constraints.
The use of qualified GNSS chips and adherence to rigorous manufacturing standards further
ensure the reliability and quality of these modules [27].
The table (3) represents the features and specifications of the Neo 7N Module.
Page 24 of 111
==PAGE:35==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Table 3: Specifications and features of Neo 7N GPS Module
[28]
3) Power Profiler Kit II
The figure (12) represents the Power Profiler Kit II (PPK2) device. It is a standalone
unit designed for power profiling and optimization of embedded solutions. It is manufactured
by Nordic Semiconductors. It is compatible with Nordic DKs and external hardware. The
PPK2 can measure and supply currents ranging from sub-uA to 1A. The PPK2 is equipped
with a cutting-edge analog measurement unit that boasts an exceptionally broad and flexible
measurement range, ensuring superior performance in capturing dynamic data. This allows
accurate power consumption measurements from single uAs to 1A. The PPK2 offers a res-
olution that spans from 100nA to 1mA, granting it the capability to identify and capture
even the smallest spikes commonly observed in low-power optimized systems. This dynamic
range ensures precise measurements, even in challenging scenarios.
Page 25 of 111
==PAGE:36==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 12: Power Profiler Kit II
[29]
Additionally, the PPK2 can function as a low-end logic analyzer by using digital inputs.
By linking the digital inputs to an I/O pin on the Device Under Test (DUT), the PPK2 fa-
cilitates code-synchronized measurements. This setup allows seamless coordination between
the device’s code execution and the measurement process, ensuring accurate and synchro-
nized data capture. The digital input can display the executed code in the DUT at different
points in time. The PPK2 comes with PC software called the Power Profiler app, which
runs within the nRF Connect for Desktop framework. The app supports both the original
PPK and PPK2, allowing users to view average acquisition times and high-resolution events
in the same window. Measured data can also be exported for further analysis.
Furthermore, the PPK2 can be complemented by the Online Power Profiler (OPP),
a tool for estimating current consumption values for Bluetooth Low Energy, LTE-M, and
NB-IoT protocols via lab testing [30].
The table (4) represents the features and specifications of the Power Profiler Kit II.
Page 26 of 111
==PAGE:37==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Table 4: Specifications and features of Power Profiler kit II
[30]
4) Power Splitter
The figure (13) depicts the Power splitter and which is also known as a power divider
and is a passive electronic device used in various applications to divide or split an input
signal into multiple output signals of equal or unequal power levels. The primary role of
a power splitter is to distribute the power from one source to multiple destinations. The
following are the main functions and roles of a power splitter.
Signal Distribution: The primary purpose of a power splitter is to distribute an input
signal to multiple output paths. This is commonly used in communication systems, such
as radio frequency (RF) and microwave systems, where a single signal needs to be sent to
multiple devices or antennas.
Equal Power Splitting: In some situations, the power splitter is designed to divide
the input power equally among all the output ports. This ensures that each output signal
receives the same power level, making it suitable for applications that require uniform signal
distribution.
Figure 13: Power Splitter
Page 27 of 111
==PAGE:38==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The figure (14) is the overall setup used to work for the project. It consists of Power
Profiler Kit II used to measure power consumption during the process of the asset connect-
ing to Cellular Network, Neo 7n sensor is used to find the location of the asset i.e. GPS
coordinates, Arduino MKR NB 1500 board is compatible with cellular technologies such as
NB-IoT and LTE-M, and Power splitter is used for equal distribution of power.
Figure 14: Overall Experimental Setup for Project
Configuration of the Modules using AT commands
Configuration of modules and connecting these modules to any of the Network operators
is one of the challenges. According to the 3GPP (Third Generation Partnership Project),
AT stands for ATtention commands and these are a standardized set of commands used
to communicate with a mobile device or modem connected to a network operator. These
commands are based on the Hayes command set, which was originally developed for dial-up
modems and has been extended for use in cellular devices. AT commands allow control and
configuration of various features and functionalities of the device. all the AT commands can
be found in the documents of 3GPP TS 27.0007 [31],[32].
The following are some of the AT commands used for the configuration of the module and
the figure (15) illustrates the AT commands used to connect network operators as defined
in the 3GPP standard.
Page 28 of 111
==PAGE:39==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 15: List of AT commands used for configuration of module
[32]
AT+CFUN=15:- This command is used to reset the module.
AT+URAT:- This command is used to check to which Radio access technology the
device is connected. if URAT (UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunications System) Ra-
dio Access Technology) is equal to 8 then the Device is connected to NB-IoT Radio Access
Technology and if the value is 7, the device is connected to LTE-M Radio Access Technology.
AT+CGDCONT= 1, "IP", "APN name":- This command is used to define
the PDP (Packet data protocol) to establish the connection.
The module is connected
to APN (Access Point Name), which is provided by the Network operator. For example,
"lpwa.telia.iot" is the APN provided by the Telia Network operator.
AT+CFUN = <fun>:- This command is used to turn on and turn off the radio
transmission of the module. if <fun> is equal to 1, then radio frequency transmission and
reception are enabled. if it is 0, then radio frequency transmission and reception are disabled.
AT+COPS=[<mode>[,<format>[, <oper>[,<AcT>]]]:- It is an essential command
used to establish connection to the network operator. it forces the device to connect and
register to the network operator.
The following are the parameters used in this AT command to connect to the network
operator:
Page 29 of 111
==PAGE:40==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
1. <mode> :- This parameter is used to select the network operator automatically or
use the number to force the particular network operator manually.
(a) 0: indicates Auto-connect to the network
(b) 1: indicates Manually connected to the network
(c) 2: indicates De-register the end device from the network
2. <format> :- It is a numeric number 2
3. <oper> :- It is a string provided by the network operator also known as "Force
Operator Number". Force operator number for the Telia network are 23820 and 23830.
AT+CSQ :- This command is used to check the radio signal quality of the network
coverage.
AT+CGATT :- This command is used to check whether an end device is connected to
the network or not. if the value is 1, it indicates that the device is connected to the cellular
network, or if the value is 0, then it indicates that the device is not connected to the network.
AT+CGDCONT :- This command is used to check if the module/an end device has
a valid IP address or not.
AT+CGACT :- This command is used to activate the PDP (Packet Data Protocol)
context for IP connectivity.
AT+CGPADDR :- This command is used to query the assigned IP address [33].
Page 30 of 111
==PAGE:41==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 16: Sarapassthrough AT commands Serial Monitor output
The figure (16) represents the output of AT commands indicating Arduino MKR NB
1500 is connected to NB-IoT cellular network as the value of URAT (UMTS (Universal Mo-
bile Telecommunications System) Radio Access Technology) is 8. The APN (Access Point
Network) for Telia is lpwa.telia.iot and the network operator value is 23820 which means the
module is connected to the Telia network.
AT+CSQ gives the signal strength of network coverage and the value is 20,99. it means
the coverage is good. if the value is 99, then the signal strength is poor. AT+CGATT
command gives the information about attaching the module to the network. if the value is
1, the module is attached to the network or else if the value is 0, the module is not attached
to the network.
Page 31 of 111
==PAGE:42==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 17: Sarapassthrough AT commands Arduino code
The code in the figure (17) illustrates the setup between two devices using a serial com-
munication protocol. it is configured and communicates with a device called "SARA" using
Arduino programming language.
The variable baud is assigned to the value 115200 as an unsigned long integer. This
sets the baud rate for serial communication. The baud rate determines the speed at which
data is transmitted between devices. The next line setup() function is a standard Arduino
function that is called once when the program starts. It is used to initialize and configure
various settings.
The pin mode of SARA RESETN is set as OUTPUT, indicating that it will be used to
send signals to the SARA device. The subsequent line sets the pin to LOW, which may be
used to reset the SARA device. The pin mode of SARA PWR ON is set as OUTPUT. It
is likely used to control the power supply to the SARA device. The subsequent lines send a
power-on pulse by setting the pin to HIGH, waiting for 150 milliseconds, and then setting it
back to LOW.
Page 32 of 111
==PAGE:43==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The Serial. begin(baud) function initializes the primary serial communication port (usu-
ally connected to the USB interface of the Arduino board) with the specified baud rate. It
enables communication between the Arduino MKR NB 1500 and the computer. The Serial-
SARA.begin(baud) function initializes another serial communication port (possibly
connected to the SARA device) with the specified baud rate. It enables communication
between the Arduino and the SARA device.
The loop() function is one of the standard Arduino functions that continuously runs
after executing the setup() function. It contains the main code that is executed repeatedly.
Inside the loop() function, there are two if statements that handle the data flow between the
Serial (computer) and SerialSARA (SARA device) ports.
The first if statement checks if there is any data available on the Serial port (from the
computer) using Serial.available(). If data is available, it reads a byte of data using Se-
rial.read() and sends it to the SerialSARA port using SerialSARA.write().
The second if statement checks if there is any data available on the SerialSARA port
(from the SARA device) using SerialSARA.available(). If data is available, it reads a byte
of data using SerialSARA.read() and sends it to the Serial port (to the computer) using
Serial.write().
In summary, this code sets up a communication bridge between the Arduino’s primary
serial port and another serial device named "SARA." It allows data to be sent and received
between the Arduino MKR NB 1500 and the SARA device, effectively forwarding data
between the computer and the SARA device.
Page 33 of 111
==PAGE:44==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Flow Chart for Configuration of the Device
Figure 18: Flow chart for the configuration of the device
Page 34 of 111
==PAGE:45==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The figure (18) illustrates a flow chart outlining the sequential steps required to configure
the modules for connecting to a network operator.
The flow chart can be divided into
two main sections. The first section focuses on configuring the module using specific AT
commands, while the second section elaborates on the process of transmitting messages. In
order to assess the coverage of NB-IoT (Narrowband Internet of Things), it is necessary to
gather information regarding signal quality. This information can be obtained by utilizing
the AT+CSQ command. Whether the module is connected to the network or not can be
known by AT+CGATT command and also to which cellular network i.e. NB-IoT or LTE-M
connected can be known from the AT+URAT command. once the module is attached to the
network, collected GPS data (longitude and latitude ) and Delivered this data to the Azure
IoT hub.
Logic to the code for Choosing Radio Technology
Figure 19: User Selecting the Radio Technology
The code snippet provided is used to choose the radio technology for the Arduino
MKRNB module, particularly between NB-IoT (Narrowband Internet of Things) and LTE-
M (Long-Term Evolution for Machines) networks. These networks are commonly used for
IoT (Internet of Things) applications due to their low power consumption and ability to
Page 35 of 111
==PAGE:46==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
support many connected devices.
The setup() function is called once when the module is powered on or reset and it
initializes the serial communication between the device and the serial port in the system and
waits until the serial port is ready.
The available RAT (Radio Access Technology) options like 0 as CAT M1 only is also
called LTE-M, 1 as NB-IoT only, 2 - CAT M1 is preferred, NB-IoT as failover (default),
and 3 - NB-IoT preferred, CAT M1 as failover are displayed in the serial monitor for user
to select and enter according to the preferred selection as shown in the figure (19). In this
project, using LTE-M and NB-IoT Technologies only.
Figure 20: Switch case for choosing Radio technology
The loop() function is where the main logic of the sketch resides and this function runs
repeatedly after the setup() function. Inside the loop() function, after a user enters the
preferred choice such as NB-IoT or LTE-M Technology, the choice is read as string and then
converted to an integer, and lastly stored in the URAT variable.
Page 36 of 111
==PAGE:47==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
After Reading the user preference, the sketch performs the switch-case on URAT to
determine the RAT configuration. Based on the user choice, the appropriate RAT config-
uration code is stored in the uratChoice string variable. The RAT codes for NB-IoT and
LTE-M are "8" and "7" respectively as shown in the figure (20).
Figure 21: Working of SetRAT and apply Functions
The setRAT() Function is called and passes the uratChoice as an argument and this
function configures the device with selected RAT using AT commands. It first disconnects
from the network (AT+COPS=2) and then sets the AT+URAT according to the user’s
preferences.
once RAT is selected, after invoking the apply() function, it proceeds to store the con-
figuration settings and commits the modifications. Subsequently, the sketch notifies the user
of the completion of this process. With that accomplished, the user is now ready to upload
their 4G application sketch. At last, the loop then enters an infinite loop (while true) to
stop further execution as shown in the figure (21).
After compiling and uploading the sketch, it displays the urat choice preferences, When
Page 37 of 111
==PAGE:48==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
the user enters the digit as 1, then the module is connected to NB-IoT cellular technology.
Once the URAT configuration is selected, it is meticulously preserved within the modem’s
internal memory. As a result, this chosen configuration will persist and remain intact even
when the user uploads new sketches for the MKR NB 1500 module. In order to change the
RAT, have to run the sketch again.
Figure 22: Output for Choosing technology as NB-IoT
This is the output for choosing radio technology as NB-IoT when 1 number is chosen and
The figure (22) indicates that the Arduino MKRNB 1500 Module is successfully connected
to the NB-IoT cellular network.
Figure 23: Output for choosing the technology as LTE-M
This is the output for choosing radio technology as CAT M1 called LTE-M1 when 0
Page 38 of 111
==PAGE:49==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
number is chosen and The figure (23) indicates that the Arduino MKRNB 1500 Module is
successfully connected to the LTE-M cellular network.
Page 39 of 111
==PAGE:50==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
4
Data Acquisition using Azure IoT hub (Cloud Plat-
form)
Azure IoT hub :- Azure IoT Hub is a cloud-based service provided by Microsoft Azure
that enables secure, reliable, and scalable communication between Internet of Things (IoT)
devices and the cloud. It serves as a central hub for managing, monitoring, and controlling
IoT devices and the data they generate [34].
It provides a secure and bi-directional communication channel between IoT devices and
the cloud. IoT devices can connect to Azure IoT Hub using various protocols such as MQTT,
AMQP, and HTTPS. Azure IoT hub provides Software Development Kit (SDK’s) for various
programming languages to use these protocols. In this project, the module is connected to
the Azure IoT hub using MQTT Protocol.
MQTT Protocol
MQTT is Message Queuing Telemetry Transport. It is a messaging protocol that has
been specifically designed to cater to the needs of resource-constrained devices operating
in low-bandwidth environments. It offers a simple and lightweight approach for facilitating
data exchange among multiple IoT devices. With its efficient design, MQTT becomes an
ideal solution for enabling seamless communication and data transfer within IoT ecosystems,
even when the devices involved have limited resources or face bandwidth constraints.
In MQTT communication, a publish and subscribe system is used. This means that
devices within an IoT network can publish messages on specific topics of interest. These
topics act as communication channels. When a device publishes a message on a topic, all
other devices that have subscribed to that particular topic will receive the message. This
allows for efficient and targeted communication, where devices only receive the information
that is relevant to them based on their subscriptions [35].
Page 40 of 111
==PAGE:51==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 24: Architecture of MQTT Protocol
[36]
MQTT Architecture consists of 4 basic concepts. They are
1) Publish/Subscribe
2) Topics
3) Messages
4) Broker
Publish/Subscribe: The publish/subscribe pattern is where the communication es-
tablishes between senders and receivers. The sender is the publisher do not message directly
to the subscriber instead a publisher categorizes the messages into specific topics. these
topics are received by subscribers with a particular message to a specific or required topic.
This method of decoupling of publishers and subscribers allows for more flexible and scalable
communication between devices.
Topics:
Topics in MQTT act as channels or subject areas in which messages are published.
Topics are generally represented in the form of strings and organized hierarchically using
forward slashes as separators. For example, a topic may be a sensors/temperature or devices
or lights or living room. IoT Devices which wants to receive messages on a particular topic
subscribe to that corresponding and suitable topic, and any published messages on that topic
are delivered to all required subscribers.
Page 41 of 111
==PAGE:52==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Messages:
Messages in MQTT are payloads of data that are published to topics and delivered to
all subscribers interested in those topics. The payload can be any form of data such as sen-
sor readings, commands, and status updates. These messages are published with a Quality
of Service (QoS) level, that determines the delivery guarantees and reliability of message
delivery.
Broker:
The MQTT broker is the central component responsible for communicating and manag-
ing with publish/subscribe flow of messages. It acts as an intermediatory between publishers
and subscribers and ensures that messages are routed to the appropriate subscribers based
on their topic subscriptions. All MQTT clients such as all devices can connect to the broker
to publish and subscribe to topics [36].
In this project, the publisher is the module that publishes the topic called GPS data
and then the receiving side, the Azure IoT hub subscribes to the topic i.e. GPS data. The
role of the MQTT Broker is to publish the message from the module to the Azure IoT hub.
X.509 certificate and Generating Self-signed key
Azure IoT Hub provides two options for device authentication: Shared Access Signature
(SAS) tokens and X.509 certificates. In this project, X.509 certificate is used to authenticate
an Arduino MKR board.
The Arduino MKR boards, such as the MKR NB 1500, come with a built-in Microchip
ATECC508A or ATECC608A crypto element. This crypto element serves as a secure hard-
ware component capable of generating and storing a strong 256-bit ECC (Elliptic Curve
Cryptography) key. This key is crucial for establishing secure communication between the
device and Azure IoT Hub.
When the device connects to Azure IoT Hub, it presents its X.509 certificate for au-
thentication. Azure IoT Hub validates the certificate, ensuring its authenticity and integrity.
Once the certificate is verified, the device is granted access to the IoT Hub services and can
securely exchange data.
Using X.509 certificates for device authentication adds an extra layer of security to IoT
deployments, ensuring that only trusted and authorized devices can interact with Azure IoT
Hub.
After executing the code, the SHA key is generated. it is a fingerprint for the self-signed
certificate for the device in Azure IoT Hub [34].
Page 42 of 111
==PAGE:53==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Configuring and Adding the Board to Azure IoT Hub
Azure IoT Hub provides support for MQTT-based device connections that utilize X.509
certificates for authentication. In this scenario, utilizes a sketch to create a self-signed X.509
certificate directly on the board. Following that, we will retrieve the Secure Hash Algorithm
(SHA1) fingerprint of this certificate and add it to the Azure IoT Hub portal for authenti-
cation purposes.
Figure 25: Generation of Self Signed SHA key
The figure (25) depicts how a self-signed SHA key is generated. After the execution of
the code and entering the required information, a self-signed certificate with a 256-bit key
called "5dd7afd94aa25dbef6e52995bd00a4ee6721fd72" is generated to securely
connect the module to the Azure IoT hub. The key is used later for the device. Once the
self-signed key is generated, The following steps are followed to configure and add Arduino
MKR NB 1500 board to the Azure IoT hub [34].
1) After successfully generating a self-signed key, the next step involved creating an
Azure account and proceeding with the login process. Once logged in, proceeded to create
a resource, which can be found in the left navigation panel as shown in the figure (26).
Page 43 of 111
==PAGE:54==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 26: First step Creating a resource
Page 44 of 111
==PAGE:55==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
2) In the second stage, navigate to the left-hand side menu where found an option labeled
"Internet of Things". Within this section, select the IoT hub that has been specifically chosen
for the application related to this project. as shown in figure (27).
Figure 27: Internet of Things and IoT hub
Page 45 of 111
==PAGE:56==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
3)Once the IoT hub application is chosen, essential product information needs to be
provided. This includes selecting the subscription, specifying the IoT hub name, choosing
the appropriate resource group, indicating the desired region, and setting the daily message
limit. Once these details have been entered, proceed to the review and create a section as
shown in the figure (28).
Figure 28: Adding Product details
Page 46 of 111
==PAGE:57==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
4)The figure (29) shows the deployment is in progress as deployment for the IoT hub
takes a few minutes to deploy it successfully.
Figure 29: Deployment is in process
Page 47 of 111
==PAGE:58==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
5)After waiting for few minutes, deployment for the IoT hub is successfully created as
shown in the figure (30).
Figure 30: Deployment Process Completed
Page 48 of 111
==PAGE:59==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
6) once the deployment is completed, then the next step is to go to the resource option
which is on the right side of the page as shown in the figure (31).
Figure 31: Go to Resource option to create a device
Page 49 of 111
==PAGE:60==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
7)now at this stage, created a new IoT device at the Devices option as shown in the
figure (32).
Figure 32: Devices option to create new IoT Device and add a device to Device list
Page 50 of 111
==PAGE:61==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
8) Under the device settings, provided a name for the device and SHA1 key.
In this case, "ArduinoMKRNB1500" was as Device ID entered. Next, navigated to
the "X.509 Self-Signed" tab and pasted the SHA1 which was generated at the first step of
the process to connect the module to the Azure IoT hub securely. Finally, clicked on the
"Save" button and successfully created the device. as shown in the figure (33).
Figure 33: Device ID is created and signed by Self-signed SHA1 key
Page 51 of 111
==PAGE:62==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
9) The new device with Device ID called ArduinoMKRNB1500 is added to the
Devices list as shown in the figure (34).
Figure 34: The new entry ArduinoMKRNB1500 added in the Device ID page
10) The parameters such as Iot hub name i.e. ArduinoMKRGPSProject is added
and also Device ID called ArduinoMKRNB1500 is added in the Arduino secrets library
to communicate securely with Azure IoT hub as shown in the figure (35).
Figure 35: Adding all required parameters in the Arduino secrets library
Page 52 of 111
==PAGE:63==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
11) After adding all parameters, the module is connected to the Azure IoT hub securely
using MQTT Protocol and published the message i.e. GPS data to Azure IoT hub, that can
be seen in the Arduino Serial Monitor as shown in the figure (36).
Figure 36: Publishing GPS data from device to Azure IoT hub
To view the messages that are coming from Arduino MKRNB 1500 Board, logged in
shell.azure.com website and installed an IoT hub extension called az extension add –
name azure-cli-iot-ext and then in the next step, executed the command called az iot hub
monitor-events –hub-name <hub name>. In this case, the hub name which was created is
ArduinoMKRGPSProject. then the messages i.e. longitude and latitude values (GPS
Data) sent from the device can be received and viewed in the shell as shown in the figure
(37).
Page 53 of 111
==PAGE:64==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 37: GPS data received in the Azure cloud shell from the Device
Page 54 of 111
==PAGE:65==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Interacting with the board on Azure IoT Core
To communicate and send data from Azure IoT hub to module, The following steps are
involved.
1)In the Azure IoT Hub portal, locate the IoT Devices table and the row corresponding
to the device ID of the board viewed on the devices list. After accessing the device page,
viewed for the "Message to device" button located in the toolbar for sending the messages
to device as shown in the figure (38).
Figure 38: Message to device on Device ID page
2) In the next step, the message called Hello there :) is typed and sent to the Ar-
duinoMKRNB1500 Board as shown in the figure (39).
Page 55 of 111
==PAGE:66==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 39: The message sent from Azure IoT hub to the module
3) In the last step, the message called Hello there :) received in the serial monitor
of Arduino IDE as shown in the figure (40). In this way, the Arduino MKRNB 1500 board
and Azure IoT hub interacted successfully and two way communication established between
them.
Figure 40: The message received and viewed in the serial monitor of Arduino IDE
The figure (41) illustrates the overview of the ArduinoMKRGPSProject IoT hub, which
gives information about IoT hub usage such as Messages used today and Daily messages
quota and IoT devices. In addition to this, it gives information about the number of messages
in this case latitude and longitude used in the ArduinoMKRGPSProject is 285.
Page 56 of 111
==PAGE:67==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 41: Overview of the number of messages used and that are sent from device to Azure
cloud
The figure (42) represents the number of Telemetry messages delivered i.e. payload to
the cloud is 73 messages and gives information about the number of connected devices to
the Azure cloud is 1 i.e. Arduino MKR NB 1500.
Figure 42: Overview of Device to Cloud messages and connected Devices.
The figure (43) represents the total number of devices connected to the Azure IoT hub
is 2.
Page 57 of 111
==PAGE:68==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 43: Overview of total number of IoT Devices.
In this way, the module Arduino MKR NB 1500 Board communicated securely with
Azure IoT hub. To establish authentication with Azure IoT Hub, a self-signed X.509 certifi-
cate was utilized. This certificate, along with the private key associated with it, was securely
stored in either the ATECC508A or ATECC608A device. With this setup, MQTT protocol
was employed to send and receive messages between the board and Azure IoT Hub, and an
overview of the number of messages used, the number of connected devices, and the total
number of IoT devices can be observed.
Page 58 of 111
==PAGE:69==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
5
Asset Tracking using NB-IoT and LTE-M Technologies
Tracking the location of the asset when it is stationary or moving can be found by using
GPS coordinates such as Latitude and longitude.
Introduction to GPS (Global Positioning System)
GPS, an acronym for Global Positioning System, operates by utilizing a network of
satellites in conjunction with a receiver and sophisticated algorithms. This ingenious system
allows for precise synchronization of location, velocity, and time data, enabling seamless
navigation across the air, sea, and land domains.
The satellite constellation comprises 24 satellites distributed across 6 Earth-centered
orbital planes, with each plane accommodating four satellites. These satellites orbit at an
altitude of 13,000 miles (20,000 km) above Earth, traveling at a velocity of 8700 meters per
hour (14000 km/h).
Only three satellites are required to produce and find out the location on the earth’s
surface, a fourth satellite is often used to validate the information from three satellites and
it moves into the third dimension allowing calculating the altitude of the device [37].
Components of GPS (Global Positioning System)
The Global Positioning System, commonly known as GPS, is composed of three inter-
connected segments that collaborate harmoniously to furnish accurate location information.
These segments, acting in tandem, ensure seamless navigation and offer invaluable data for
users across air, sea, and land travel domains.
The following are the Three segments of GPS:
1)Space (Satellites) :- As the Earth’s satellites gracefully orbit the planet, they dili-
gently broadcast signals to users, divulging both their geographical position and the precise
time of day. This transmission of essential information enables users to determine their exact
location and synchronize their activities with unparalleled accuracy and convenience.
2) Ground Control :- Ground Control consists of Earth-based monitor stations, mas-
ter control stations, consists of a global network of ground facilities that tracks the GPS
satellite and also monitor the transmissions, perform analyses, and send commands and
data to the constellation and also ground antenna. Control activities include tracking and
operating satellites in space and monitoring transmissions. The monitor control stations are
Page 59 of 111
==PAGE:70==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
present in almost all continents in the world, that includes North, South America, Africa,
Europe, Asia, and Australia.
3) User Equipment:- GPS receivers and transmitters encompass an array of versa-
tile devices such as watches, smartphones, and telematic gadgets. These innovative tools
act as conduits, allowing users to interact with the Global Positioning System effectively.
Whether it’s on your wrist, in your pocket, or embedded in your vehicle, these devices har-
ness the power of GPS technology to provide location-based services, navigation assistance,
and precise timekeeping capabilities to users worldwide. [37].
Working principle of GPS Technology
GPS, or Global Positioning System, relies on a technique known as trilateration which
precisely determines the location, velocity, and elevation of a GPS device. This process
involves gathering signals transmitted by satellites orbiting the Earth. It is important to
note that trilateration is different from triangulation, as the former calculates distances, not
angles.
As the Earth’s satellites orbit, they continuously transmit unique signals, along with
their orbital parameters and time information. For finding an accurate location calculation,
a GPS device needs to receive signals from at least four satellites. In practice, it commonly
receives signals from six or more satellites simultaneously. Real-world scenarios frequently
involve the reception of signals from six or more satellites concurrently.
The figure (44) represents the Satellite Ranging and Possible positions of the GPS
receiver. To begin the process, a single satellite sends out a microwave signal, which is de-
tected by the GPS device. From this signal, the device can calculate the distance between
itself and the satellite. As distance measurement lacks directional data, the GPS device’s
potential location lies on a sphere’s surface, centered around the satellite. Without direc-
tional information in distance measurement, the GPS device’s possible location encompasses
the surface of a sphere centered at the satellite
To narrow down the location, a second satellite’s signal is also received, creating other
sphere with the GPS device as one of the possible intersection points between the two spheres.
The device’s location is narrowed down to two possible points at this stage.
Page 60 of 111
==PAGE:71==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 44: Satellite Ranging
[37]
Upon receiving signals from a third satellite, a third sphere is formed, and the GPS
device’s location is finally pinpointed to the intersection of all three spheres. The two points
of intersection on the surface of the Earth’s geoid are considered, but since we live in a
three-dimensional world, one point is typically much closer to the Earth’s surface than the
other, and that is the chosen location.
In essence, GPS uses trilateration with signals from multiple satellites to determine
the precise three-dimensional position of a GPS device, enabling accurate navigation and
location-based services.
As an object or device moves through space, it continuously changes its distance from
a satellite. These changing distances result in the creation of new spheres centered around
the satellite, with each sphere representing a different position of the object at a specific
time. By analyzing this positional data and incorporating the time information transmitted
by the satellite, we can accurately determine the velocity of the object’s movement [37].
Applications and uses of GPS
GPS, the Global Positioning System, serves as a powerful and reliable tool widely em-
ployed by diverse businesses and organizations across various industries. Professionals such
as surveyors, scientists, pilots, boat captains, first responders, as well as those in mining and
agriculture, rely on GPS on a daily basis to enhance their work processes.
For preparing accurate surveys and maps, and for taking precise time measurements,
tracking position and for navigation GPS information is used. The best thing about GPS is
Page 61 of 111
==PAGE:72==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
that it works for all times and in almost all weather conditions.
The following are the main uses of GPS:
Location:- This helps to determine the position of the object.
Navigation:- With the calculated position, GPS aids in navigation by providing real-
time directions and route guidance to reach a desired destination efficiently and accurately.
Tracking:- In this project, using GPS implemented tracking of an Asset. GPS track-
ing involves using the Global Positioning System to monitor the movement and location of
objects or individuals in real-time. The GPS receiver continuously updates its position by
receiving signals from multiple satellites at regular intervals. This data is often transmit-
ted to a central server or user’s device via cellular networks or other communication methods.
Mapping:- one of use case of GPS is mapping, which means it is helpful for creating
maps of the world like Google Maps.
Timing:- GPS makes it possible for taking precise time measurements such as time
and day [37].
GPS is utilized in a wide range of specific use cases, demonstrating its versatility and
value in various industries:
Emergency Response:- GPS plays a critical role in emergency situations, aiding first
responders in mapping disaster areas, predicting weather patterns, and efficiently managing
emergency personnel. Within the European Union and Russia, the eCall regulation lever-
ages GLONASS, a noteworthy GPS alternative, alongside telematics technology to swiftly
dispatch critical data to emergency services in the unfortunate event of a vehicle crash. This
strategic implementation significantly cuts down response times, ensuring a rapid and effi-
cient rescue process, thereby enhancing safety and potentially saving lives on the road.
Entertainment:- GPS adds an element of excitement and exploration to entertainment
experiences, as seen in popular games such as Pokemon Go and Geocaching. Integrating GPS
technology into these activities enables users to embark on location-based adventures and
scavenger hunts.
Health and Fitness:- Smartwatches and wearable devices utilize GPS to track and
measure fitness activities, such as running distance, and compare individual performance
against similar demographics. This data empowers users to monitor their fitness progress
and set achievable goals.
Construction, Mining, and Off-road Trucking:- In industries like construction
and mining, GPS assists in various aspects, including equipment location, asset allocation
Page 62 of 111
==PAGE:73==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
optimization, and measuring performance. By leveraging GPS technology, companies can
enhance asset management and improve overall operational efficiency.
Transportation:- Logistics companies rely on GPS-based telematics systems to boost
driver productivity, safety, and compliance. By utilizing GPS trackers for trucks, businesses
can optimize routes, improve fuel efficiency, and ensure driver safety, ultimately enhancing
their transportation operations .
GPS is utilized in agriculture for precision farming, autonomous vehicles for navigation,
sales and services for fleet management, military for strategic positioning, mobile commu-
nications for location-based services, security for asset tracking, and fishing for monitoring
fishing grounds [37].
Accuracy of GPS
The accuracy of GPS devices can be influenced by various factors that include the avail-
ability of satellites, atmospheric conditions, physical obstacles like mountains and buildings,
outdated satellite orbital models (ephemeris), numerical errors in device hardware, and
artificial interference from GPS jamming or spoofing devices.
physical obstructions:- Physical obstructions such as tall buildings and natural struc-
tures can distort arrival time measurements, leading to inaccuracies in GPS positioning.
atmospheric effects:- The atmospheric effects like ionospheric delays, storm cover,
and solar storms can impact the reliability of GPS signals.
Ephemeris:- While quite uncommon, satellites may occasionally carry outdated or in-
accurate orbital models.
Numerical miscalculations:- Such discrepancies arise when device hardware fails to
meet the necessary specifications.
Artificial interference:- These Artificial interference include GPS jamming devices
or spoofs.
While efforts are made to improve GPS accuracy, it is important to consider these vari-
ables and potential hindrances when relying on GPS devices in various environments and
applications [37].
Page 63 of 111
==PAGE:74==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS)
GPS, or Global Positioning System, is classified as a Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS), providing worldwide satellite-based navigation coverage. As of 2020, there are two
primary operational GNSS systems: the U.S. NAVSTAR GPS and Russia’s GLONASS. The
NAVSTAR GPS, comprising 32 U.S.owned satellites, is the most renowned and extensively
used satellite navigation system. On the other hand, Russia’s GLONASS encompasses 24
operational satellites, with three additional satellites serving as spares or undergoing testing.
Both systems offer global coverage and play crucial roles in enabling accurate positioning
and navigation services across the globe.
GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite System) is a comprehensive system that includes
GPS (Global Positioning System) as one of its components. while it is limited to accessing
satellites within a satellite network, which consists of GNSS receivers that can
simultaneously receive signals from multiple satellite systems like GPS and GLONASS,
among others as shown in the figure (45).
A GNSS receiver receives access to a larger constellation of satellites, with up to 60
satellites which is sufficient for a device to determine its location, having more satellites that
enhance the accuracy of the position calculation.
Figure 45: GNSS Satellites
[37]
Countries worldwide are actively striving to bridge the gap in satellite navigation
capabilities.
The EU has been diligently developing Galileo, a system poised to achieve
full operational capacity by the end of 2020, providing comprehensive navigation services.
Similarly, China is making significant strides with the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System,
aiming to have 35 satellites operational in orbit by May 2020, bolstering their navigation
capabilities.
In addition to this, Japan and India have not been left behind, as they work on their re-
gional systems: the Quasi-Zenith Satellite System (QZSS) in Japan and the Indian Regional
Page 64 of 111
==PAGE:75==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS) in India. With each country’s initiatives, the world is
witnessing a race towards improved satellite navigation infrastructure, promising enhanced
global positioning services in the near future [37].
Measuring power consumption using NB-IoT Technology
for Tracking of Location for Stationary Assets
In this project, when the Asset is not in motion i.e. stationary, then it establishes the
connection with NB-IoT cellular network which is known for its low power consumption. The
primary goal is to track the location of the stationary Asset, so it connects to the cellular
network via NB-IoT [38].
The figure (46) shows that the object or asset is connected to NB-IoT Cellular Network
successfully.
Once the NB-IoT connection is established, the GPS data, which includes
latitude and longitude information, is transmitted to the Azure IoT hub using the MQTT
protocol.
This MQTT protocol facilitates efficient and reliable data transmission to the
Azure IoT hub, where the location data can be further processed, monitored, and analyzed
as needed.
Figure 46: Output of GPS data when connected to NB-IoT
nRF Connect for Desktop serves as a versatile cross-platform framework designed to
Page 65 of 111
==PAGE:76==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
facilitate the development of desktop applications specifically tailored for Nordic
Semiconductor’s development kits.
Among the array of applications housed within nRF
Connect for Desktop, the Power Profiler Kit II stands out as a notable inclusion. This tool
empowers developers with valuable insights into power consumption, enabling them to
optimize energy usage and enhance the overall performance of their devices.
In Figure (47), the power consumption of an asset is illustrated when it is configured
to use the NB-IoT cellular network while being stationary. The average power consumed
during this scenario is measured to be approximately 110.52 mA (milliamperes).
Figure 47: Measuring Power consumption when the module is connected to NB-IoT Network
Figure (48) illustrates the average power consumption during the process of publishing
messages to the Azure IoT hub through MQTT Protocol using NB-IoT connectivity. The
recorded average power consumption amounts to 103.41 mA.
Page 66 of 111
==PAGE:77==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 48: Measuring Power consumption while publishing a message to Azure Cloud
The figure labeled as Figure (49) displays the average power consumption observed while
transmitting GPS data that includes Latitude and Longitude using NB-IoT
connectivity. According to the data recorded, the average power consumption during this
process is measured to be 103.57 mA.
Figure 49: Measuring Power consumption while sending GPS DATA to cloud
The above information provides valuable insights into the energy requirements of the
NB-IoT communication process when transmitting GPS data from neo 7n.
Page 67 of 111
==PAGE:78==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
By understanding the power consumption patterns, it becomes possible to optimize the
system for more efficient energy usage, potentially leading to extended battery life for the
device.
Additionally, this data is crucial for evaluating the overall power efficiency of the system
and ensuring that the chosen NB-IoT connectivity option remains a viable and sustainable
solution for sending GPS data to the cloud or other IoT platforms [39].
When the asset is stationary, the average energy consumption is relatively higher dur-
ing the asset’s connection to the NB-IoT network. This is primarily due to NB-IoT’s na-
ture, which necessitates periodic network reattachments and longer transmission times and
handover between base stations, leading to increased power usage compared to publishing
messages to the Azure IoT hub and sending GPS data to the cloud [40].
Page 68 of 111
==PAGE:79==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Measuring power consumption using NB-IoT Technology
for Tracking of Location for Moving Assets
In the given diagram 50, observed the status displayed in the serial monitor indicat-
ing the successful connection of the device to the NB-IoT cellular network. Moreover, the
diagram illustrates the seamless integration of the asset with the Azure IoT hub using the
MQTT protocol.
Once the asset is successfully connected to the Azure Cloud, it provides transmitting
valuable information, such as real-time location updates, leveraging the GPS data collected
from the Neo 7n module.
These transmitted messages facilitate efficient asset tracking,
providing valuable insights into the asset’s movements.
Figure 50: Output of GPS data in Serial Monitor when connected to NB-IoT
Page 69 of 111
==PAGE:80==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The figure (51) displays the power consumption during the process of asset establishing
connecting to the NB-IoT cellular network. The average energy consumed during the process
of connecting the asset to the NB-IoT network is 96.47 mA.
Figure 51: Measuring Power Consumption While asset is connected to the NB-IoT Network
and moving
Once the asset successfully established a connection to the NB-IoT network, it is move-
ment was tracked at various locations.
During this tracking period, the average power
consumption of the asset was measured and found to be 95.78 mA as shown in the figure
(52).
Page 70 of 111
==PAGE:81==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 52: Multiple Locations of GPS while tracking the Asset
when the asset is in motion, the average power consumption during the asset’s connec-
tion to the NB-IoT cellular network [41] becomes slightly lower than while tracking the asset’s
multiple GPS locations. This difference can be attributed to NB-IoT’s power optimization
in handling mobile assets. [42].
Measuring signal strength using NB-IoT Technology
Figure 53: Finding Signal Strength connected to NB-IoT Network
Page 71 of 111
==PAGE:82==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The provided graphical representation, denoted as figure (53) presents valuable insights
into the signal strength experienced by the asset while establishing a connection with the
NB-IoT Network. The graph visually depicts the varying levels of network coverage [43]
over time, offering crucial information about the strength and stability of the signal during
the asset’s interaction with the network. The average power measured during finding signal
strength was noted as 102.61 mA.
If the value returned by the "+CSQ" command is 26, it typically means that the signal
strength of the cellular network RSSI value is -61 dBm (decibels milliwatts). This value
represents the received signal power level at the device location, where a higher negative
dBm value indicates a weaker signal and a lower negative dBm value indicates a stronger
signal.
In the context of cellular networks like NB-IoT (Narrowband Internet of Things), a
signal strength of -61 dBm is generally considered to be a excellent signal. It suggests that
the device is receiving a reasonably strong signal from the network, which should result in
stable and reliable connectivity.
Received signal strength indicator (RSSI) in dBm and corresponding values are given in
the figure (54). For instance, if the value is 25 then the cellular network signal is excellent,
and if the value is 14, then the signal strength is okay, and so on [44].
Page 72 of 111
==PAGE:83==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 54: Received Signal Strength indicator (RSSI) value in dBm and the possible signal
strength values
[44]
RSRP is a measurement used in cellular networks to quantify the power level of the
received signal from a specific cell tower. The RSRP value is typically reported in dBm
(decibels relative to 1 milliwatt).
The exact formula or mapping table used may depend on the specific cellular technology
or standard being used (e.g., LTE, 5G). Additionally, various network equipment manufac-
Page 73 of 111
==PAGE:84==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
turers might use their own proprietary formulas. The mapping table that could be used to
convert RSRP and RSRQ values to signal strength values is shown in the figure (55).
Figure 55: RSRP and RSRQ range of values with corresponding Signal Strength
[45]
The RSRP values greater than -90 dBm would be excellent, and if the RSRP value
is less than -120 dBm then signal strength is poor, and so on. RSRQ (Reference Signal
Received Quality) is one of the measuring parameters used for measuring the signal strength
of network coverage. for instance, if the RSRQ value is greater than -9 dB then the signal
Quality is excellent and when the RSRQ value is less than -13 dB, then the signal quality is
Fair or poor.
Page 74 of 111
==PAGE:85==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 56: Finding Signal Strength connected to NB-IoT Network
The figure (56) depicts that the asset is connected to NB-IoT network only and signal
strength i,e, the values is 26 it means the corresponding RSSI value is -61 dBm and it denotes
the device is receiving a reasonably strong signal from network and network coverage is
excellent.
Page 75 of 111
==PAGE:86==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Measuring power consumption using LTE-M Technology
for Tracking of Location for Stationary Assets
The asset, while stationary, establishes a stable connection with the LTE-M (Long-Term
Evolution for Machines) network as the user enters 0 means the device is chosen with CAT
M1 i.e. LTE-M technology and it established the LTE-M connection successfully enabling
it to receive location information through GPS (Global Positioning System) technology. By
utilizing GPS satellites, the asset can accurately determine its geographical coordinates, in-
cluding latitude and longitude.
This location data is periodically updated, providing real-time insights into the asset’s
stationary position. The integration of LTE-M and GPS technology ensures reliable and
precise location tracking, facilitating efficient monitoring and management of the asset’s
during its stationary state.
Figure 57: Finding the location of the Asset when connected to LTE-M
Measuring power consumption is essential when the asset is connected to LTE-M tech-
nology, as it directly impacts the device’s operational efficiency and battery life [41]. When
the asset establishes a connection with the LTE-M network, it consumes an average power
of 115.91 mA as shown in the figure (58) This power usage was precisely measured using the
Power Profiler Kit II, a specialized tool designed to monitor and quantify energy consump-
tion.
Page 76 of 111
==PAGE:87==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
The recorded average power draw provides valuable insights into the energy require-
ments during the connection establishment process, helping to optimize power management
and enhance the overall efficiency of the asset’s LTE-M connectivity.
Figure 58: Measuring Power Consumption of asset when connected to LTE-M
Figure 59: Measuring Power Consumption while collecting GPS data
Power consumption is closely associated with data transmission activities. When the
asset communicates with the LTE-M network, power is consumed during the transmission of
Page 77 of 111
==PAGE:88==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
data packets, including status updates, sensor readings, or any other information exchange.
The average energy recorded during the process of collecting GPS data is 147.61 mA and it
is 31.7 mA higher compared to connecting to the network alone as shown in the figure (59).
Figure 60: Measuring Power Consumption while the asset is publishing message using MQTT
protocol
The average power observed during the asset is stationary and while asset is publishing
the data to Azure IoT hub is 147.17 mA as shown in the figure (60.
LTE-M demonstrates a relatively lower average power consumption during the asset’s
connection compared to sending and collecting GPS data to the cloud, benefiting from re-
source allocation optimization and efficient use of physical resource blocks and base stations.
Page 78 of 111
==PAGE:89==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Measuring power consumption using LTE-M Technology
for Tracking of Location for Moving Assets
Figure 61: Serial Monitor output of Location of Moving Asset using LTE-M Network
Page 79 of 111
==PAGE:90==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
In the provided diagram labeled as figure (61), it can be observed that the status dis-
played in the serial monitor indicates the successful connection of the device to the LTE-M
cellular network observed in the serial monitor while asset is moving. The diagram also illus-
trates the seamless integration of the asset with the Azure IoT hub using the MQTT protocol.
Once the asset establishes a successful connection to the Azure Cloud through the LTE-
M network, it begins transmitting valuable information, including real-time location updates.
These updates are made possible by leveraging the GPS data collected from the Neo 7n mod-
ule installed in the asset. The transmitted messages enable efficient asset tracking, offering
valuable insights into the asset’s movements and current location.
This real-time location data is instrumental in enhancing asset management, optimizing
logistics, and enabling timely decision-making based on the asset’s activities. The combina-
tion of LTE-M connectivity and GPS technology ensures reliable and accurate data trans-
mission, contributing to a robust and effective asset-tracking solution within the Azure IoT
ecosystem.
The figure (62) represents the average power consumption recorded as 122.29 mA during
the process of sending and publishing messages to Azure cloud and establishing a connection
to the LTE-M network.
Figure 62: Measuring Power Consumption when the Asset is connected to LTE-M and
moving
The average energy consumption measured and observed is 111.65 mA during the pro-
cess of collecting and sending data to cloud as shown in the figure (63).
Page 80 of 111
==PAGE:91==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 63: Measurinng Power Consumption while asset moving
Overall, The average energy consumption is higher while the asset connects to the LTE-
M network compared to the average power consumption of the asset while in motion. This
indicates that LTE-M is more suitable for stationary and fast-moving assets [41].
Page 81 of 111
==PAGE:92==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Measuring signal strength using LTE-M Technology
Figure 64: Finding Signal Strength when the device is connected to LTE-M Network
The provided graphical representation, denoted in Figure 64 represents the signal strength
of the network coverage experienced by the asset while establishing a connection with the
LTE-M Network. The RSSI value is 31 which means coverage is good.
Page 82 of 111
==PAGE:93==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Tracking of an Asset using GPS Visualizer in Google Maps
Firstly, the GPS data such as latitude, longitude, and altitude are used to find the
location of the asset when the asset is moving. The GPS data was collected and conducted
the experiment at DTU Campus. once GPS data is collected and stored in text format using
cool term software and then uploaded CSV file to the GPS Visualizer website [46] is utilized
to track the location of an asset as shown in the figure (65).
Figure 65: Finding and tracking the location of an asset using GPS visualizer
GPS data was collected in the CSV file and imported into the text file in google maps,
then it visualized the location of the asset in google maps as shown in the figure (66). It
denoted each and every location of the asset and gives the real-time location of the asset.
Page 83 of 111
==PAGE:94==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Figure 66: Location of an asset using Google Maps
Utilizing Google Maps for real-time asset tracking provides valuable insights into the
movement and location of the asset, enabling better monitoring and management.
Page 84 of 111
==PAGE:95==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Finding the address of the location using GPS Coordinates
in Python
Figure 67: Implementation of python code for finding Address of the location
The Python code is implemented to find the address of the location using GPS Coor-
dinates such as latitude and longitude to track and monitor the place of the asset while it
is moving. An API key is a special code utilized to distinguish and validate applications or
users. It serves as a distinctive identifier and grants access to a secure token, which plays a
vital role in the authentication process. By employing this key, applications, and users can
Page 85 of 111
==PAGE:96==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
interact with various services, ensuring secure and controlled access to specific functionalities
and data.
Google API key called "AIzaSyAIViBg0ZTkqK6STBEjb94HhmpjHy1WArA" is uti-
lized to find the location as shown in the figure (67). Google Maps API allows for customiza-
tion, making it easier to interpret the data and differentiate between various assets or data
points.
Figure 68: The Addresses of Multiple Locations
The figure (68) represents the addresses of the exact location of the asset and helps to
monitor and find the location of an asset which saves time and fuel for the organizations.
Page 86 of 111
==PAGE:97==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
6
Comparison of Two Technologies
When comparing NB-IoT and LTE-M technologies in terms of power consumption for
both stationary and moving assets, distinct patterns emerge. When the asset is stationary,
the average energy consumption is relatively higher during the asset’s connection to the NB-
IoT network. This is primarily due to NB-IoT’s nature, which necessitates periodic network
reattachments and longer transmission times, leading to increased power usage compared to
publishing messages to the Azure IoT hub and sending GPS data to the cloud.
In contrast, LTE-M demonstrates a relatively lower average power consumption during
the asset’s connection then collecting GPS data to the cloud and publishing messages to the
Azure IoT hub, benefiting from resource allocation optimization and efficient use of physical
resource blocks and base stations. This makes LTE-M and NB-IoT more power-efficient for
stationary asset scenarios.
Conversely, when the asset is in motion, the average power consumption during the as-
set’s connection to the NB-IoT cellular network becomes slightly lower than while tracking
the asset’s multiple GPS locations. This difference can be attributed to NB-IoT’s power
optimization in handling mobile assets. On the other hand, the average energy consumption
is higher while the asset connects to the LTE-M network compared to the average power
consumption of the asset while in motion. This indicates that LTE-M is more suitable for
fast-moving assets.
LTE-M shines in its support for mobility and faster-moving assets. It is well-suited for
applications that involve mobile or rapidly moving devices, such as asset tracking in trans-
portation, logistics, or fleet management. LTE-M’s capabilities for mobility management
and faster handover make it a more appropriate choice in use cases where assets frequently
change their locations or require continuous tracking during movement.
NB-IoT’s power efficiency is one of its key strengths, making it particularly suitable
for tracking static or stationary assets. Static assets typically do not move frequently, and
their tracking requirements may involve infrequent data updates or transmissions. In such
cases, NB-IoT’s low power consumption ensures that the tracking devices can operate for an
extended period on a single battery charge, reducing the need for frequent maintenance and
battery replacements.
In terms of power efficiency, LTE-M is also designed to be power-efficient, but it may
have slightly higher power consumption compared to NB-IoT in some scenarios. LTE-M
provides higher data rates and better bandwidth utilization, which enables faster data trans-
mission. However, this advantage in data rates may come at the cost of increased power
consumption during data transmission compared to NB-IoT.
Furthermore, in terms of network coverage signal strength, NB-IoT outperforms LTE-M
Page 87 of 111
==PAGE:98==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
with stronger and excellent signal strength. This means that NB-IoT provides more robust
and reliable coverage, making it a preferable choice for scenarios where reliable and wide-
ranging connectivity is essential.
In summary, it can be observed that NB-IoT is more power-efficient for stationary and
slow-moving assets, whereas LTE-M is better suited for stationary and fast-moving assets
irrespective of the asset’s state, the overall power consumption is higher when establishing
a connection with an LTE-M network than with an NB-IoT network [47].
Page 88 of 111
==PAGE:99==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
7
Conclusion
In a nutshell, The implementation of asset tracking using both NB-IoT and LTE-M
networks provided valuable insights into their respective performances and power consump-
tion characteristics. In the first step, successfully configured the device to both NB-IoT and
LTE-M networks. The use of a GPS visualizer and Google Maps enabled accurate tracking
of GPS coordinates, facilitating real-time location monitoring of the assets.
The system provides accurate and real-time tracking of the asset’s location, allowing
for efficient management and quick responses to changes in the asset’s movement, the stored
GPS data enables historical analysis, facilitating performance evaluation, route optimization,
and decision-making for process improvements, and also the live view of the asset’s location
on Google Maps fosters collaboration among stakeholders, leading to improved coordination
in asset management.
The comparison between NB-IoT and LTE-M technologies reveals distinct strengths
and use cases for each. NB-IoT proves to be highly advantageous for stationary and slow-
moving assets, offering exceptional power efficiency during tracking and data transmission.
Its ability to operate on a single battery charge for extended periods makes it an ideal choice
for applications where infrequent data updates are required.
On the other hand, LTE-M excels in scenarios involving mobile and fast-moving assets,
showcasing its efficiency in managing mobility, faster handovers, and bidirectional commu-
nication capabilities. Its support for higher data rates enables seamless tracking of rapidly
changing asset locations, making it suitable for transportation, logistics, and other dynamic
use cases.
Furthermore, NB-IoT’s superior signal strength and wider coverage ensure robust and
reliable connectivity, making it a reliable option for applications that demand extensive net-
work reach and consistent signal reception.
Ultimately, the choice between NB-IoT and LTE-M depends on the specific require-
ments of the IoT deployment, such as asset mobility, data transmission frequency, power
constraints, and the need for voice communication. Careful consideration of these factors
will enable organizations to leverage the strengths of each technology to optimize their IoT
solutions for diverse use cases and ensure efficient and reliable asset tracking and manage-
ment.
Future Work
While the current implementation has yielded significant benefits, the following are the
several areas of potential future work that can enhance asset tracking such as
Page 89 of 111
==PAGE:100==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Power Consumption Optimization: LTE-M technology consumes more power than
NB-IoT, further research and development should focus on optimizing power consumption
for assets connected to LTE-M networks. This could involve using more energy-efficient
hardware, optimizing communication protocols, or implementing sleep modes to conserve
power during periods of inactivity.
Hybrid Connectivity Solutions:
implementing a hybrid connectivity approach that
intelligently switches between NB-IoT and LTE-M based on the asset’s current state and
location. For example, in areas with good NB-IoT coverage, the asset could use NB-IoT to
minimize power consumption, while in areas with weak NB-IoT signal, it could switch to
LTE-M for better connectivity.
Integration with Asset Data: Integrating the asset tracking system with other data
sources, such as sensors monitoring temperature, humidity, or other environmental
conditions. Combining asset location data with environmental data can provide valuable
insights into asset health and conditions during transportation.
Predictive Analytics: Implementing predictive analytics algorithms to forecast
potential routes, and asset behavior, and optimize resource allocation. By leveraging his-
torical data and other relevant information, the system can anticipate challenges and make
proactive decisions.
User Interface Enhancements: Continuously improves the user interface of the
tracking system to make it more intuitive, user-friendly, and informative. Consider adding
features like geofence visualization, custom notifications, and interactive data filters.
Security and Privacy: Strengthens the security measures of the system to safeguard
GPS data and ensure compliance with data privacy regulations. Implement secure commu-
nication protocols and access controls to protect sensitive information.
By addressing these aspects and continuously refining the asset tracking system, it can
become a robust and efficient tool for businesses and individuals alike, enabling better asset
management, resource optimization, and decision-making.
Page 90 of 111
==PAGE:101==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
8
Appendix
Appendix A - SARA SerialPassthrough Code AT Commands
1
/*
2
SerialSARAPassthrough sketch
3
4
This sketch allows to send AT commands from the USB CDC serial port of
the MKR NB 1500 board to the onboard ublox SARA−R410 cellular module.
5
6
For a list of supported AT commands see:
7
https://www.u−blox.com/sites/default/files/u−blox−CEL_ATCommands_%28UBX
−13002752%29.pdf
8
*/
9
// SARA Passthrough code for implementing and sending AT commands
10
// Baud rate used for both Serial Communication
11
12
unsigned long baud = 115200;
13
14
void setup() {
15
pinMode(SARA_RESETN, OUTPUT);
16
digitalWrite(SARA_RESETN, LOW);
17
18
// Sending Poweron pulse
19
pinMode(SARA_PWR_ON, OUTPUT);
20
digitalWrite(SARA_PWR_ON, HIGH);
21
delay(150);
22
digitalWrite(SARA_PWR_ON, LOW);
23
24
Serial.begin(baud);
25
SerialSARA.begin(baud);
26
}
27
28
void loop() {
29
//Checking if there is any data available on the Serial port from computer.
30
if (Serial.available()) {
31
SerialSARA.write(Serial.read());
32
}
33
//Checking if there is any data available on the SerialSARA port
34
if (SerialSARA.available()) {
35
Serial.write(SerialSARA.read());
36
}
37
}
Page 91 of 111
==PAGE:102==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Appendix B - Choosing Radio Technology
1
/*
2
Radio Access Technology selection for Arduino MKR NB 1500
3
4
This sketch allows to select your preferred 4G
5
Narrowband Radio Access Technology (RAT).
6
7
choosING among CAT−M1, NB−IoT or a combination of both.
8
9
Selecting and choosing just one technology will speed up the modem's
network
10
registration a lot.
11
12
The chosen configuration will be saved to modem's internal memory
13
and will be preserved through MKR NB 1500 sketch uploads.
14
15
In order to change the RAT, The program needs to run this sketch again.
16
17
*/
18
// Including necessary Libraries.
19
#include <MKRNB.h>
20
21
22
void setup() {
23
// Baud rate for Serial communication
24
Serial.begin(115200);
25
while (!Serial);
26
27
MODEM.begin();
28
while (!MODEM.noop());
29
30
for (int i = 0; i < 80; i++) Serial.print("*");
31
Serial.println();
32
Serial.println("This sketch allows you to select your preferred");
33
Serial.println("4G Narrowband Radio Access Technology (RAT).");
34
Serial.println();
35
Serial.println("You can choose among CAT−M1, NB−IoT or a combination of
both.");
36
Serial.println();
37
Serial.println("Selecting JUST ONE technology will speed up the modem's
network registration A LOT!");
38
Serial.println();
Page 92 of 111
==PAGE:103==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
39
Serial.println("The chosen configuration will be saved to modem's internal
memory");
40
Serial.println("and will be preserved through MKR NB 1500 sketch uploads."
);
41
Serial.println();
42
Serial.println("In order to change the RAT, you will need to run this
sketch again.");
43
for (int i = 0; i < 80; i++) Serial.print("*");
44
45
Serial.println();
46
Serial.println();
47
//User Chooses the Radio Technology
48
Serial.println("Please choose your Radio Access Technology:");
49
Serial.println();
50
Serial.println("
0 −CAT M1 only");
51
Serial.println("
1 −NB IoT only");
52
Serial.println("
2 −CAT M1 preferred, NB IoT as failover (default)");
53
Serial.println("
3 −NB IoT preferred, CAT M1 as failover");
54
Serial.println();
55
}
56
57
void loop() {
58
59
String uratChoice;
60
// User enters the preferred URAT
61
Serial.print("> ");
62
Serial.setTimeout(−1);
63
while (Serial.available() == 0);
64
String uratInput = Serial.readStringUntil('\n');
65
uratInput.trim();
66
int urat = uratInput.toInt();
67
Serial.println(urat);
68
//Switch case used to perform URAT Configuration
69
switch (urat) {
70
case 0:
71
uratChoice = "7";
72
break;
73
case 1:
74
uratChoice = "8";
75
break;
76
case 2:
77
uratChoice = "7,8";
78
break;
79
case 3:
Page 93 of 111
==PAGE:104==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
80
uratChoice = "8,7";
81
break;
82
default:
83
Serial.println("Invalid input. Please, retry.");
84
return;
85
}
86
87
setRAT(uratChoice);
88
apply();
89
90
Serial.println();
91
Serial.println("Radio Access Technology selected.");
92
Serial.println("Now you can upload your 4G application sketch.");
93
while (true);
94
}
95
//configuring the device with selected RAT using AT commands
96
bool setRAT(String choice)
97
{
98
String response;
99
100
Serial.print("Disconnecting from network: ");
101
MODEM.sendf("AT+COPS=2");
102
MODEM.waitForResponse(2000);
103
Serial.println("done.");
104
105
Serial.print("Setting Radio Access Technology: ");
106
MODEM.sendf("AT+URAT=%s", choice.c_str());
107
MODEM.waitForResponse(2000, &response);
108
Serial.println("done.");
109
110
return true;
111
}
112
//This function saves the configuration and saves the changes.
113
bool apply()
114
{
115
Serial.print("Applying changes and saving configuration: ");
116
MODEM.send("AT+CFUN=15");
117
MODEM.waitForResponse(5000);
118
delay(5000);
119
120
do {
121
delay(1000);
122
MODEM.noop();
123
} while (MODEM.waitForResponse(1000) != 1);
Page 94 of 111
==PAGE:105==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
124
125
Serial.println("done.");
126
127
return true;
128
}
Appendix C- GPS Location finding Code
1
2
//including all necessary libraries
3
#include "TinyGPS++.h"
4
#include <MKRNB.h>
5
TinyGPSPlus gps;
6
#define gpsSerial Serial1
7
unsigned long lastDisplayTime = 0;
8
9
#include "arduino_secrets.h"
10
11
12
13
void setup() {
14
//Baud rate for Serial Communication
15
Serial.begin(9600);
16
gpsSerial.begin(9600);
17
}
18
19
void loop() {
20
//checking if gps is available for Serial communication
21
while ( gpsSerial.available() > 0)gps.encode(gpsSerial.read());
22
// checking if the GPS location is Valid
23
if (gps.location.isValid() && (millis() −lastDisplayTime >= 2000)) {
24
// Printing Latitude Values
25
Serial.print(gps.location.lat(), 6);
26
// Printing Longitude Values
27
Serial.print(",");
28
Serial.print(gps.location.lng(), 6);
29
//Printing Altitude Value
30
Serial.print(",");
31
Serial.print(gps.altitude.meters());
32
Serial.print(" number of satallites=");
33
Serial.print(",");
34
Serial.println(gps.satellites.value());
35
Page 95 of 111
==PAGE:106==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
36
delay(2000); // Wait for the response
37
lastDisplayTime = millis();
38
}
39
}
Appendix D- ECCX08 Self Signed Certificate
1
2
/*
3
ArduinoECCX08 −Self Signed Certificate
4
5
This sketch can be used to generate a self signed certificate
6
for a private key generated in an ECC508/ECC608 crypto chip slot.
7
The issue and expired date, and signature are stored in another
8
slot for reconstruction.
9
10
If the ECC508/ECC608 is not configured and locked it prompts
11
the user to configure and lock the chip with a default TLS
12
configuration.
13
14
The user can also select the slot number to use for the private key and
storage.
15
A new private key can also be generated in this slot.
16
The circuit:
17
−Arduino MKR board equipped with ECC508 or ECC608 chip
18
19
*/
20
21
#include <ArduinoECCX08.h>
22
#include <utility/ECCX08SelfSignedCert.h>
23
#include <utility/ECCX08DefaultTLSConfig.h>
24
25
void setup() {
26
Serial.begin(9600);
27
while (!Serial);
28
29
if (!ECCX08.begin()) {
30
Serial.println("No ECCX08 present!");
31
while (1);
32
}
33
34
String serialNumber = ECCX08.serialNumber();
35
Page 96 of 111
==PAGE:107==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
36
Serial.print("ECCX08 Serial Number = ");
37
Serial.println(serialNumber);
38
Serial.println();
39
40
if (!ECCX08.locked()) {
41
String lock = promptAndReadLine("The ECCX08 on your board is not locked,
would you like to PERMANENTLY configure and lock it now? (y/N)", "N"
);
42
lock.toLowerCase();
43
44
if (!lock.startsWith("y")) {
45
Serial.println("Unfortunately you can't proceed without locking it :("
);
46
while (1);
47
}
48
49
if (!ECCX08.writeConfiguration(ECCX08_DEFAULT_TLS_CONFIG)) {
50
Serial.println("Writing ECCX08 configuration failed!");
51
while (1);
52
}
53
54
if (!ECCX08.lock()) {
55
Serial.println("Locking ECCX08 configuration failed!");
56
while (1);
57
}
58
59
Serial.println("ECCX08 locked successfully");
60
Serial.println();
61
}
62
63
Serial.println("Hi there, in order to generate a new self signed cert for
your board, we'll need the following information ...");
64
Serial.println();
65
66
String issueYear
= promptAndReadLine("Please enter the issue year
of the certificate? (2000 −2031)", "2019");
67
String issueMonth
= promptAndReadLine("Please enter the issue
month of the certificate? (1 −12)", "1");
68
String issueDay
= promptAndReadLine("Please enter the issue day
of the certificate? (1 −31)", "1");
69
String issueHour
= promptAndReadLine("Please enter the issue hour
of the certificate? (0 −23)", "0");
70
String expireYears
= promptAndReadLine("Please enter how many years
the certificate is valid for? (1 −31)", "31");
Page 97 of 111
==PAGE:108==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
71
String privateKeySlot
= promptAndReadLine("What slot would you like to
use for the private key? (0 −4)", "0");
72
String storageSlot
= promptAndReadLine("What slot would you like to
use for storage? (8 −15)", "8");
73
String generateNewKey
= promptAndReadLine("Would you like to generate
a new private key? (Y/n)", "Y");
74
75
Serial.println();
76
77
generateNewKey.toLowerCase();
78
79
if (!ECCX08SelfSignedCert.beginStorage(privateKeySlot.toInt(), storageSlot
.toInt(), generateNewKey.startsWith("y"))) {
80
Serial.println("Error starting self signed cert generation!");
81
while (1);
82
}
83
84
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.setCommonName(ECCX08.serialNumber());
85
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.setIssueYear(issueYear.toInt());
86
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.setIssueMonth(issueMonth.toInt());
87
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.setIssueDay(issueDay.toInt());
88
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.setIssueHour(issueHour.toInt());
89
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.setExpireYears(expireYears.toInt());
90
91
String cert = ECCX08SelfSignedCert.endStorage();
92
93
if (!cert) {
94
Serial.println("Error generating self signed cert!");
95
while (1);
96
}
97
98
Serial.println("Here's your self signed cert, enjoy!");
99
Serial.println();
100
Serial.println(cert);
101
Serial.println();
102
103
Serial.print("SHA1: ");
104
Serial.println(ECCX08SelfSignedCert.sha1());
105
}
106
107
void loop() {
108
// do nothing
109
}
110
Page 98 of 111
==PAGE:109==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
111
String promptAndReadLine(const char* prompt, const char* defaultValue) {
112
Serial.print(prompt);
113
Serial.print(" [");
114
Serial.print(defaultValue);
115
Serial.print("]: ");
116
117
String s = readLine();
118
119
if (s.length() == 0) {
120
s = defaultValue;
121
}
122
123
Serial.println(s);
124
125
return s;
126
}
127
128
String readLine() {
129
String line;
130
131
while (1) {
132
if (Serial.available()) {
133
char c = Serial.read();
134
135
if (c == '\r') {
136
// ignore
137
continue;
138
} else if (c == '\n') {
139
break;
140
}
141
142
line += c;
143
}
144
}
145
146
return line;
147
}
Page 99 of 111
==PAGE:110==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Appendix E - Python code to find Address of the Location
1
# −*−coding: utf−8 −*−
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Jul 18 22:18:24 2023
4
5
@author: Shirisha
6
"""
7
8
import requests
9
#get_addresses function is used to get latitude and longitude to find
location
10
def get_addresses(latitudes, longitudes):
11
addresses = []
12
url = "https://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/json"
13
for latitude, longitude in zip(latitudes, longitudes):
14
params = {
15
"latlng": f"{latitude},{longitude}",
16
# Replacing with Application Programming Interface (API) key
17
"key": "AIzaSyAIViBg0ZTkqK6STBEjb94HhmpjHy1WArA"
18
19
}
20
response = requests.get(url, params=params)
21
data = response.json()
22
23
if data["status"] == "OK" and len(data["results"]) > 0:
24
addresses.append(data["results"][0]["formatted_address"])
25
else:
26
addresses.append("Address not found")
27
28
return addresses
29
# Example list of latitudes for tracking the location of an asset
30
latitudes = [55.782515, 55.78252, 55.782018,55.782482,55.790578,55.782528]
31
# Example list of Longitudes for tracking the location of an asset
32
longitudes = [12.519958, 12.522768, 12.510844,12.519861,12.523821,12.519964]
33
34
35
addresses = get_addresses(latitudes, longitudes)
36
for address in addresses:
37
#Printing the address of the location
38
print(address)
Page 100 of 111
==PAGE:111==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
Appendix F - Final Code
1
/*
2
Azure IoT Hub NB
3
This sketch securely connects to an Azure IoT Hub using MQTT over NB IoT/
LTE Cat M1.
4
It uses a private key stored in the ATECC508A and a self signed public
5
certificate for SSL/TLS authentication.
6
It publishes a message every 5 seconds to "devices/{deviceId}/messages/
events/" topic
7
and subscribes to messages on the "devices/{deviceId}/messages/devicebound
/#"
8
topic.
9
The circuit:
10
−MKR NB 1500 board
11
−Antenna
12
−SIM card with a data plan
13
Arduino Project Hub can be used
14
to setup your Azure account and the MKR board:
15
https://create.arduino.cc/projecthub/Arduino_Genuino/securely−connecting−
an−arduino−nb−1500−to−azure−iot−hub−af6470
16
17
*/
18
// Including all necessary Libraries
19
#include <ArduinoBearSSL.h>
20
#include <ArduinoECCX08.h>
21
#include <utility/ECCX08SelfSignedCert.h>
22
#include <ArduinoMqttClient.h>
23
#include <MKRNB.h>
24
#include "TinyGPS++.h"
25
TinyGPSPlus gps;
26
#define gpsSerial Serial1
27
unsigned long lastDisplayTime = 0;
28
NBScanner nb;
29
#include "arduino_secrets.h"
30
31
// Enter your sensitive data in arduino_secrets.h
32
const char pinnumber[]
= SECRET_PINNUMBER;
33
const char broker[]
= SECRET_BROKER;
34
String
deviceId
= SECRET_DEVICE_ID;
35
36
NB nbAccess;
37
GPRS gprs;
38
Page 101 of 111
==PAGE:112==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
39
NBClient
nbClient;
// Used for the TCP socket connection
40
BearSSLClient sslClient(nbClient); // Used for SSL/TLS connection,
integrates with ECC508
41
MqttClient
mqttClient(sslClient);
42
43
unsigned long lastMillis = 0;
44
45
void setup() {
46
// Baud rate for Serial Communication
47
Serial.begin(9600);
48
gpsSerial.begin(9600);
49
50
while (!Serial);
51
Serial.println("Initializing connection...");
52
if (!nb.begin()) {
53
Serial.println("Failed to initialize!");
54
while (1);
55
}
56
57
MODEM.begin();
58
if (!ECCX08.begin()) {
59
Serial.println("No ECCX08 present!");
60
while (1);
61
}
62
for (int i = 0; i < 80; i++) Serial.print("*");
63
Serial.println();
64
Serial.println("This sketch allows you to select your preferred");
65
Serial.println("4G Narrowband Radio Access Technology (RAT).");
66
Serial.println();
67
Serial.println("You can choose among CAT−M1, NB−IoT or a combination of
both.");
68
Serial.println();
69
Serial.println("Selecting JUST ONE technology will speed up the modem's
network registration A LOT!");
70
Serial.println();
71
Serial.println("The chosen configuration will be saved to modem's internal
memory");
72
Serial.println("and will be preserved through MKR NB 1500 sketch uploads."
);
73
Serial.println();
74
Serial.println("In order to change the RAT, you will need to run this
sketch again.");
75
for (int i = 0; i < 80; i++) Serial.print("*");
76
Page 102 of 111
==PAGE:113==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
77
Serial.println();
78
Serial.println();
79
//User choosed the Radio Technology
80
Serial.println("Please choose your Radio Access Technology:");
81
Serial.println();
82
Serial.println("
0 −CAT M1 only");
83
Serial.println("
1 −NB IoT only");
84
Serial.println("
2 −CAT M1 preferred, NB IoT as failover (default)");
85
Serial.println("
3 −NB IoT preferred, CAT M1 as failover");
86
Serial.println();
87
// reconstruct the self signed certificate
88
89
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.beginReconstruction(0, 8);
90
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.setCommonName(ECCX08.serialNumber());
91
ECCX08SelfSignedCert.endReconstruction();
92
93
// Set a callback to get the current time
94
// used to validate the servers certificate
95
ArduinoBearSSL.onGetTime(getTime);
96
97
// Set the ECCX08 slot to use for the private key
98
// and the accompanying public certificate for it
99
sslClient.setEccSlot(0, ECCX08SelfSignedCert.bytes(), ECCX08SelfSignedCert
.length());
100
101
// Set the client id used for MQTT as the device id
102
mqttClient.setId(deviceId);
103
104
// Set the username to "<broker>/<device id>/api−version=2018−06−30" and
empty password
105
String username;
106
107
username += broker;
108
username += "/";
109
username += deviceId;
110
username += "/api−version=2018−06−30";
111
112
mqttClient.setUsernamePassword(username, "");
113
114
// Set the message callback, this function is
115
// called when the MQTTClient receives a message
116
mqttClient.onMessage(onMessageReceived);
117
118
}
Page 103 of 111
==PAGE:114==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
119
120
121
void loop() {
122
String uratChoice;
123
//Users enters the preferred URAT
124
Serial.print("> ");
125
126
Serial.setTimeout(−1);
127
while (Serial.available() == 0);
128
String uratInput = Serial.readStringUntil('\n');
129
uratInput.trim();
130
int urat = uratInput.toInt();
131
Serial.println(urat);
132
// Switch case used to perform URAT Configuration
133
switch (urat) {
134
case 0:
135
uratChoice = "7";
136
break;
137
case 1:
138
uratChoice = "8";
139
break;
140
case 2:
141
uratChoice = "7,8";
142
break;
143
case 3:
144
uratChoice = "8,7";
145
break;
146
default:
147
Serial.println("Invalid input. Please, retry.");
148
return;
149
}
150
151
setRAT(uratChoice);
152
153
if (nbAccess.status() != NB_READY || gprs.status() != GPRS_READY) {
154
connectNB();
155
}
156
// Checking MQTT Client is connected
157
if (!mqttClient.connected()) {
158
// MQTT client is disconnected, connect
159
connectMQTT();
160
}
161
162
// poll for new MQTT messages and send keep alive
Page 104 of 111
==PAGE:115==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
163
mqttClient.poll();
164
165
// publish a message roughly every 5 seconds.
166
if (millis() −lastMillis > 5000) {
167
lastMillis = millis();
168
169
publishMessage();
170
}
171
172
}
173
174
unsigned long getTime() {
175
// get the current time from the cellular module
176
return nbAccess.getTime();
177
}
178
179
void connectNB() {
180
Serial.println("Attempting to connect to the cellular network");
181
182
while ((nbAccess.begin(pinnumber) != NB_READY) ||
183
(gprs.attachGPRS() != GPRS_READY)) {
184
// failed, retry
185
Serial.print(".");
186
delay(1000);
187
}
188
189
Serial.println("You're connected to the cellular network");
190
Serial.println();
191
}
192
193
void connectMQTT() {
194
Serial.print("Attempting to MQTT broker: ");
195
Serial.print(broker);
196
Serial.println(" ");
197
198
while (!mqttClient.connect(broker, 8883)) {
199
// failed, retry
200
Serial.print(".");
201
Serial.println(mqttClient.connectError());
202
delay(5000);
203
}
204
Serial.println();
205
206
Serial.println("You're connected to the MQTT broker");
Page 105 of 111
==PAGE:116==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
207
Serial.println();
208
209
// subscribe to a topic
210
mqttClient.subscribe("devices/" + deviceId + "/messages/devicebound/#");
211
}
212
213
void publishMessage() {
214
Serial.println("Publishing message");
215
// Parse GPS data
216
while (Serial1.available() > 0) {
217
gps.encode(Serial1.read());
218
219
}
220
// Check if valid GPS data is available
221
222
if (gps.location.isValid() && (millis() −lastDisplayTime >= 2000)) {
223
// Format GPS data as JSON
224
//Print signal strength
225
Serial.print("Signal strength: ");
226
Serial.println(nb.getSignalStrength());
227
228
// GET GPS Latitude
229
Serial.print(gps.location.lat(), 6);
230
// GET GPS Longitude
231
Serial.print(gps.location.lng(), 6);
232
// GET Altitude Serial.print(gps.altitude.meters());
233
// GET number of Satellites
234
Serial.println(gps.satellites.value());
235
236
delay(2000); // Wait for the response
237
lastDisplayTime = millis();
238
String GPSdata = "{\"latitude\":" + String(gps.location.lat(), 6) + ",\"
longitude\":" + String(gps.location.lng(), 6)+ "}";
239
240
// Publish GPS data to MQTT
241
mqttClient.beginMessage("devices/" + deviceId + "/messages/events/");
242
mqttClient.print(GPSdata);
243
mqttClient.endMessage();
244
245
// Print the GPS data
246
Serial.println("GPS Data: " + GPSdata);
247
}
248
249
Page 106 of 111
==PAGE:117==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
250
}
251
void onMessageReceived(int messageSize) {
252
//
received a message, print out the topic and contents
253
Serial.print("Received a message with topic '");
254
Serial.print(mqttClient.messageTopic());
255
Serial.print("', length ");
256
Serial.print(messageSize);
257
Serial.println(" bytes:");
258
259
// use the Stream interface to print the contents
260
while (mqttClient.available()) {
261
Serial.print((char)mqttClient.read());
262
}
263
Serial.println();
264
265
Serial.println();
266
}
267
268
//Configuring the device with selected RAT using AT commands
269
bool setRAT(String choice)
270
{
271
String response;
272
Serial.print("Setting Radio Access Technology: ");
273
MODEM.sendf("AT+URAT=%s", choice.c_str());
274
MODEM.waitForResponse(2000, &response);
275
Serial.println("done.");
276
277
return true;
278
}
Appendix G - Arduino Secrets
1
// NB settings
2
#define SECRET_PINNUMBER ""
3
4
// Fill in the hostname of your Azure IoT Hub broker
5
#define SECRET_BROKER
"ArduinoMKRGPSProject.azure−devices.net"
6
7
// Fill in the device id
8
#define SECRET_DEVICE_ID "ArduinoMKRNB1500"
Page 107 of 111
==PAGE:118==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
References
References
[1] Saikirankarampudi, “Internet of things.” https://saikirankarampudi.wordpress.
com/2018/03/25/internet-of-things-architecture/, 2018.
Last added on 25
March 2018.
[2] “Samsonite track and go: locate your lost luggage..” https://accent-systems.com/
project/trackgo-localiza-equipaje/, 2019. Last added on 26 November 2019.
[3] “What is lpwan and the lorawan open standard.” https://www.iotforall.com/
what-is-lpwan-lorawan, 2019. Last added on 12 March 2019.
[4] J.-P. Bardyn, T. Melly, O. Seller, and N. Sornin, “Iot: The era of lpwan is starting
now,in esscirc conference 2016: 42nd european solid-state circuits conference, ieee, sep..”
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7598235/, 2016. Last added on September
2016.
[5] “Nb-iot
vs.
lora
vs.
sigfox.”
https://www.link-labs.com/blog/
nb-iot-vs-lora-vs-sigfox, 2019. Last added on 22 November 2019.
[6] Robert, S. Rauh, H. Lieske, and A. Heuberger, “Ieee 802.15 low power wide area network
(lpwan) phy interference model in 2018 ieee international conference on communications
(icc), ieee.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8422801, 2018. Last
added on May 2018.
[7] “Managing
power
in
the
iot
with
cellular
lpwan
technol-
ogy.”
https://www.electronicspecifier.com/news/analysis/
managing-power-in-the-iot-with-cellular-lpwan-technology,
2019.
Last
added on 9th February 2019.
[8] “What
is
nb
iot
and
how
does
it
work.”
https://www.telefonica.com/en/
communication-room/blog/what-is-nb-iot-and-how-does-it-work/.
[9] Kunz, Andreas, Kim, H. Kim, Laeyoung, Husain, and S. S., “Machine type commu-
nications in 3gpp: From release 10 to release 12.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/6163599, 2012. Last added on 2012.
[10] Chen, Min, Miao, Yiming, Hao, Yixue, Hwang, and Kai, “Narrow band internet of
things.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8038776, 2017.
Last added on
2017.
[11] Mwakwata, C. Burton, Malik, Hassan, Alam, M. Mahtab, Moullec, Y. Le, Parand, Sven,
Mumtaz, and Shahid, “Narrowband internet of things (nb-iot): From physical (phy) and
media access control (mac) layers perspectives.” https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/
19/11/2613, 2019. Last added on 2019.
[12] M. Chen, Y. Miao, Y. Hao, and K. Hwang, “Narrow band internet of things.” https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9097268.
Page 108 of 111
==PAGE:119==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
References
[13] “Narrow
band
lte-nb-iot.”
https://www.techplayon.com/
narrow-band-lte-narrow-band-iot-nb-iot/,
2017.
Last added on May 10,
2017.
[14] “3gpp release14, non-access-stratum(nas) protocol for evolved packet system (eps)..”
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/124300_124399/124301/14.03.00_60/
ts_124301v140300p.pdf, 2019. Last added on 10 July 2019.
[15] Amirhossein,
“Nb-iot
technical
series-1.”
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/
nb-iot-technical-series-1-amirhossein-vaziri, 2023. Last added on March 12,
2023.
[16] N. Mangalvedhe, R. Ratasuk, and A. Ghosh, “Nb-iot deployment study for low power
area cellular iot, in 2016 ieee 27th annual international symposium on personal, in-
door, and mobile radio communications (pimrc), ieee.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/7794567, 2016. Last added on 2016.
[17] “Non-access-stratum(nas)
protocol
for
evolved
packet
system
(eps).”
https:
//www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/124300_124399/124301/15.04.00_60/ts_
124301v150400p.pdf, 2019. Last added on 10 July 2019.
[18] “nbiotutilities.” https://github.com/wiaio/nb-iot-utilities, 2019. Last added on
12 November 2019.
[19] KalliopiPapanikolaou, “What is lte-m? long term evolution for machines explained.”
https://www.emnify.com/iot-glossary/lte-m, 2021. Last added on 13 April 2021.
[20] M. Lauridsen, I. Z. Kovacs, P. Mogensen, M. Sorensen, and S. Holst, “Coverage and ca-
pacity analysis of lte-m and nb-iot in a rural area, in 2016 ieee 84th vehicular technology
conference (vtc-fall), ieee.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7880946, 2016.
Last added on September 2016.
[21] ElisabethNebster, “Cellular technologies: Lte-m and nb-iot comparison.” https://www.
xme.digital/post/cellular-technologies-lte-m-and-nb-iot-comparison, 2022.
Last added on 24 November 2021.
[22] P. Masek, “Lte cat m and nb-iot deployment modes.” https://www.researchgate.
net/figure/LTE-Cat-M-and-NB-IoT-deployment-options-15_fig1_337144002.
[23] P. Masek, M. Stusek, K. Zeman, R. D. A. Ometov, and J. Hosek, “Implementation
of 3gpp lte cat-m1 technology in ns-3: System simulation and performance.” https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8970869, 2020. Last added on 30 January 2020.
[24] “What is lte-m? - considerations and applications for lte-m.” https://www.iotforall.
com/what-is-lte-m.
Page 109 of 111
==PAGE:120==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
References
[25] G. SoĂłs, D. Ficzere, and P. Varga, “The pursuit of nb-iot transmission rate limita-
tions by real-life network measurements.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9163540, 2020. Last added on 11 August 2020.
[26] Smith, “Arduino mkr nb 1500 pinout and features.” https://electronicsmith.com/
arduino-mkr-nb-1500-pinout-features/, 2023. Last added on March 2023.
[27] “Neo
7n
product
features
and
specifications.”
https://www.mouser.dk/
ProductDetail/u-blox/NEO-7N-0?qs=KUoIvG%2F9IlbCeYckKu5fpQ%3D%3D.
[28] “Neo-7 u-blox 7 gnss modules data sheet.” https://content.u-blox.com/sites/
default/files/products/documents/NEO-7_DataSheet_%28UBX-13003830%29.pdf.
[29] “Nordicsemiconductors
power
profiler
kit
ii.”
https://www.nordicsemi.com/
Products/Development-hardware/Power-Profiler-Kit-2.
[30] “Nordicsemiconductors
power
profiler
kit
ii.”
https://nsscprodmedia.blob.
core.windows.net/prod/software-and-other-downloads/product-briefs/
power-profiler-kit-ii-pbv10.pdf.
[31] 3GPP, “At command set for user equipment (ue).” https://portal.3gpp.org/
desktopmodules/Specifications/SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId=
1515, 2015.
[32] “Sara at commands manual.” https://content.u-blox.com/sites/default/files/
SARA-R4_ATCommands_UBX-17003787.pdf, 2019. Last added on 26 October 2019.
[33] “Sodaq support pages.” https://support.sodaq.com/Boards/Sara_SFF/examples/
passthrough/#t-mobile-nl-lte-m.
[34] “Securely
connecting
an
arduino
nb
1500
to
azure
iot
hub.”
https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/mkr-nb-1500/
securely-connecting-an-arduino-nb-1500-to-azure-iot-hub.
[35] “What
is
mqtt
and
how
it
works.”
https://randomnerdtutorials.com/
what-is-mqtt-and-how-it-works/.
[36] Javapoint, “Mqtt protocol.” https://www.javatpoint.com/mqtt-protocol.
[37] GeoTab, “What is gps? global positioning systems explained.” https://www.geotab.
com/blog/what-is-gps/, 2022. Last added on 22 May 2022.
[38] M. Lauridsen, R. Krigslund, M. Rohr, and G. Madueno, “An empirical nb-iot power
consumption model for battery lifetime estimation.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8417653, 2018. Last added on June 2018.
Page 110 of 111
==PAGE:121==
Implementation of Asset Tracking using IoT
References
[39] Jian, Xin, Wei, Yixiao, Liu, Yuqin, Song, Jian, Zeng, Xiaoping, Tan, and Xiaoheng,
“Power consumption modeling and optimization for nb-iot edrx, journal on communi-
cations.” https://famaey.eu/papers/cnf-sultania2018a.pdf, 2019. Last added on
2019.
[40] P. Jorke, R. Falkenberg, and C. Wietfeld, “Power consumption analysis of nb-iot
and emtc in challenging smart city environments.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8644481, 2018. Last added on 2018.
[41] Chang, Xiangmao, Chen, Kai, Xing, Guoliang, Huang, Jun, Chen, and Bing, “Optimiz-
ing nb-iot power consumption via adaptive radio access.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/9521979, 2022. Last added on 2022.
[42] S.-M., O. K.-R, Jung, M. Bae, and J. Shin, “Performance analysis for the battery
consumption of the 3gpp nb-iot device.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
8190831, 2017. Last added on 18-20 October 2017 DOI: 10.1109/ICTC.2017.8190831.
[43] Ferreira, Bruno, Gaspar, Bruno, Paiva, Sofia, Santos, AntĂłnio, and C. andJorge, “Cov-
erage and deployment analysis of nb-iot technology under various environment scenar-
ios.” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9507153, 2020. Last added on 2020.
[44] M2MSupport.net,
“Signal
quality.”
https://m2msupport.net/m2msupport/
signal-quality/.
[45] P. Kline, “Understanding rssi, rsrp, and rsrq.” https://5gstore.com/blog/2021/04/
08/understanding-rssi-rsrp-and-rsrq/, 2021. Last added on 8 April 2021.
[46] “Gps visualizer.” https://www.gpsvisualizer.com/.
[47] “Power-optimized nb-iot (lte cat nb1) modules data sheet..” https://content.u-blox.
com/sites/default/files/SARA-N2_ProductSummary_(UBX-16014015).pdf,
2019.
Last added on 12 January 2019.
Page 111 of 111
