==PAGE:1==
Biogenic carbon in LCA
Critical review of methods for calculating biogenic
carbon in LCA and application in case study of
bio­based building materials
Master thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Biogenic carbon in LCA
Critical review of methods for calculating biogenic carbon in LCA and application in case
study of bio­based building materials
Master thesis
August, 2023
By
Anders S. Ravn
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Nirojsedhai, CC BY­SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons (left)
Maurice Flesier, CC BY­SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons (right)
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn­
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Quantitative Sustainabil­
ity Assessment, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, at the Techni­
cal University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of life cycle assessment
(LCA).
Anders S. Ravn ­ s174663
Signature
Date
ii
Biogenic carbon in LCA
21-08-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
For a long time, the handling of biogenic carbon (bio­C) in LCA has been discussed,
and as of yet no clear consensus has been achieved on how this should be considered.
Two aspects of the biogenic materials and their carbon cycle are usually discussed: The
regrowth period, i.e. the time it takes from the raw material is harvested, until an equal
amount has regrown, and whether this time period should be considered or not. The other
aspect is the effect of temporarily storing the bio­C in a product, and the effects of post­
poning the emissions from the disposal of this product through storage. In this project,
seven different ways of accounting bio­C in LCA was assessed. Several differences ex­
isted between the methods, mainly on whether they considered the biogenic material to be
climate neutral, if the effects of temporary storage were credited, and if the rotation period
was modelled. The methods were used on a case study of straw products and harvested
wood products (HWP) with different rotation periods. Generally, the static methods al­
ways produced positive results, and the table­value methods only considering storage
always produced negative results. For the dynamic LCA methods, the results were both
dependant on length of rotation period and length of storage period. It is recommended to
use static and/or dynamic LCA when considering biogenic products, but not the methods
only considering storage as this leads to undesirable results.
Keywords: Biogenic Carbon, LCA, dynamic LCA, storage, regrowth.
Biogenic carbon in LCA
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
A big and heartfelt thank you to:
Anders Bjørn, Postdoc, DTU Sustain
Michael Zwicky Hauschild , Professor, DTU Sustain
for effective and relevant guidance, and for pulling strings where needed.
Chris Mutel, Senior Researcher, Paul Scherrer Institute
for quick response and help with the implementation and use of Brightway and Temporalis.
Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen, PhD Fellow, AAU Build
Nicolas Francart, Postdoc, AAU Build
for taking the time to answer my questions regarding methodologies and application.
Jeppe Krabbe Bennett
for interesting discussions on forest management practices and the future of the building
industry.
Friends & family
iv
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
2
2.1
Biogenic carbon accounting method review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Results
10
3.1
Straw
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
HWP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Time­distributed radiative forcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Discussion and conclusion
14
4.1
Crediting temporary carbon storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Permanence and additionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
The forest system: NEP or regrowth?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
Application of methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.5
Consequential aspects of biogenic carbon accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Bibliography
19
Appendices
23
A Additional results
23
B Uncertainty analysis
26
C Storage factors from GHG Protocol
27
D Graphic representation of two ton­year methods
28
E
List of electronic appendices
29
Biogenic carbon in LCA
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
For a long time, the handling of biogenic carbon (bio­C) in LCA has been discussed,
and as of yet no clear consensus has been achieved on how this should be considered
(Breton et al. 2018). Historically, it has been assumed that since biogenic materials are
part of a carbon cycle between the terrestrial system and the atmosphere, the biogenic
material is inherently climate neutral. This assumption is typically used in EPD standards,
such as EN15804. However, even between standards and applications, different ways
of accounting exists, which can lead to confusion for LCA practitioners, consultants, and
policy makers.
Two aspects of the biogenic materials and their carbon cycle are widely discussed: The
regrowth period, i.e. the time it takes from the raw material is harvested, until an equal
amount has regrown, and whether this time period should be considered or not. The
other aspect is the effect of temporarily storing the bio­C in a product, e.g. a wooden
beam, where the update of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol – Land Sector and Removals
Guidance (Draft for Pilot Testing and Review) poses the following question:
“Should removals with product storage, accounted for using a storage dis­
counting framework, be reported outside the scopes in a separate reporting
category (as temporary product carbon storage)? Or should other metrics be
used to report on product storage and longevity?”
Thus, mainstream accounting standards are also considering this aspect, and are deter­
mining how and whether to include it by input from their community. The case of discount­
ing storage and/or future emissions is debated in academia. The argument for not giving
credits or considering temporary storage is two­fold: First, some professionals within LCA
deem it unethical to weight impacts according to their time of occurrence, as this would
diminish the well­being of future generations (Hellweg et al. 2003). The second reason
is that temporary storage of bio­C only has a climate cooling effect in the short­term, and
will be diminishing on an infinite time­scale (World Resource Institute and WBCSD 2022).
Some studies even show, that the release of temporally stored carbon can lead to higher
atmospheric CO2 concentrations, than if the CO2 had not been stored (e.g. Kirschbaum
2006) – this is however instantaneous effects, and not considering cumulative impacts.
However, there are also arguments in favor of temporally storing bio­C, pertaining to the
urgency of the climate crisis, where temporary storage buys time for technological devel­
opments before tipping points are reached.
In the building industry, biogenic materials and especially wood products, are seen as low­
impact alternatives to concrete and steel, which can help the building industry reducing
it’s massive climate impact (Ouellet­Plamondon et al. 2023). Several studies show CO2
reductions, when comparing wooden and concrete structures (Himes and Busby 2020).
However, as Hansen et al. (2022) note, few studies in general consider consequential
aspects (such as indirect land use change) combined with the regrowth time of biogenic
products, and may therefore disregard important aspects.
In this project, several methods considering bio­C accounting are analyzed and applied to
both fast­ and slow­growing biogenic materials. The project focuses on the sequestration,
storage and release of bio­C, which is considered with varying assumptions in the different
methods, and aim to showcase significant differences, as well as consider the applicability
of the methods.
Biogenic carbon in LCA
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Methodology
2.1
Biogenic carbon accounting method review
Several methods for accounting for bio­C were already known, but to make sure all rel­
evant methods were found, a literature search was conducted. Using the building block
method, a boolean search term was used in the library database DTU FindIt. The search
term should find methodologies used in LCA, and the methods should consider the use
of biogenic carbon or carbon storage. The resulting boolean search term used was:
kw:("life cycle assessment" OR "LCA") ("biogenic carbon" OR "carbon stor")
("method" OR "model")
The search term retrieved 133 ‘hits’. First, the relevance of the search hits were evaluated
on their title, remaining studies where then evaluated by their abstracts. This resulted in
a list of 34 studies for further inspection. Most of the articles found were studies com­
paring different methods (e.g. Arehart et al. 2021; Garcia and Freire 2014; Liptow et al.
2018; Morris et al. 2021; Zieger et al. 2020), with an overlap of methods also identified
by the literature search. A comprehensive review of methods was found in Breton et al.
(2018), where two dynamic methods were highlighted. By reviewing the references of the
articles, it was concluded that the most relevant methods were found, resulting in seven
different methods, as seen in fig. 2.1. The methods consists of static LCA methods, com­
monly used in standards and Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs), dynamic LCA
methods, which consider the timing aspects of activities and emissions. The last type of
method are table­value methods computed from scientific methods, allowing easier appli­
cation of more complex methods, usually applied in accounting standards. The methods
and their respective characteristics can be seen in table 2.1, and will be described below.
Figure 2.1 Results of the literature search through DTU FindIt. ‘n’ refer to the number of
sources describing the methods. The sources for each method are: ‘0/0’ and ‘­1/+1’: CEN
2015, 2019 (already known). DLCA: Levasseur et al. 2010, 2012, 2013. GWPbio: Cherubini
et al. 2011, 2012a,b; Guest et al. 2013a,b. Ton­year methods: World Resource Institute and
WBCSD 2022 (already known). FBZ: Resch et al. 2022.
2
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:9==
Table 2.1 Comparison of bio­C accounting methods, with indication of what assumptions and
considerations are assessed in the methods.
Method
0/0
­1/1
DLCA
GWPbio
ILCD
Lashof
FBZ
Type
Standard
Academia
Academia
Guidance/Standard
Guidance
Carbon neutral
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Climate neutral
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Temp. storage
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Rotation period
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Albedo effect
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
2.1.1
Static LCA methods
The term static LCA is used for LCAs where the timing of processes and emissions occur­
ring through the life cycle are aggregated to a single point­in­time. This both relates to the
inventory and the impact assessment. Timing is less important for short­lived products,
where production and EOL are happening within a few years, even as little as days. It can
be argued that even seasonal or daily timing has an impact on the the inventory or the
impact assessment, as e.g. electricity production during either day or night can have dif­
ferent production sources, and thus different environmental impacts. Generally, all similar
emissions are aggregated into a single value with the same characterisation factor (CF),
whether the emission happens at year 0 or 30. For impacts such as GWP, where char­
acterization is defined by a time horizon, the use of a fixed CF can lead to a sliding time
window (see fig. 2.2a). A sliding time window occurs, when emissions occur later in the
life cycle, which extend their characterisation beyond the considered time horizon (TH) of
the study, e.g. if a study uses a TH of 100 years, and the disposal of the product happens
at year 50, the CF for GWP100 would extend 50 years after the considered TH.
There are two static LCA methods often used for considering bio­C: The ‘0/0’ and the
‘­1/+1’ methods. Both methods assume a carbon neutral cycle in the forest system, and
from this makes the assumption that “carbon­neutral­equals­climate­neutral” (Guest et al.
2013a). The origins of the ‘0/0’ method are not well described in the found literature,
however in Cherubini et al. (2011) an expert meeting by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 1991 is referenced, stating that “CO2 emis­
sions resulting from bioenergy consumption should not be included in a country’s official
emission inventory (OECD 1991)”. This stems from the assumption that since the bio­C
sequestered in the biomass used to populate the atmosphere before uptake, it will thus
result in a neutral effect when it is released to the atmosphere at the EOL, and will be
sequestered in new biomass again (Hauschild et al. 2017, Ch. 2).
The ‘­1/+1’ also considers this inherent climate­neutrality, but depicts the carbon cycle
through the life cycle of the product. The sequestered amount of CO2 during forest growth
is calculated as a negative emission occuring in the production phase, and an equal (pos­
itive) emission is emitted at end of life (EOL) (CEN 2015). Thus, the results over the life
cycle from using either the ‘0/0’ or the ‘­1/+1’ method should be equal, as the system is as­
sumed climate neutral. Both calculation methods are described in EN16760 (CEN 2015).
The assumption across the two methods are the same, but the bio­C cycle is visible for
‘­1/+1’, when dividing the results into the phases described in EN15804 (CEN 2019).
Implicitly, when assuming climate neutrality of the biomass products, sustainable forest
management is assumed, often undefined in literature according to Searchinger et al.
(2023a), “... but for some papers sustainable forest management means that carbon
Biogenic carbon in LCA
3
==PAGE:10==
losses from forest harvests in a given year are at most equal to gains in carbon else­
where within a defined ‘forest management area’”. According to EN16760 (CEN 2015),
Sustainable forest management ensure stable (or even improving) bio­C stocks in the
forest.
If the harvested wood product (HWP) is not originating from a sustainably managed forest,
or if it is from a natural forest, the HWP can not be considered climate neutral. If the HWP
originates from a natural forest, emissions should be modelled as emissions from land use
change (LUC) in EPDs complying with EN15804 (CEN 2019). Natural forests store more
bio­C than planted forests, why the clear­cutting of natural forests leads to a net release
of bio­C, even if a managed forest is regrown (Ahlström et al. 2022). In French guidance
on LCAs for buildings, HWP from non­sustainable forest management, does not receive
the ‘­1’ credit from the ‘­1/+1’ method (Ouellet­Plamondon et al. 2023).
To increase transparency of bio­C flows in EPDs, the GWP category is sub­divided into
GWP­fossil, GWP­biogenic, and GWP­LULUC in EPDs conducted in compliance with
EN15804+A2 (CEN 2019). It not only makes it easier for users of the EPDs to check
whether the bio­C flow is climate neutral, but also considers impacts from land use prac­
tices. This impact can be omitted if the contribution is less than 5 % of GWP­total. Indirect
land use change (iLUC) is however not considered, since EN16760 (CEN 2015) states
that no scientific method is agreed upon in the determination of this impact.
2.1.2
Dynamic methods
Two dynamic methods have been found: the GWPbio method (Guest et al. 2013b) and
Dynamic LCA (DLCA) (Levasseur et al. 2013). Both methods consider the timing of emis­
sions and the rotation period of the biomass, and they take a critical stance of the assump­
tion, that biogenic emissions are inherently climate neutral. Usually regrowth after harvest
is considered, which is recommend by Cordier et al. (2022), as this produces the most
conservative results. No scenario regarding regrowth before or after harvest is consid­
ered ‘more correct’ than the other, and Levasseur et al. (2013) describes the situation as
a ‘chicken or egg’ dilemma. The timing of emissions is considered by adopting dynamic
CFs coupled with a fixed TH, as can be seen in fig. 2.2b, which is described as a fixed
time­window analysis. Thus, emissions happening later in the life cycle has a shorter
occupancy in the atmosphere within the TH and thus a lower impact.
The dynamic methods use impulse response functions (IRF) to calculate dynamic CFs for
GHGs. An IRF is an approximation of the decay of an anthropogenic GHG in the atmo­
sphere (Joos et al. 2013). In contrast to most GHGs, which are broken down by chemical
reactions in the atmosphere, CO2 is part of several cycles with different timescales be­
tween the major carbon reservoirs: the atmosphere, oceans, and land biosphere (Joos
et al. 2013). In Cherubini et al. (2011) they raise a concern over slight amounts of double
counting, since the land biosphere is included in the calculation of the IRFs. Cherubini
et al. (2011) apply the IRFs which are given by the Bern 2.5CC model, and it is concluded
that no double counting occurs, since this model ‘does not include formulation for forestry
management nor bioenergy production (Strassmann et al. 2008)’. However, in the 5th
Assessment Report from the IPCC (Myhre et al. 2013a), a multi­model analysis is used
to compute IRFs as described in Joos et al. (2013), and it is unknown whether double
counting occurs in this case, when regrowth is modelled.
An uptake of CO2 is modelled with a negative IRF (mirrored along x­axis), which is
deemed sensible in Guest et al. (2013a) since the continuous sequestration leads to a
decreasing atmospheric CO2 level, and thus a decrease in the strength of oceanic and
terrestrial sinks.
4
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:11==
The GWPbio method has been revised and refined in several articles (Cherubini et al.
2011, 2012a,b; Guest et al. 2013a), and the version applied here is that of Guest et al.
(2013b). In GWPbio, a static LCI is combined with dynamic CFs for bio­C flows, thus rep­
resenting a “dynamic ‘­1/+1’”. The method applies a convolution of the IRF with a regrowth
function of the biomass resource pool (BRP). In GWPbio, only the regrowth after harvest
is considered, as the (possible) carbon credits given should stem from additionality, i.e.
removals should only be considered when they would not otherwise have occurred. The
additional sequestration should be determined by a baseline scenario, e.g. a business­
as­usual (BAU) scenario (Guest et al. 2013b). In later refinements of the method, the net
ecosystem productivity (NEP) was adopted for modelling regrowth instead of simpler bell­
curve functions, given in Cherubini et al. (2011). In Cherubini et al. (2012a) NEP is defined
as (annual) change in carbon stocks of a BRP, and is the difference between sequestered
CO2 by net primary production (NPP) and CO2 released through heterotrophic respiration
RH, which consists of e.g. soil respiration and decomposition of forest residues. Consid­
ering the NEP can lead to positive carbon fluxes from the forest system to the atmosphere,
when forest residues are left to decompose (Guest et al. 2013b), which is in contrast to
only considering simpler regrowth functions, where negative fluxes would occur directly
after harvest and replanting. Additionally, the GWPbio method can account for the in­
creased albedo effect of clear­cut forest areas, which can be significant in snowy regions
(Guest et al. 2013b). Lastly, some studies have used the GWPbio factors from Guest et al.
(2013a) directly for different types of biomass products (Breton et al. 2018), which greatly
reduces the complexity of application.
In contrast to GWPbio, the DLCA methodology developed by Levasseur et al. (2010, 2012,
2013) considers the timing of all processes during a life cycle, thus creating a dynamic
inventory, which is coupled with dynamic CFs. The method is mainly developed for GHG
emissions, but can be extended to other (time­dependant) emissions. The argument for
considering the timing is that early emissions have a longer residence time in the atmo­
sphere and thus lead to a higher cumulative impact on a finite timescale (Levasseur et al.
2010). In the literature, Levasseur and colleagues only consider simple regrowth func­
tions, which is described as a limitation of the analysis (Levasseur et al. 2013). NEP
functions can however easily be applied in the method, similar to GWPbio. The main dif­
ference between the two dynamic methods is thus, that DLCA considers all emissions to
be time­distributed, whereas GWPbio only considers the sequestration and release of bio­
C to be distributed through time. Therefore, results are expected to be similar between
the methods, with results from GWPbio having a slightly larger impact (Breton et al. 2018).
2.1.3
Table­value methods
Table­value methods are derived from scientific methods, with the aim of simplification
to ease application. Three different table­value methods are described, one is a part of
a Norwegian guidance on climate­friendly construction projects, called FutureBuilt Zero
(Resch et al. 2022). The two other methods are similar in nature, and described in the
Greenhouse Gas Protocol – Land Sector and Removals Guidance, which is an accounting
guidance developed for company climate budgets (World Resource Institute and WBCSD
2022).
As mentioned above, FutureBuilt Zero (FBZ) is developed as a voluntary program for
climate­ambitious building projects in Norway. The aim of the method is, in part, to in­
centivize low­carbon construction methods across the life cycle and aligning the goals set
by the FBZ method with the Norwegian reduction pledges towards the Paris Agreement.
FBZ applies weighting factors or credits for technological development, bio­C seques­
tration and carbonization of concrete, urgency (i.e. emissions occurring today have a
Biogenic carbon in LCA
5
==PAGE:12==
(a) Static LCA (sliding time­window)
(b) Dynamic LCA (fixed time­window)
Figure 2.2 Diagrams depicting the differences between the static and dynamic methods. The
placement of the rectangles above or below the time axis depicts whether an emission or
uptake occurs. The height of the rectangle depicts the size of the emission, and the left­most
edge shows the time of emission. The length of the rectangle represents the time horizon
associated with the CF. Thus, the area of the rectangle (not dashed) becomes the characterized
value of the emission or uptake. a) Non­bio emission. b) Instantaneous bio­C release (e.g.
incineration). c) Instantaneous bio­C sequestration. d) Continuous bio­C sequestration. Note
that c) and d) have same area. d) is dashed in the static case, since the regrowth time of
biogenic materials is disregarded.
higher weight than future emissions), reuse of materials, and recycling or energy recov­
ery at EOL. The guidance aims to be as simple and practical as possible, which is why
the dynamic aspects of the aforementioned factors have been readily calculated and are
available as table­values, partly using the methods described in Resch et al. (2021). The
credit for using wood in the building is computed using a variation of dynamic LCA, where a
regrowth function of 100 years is used, as this is the rotation period for Norwegian spruce.
The method is not only considering the regrowth, but is also applying a time­weighting of
the bio­C sequestration. To apply this credit, it is stated that wood must originate from
sustainable forestry. Furthermore, since wood – despite being renewable – is a limited
resource, the excessive use of wood products is de­incentivized by limiting the credit. The
credit can at maximum be equal to the sum of emissions from waste handling of the wood
product and 75 % of emissions from material production (Resch et al. 2022).
The GHG Protocol is an accounting guidance developed for company climate budgets.
The guidance considered herein is the Land Sector and Removals Guidance, as this is
specific for biogenic products. The draft poses several open questions to future account­
ing practice, and they will be discussed and answered when the draft is finalized and pub­
lished in the first half of 2024 (World Resource Institute and WBCSD 2023). The GHG
Protocol divides a company’s activities up into three scopes: Scope 1 is direct emissions
from the company, e.g. owned transport vehicles, scope 2 is purchased energy, and
scope 3 is everything else, e.g. purchased products. The scopes will not be considered
in this project, as only singular products are considered. When reporting GHG accord­
ing to the scopes, an annual stock­change approach is applied, which determines net C
stock differences over time, which gives a clear indication, whether the C stock is in­ or
decreasing over time in the entire assessed area. This approach is criticized in Peng et al.
(2023), where they claim that the negative effects of harvesting wood are hidden, as long
6
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:13==
as the entire C stock of the assessed area is increasing.
The GHG Protocol does not give credits for temporary storage of CO2 within the scopes,
since CO2 “...stored in non­atmospheric carbon pools for less than millennial timescales
(e.g., 100 years) and there are no additional CO2 removals to maintain the net carbon
stocks in that pool, it will not contribute to lowering cumulative CO2 emissions.” (World
Resource Institute and WBCSD 2022, Ch. 6). However, outside of the scopes it is pro­
posed to discount temporarily stored bio­C, by applying dynamic ton­year methods.
A ton­year method calculates equivalency factors for sequestering and storing a certain
amount of CO2 for a certain amount of years. The Moura­Costa and the Lashof method
are based on Absolute Global Warming Potential (AGWP) to calculate equivalency fac­
tors. The baseline for each eqivalency factor is a time horizon of 100 years and 1 ton CO2
pulse emission. Moura­Costa calculates the integral of radiative forcing over the time pe­
riod, which is equal to 48 ton­years, and determines that storing 1 t CO2 for 48 years is
equivalent to avoiding 1 t pulse emission within a 100­year period. This method can how­
ever not be used in the GHG Protocol. The Lashof method determines the equivalency
factor, by comparing a pulse emission at year 0 with an emission at the end of storage,
and taking the difference of the integral of the IRFs within the 100­year period (Levasseur
et al. 2012). A graphic representation can be seen in Appendix D. The ILCD 1 % method
has been developed as a simplification of the Lashof method. This method assumes the
IRF curve to be linear, and the equivalency factor of storing 1 ton CO2 per year is 0.01. In
the GHG protocol, both the ILCD and the Lashof method are accepted, and the storage
factors can be seen in table C.1.
Aside from evaluating the effects of temporary storage (outside scopes), the GHG Protocol
draft (World Resource Institute and WBCSD 2022) has a strong focus on land use change
(LUC), as this is also an important factor for emissions from BRPs. Contrary to EN16760,
iLUC shall also be reported in the GHG Protocol to avoid geographical burden shifting
(World Resource Institute and WBCSD 2022). An example of geographical burden shifting
could be the conversion of agricultural land to forest, to produce HWPs. This does not
decrease the demand of agricultural products (such as food), and this amount of land will
thus be occupied somewhere else.
2.2
Case study
This project considers two different types of biogenic materials, which shows the impact
short and long rotation periods have. The two materials are: Timber, a harvested wood
product (HWP), typically used for structural framing or cladding. The other material is
straw, which in buildings historically has been used as a roofing material. Today, straw is
being used as a bio­based insulation material, an alternative to e.g. stone wool.
The biggest difference for the two materials regarding bio­C accounting is the rotation
period, where straw is a yearly crop, whereas HWPs can have rotation periods ranging
from 50 years to more than 100 years, depending on species, climatic conditions, etc.
Furthermore, straw can either be produced as a stand­alone crop or as a by­product from
e.g. wheat or oat production, which will lead to different allocations of impacts in LCA. For
HWPs, the rotation period can be described with a (simple) bell­curve (Cherubini et al.
2012b), with specific regrowth functions (e.g Schnute or Chapman­Richards), or as a Net
Ecosystem Productivity (NEP) function or chronosequence (Cherubini et al. 2012a).
NEP functions can either be modelled using simulation software or measured using eddy
covariance, but are always site­specific. NEP considers the difference between CO2 in­
and effluxes to the forest system (Cherubini et al. 2012a), with the influxes induced by
Biogenic carbon in LCA
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3 Three different regrowth functions for simulating the regrowth of biomass after har­
vest. The green lines are using the bell­curve distribution from Cherubini et al. (2011). The
red line is a scaled representation of the NEP function given in Peichl et al. (2023). The sum
of each distribution is 1.
photosynthesis of the trees (and understory) and effluxes stemming from heterotrophic
respiration (Rh), e.g. decomposition of wooden litter left after harvest. According to Pe­
ichl et al. (2023), there is limited knowledge on Fennoscandian boreal forests, with most
knowledge existing for Canadian and Russian forests. However, it seems that there is a
general consensus in literature, considering Canadian and Fennoscandian boreal forests,
that clearcut areas are CO2 sources the first years after replanting, however overall they
act as CO2 sinks (Cherubini et al. 2012a; Grant et al. 2007, 2010; Peichl et al. 2023).
Since straw is a yearly crop, the bio­C sequestration is modelled as a delta­function, i.e.
an instantaneous uptake of CO2 in year 0, much like it is modelled in EN15804 (for all
biogenic materials). For the HWP, the regrowth is both modelled as a bell­curve with two
different rotation periods, following equation (2.1) (Cherubini et al. 2011), and modelled
as the NEP function reported in Peichl et al. (2023). The dataset in Peichl et al. (2023)
considers 50 forest stands with different ages (from 5 to 211 years) in a 68 km2 managed
boreal forest in northern Sweden. The tree species are mainly Scots pine and Norwegian
spruce. For this project the NEP function is scaled to sequester an amount of CO2 equal
to the emission at EOL over a rotation of 100 years, as described in Cherubini et al.
(2012a). All regrowth functions are scaled to be bio­C neutral over the rotation period.
The different regrowth functions can be seen in fig. 2.3.
g(t) =
1
√
2πσ2 e−(t−µ)2/2σ2
(2.1)
The LCA is conducted using Brightway 2.5 (Mutel et al. 2023) and the sub­module Tempo­
ralis (Cardellini et al. 2018), which are Python based software. Brightway and Temporalis
were chosen, as they allow for using Ecoinvent datasets in dynamic LCA. Brightway cal­
culates static LCA (SLCA) and Temporalis is used for dynamic LCA (DLCA). First, a SLCA
is conducted, which is used by Temporalis to traverse the most impacting activities and
flows based on a cutoff value, and build a timeline using these activities. Therefore, not
8
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:15==
all flows and activities are necessarily accounted for. Furthermore, only CO2, CH4 and
N2O are characterized using the IRFs from the Ch. 8 supplementary material of the IPCC
Fifth Assessment Report (Myhre et al. 2013b).
All Ecoinvent activities at production and EOL are temporally distributed as delta­functions,
i.e. instantaneously happening at a specific year. Only the regrowth functions of HWP
are distributed over several years. As the products are used as building materials, the
lifetime of these are assumed to be 60 years, which is the lifetime considered in FBZ.
The C contents of timber is 0.5 kg C per kilogram of dry­weight (DW), according to Pittau
et al. (2018). For straw, the value reported in the Ecoinvent dataset is 0.45 kg C per kg
DW. The factor between C and CO2 is 44
12 kg CO2/kg C.
As all methods mainly consider climate change, this is the only impact category reported
in this study, using the characterization factors from Myhre et al. (2013a), for a time hori­
zon of 100 years. Breton et al. (2018) further recommends calculating GWP20, which
is disregarded here, since 2/3 of the product life would not be considered. Instead, the
short­term climate change effects are analyzed using a dynamic timeline.
For a complete overview of the environmental of the considered products, refer to ap­
pendix A, where other mid­ and endpoint categories are reported.
Biogenic carbon in LCA
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Results
The results are presented using the life cycle phases described in EN15804 (CEN 2019),
where the A1­A3 phases refer to the production of the material. In the ‘­1/+1’ method, the
carbon sequestration is reported here. The B1 phase is the use phase, where the regrowth
will be reported for the dynamic methods, as will the effects from storage for the table­
value methods. The C3­C4 is the EOL, which both considers impacts from incineration
and emission of bio­C for all methods. The D phase is not considered in this study, but
the substitution potential due to energy production could be reported here.
Figure 3.1 GWP100 using different methods for straw from stand­alone production, and HWP
with respectively a rotation period of 100 years and using a NEP function. *Bio­C sequestration
is limited to a maximum compensation of waste treatment and 75 % of material production.
The “official” result of FBZ is therefore 0.03 kg CO2­eq.
3.1
Straw
When not considering regrowth time and storage period (i.e. 0/0 and ­1/+1), straw has a
slightly positive impact. The greatest difference between the two static methods is whether
the main emission seem to happen in the production phase or in the EOL phase. When
considering both regrowth and storage period, as is done in the dynamic methods, it is
seen that the impacts from phases A1­A3 and B1 (sequestration) are of the same size as
A1­A3 (which contains production and sequestration) in the ­1/+1 method. The difference
is instead in the impacts from EOL, consisting of both emissions from incineration and
release of sequestered CO2, due to the fact that the EOL impacts have less cumulative
effect on the radiative forcing within the time horizon of 100 years in dynamic methods.
Thus, the results are negative, as the climatic effects of the bio­C flow are not balanced.
The two methods only considering the effects of storage (Lashof and ILCD) also have
negative results. In fact, GWPbio and the Lashof method have nearly the same results,
which is intuitive, since both methods are calculating the effects of pushing an emission
into the future, and the sequestration is considered equally, as straw is a yearly crop. No
value is reported for FBZ as this framework only considers a regrowth period of 100 years,
which is not representative of straw.
10
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:17==
3.2
HWP
The results for the different regrowth scenarios for HWP are equal for all methods, which
do not consider the regrowth of biomass (i.e. 0/0, ­1/+1, Lashof, ILCD). The results from
the SLCA are equal, however with a shift in emissions either occurring in A1­A3 or C3­C4.
For the simplified modelling with a regrowth time of 100 years, the dynamic results are
practically climate neutral, since the cumulative negative radiative forcing from sequestra­
tion balances emissions from production and EOL. This is in contrast to the fast­growing
straw, where sequestration had a larger cumulative effect, which resulted in climate cool­
ing. When not considering the regrowth time, which is the case in the ton­year methods,
the HWP is credited for storage, which results in an overall negative result. Interestingly,
FBZ which is based on simplifications of DLCA, result in a 49 % larger sequestration
than DLCA and GWPbio. Since the EOL is both time­ and technology­weighted, FBZ has
the least impact in phases C3­C4. The table values for FBZ are only applicable for a
regrowth period of 100 years, which Resch et al. (2022) assume representative of Nor­
wegian spruce. To limit increase in demand for wood, Resch et al. (2022) has decided
that the bio­C sequestration at maximum can compensate the impacts from waste treat­
ment and 75 % of the material production. The “official” result of FBZ is therefore 0.03 kg
CO2­eq.
When considering actual forest dynamics (NEP) in the regrowth function, the dynamic
results are in the same order of magnitude as the static results, with GWPbio having a
slightly larger climate impact. The DLCA results are highly dependant on the storage
period, and with shorter storage the climate impact would be higher (see fig. A.1). A rule of
thumb by Guest et al. (2013a) is that for a bio­C flow to reach climate neutrality, the storage
period should be half the rotation period. This holds true for the simplified modelling of
HWP regrowth, but not when the regrowth is modelled using the NEP. The methods,
which only consider storage and postponing emissions, result in negative emissions, and
it seems that the omission of regrowth for longer rotation periods leads to bloated results.
3.3
Time­distributed radiative forcing
When comparing the dynamic results, it is possible to consider the time­specific aspects
of sequestration and emissions, as seen in fig. 3.2. The instantaneous sequestration of
bio­C in straw products leads to negative cumulative radiative forcing from the first year
of “production”. When disposal of the product happens after 60 years, the curve shifts
upwards, but remains negative within the considered time horizon (TH) of 100 years.
For HWP the timelines are significantly different. The two simplified approaches to mod­
elling regrowth (r=70 and r=100) have slightly cooling climate effects, meaning that the
emissions from harvest and production are offset by the regrowth of the biomass. Around
year 16 and 22, respectively, the sequestration leads to cooling effects. After 60 years the
EOL shifts the curve upwards, but remains negative withing the TH, as was the case for
straw products. For the HWP with regrowth modelled by a NEP function, the cumulative
radiative forcing is positive for the first 40 years after harvest, and only has a cooling ef­
fect in the following 25 years. Overall, the HWP (NEP) scenario has a positive cumulative
radiative forcing within the TH.
The cumulative timeline adds valuable insight in the climate effects of different biogenic
materials, not only considering the climate effect at the end of the TH, but showing short­
term effects during the product life. This is different from the framework given in e.g.
EN15804, where sequestration is presented in phases A1­A3, leading to the understand­
ing that sequestration either has happened or is happening instantaneously at the time of
Biogenic carbon in LCA
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2 Cumulative radiative forcing for 5 different biogenic products, calculated using the
DLCA framework. The ‘Fossil CO2’ line depicts a reference emission of 1 kg CO2 at the
starting year.
production. Even when reporting the sequestration under the use phase, some dynamic
aspects are lost, such as the time lag before leading to negative impacts for HWPs.
3.4
Uncertainty
A Monte Carlo analysis was conducted for the static analysis, considering GWP100, which
can be seen in Appendix B. The general picture is that 1 kg of straw from stand­alone
production has a lower climate impact than HWP, with a slight overlap in uncertainties.
When producing straw as a by­product of wheat, it has lower climate impacts than stand­
alone production of straw and HWP, since most impacts are allocated to the production
of wheat. The different HWP products have almost the same average value, which is
expected, since the regrowth period has no influence on the static results. Thus, the
small differences are due to the stochastic nature of Monte Carlo analysis.
A quantitative uncertainty analysis will not be conducted for the dynamic results, but the
uncertainties will be discussed qualitatively. First, a major factor of uncertainty is the
combination of the Ecoinvent database and GraphTraversal. As Ecoinvent 3.8 has an
average of 11.3 technosphere exchanges (according to Chris Mutel, developer of Bright­
way), many calculations are needed through GraphTraversal to consider all activities and
flows. In the setup for this project, between 1000 and almost 6000 calculations are done,
dependant of the product considered, but not all impacts are accounted for. This can be
seen in fig. 3.1 (for numerical results refer to table A.1), where only 41 % of the impact
is accounted for in the case of HWP (r=100), for phases A1­A3 between DLCA (0.055 kg
CO2­eq.) and the ‘0/0’ method (0.125 kg CO2­eq.). This should be the same value, as the
production is assumed to happen in the first year of assessment, and cumulative effects
should be equal. For straw as stand­alone production, 71 % of the production impacts are
accounted for when comparing DLCA (0.066 kg CO2­eq.) and ‘0/0’ (0.092 kg CO2­eq.).
In the dynamic LCA, only three GHGs are characterized: CO2, CH4, and N2O. In the
static results, these three GHGs make up 98.3 % of the total impact. Thus, it is deemed
12
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:19==
sufficient only characterizing these three GHGs for obtaining correct results in the DLCA.
Biogenic carbon in LCA
13
==PAGE:20==
4
Discussion and conclusion
From the results of the case study, it is clear that the different methods give different
results, dependant on whether they consider storage, regrowth or nothing at all. These
factors raise several discussion points, including crediting of temporary storage, addition­
ality and permanence, applicability of methods, and whether consequential considerations
should be applied.
4.1
Crediting temporary carbon storage
Within the LCA community there is a discussion whether weighting timing of emissions
and crediting temporary storage is ethically justifiable (Brandão and Levasseur 2011; Hell­
weg and Frischknecht 2004; Parisa et al. 2022). The argument against crediting tempo­
rary storage (and thus delaying emissions) is that “... the welfare for future generations
should be a concern to us” (Hellweg et al. 2003). When crediting temporary storage,
welfare for current generations is deemed more important than the welfare of future gen­
erations. As seen when comparing fig. 3.2 and fig. A.1, the cumulative radiative forcing
within the TH decrease with longer storage periods, however the argument against this in­
direct crediting, is that on an infinite timescale the differences in radiative forcing would be
minuscule, unless permanent storage is achieved, which is indicated by the diminishing
effects of storage in the dynamic GWP500 results, seen in appendix A.
An argument in favor of the crediting of temporary storage, is the possibility of developing
technologies for mitigating the impacts of these future emissions (World Resource Institute
and WBCSD 2022), since the period before climate tipping points are reached is extended.
Here, the dynamic timeline gives valuable insight into whether a cooling effect is achieved
in the short term. According to Hellweg et al. (2003), imposing the risks associated with
delaying emissions to future generations is not ethically justifiable. A counter­argument to
this, would be that imposing the risk is less damaging than imposing the negative effects
associated with this risk directly.
On a more practical level, crediting of temporary storage which lead to negative results
within the TH can lead to excessive use of the biogenic material, as also noted by Resch et
al. (2022). Especially the methods only considering storage, and not regrowth, generally
produce negative results, even when the dynamic results are climate neutral at best or
have an overall warming effect. In FBZ, the authors have decided to limit the possible
credit available, to discourage the use of excessive amounts of HWP. Another way of
underlining the consequences of increased use of biogenic materials, is reporting dLUC
and iLUC, as is required in World Resource Institute and WBCSD (2022). These impacts
have not been considered in this study, as the origins of the straw and HWP are undefined.
Generally, the ton­year methods only considering the storage period, and not the re­
growth period are too simplistic and produce bloated results, making climate warming
products seem to have cooling effects. Application of these methods is therefore not rec­
ommended, thus answering the open question in the GHG Protocol draft: Other metrics
should be used to report on product storage and longevity.
4.2
Permanence and additionality
The methodologies considering temporary storage are very sensitive to the length of this
period, and it is therefore important to make the correct assumption regarding this pe­
riod. Here, the disposal is assumed to happen after 60 years at the building EOL. The
14
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:21==
lifetime of 60 years is set as a standard, to ease comparison. However actual lifetime of
the building might be very different, both dependant on typology and construction year,
as seen in R. Andersen and Negendahl (2023). Andersen and Negendahl predict the
lifespan across residential building categories to be 168 years, when considering their
entire data set. However, when only considering buildings constructed between 1990–
2010, the predicted lifespan decreases to 81 years. Further, there is significant deviations
between single­ and multifamily housing. Applying a building lifetime of >100 years (and
assuming the same lifetime for the biogenic products), would be considered as permanent
storage for some methods. However, assuming this lifetime for all residential buildings
would not be correct, and would lead to inflated storage times for new buildings, and thus
inflated results. Another crucial assumption is that building lifetime equals product life­
time. Cherubini et al. (2012b) recommends using a chi­square distribution for modelling
the oxidation of bio­C at EOL. In combination with predicted lifetimes as given in R. An­
dersen and Negendahl (2023), this could embrace the uncertainties of the DLCA, which
is desirable for studies comparing e.g. construction products. Resch et al. (2021) also
underline the need for modelling uncertainty of future activities, as these are not equally
accurate as current activities.
Additionality has not been considered in this project, which is a limitation for the results.
Levasseur et al. (2013) point to the fact that “The benefits of forest exploitation would also
have decreased if we [...] had considered the additional amount of carbon sequestered
when the forest is kept untouched”. In Guest et al. (2013b), it is also stated that addition­
ality should be determined compared to a baseline scenario. A point made in the report
The Global Land Squeeze by the World Resource Institute (Searchinger et al. 2023a)
concludes that this baseline can not be a scenario where no regrowth occurs, as the for­
est floor would not remain barren after harvest, but would naturally regrow. The World
Resource Institute (WRI) recommends using a ‘no harvest’ scenario as baseline. This
demands a representative NEP function.
4.3
The forest system: NEP or regrowth?
In this study, both a normal distribution function is used to describe regrowth (Cherubini
et al. 2011), and a NEP function considering a Swedish forest, which is representative for
most HWPs on the European market. However, NEP profiles are determined by small­
scale geographical characteristics (Grant 2004; Peichl et al. 2023), and the NEP function
applied here, should be seen as an example, making comparisons between simple (bell­
curve) and more specific regrowth functions (NEP) possible. From the results seen in
fig. 3.2, the conclusion could be that shorter rotation periods are desirable. This conclu­
sion is not valid when considering the whole forest system, and several studies find that
increasing rotation periods increases the bio­C sequestration of the forests (Cordier et al.
2022; Peichl et al. 2023; Searchinger et al. 2023a). A consequence of this is however,
that the supply of HWPs would decrease (Searchinger et al. 2023a).
Another critique made in Searchinger et al. (2023b) is that there is a large loss in biogenic
matter when producing HWPs, both during harvest and production. The volumetric loss
from production is accounted for in the Ecoinvent dataset, however losses of biogenic
material due to the forest management such as thinnings are not accounted for. Fur­
thermore, emissions from by­products are not considered, as a cut­off approach is used.
Emissions from woody debris left behind after harvest is only accounted for in the NEP
scenario. In none of the regrowth scenarios is the increased albedo effect from clear­
cutting considered, even though it can have significant cooling effects in the first decade
after harvest (Cherubini et al. 2012a).
Biogenic carbon in LCA
15
==PAGE:22==
As noted before, the NEP function used in this project serves as an example of effects of
including more detailed modelling of the forest system. The use of this function has some
uncertainties. First, the Net Primary Production (NPP) component of the NEP function
both considers tree regrowth and understory. Thus, some part of the bio­C is sequestered
in smaller shrubs and not in the actual HWP. However, when considering the NEP function,
the forest as an entire system is encompassed. If only the NPP of the tree growth was to
be used, the time lag before the forest would act as a C sink would be even longer, and the
system would only be C neutral after 100+ years. Second, as the NEP function is scaled
to the appropriate bio­C sequestration from the HWP, it might not match the Ecoinvent
dataset. Another approach would be to consider the forest system ‘top down’, i.e. doing a
comprehensive DLCA of the forest system, considering all products and by­products, and
allocating inventory/impacts according to e.g. physical aspects or economic allocation,
when the entire system has been modelled.
Since the dynamic results for HWP are highly dependant on the regrowth function applied,
the same level of detail might be applied to the regrowth function of the fast­growing
biomass. The soil carbon contents should be considered, as annual crops usually leads
to degradation of the soil and declining carbon content over time (Brandão et al. 2011;
Costa et al. 2020).
4.4
Application of methods
In this study, a total of 7 different methods for accounting biogenic carbon has been as­
sessed. The two static methods, which are also the most widespread (Hoxha et al. 2020),
lay the basis for all other methods. Both methods are rather simple, however when apply­
ing the ‘­1/+1’ method, it is important to balance the sequestration and release of bio­C.
The three table­value methods, are also simple to apply, as long as table­values are avail­
able. Calculating the Lashof credit with a storage time of e.g. 35 years is not as simple
as looking up a value. For FBZ, the only credits given for HWP was for a rotation period
of 100 years, and since no equation is given in the article, calculating another factor for a
shorter or longer rotation period is not straight­forward.
For DLCA, it was chosen to work with Brightway 2.5 and Temporalis, to directly use the
Ecoinvent database. This combination introduced some limitations with the way Tempo­
ralis handles the inventory, and not all flows and activities ended up being charaterized as
described in section 3.4. Thus, if one wishes to combine Ecoinvent and DLCA, simplifica­
tions in the inventory must be made, or cut­off values should be decreased, which would
induce longer calculation times. The use of the DLCA method generally requires con­
ducting an entire LCA, whereas LCA in the building industry usually relies on data from
Environmental Product Declarations (EPD). Thus, for this methodology to be adopted
within the industry, it must be applied in EPDs. In EN16760 (CEN 2015) it is stated that:
“Where temporal accounting of GHG emissions is relevant, it should be taken into account
but reported separately.” However, the method they refer to, for accounting for temporary
storage is the ILCD method, which has certain limitations.
The GWPbio is simpler than DLCA to apply, since it only considers the bio­C flows, and
as seen in fig. 3.1 the results are almost similar to DLCA (with some difference due to
the GraphTraversal). The method can be applied alongside static LCA, and can thus
provide additional information to EPDs. However, finding correct or representative NEP
functions can be difficult, especially when considering Fennoscandian boreal forests, as
knowledge is limited here (Peichl et al. 2023). Furthermore, there should be guidelines
on how to determine a reference scenario, as this consideration can alter the conclusions
of the study (Levasseur et al. 2013; Searchinger et al. 2023a).
16
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:23==
A method not directly considered in this project, but used by FBZ (Resch et al. 2022), is a
simplification of the IRF for CO2. Here, Resch et al. (2021) find that an exponential decay
function of f(t) = 2 −exp ((ln 2/TH)t) fits the IRF. For a TH of 100 years, the method is
within 0.2 % of an equivalent IRF calculation, considering a reference emission of 1 kg
CO2. This method might be easier to implement than DLCA, and it can also be applied
to EPD results, which however introduces some uncertainty as these results are already
characterized into CO2­equivalents.
An alternative to practitioners themselves implementing dynamic considerations to data
sets, could be implementation of dynamic aspects in EPDs or even in Forest Management
Certifications, reported as additional information. This would allow for standardisation and
consistency in application, and for the practice to reach a broader “audience”.
4.5
Consequential aspects of biogenic carbon accounting
Peng et al. (2023) project wood consumption to increase by 54 % globally between 2010
and 2050, and both FBZ (Resch et al. 2022) and World Resource Institute and WBCSD
(2022) consider some aspects in regards to the rising demand of HWPs. In FBZ it is
not possible to achieve negative results from wooden products, which is done to reduce
material (over­) consumption. In the GHG Protocol, iLUC shall be reported, which also
considers the consequences of increasing wood demand. In Guest et al. (2013b), the ad­
ditionality of the bio­C sequestration should be considered, which can also be considered
as consequential modelling.
As wood demand is projected to increase, and the construction industry is looking towards
wood products to decrease their climate impact, consequential analysis should be con­
ducted, also considering the real dynamic life cycle of the bio­C flows. This coupling of
dynamic and consequential LCA is according to C. E. Andersen et al. (2021) rarely oc­
curring in scientific studies, and will provide valuable insights for both forest management
and the building industry.
4.6
Conclusion
In this study, seven different ways of accounting for bio­C in LCA was assessed. Several
differences existed between the methods, mainly on whether they considered the biogenic
material to be climate neutral, if the effects of temporary storage were credited, and if the
rotation period was modelled. The methods was used on a case study of straw products
and harvested wood products with different rotation periods. Generally, the static meth­
ods always produced positive results, and the ton­year methods only considering storage
always produced negative results. The ton­year methods are deemed too simplistic, and
does not consider all relevant aspects of the bio­C flows, and are thus not recommended
to be applied. For the dynamic LCA methods, the results were both dependant on length
of rotation period and length of storage period. With decreasing storage periods, the
methods have higher climate impacts, and with decreasing rotation periods, the methods
have lower climate impacts. However, a general consensus on forest management is
that increasing rotation periods lead to higher bio­C accumulation in the forest system,
and thus are better for mitigating climate change (Cordier et al. 2022; Peichl et al. 2023;
Searchinger et al. 2023a). This underlines the need for “correct” modelling of the C flows
in the regrowth function.
To increase applicability and use of dynamic considerations, it is recommended to use the
GWPbio method, as this produces results similar to DLCA, but is easier to implement. An
alternative to LCA practitioners themselves calculating dynamic aspects for e.g. building
Biogenic carbon in LCA
17
==PAGE:24==
LCAs, is to implement these results in either EPD standards or in forest management
certification schemes.
Generally, it is recommended to consider either the static and/or dynamic methods, as only
crediting storage leads to undesirable results, where static methods are conservative and
don’t consider weighting of future emissions, and dynamic methods present possibilities
for analyzing short­term climate impacts.
4.6.1
Future work
It is unclear whether the implementation of a NEP function for modelling regrowth in this
study is compatible with the Ecoinvent dataset used. A recommendation is to consider
the forest system ‘top down’ i.e. doing a comprehensive DLCA of the forest system,
considering all products and by­products, and allocating inventory/impacts according to
e.g. physical aspects or economic allocation, when the entire system has been modelled.
Furthermore, consequential aspects such as iLUC and additionality should be added to
the results presented in this study, which gives a deeper insight in the climate effects
of harvesting biogenic materials for use in buildings. This work can then be used for
conducting consequential and dynamic LCAs for buildings, comparing the climate effects
of bio­based buildings with more usual building materials, such as concrete and steel.
18
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:25==
Bibliography
Ahlström, Anders et al. (2022). “Widespread Unquantified Conversion of Old Boreal Forests
to Plantations”. In: Earth’s Future 10.11, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1029/2022EF003221.
Andersen, C. E. et al. (2021). “Embodied GHG Emissions of Wooden Buildings—Challenges
of Biogenic Carbon Accounting in Current LCA Methods”. In: Frontiers in Built Environ­
ment 7.August, pp. 1–15. DOI: 10.3389/fbuil.2021.729096.
Andersen, Rune and Kristoffer Negendahl (2023). “Lifespan prediction of existing building
typologies”. In: Journal of Building Engineering 65. DOI: 10.1016/j.jobe.2022.105696.
Arehart, Jay H. et al. (2021). “Carbon sequestration and storage in the built environment”.
In: Sustainable Production and Consumption 27, pp. 1047–1063. ISSN: 2352­5509.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2021.02.028.
Brandão, Miguel and Annie Levasseur (Jan. 2011). Assessing Temporary Carbon Storage
in Life Cycle Assessment and Carbon Footprinting: Outcomes of an expert workshop.
Brandão, Miguel et al. (2011). “Soil organic carbon changes in the cultivation of energy
crops: Implications for GHG balances and soil quality for use in LCA”. In: Biomass and
Bioenergy 35.6, pp. 2323–2336. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2009.10.019.
Breton, Charles et al. (2018). “Assessing the climate change impacts of biogenic car­
bon in buildings: A critical review of two main dynamic approaches”. In: Sustainability
(Switzerland) 10.6. DOI: 10.3390/su10062020.
Cardellini, Giuseppe et al. (2018). “Temporalis, a generic method and tool for dynamic
Life Cycle Assessment”. In: Science of The Total Environment 645, pp. 585–595. ISSN:
0048­9697. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.07.044. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969718325257.
CEN (Nov. 2015). EN16760: Bio­based products – Life Cycle Assessment.
– (Oct. 2019). EN15804+A2: Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product
declarations – Core rules of the product category of construction products.
Cherubini, Francesco et al. (2011). “CO2 emissions from biomass combustion for bioen­
ergy: Atmospheric decay and contribution to global warming”. In: GCB Bioenergy 3.5,
pp. 413–426. DOI: 10.1111/j.1757-1707.2011.01102.x.
Cherubini, Francesco et al. (2012a). “Site­specific global warming potentials of biogenic
CO2 for bioenergy: Contributions from carbon fluxes and albedo dynamics”. In: Envi­
ronmental Research Letters 7.4. DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/7/4/045902.
Cherubini, Francesco et al. (2012b). “Application of probability distributions to the model­
ing of biogenic CO2 fluxes in life cycle assessment”. In: GCB Bioenergy 4.6, pp. 784–
798. DOI: 10.1111/j.1757-1707.2011.01156.x.
Cordier, Sylvain et al. (2022). “Dynamic LCA of the increased use of wood in buildings
and its consequences: Integration of CO2 sequestration and material substitutions”.
In: Building and Environment 226.February, p. 109695. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2022.
109695.
Costa, Marcela Porto et al. (2020). “Representing crop rotations in life cycle assessment:
a review of legume LCA studies”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment
25.10, pp. 1942–1956. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-020-01812-x.
Garcia, Rita and Fausto Freire (2014). “Carbon footprint of particleboard: a comparison
between ISO/TS 14067, GHG Protocol, PAS 2050 and Climate Declaration”. In: Journal
of Cleaner Production 66, pp. 199–209. ISSN: 0959­6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.073.
Biogenic carbon in LCA
19
==PAGE:26==
Grant, Robert F. (2004). “Modeling topographic effects on net ecosystem productivity of
boreal black spruce forests”. In: Tree Physiology 24.1, pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1093/treephys/
24.1.1.
Grant, Robert F. et al. (2007). “Net ecosystem productivity of boreal jack pine stands
regenerating from clearcutting under current and future climates”. In: Global Change
Biology 13.7, pp. 1423–1440. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2007.01363.x.
Grant, Robert F. et al. (2010). “Net ecosystem productivity of temperate and boreal forests
after clearcutting – a FluxnetCanada measurement and modelling synthesis”. In: Tellus,
Series B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology 62.5, pp. 475–496. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-
0889.2010.00500.x.
Guest, Geoffrey et al. (2013a). “Global Warming Potential of Carbon Dioxide Emissions
from Biomass Stored in the Anthroposphere and Used for Bioenergy at End of Life”. In:
Journal of Industrial Ecology 17.1, pp. 20–30. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-
9290.2012.00507.x.
Guest, Geoffrey et al. (2013b). “Consistent quantification of climate impacts due to bio­
genic carbon storage across a range of bio­product systems”. In: Environmental Impact
Assessment Review 43, pp. 21–30. DOI: 10.1016/j.eiar.2013.05.002.
Hansen, R. N. et al. (2022). “Wood as a carbon mitigating building material: A review of
consequential LCA and biogenic carbon characteristics”. In: IOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science 1078.1. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/1078/1/012066.
Hauschild, Michael Z. et al. (2017). Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice, pp. 1–
1216. ISBN: 9783319564753. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Hellweg, Stefanie and Rolf Frischknecht (2004). “Evaluation of long­term impacts in LCA”.
In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 9.5, pp. 339–341. DOI: 10.1007/
BF02979427.
Hellweg, Stefanie et al. (2003). “Discounting and the environment: Should current impacts
be weighted differently than impacts harming future generations?” In: International Jour­
nal of Life Cycle Assessment 8.1, pp. 8–18. DOI: 10.1007/BF02978744.
Himes, Austin and Gwen Busby (2020). “Wood buildings as a climate solution”. In: Devel­
opments in the Built Environment 4.September. DOI: 10.1016/j.dibe.2020.100030.
Hoxha, Endrit et al. (2020). “Biogenic carbon in buildings: a critical overview of LCA meth­
ods”. In: Buildings and Cities 1.1, pp. 504–524. DOI: 10.5334/bc.46.
Joos, F. et al. (2013). “Carbon dioxide and climate impulse response functions for the com­
putation of greenhouse gas metrics: A multi­model analysis”. In: Atmospheric Chemistry
and Physics 13.5, pp. 2793–2825. DOI: 10.5194/acp-13-2793-2013.
Kirschbaum, Miko U.F. (2006). “Temporary carbon sequestration cannot prevent climate
change”. In: Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 11.5­6, pp. 1151–
1164. DOI: 10.1007/s11027-006-9027-8.
Levasseur, Annie et al. (2010). “Considering time in LCA: Dynamic LCA and its application
to global warming impact assessments”. In: Environmental Science and Technology
44.8, pp. 3169–3174. DOI: 10.1021/es9030003.
Levasseur, Annie et al. (2012). “Assessing temporary carbon sequestration and storage
projects through land use, land­use change and forestry: Comparison of dynamic life
cycle assessment with ton­year approaches”. In: Climatic Change 115.3­4, pp. 759–
776. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-012-0473-x.
Levasseur, Annie et al. (2013). “Biogenic Carbon and Temporary Storage Addressed with
Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 17.1, pp. 117–128.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00503.x.
Liptow, Christin et al. (2018). “Accounting for effects of carbon flows in LCA of biomass­
based products – exploration and evaluation of a selection of existing methods”. In:
20
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:27==
The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 23, pp. 2110–2125. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11367-018-1436-x.
Morris, Freya et al. (2021). “On the embodied carbon of structural timber versus steel,
and the influence of LCA methodology”. In: Building and Environment 206, p. 108285.
ISSN: 0360­1323. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108285.
Mutel, Chris et al. (2023). Brightway LCA software framework (GitHub). URL: https://
github.com/brightway-lca.
Myhre, Gunnar et al. (2013a). “Anthropogenic and natural radiative forcing”. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, pp. 659–740.
DOI: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.018.
– (2013b). “Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing: Supplementary Material”. In:
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, pp. 1–44.
URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/07/WGI_AR5.Chap_.8_SM.pdf.
OECD (Feb. 1991). “Estimation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks”. In: Final Re­
port of the OECD Expert Meeting. Paris, France.
Ouellet­Plamondon, Claudiane M. et al. (2023). “Carbon footprint assessment of a wood
multi­residential building considering biogenic carbon”. In: Journal of Cleaner Produc­
tion, p. 136834. ISSN: 09596526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.136834.
Parisa, Zack et al. (2022). “The time value of carbon storage”. In: Forest Policy and Eco­
nomics 144, p. 102840. ISSN: 1389­9341. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2022.
102840.
Peichl, Matthias et al. (2023). “Landscape­variability of the carbon balance across man­
aged boreal forests”. In: Global Change Biology 29.4, pp. 1119–1132. DOI: 10.1111/
gcb.16534.
Peng, Liqing et al. (2023). “The carbon costs of global wood harvests”. In: Nature 620.Au­
gust, pp. 14–16. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06187-1.
Pittau, Francesco et al. (2018). “Fast­growing bio­based materials as an opportunity for
storing carbon in exterior walls”. In: Building and Environment 129.August 2017, pp. 117–
129. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.12.006.
Resch, E. et al. (2021). “Estimating dynamic climate change effects of material use in
buildings—Timing, uncertainty, and emission sources”. In: Building and Environment
187. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.107399.
Resch, E. et al. (Sept. 2022). “FutureBuilt Zero – A simplified dynamic LCA method with re­
quirements for low carbon emissions from buildings”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth
and Environmental Science 1078.1. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/1078/1/012047.
Searchinger, Timothy et al. (2023a). The Global Land Squeeze: Managing the Growing
Competition for Land. World Resource Institute. DOI: https://doi.org/10.46830/wrirpt.
20.00042.
– (July 2023b). Wood Is Not the Climate­friendly Building Material Some Claim it to Be.
URL: https://www.wri.org/insights/mass-timber-wood-construction-climate-change.
Strassmann, K. M. et al. (2008). “Simulating effects of land use changes on carbon fluxes:
past contributions to atmospheric CO2 increases and future commitments due to losses
of terrestrial sink capacity”. In: Tellus B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology 60.4,
pp. 583–603. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0889.2008.00340.x.
World Resource Institute and WBCSD (Sept. 2022). Greenhouse Gas Protocol – Land
Sector and Removals Guidance (Draft for Pilot Testing and Review). URL: https://
ghgprotocol.org/land-sector-and-removals-guidance.
Biogenic carbon in LCA
21
==PAGE:28==
World Resource Institute and WBCSD (June 2023). Greenhouse Gas Protocol – Land
Sector and Removals Initiative: Project Overview. URL: https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/
default/files/2023-06/Project%20Overview_16%20June%202023.pdf.
Zieger, Vladimir et al. (2020). “Impact of GHGs temporal dynamics on the GWP assess­
ment of building materials: A case study on bio­based and non­bio­based walls”. In:
Building and Environment 185, p. 107210. ISSN: 0360­1323. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.buildenv.2020.107210.
22
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:29==
A
Additional results
Table A.1 GWP100 using different methods for different biogenic materials. *Bio­C sequestra­
tion is limited to a maximum compensation of waste treatment and 75 % of material production.
The “official” result of FBZ is therefore 0.03 kg CO2­eq.
GWP100
A1­A3
B1
C3­C4
Sum
Strw (virgin)
0/0
0.092
0.0
0.009
0.101
­1/+1
−1.228
0.0
1.329
0.101
DLCA
0.066
−1.32
0.655
−0.599
GWPbio
0.092
−1.32
0.664
−0.564
Lashof
−1.228
−0.651
1.329
−0.55
ILCD
−1.228
−0.792
1.329
−0.691
FBZ
N/A
Strw (wheat)
0/0
0.03
0.0
0.009
0.039
­1/+1
−1.290
0.0
1.329
0.039
DLCA
0.018
−1.32
0.655
−0.646
GWPbio
0.03
−1.32
0.664
−0.626
Lashof
−1.29
−0.651
1.329
−0.612
ILCD
−1.29
−0.792
1.329
−0.753
FBZ
N/A
HWP (r=70)
0/0
0.125
0.0
0.01
0.135
­1/+1
−1.341
0.0
1.476
0.135
DLCA
0.055
−1.047
0.728
−0.265
GWPbio
0.125
−1.047
0.738
−0.184
Lashof
−1.341
−0.723
1.476
−0.588
ILCD
−1.341
−0.88
1.476
−0.745
FBZ
N/A
HWP (r=100)
0/0
0.125
0.0
0.01
0.135
­1/+1
−1.341
0.0
1.476
0.135
DLCA
0.055
−0.852
0.728
−0.069
GWPbio
0.125
−0.852
0.738
0.011
Lashof
−1.341
−0.723
1.476
−0.588
ILCD
−1.341
−0.88
1.476
−0.745
FBZ*
0.125
−1.27
0.24
0.03
HWP (r=NEP)
0/0
0.125
0.0
0.01
0.135
­1/+1
−1.341
0.0
1.476
0.135
DLCA
0.055
−0.677
0.728
0.106
GWPbio
0.125
−0.677
0.738
0.186
Lashof
−1.341
−0.723
1.476
−0.588
ILCD
−1.341
−0.88
1.476
−0.745
FBZ
N/A
Biogenic carbon in LCA
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure A.1 Cumulative radiative forcing for 5 different biogenic products, calculated using the
DLCA framework with a storage period of 30 years. The ‘Fossil CO2’ line depicts a reference
emission of 1 kg CO2 at the starting year. Results in CO2 equivalents at the end of the TH of
100 years (i.e. GWP100): Strw (virgin): ­0.24 kg CO2­eq.; Strw (wheat): ­0.29 kg CO2­eq.;
HWP (r=70): 0.13 kg CO2­eq.; HWP (r=100): 0.33 kg CO2­eq.; HWP (NEP): 0.5 kg CO2­eq.
Figure A.2 Comparison of SLCA and DLCA results using the GWP500 metric from IPCC 2007
for different products and rotation periods.
24
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:31==
Table A.2 ReCiPe 2013 V1.13 results. Note, that HWP results are indifferent to the rotation periods in the static methods. Max. values within each
category are presented in bold face.
Method
Impact Category
Unit
Strw (virgin)
Strw (wheat)
HWP
ReCiPe
Midpoint
(H)
agricultural land occupation
square meter­year
4.00E+00
1.31E­01
4.05E+00
ozone depletion
kg CFC­11­Eq
8.39E­09
2.33E­09
1.63E­08
climate change
kg CO2­Eq
1.09E­01
4.50E­02
1.35E­01
terrestrial acidification
kg SO2­Eq
4.48E­04
4.33E­04
7.94E­04
photochemical oxidant formation
kg NMVOC­Eq
7.14E­04
2.95E­04
1.35E­03
metal depletion
kg Fe­Eq
5.64E­03
2.26E­03
8.00E­03
water depletion
m3 water­Eq
3.36E­03
1.21E­02
2.67E­03
freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB­Eq
2.15E­03
1.52E­03
2.80E­03
human toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB­Eq
2.63E­02
4.85E­02
8.94E­02
urban land occupation
square meter­year
2.12E­03
5.36E­04
4.81E­02
particulate matter formation
kg PM10­Eq
2.42E­04
1.30E­04
4.76E­04
freshwater eutrophication
kg P­Eq
8.10E­05
3.12E­05
5.96E­05
marine eutrophication
kg N­Eq
3.69E­05
2.53E­04
6.95E­05
terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB­Eq
­1.01E­04
2.28E­04
8.04E­05
fossil depletion
kg oil­Eq
2.15E­02
8.52E­03
4.36E­02
ionising radiation
kg U235­Eq
4.24E­03
1.08E­03
2.47E­02
marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DB­Eq
2.00E­03
1.33E­03
2.70E­03
ReCiPe
Endpoint
(H,A)
total
points
2.19E­01
1.07E­01
2.32E­01
ecosystem quality
points
1.73E­01
6.62E­02
1.76E­01
resources
points
5.01E­03
1.64E­03
7.99E­03
human health
points
4.13E­02
3.93E­02
4.86E­02
Biogenic carbon in LCA
25
==PAGE:32==
B
Uncertainty analysis
A Monte Carlo analysis (MC) was done for SLCA results in Brightway 2.5 with 1000 runs
each, using the uncertainty in the ecoinvent 3.8 datasets.
(a) MC histogram
(b) Average results from MC
Figure B.1 Results from MC with a 1000 runs for each product. The stochastic results are
slightly higher than the static results, however straw has a lower climatic impact than HWP in
both cases.
26
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:33==
C
Storage factors from GHG Protocol
Table C.1 Temporary storage factor for two different ton­year accounting methods. Lashof
method is based on an IRF for CO2, whereas the ILCD is a simplification of Lashof, assuming
linear decay. Table adapted from World Resource Institute and WBCSD (2022, Tab. 20.1).
The equation for calculating the credit is: credit = kg CO2 × storagefactor × −1.
Storage period
Temporary storage factor
[years]
ILCD ton­year approx.
Lashof ton­year method
20
0.2
0.15
30
0.3
0.229
40
0.4
0.312
50
0.5
0.399
60
0.6
0.493
70
0.7
0.594
80
0.8
0.706
90
0.9
0.833
100
1.0
1.0
Biogenic carbon in LCA
27
==PAGE:34==
D
Graphic representation of two ton­year
methods
Figure taken from Levasseur et al. (2012).
Figure D.1 “Illustration of the two principal ton­year approaches for a 100­year time horizon:
the Moura­Costa method (b) and the Lashof method (c), both of which being based on the
cumulative radiative forcing of 1 t CO2 (a)” – Levasseur et al. (2012)
28
Biogenic carbon in LCA
==PAGE:35==
E
List of electronic appendices
• Jupyter notebook with script for static and dynamic results:
– E.1_strw-vs-wood.ipynb
• Jupyter notebook investigating CFs for different CO2 flows:
– E.2_gwp-cf.ipynb
• Text file with code for installing Brightway and Temporalis:
– E.3_installation.txt
Biogenic carbon in LCA
29
