==PAGE:1==
Applying Natural Language Processing for
the curation of Biological Databases
Anvende Natural Language Processing til at
hjælpe med at udfylde biologisk database
Master of Science ­ thesis
DTU Biosustain and DTU Compute
Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the institutes of DTU Compute and
DTU Novo Nordisk biosustain, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Author Niels Jakob Larsen ­ s213428
Signature
Date
ii
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In recent years, transformer and large language models have gained substantial recog­
nition for their performance in dealing with text.
This project aims to use transformer models for chemistry and biological data to predict
curations of the biological database MIBiG. The project is divided into four task areas:
predicting if scientific articles can be introduced to MIBiG, predicting the class and activ­
ity of a secondary metabolite molecule, and predicting secondary metabolite molecules
represented as SMILES strings given a representation of a biosynthetic gene cluster.
Primarily, the transformer architecture of T5 was applied to the objectives.
In the project, promising results were obtained for most of the tasks. Especially note­
worthy are the results of predicting molecular classes of secondary metabolite molecules
with perfect accuracy of 1. Also, the result of predicting secondary metabolite molecules
represented as SMILES strings, with an accuracy of 25% and a Rouge F1 score of 0.95.
In conclusion, the objectives outlined in the project description were met satisfactorily.
All code and datasets is available in the GitHub repository Transformer DB Curation MIBiG
link here [1]
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Author Niels Jakob Larsen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator.
Giorgio Giannone, PhD­student, DTU Compute
Supervisor
Kai Blin, Senior Researcher, DTU biosustain
Supervisor
Ole Winther, Professor, DTU Compute
Supervisor
iv
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
0.1
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
0.2
Introduction to problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
0.3
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Literature Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methods
18
2.1
Tasks in project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2
Plots and illustrations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3
Short Description of Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.5
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3
Results
29
3.1
Overview and understanding of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2
Understanding the Abstract data for binary classification . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3
Understanding text2text MIBiG data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.4
Performance of abstract binary classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.5
Performance of models predicting secondary metabolites molecules . . . . 38
3.6
Model performance for the task of predicting molecular classes . . . . . . . 43
3.7
Multitasking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4
Discussion
48
4.1
Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.2
Bias in the task of binary classifying Abstracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.3
RL vs supervised learning for making the predictions better of SMILES . . . 50
4.4
How to evaluate predicted SMILES in a meaningful way?
. . . . . . . . . . 51
4.5
Bias in reduction of protein sequences longer than 850 amino acids
. . . . 51
4.6
Improvements and possible future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.7
Project oversights
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5
Conclusion
54
5.1
Binary classification of scientific abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.2
prediction of classes and activity of secondary metabolite molecules . . . . 54
5.3
Prediction of secondary metabolite molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.4
Final conclusive words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Bibliography
56
A Appendix
59
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:7==
0.1
Project description
The MiBIG (Minimal information about Biosynthetic gene cluster) database currently has
2,721 data entries (https://github.com/mibig­secmet/mibig­json/) that are annotated (around
2500 active entries), each containing minimal details on a specific secondary metabolite
gene cluster, PubMed reference, SMILE­structure, and more (Terlouw et al.,2023). The
Pubmed article describes the cluster/metabolite produced in the gene cluster. These ar­
ticles, or their abstracts, will be labeled as ‘positive’ articles. An equal number of articles
labeled as ‘negative’ will be selected from topics unrelated to the biosynthesis of gene
clusters but from the same journals as the positive labeled articles.
These approximately 5000 articles will serve as the training base for fine­tuning an NLP
transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017)(Devlin et al., 2019). Furthermore, an SVM model
will also be trained on the exact data for comparison (Rachel Ida Buff, 2009).
If a satisfactory predictive model is developed, it can be implemented using the PubMed
API to stream abstracts from newly released articles in relevant selected journals. To help
curate biological databases.
0.2
Introduction to problem
The problem, as stated in the above problem description, only partially covers the devel­
opmental scope of this thesis. Further exploratory work was done.
The MIBiG database serves as an excellent foundation for supervised learning because
all entries have roughly the same category labels, which can be used as input_text and
target labels. Consequently, different supervised tasks were set up through conversa­
tions with supervisors. These supervised tasks involved predicting molecule activity and
molecule class given a secondary metabolite molecule. Additionally, the task of predicting
secondary metabolite molecules based on the genes in a biosynthetic gene cluster.
Particularly, predicting secondary metabolite molecules could benefit industry and academia.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
1
==PAGE:8==
0.3
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
BGC
Biosynthetic gene cluster
MIBiG
Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster
DB
Database
SMILES
Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System
SVM
Support Vector Machine
FFNN
Feed­forward Neural Network
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
tanh
Hyperbolic Tangent
NLP
Natural Language Processing
Q
Query
K
Key
V
Value
T5
TextToText Transfer Transformer
ESM2
Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2
GPT
Generative Pretrained Transformer
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
ROUGE
Recall Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation
BLEU
Bilingual Evaluation Understudy
CER
CharErrorRate
CV
Crossvalidation
RL
reinforcement learning
Table 1: Table of Abbreviations
2
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Literature Study
The fields of machine learning and deep learning have been rapidly developing over the
past decade, driven by advances in computational power, the availability of large datasets,
and novel algorithmic innovations.
An interesting indicator of this trend is the number of Google searches for the two topics,
which is currently at an all­time high. With a trend line shows that the volume of these
searches has increased since Google first released this data.
More specifically, this project focuses on the natural language processing tasks of text
classification and text­to­text (text2text) transformation. In text classification, standard
classifiers include SVM, KNN, naïve Bayes, decision trees, and random forests, among
others [2]. However, recent advancements in deep learning models have significantly im­
proved performance, surpassing traditional machine learning models in many text classi­
fication tasks. This is due mainly to the ability of deep learning models to learn complex
patterns and representations from large amounts of data.
In particular, the deep learning architecture of transformers has enhanced performance
[3]. The encoder­only transformer model BERT has made significant advancement [4],
which has set new state­of­the­art performance benchmarks on some text classification
tasks.
In the field of text2text tasks, models like GPT­4 and T5 [5] have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in generating human­like text.
A challenge in this field is the requirement for large amounts of data and computational
resources.
In conclusion, natural language processing and transformers are rapidly evolving, with
new models being released quickly.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
3
==PAGE:10==
1.2
background
1.2.1
Deep learning ­ Feed­forward neural network
Artificial neural networks, also known as neural networks seen in Fig 1.1, have found ex­
tensive applications across various fields, tackling diverse problems with varying complex­
ities. The fundamental concept of neural networks involves using interconnected nodes,
or ”neurons.” Each neuron in a neural network holds a value known as its activation, the
value which neuron holds is solely determined based on its input. The lines, or ”weights,”
that interconnect neurons represent one neuron’s output’s strength or influence on an­
other’s activation [6].
One of the most straightforward architectures of a neural network is the all­connected
feed­forward neural network (FFNN). As the name suggests, in this architecture, informa­
tion only travels forward – from the input layer, through the hidden layers, and finally to
the output layer, with no loops or recurrences in the network [6].
Figure 1.1: A simple feed­forward neural network architecture. Where the circles are
neurons and the lines are connections. A cluster of neurons that are aligned horizontally
are referred to as a layer
When inspecting the fully­connected FFNN in figure 1.1, it can be seen that it consists of
an input layer with 6 neurons, two hidden layers with 4 and 3 neurons, respectively, and
an output layer with a single neuron. The input and output shape of the network is given
by the first layer and last layer, respectively. The weights are usually initialized as small
random numbers and adjusted during training as the network learns from data [6].
The hidden layers shown in figure 1.1, perform transformations on the input data using
their weights and non­linear activation functions such as a sigmoid, Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU), or hyperbolic tangent (tanh), both seen in (eq 1.1) for generating higher­level fea­
tures. These layers are referred to as ’hidden’ as their values are not directly observable
in the input or output [6].
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
Tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
Sigmoid(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(1.1)
4
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:11==
The final layer is the output of the model. Depending on the purpose of the model, there
can be a different number of nodes in the layer. A single neuron with a linear activation
function is needed in a regression task predicting continuous value. There must be as
many nodes as there are classes for a multiclass classification task. Each neuron rep­
resents a particular class; the activation function is the softmax function. In the case of
binary classification, the final layer typically contains one node. This node equals the bi­
nary class probability. Sigmoid activation function can then get a value between 0 and 1
[6].
In other words, can an FFNN be thought of as a mapping from the input layer to the output
layer:
Let’s denote D as the inputs of the network: x = x1, . . . , xD and K as the outputs: y =
y1, . . . , yK.
Then, the mapping can be seen as:
f : RD →RK.
(1.2)
To calculate the values, referred to as the activations, of the first layer nodes a(1)
j
where
j denotes the index of the node, i.e. a(1)
j
is the j′th neuron in the first layer, we use the
following equations:
a(1)
j
= h1(
D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0 )
(1.3)
where w(1)
ji
represents the weights, xi represents the inputs, h1 represent a non­linear
activation function and w(1)
j0 represents the bias [6].
In an FFNN, the computations exhibit a layered structure as each layer performs a series
of linear and non­linear transformations on the outputs from the previous layer. Therefore
when calculating the nodes of the output layer in the FFNN example illustrated in figure
1.1, the nodes calculated as seen in Eq 1.4:
yj = h3(
N
∑
i=0
w(3)
ji h2(
M
∑
k=0
w(2)
ik h1(
D
∑
d=0
w(1)
kd xi)))
(1.4)
In the above equation, the bias term represents w(1)
k0+ for the first hidden layer, with the
understanding that x0 = 1, thus maintaining the product w(1)
k0 ∗x0 = w(1)
k0 . Similarly,
bias terms for the other layers can be incorporated by continuing the pattern. While not
explicitly written, the bias terms are included in the weights of the connections from the
extra node to the nodes in the following layer [6].
1.2.2
Deep learning ­ Backpropagation
While the forward pass of an FFNN explained above computes the output of the network
given an input, the backpropagation algorithm enables the network to learn from data.
The algorithm accomplishes this by adjusting the model’s weights and biases.
Backpropagation is a method used to calculate the gradient of the loss function with re­
spect to the weights in the neural network.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
5
==PAGE:12==
The backpropagation algorithm effectively implements the chain rule [7]. The first step
involves the introduction of a notation system that provides a reference to the network’s
weights and biases. Firstly, using w(l)
jk to denote the weight for the connection/line from
the kth neuron in the (l −1)th layer to the jth neuron in the lth layer. For biases using w(l)
j
for the jth neuron in the lth layer. [6].
In a similar manner, the notation for the activation is a(l)j of the jth neuron in the lth
layer[6].
Given these notations, the activation a(l)
j of the jth neuron in the lth layer can be computed
from the activations in the (l −1)th layer using the following equation:
a(l)
j
= h
(∑
k
w(l)
jk a(l−1)
k
+ w(l)
j
)
(1.5)
In this equation, h again denotes the activation function.
In this notation, the error δ(l)
j
in the jth neuron in the lth layer is calculated as follows:
For the output layer:
δ(L)j =
∂L
∂a(L)
j
= (yj −ˆyj) ∗σ′
L(a(L)
j
)
(1.6)
For the hidden layers:
δ(l)j =
(sl+1
∑
i=1
w(l+1)
ji
δ(l+1)
i
)
∗σ′
l(a(l)
j )
(1.7)
where sl+1 denotes the number of neurons in the (l + 1)th layer.
After computing the error terms, we can calculate the gradients of the loss function with
respect to the weights and biases:
∂L
∂w(l)
jk
= δ(l)
j
∗a(l−1)
k
(1.8)
The weights and biases are then updated using the gradients and a learning rate η:
w(l)
jk = w(l)
jk −η ∂L
∂w(l)
jk
(1.9)
After the gradients of the loss function with respect to the weights and biases have been
calculated, the weights and biases are updated with the purpose of minimizing the loss.
Initially, this is accomplished by the not­so­efficient but functional method of gradient de­
scent.
Another optimization algorithm that improves the efficiency is the AdamW optimizer [8]. It
combines the benefits of two extensions of gradient descent, namely Adam (Adaptive Mo­
ment Estimation) and weight decay regularization. This helps to improve generalization
performance and often leads to faster convergence.
6
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:13==
1.2.3
Deep Learning ­ Transformers
Transformer models are a type of deep learning architecture that has become state­of­
the­art in the field of natural language processing (NLP), arguably surpassing recurrent
neural networks with long short­term memory. The transformer model was introduced in
the paper ”Attention Is All You Need” [3]. The crucial attention architecture was introduced
in the paper ”Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate” [9].
A classic Transformer architecture typically consists of N layers of encoders and decoders,
as seen in 1.2. But also encoder­only models (like ESM­2) and decoder­only models (like
GPT) exist.
Figure 1.2: The transformer architecture, as illustrated in [3], consists of a left grey square
representing the encoder and a right grey square representing the decoder. Each encoder
and decoder is a stack of N identical layers.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
7
==PAGE:14==
Transformers models process sequential input data, like natural text or biological se­
quences. It is the encoder’s role to model encoder­embedding, passed to the decoder,
which can again output text, making the encoder­decoder transformer model a text2text
model.
Deep Learning ­ Transformer Architecture
Before the text is passed to the encoder, it must be tokenized, embedded, and positional
encoded. Tokenization is converting raw text into a numerical representation known as a
token. A token can be viewed as a distinct unit of meaning, ranging from a single character
to an entire word or even a sentence, depending on the vocabulary of the tokenizer. The
tokenizer and model are linked together because tokenizer vocabulary and numerical
conversion may vary. An example of a specialized tokenizer is the Evolutionary Scale
Modeling (ESM)­2 tokenizer, which is vocabulary limited to the number of distinct amino
acids, where each amino acid is assigned to a unique token.
After tokenizing the text, it can be fed into the embedding layer, as shown in Figure 1.2.
The embedding layer transforms each token into a higher­dimensional vector represen­
tation with the dimension of Dmodel. The embedding layer acts simply as a lookup table
to retrieve embedding values. The weights in the embedding layer are learned in the pre­
training of the model.
Next is positional encoding. Transformer models do not contain any recurrence or convo­
lution. Therefore, positional encoding is required to capture the specific order of tokens.
This is important simply because the order of words in a sentence can change the mean­
ing of the sentence.
A simple and intuitive approach is to assign numbers sequentially, starting with 1 for the
first token, 2 for the next, and so forth. However, this approach has some drawbacks that
make it unsuitable for positional encodings, like a lack of relative positions.
Instead, using sine and cosine functions, as seen in Eq: (1.10) and (1.11), to add a unique
positional encoding to each token is often used [3].
For even instances of token position.
PE(pos,2i) = sin
(
pos
100002i/dmodel
)
(1.10)
For odd instances of token position.
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos
(
pos
100002i/dmodel
)
(1.11)
Where:
­ pos is the position of the word in the sequence.
­ i is the dimension.
­ dmodel is the total number of dimensions in the model.
The functions seen in Eq: (1.10) and Eq: (1.11) are used for their periodic nature, which
generates a unique output for each unique input position.
Furthermore, the functions (1.10), (1.11) allow the model to learn relative distance be­
tween positions, as for any fixed offset k, PEpos+k can be represented as a linear function
of PEpos, which is believed to make it easier for the model to understand the positional
relationships between different tokens in a sequence [3].
8
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:15==
The input embeddings and positional encoding are concatenated and fed to the encoder,
as seen in fig 1.2. The encoder has basically two layers. First, a multi­head self­attention
mechanism, and next, a FFNN. Where there is a residual connection around each of the
two layers, followed by a normalization layer [3].
The multi­head in multi­head self­attention mechanism refers to the process of the self­
attention mechanism happening multiple times, as seen in the right part of fig 1.3.
The attention process is described in the paper [3] as the ”mapping a query and a set of
key­value pairs to an output, where the query, keys, values, and output are all vectors.
The output is computed as a weighted sum of the values, where the weight assigned to
each value is computed by a compatibility function of the query with the corresponding
key.”
In the explanation cited above, the query (Q), key(K), and value(V) are all derived repre­
sentations of the input (a derivation of a vector with the embedding and positional encoding
for each token). These Q, K, and V derived representations come from multiplying the
inputs with Q, K, and V weights. These weights are learned during the training process.
Figure 1.3: The left side of the illustration displays the self­attention architecture, whereas
the right side depicts the multi­head attention. [3]
When Q, K, and V are determined for all the inputs, the process of self­attention can
occur. The type of self­attention described here is scaled dot­product attention, as seen
in the left part of fig 1.3. First, the Q of a given input is matrix­multiplied with all K’s.
The results of these multiplications are then scaled by dividing by √dk, where dk is the
dimension of K. Next, the softmax function is applied to all scaled products to convert the
scores into probabilities. The softmax function in attention transforms the products into
a probability distribution, thus enabling the model to assign weights to inputs based on
these probabilities.
Next and the final step in the scaled dot­product is the matrix multiplying the results of the
softmax function with the individual V’s.
The entire attention process is described in Eq: (1.12). A more intuitive illustration of the
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
9
==PAGE:16==
same process is illustrated in the appendix in Fig A.1.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKT
√dk
)
V
(1.12)
In conclusion, the process of self­attention captures the amount of focus the input Q should
place on the other K­V pairs in the input sentence. It can be considered the ”relevance” of
Q to all K­V pairs. This relevance is determined by the attention scores, which are derived
from the softmax function. A high score implies a high degree of ”relevance”, and vice
versa.
The multi­head attention is shown on the right side of Fig 1.3 and in equations (1.13)
and (1.14). The self­attention mechanism is executed h times, accompanied by linear
projections of Q, K, and V, each having distinct learned weights. Once the linear projection
and self­attention have been performed h times, all the results are concatenated, and a
final linear projection is carried out.
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Linear(concat(head1, head2, ..., headh))
(1.13)
Where
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W Q
i )
(1.14)
Where W Q
i , W K
i
and W V
i
is linear projections.
In the encoder architecture illustrated in Fig. 1.2, it can be seen that the output from the
multi­head attention passes through a layer of normalization and a residual layer, where
the information from before the attention layer is concatenated to the normalized output.
It is then fed to an FFNN, and once again, normalization and a residual layer are applied.
To briefly sum up the encoder part, its purpose is to transform the input sentence into
a sequence of continuous representations that capture the meaning of each word in its
context, as well as the overall semantics of the sentence.
The output of the encoder is then fed into the decoder. A simple, intuitive way to think of
a decoder is the inverse of an encoder, transforming encodings into tokens/text. Just like
the encoder, the decoder is also composed of ’N’ identical stacks of layers.
Each stack in the decoder consists of three main sub­layers: a masked multi­head atten­
tion layer, a multi­head attention layer, and an FFNN, as shown in Fig. 1.2.
The input to the first sub­layer, the masked multi­head attention mechanism, is the output
of the previous decoder layer but shifts one position to the right in the string of predicted
tokens. Moreover, a positional embedding is applied to the output from the previous de­
coder layer to capture positional information.
The masking process ensures that the attention scores for future positions are set to
zero because, when generating a new token, the token should depend only on preceding
tokens. Hence, masking is applied to future tokens.
The remainder of the masked multi­head attention layer operates as previously explained
for the multi­head attention. After this layer, normalization and a residual layer are applied,
which add the information before the layer to the information after it.
Next comes another attention head, referred to as the ”encoder­decoder attention.” Here’s
an interesting point: K and V come from the encoder, while Q comes from the previous
10
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:17==
step in the decoder (also depicted with two arrows from the encoder and a single one from
the decoder in Fig 1.2).
This setup enables the model to focus on appropriate parts of the input sentence as it
generates each word of the output sentence. The resulting attention scores are normal­
ized, and a residual layer is added around the encoder­decoder attention. This feeds into
an FFNN, after which a final normalization and a residual layer are applied.
Following this, the N­stacked decoder is linearly projected, and the softmax function is
applied to the vocabulary of the tokenizer to identify the token with the highest probability
of being the next one.
In summary, the decoder’s purpose is to take the encoded input (which represents the
input sentence in a continuous form that captures the meaning of each word in context)
and transform it into the final output sequence. This is done in an autoregressive manner,
producing one word at a time while using the encoder’s outputs to help generate each
word. This combination of autoregressive generation and the use of encoder information
is what makes the transformer decoder so effective at text2text tasks.
A key feature of transformer models is that they are highly parallelizable, which means
they can process all words or symbols in the sequence simultaneously rather than sequen­
tially. This parallelization is evident in the attention layers and the stacks of encoders and
decoders. This makes Transformer models more efficient to train and ideal for use with
GPUs.
Furthermore, transformer models can capture long­range dependencies between words,
which recurrent neural network architectures struggle with due to their sequential nature.
The scalability of transformer models is also an essential factor. The model’s ability to
scale with increased data and computational power is a great advantage. The models
can easily be expanded by increasing the model size (number of layers and attention
heads), allowing them to learn more complex patterns from larger datasets.
Lastly, recent transformer models have undergone extensive pre­training. The task of
pre­training is a self­supervised task where the model is trained on abundantly­available
unlabeled text data. The task often involves masking words and then predicting the cor­
rect masked word. This pre­training on a large, abundant dataset easily enables transfer
learning for the model when it is later fine­tuned for a specific task. Transfer learning is
simply the reuse of knowledge learned from one task to a related task [5].
To sum up, transformers, the heart of the model is the attention mechanism which allows
the model to weigh the relevance of words in a sentence. Transformers have become
state­of­the­art in many NLP tasks, partially because of the model’s parallelization, trans­
fer learning, and scalability abilities.
1.2.4
huggingface
Hugging Face is a start­up company focused on democratizing NLP and DL. They ac­
complish this by hosting thousands of pre­trained models, which include state­of­the­art
models like T5, GPT, LLaMa, and ESM­2. These models are trained by leading private
companies and academic institutions.
These models are made available to the public through the Transformers library, allowing
anyone to use them for inference and fine­tuning.
The effort of Hugging Face and other like­minded companies in the NLP field has encour­
aged a culture of knowledge sharing, results transparency, and more, has made the field
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
11
==PAGE:18==
more accessible and provided significant benefits to smaller entities in the ecosystem.
1.2.5
Transformer architectures
Since the introduction of transformer models [3], several transformer architectures have
been developed.
T5
Google introduced the Text­To­Text Transfer Transformer (T5) in 2020 [10]. T5 is a model
that excels in transfer learning across various tasks. It is pre­trained on a large, unlabeled,
open­source dataset in an unsupervised manner.
T5 reframes all NLP tasks into a unified text­to­text framework, allowing it to use the same
model, loss function, and hyperparameters for any NLP task. These tasks include trans­
lation, summarization, question answering, and classification. This multitasking concept
is illustrated in Fig. 1.4.
Figure 1.4: The T5 text­to­text framework is illustrated in [10]. This framework demon­
strates the model’s multitasking ability, which means the model is trained on different
tasks. In the case of this Figure, it shows the model handling four different tasks.
Text Chem T5
Text Chem T5 was introduced in 2023 [11] and is a cross­domain, multi­task chemical
T5 language model. Text Chem­T5 integrates both natural and chemical language. Text
Chem T5 has provided excellent results in the field of chemical NLP [11].
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) is an early transformer
model that has made significant contributions to a range of NLP tasks. The unique as­
pect of BERT is its bidirectionality in processing input data, and this allows the model to
understand the context of a word based on all of its surroundings [4]. Robustly optimized
BERT approach (RoBERTa) exceeds the performance of any BERT models due to BERT
being under­trained, which RoBERTa tackles better by optimizing key hyperparameters
[12]. An excellent RoBERTa­model for biology tasks is Bio­RoBERTa.
GPT­3
As suggested by its name, Generative Pretrained Transformer­3 (GPT­3) is the third gen­
eration of OpenAI’s GPT series. It is an autoregressive (”decoder­only”) language model
that uses previous inputs to predict the next token in the sequence [13].
12
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:19==
ESM­2
Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2 (ESM­2) is a transformer­based protein language model
featuring an encoder­only architecture. It was released by Meta in 2021. Interestingly, it
was pre­trained on all UniRef50 protein sequences (250 million protein sequences), and
the model’s tokenizer vocabulary is restricted to amino acids [14].
The results produced by ESM­2 are awe­inspiring. This is best demonstrated by the
ESM Metagenomic Atlas and ESMfold version of the model. ESMfold can predict pro­
teins’ tertiary structure with unprecedented speed and accuracy. It performs as well as
AlphaFold­2 but much faster [15].
1.2.6
Biology ­ Proteins and Natural Products
The central dogma of molecular biology forms a fundamental part of our understanding of
biological information. In essence, it describes the transfer of sequence information be­
tween information­carrying molecules. The process starts with DNA, which is transcribed
into RNA, and then translated into protein. This process is depicted in Fig. 1.5.
Figure 1.5: The central dogma of molecular biology is depicted in [16]. It represents the
universal process of creating functional proteins: DNA is transcribed into mRNA, then
translated into an amino acid peptide. This peptide undergoes a folding process to be­
come a functional protein.
Proteins perform nearly all cellular functions in organisms. These functions include the
biosynthesis of building blocks, linking these building blocks together, modifying metabo­
lites, and performing many other functions.
Natural products can be divided into two classes: primary and secondary metabolites.
Primary metabolites are the essential metabolic molecules required for life sustenance.
These include carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleic acids [17]. In contrast,
secondary metabolites are not essential for organism survival, but they possess a broad
range of functions, including antifungal, antibacterial, and antiprotozoal properties. Many
natural products in prokaryotic and fungal organisms are produced in biosynthetic gene
clusters (BGCs).
1.2.7
Biology ­ Biosynthetic Gene Clusters
A BGC consists of a closely connected group of predominantly non­homologous genes.
These genes are involved in a specific metabolic pathway, and their physical location on
the genome is often adjacent. Moreover, their expression tends to be jointly regulated.
A simplified BGC illustration is shown in Fig. 1.6.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.6: The illustration provides a simplified depiction of a polyketide BGC in action,
showing the gene cluster on the genome. The proteins translated from these genes work
in tandem to produce a polyketide.
The study of BGCs is significant in the field of natural product discovery and develop­
ment. Identifying and characterizing these clusters is essential because researchers and
pharmaceutical companies can gain insights into the biosynthetic pathways of various or­
ganisms. These insights can be exploited to produce and discover novel compounds with
potential therapeutic or industrial applications.
Molecules like secondary metabolites can be represented as text strings to simplify work­
ing with them. The Simplified Molecular­Input Line­Entry System (SMILES) is a notation
that provides a way to describe the structure of a chemical compound in a compact and
readable string format. It is widely used in bioinformatics and computational chemistry to
facilitate storage, retrieval, and manipulation of chemical information. Table 1.1 illustrates
the most common organic chemistry SMILES notation.
1.2.8
Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster DB
Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster (MIBiG) DB contains standard­
ized entries for experimentally validated BGCs of known function. Each entry minimally
includes information about the nucleotide entry and coordinates of the genomic locus in­
14
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:21==
SMILES Symbol
Meaning
C
Carbon atom
O
Oxygen atom
N
Nitrogen atom
()
Encloses branches
=
Double bond
#
Triple bond
\/
Single or double bond (cis or trans)
@
Chirality (clockwise)
@@
Chirality (anticlockwise)
[ ]
Atomic properties (charge, isotopic mass, etc.)
Table 1.1: Most common SMILES symbols and meanings
volved, the producing organism’s taxonomy, biosynthetic class, name of the produced
compound(s), and literature reference(s) [18].
The most recent version of MIBiG, 3.0, features 2721 entries that detail unique BGCs.
Among these entries, over 1500 also include a SMILES representation of the secondary
metabolite.
1.2.9
Bioinformatics tools ­ BLAST
The Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) is an algorithm and program, which uses
a heuristic approach to search a query biological sequence against a database, to find
similar/homologous sequences [19].
1.2.10
Bioinformatics tools ­ Multiple sequence alignment
Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) is the process of arranging multiple biological se­
quences, often homologous or related, into a rectangular array in such a manner that the
rows represent the individual sequences in the alignment. These sequences are ordered
so that the characters in each column are the same or similar [20].
Columns with conserved regions in the rows of an MSA can imply a functional, structural,
or evolutionary relationship among the sequences or sub­sequences [20].
1.2.11
Evaluation Metrics
In text2text prediction tasks, traditional evaluation metrics such as accuracy and F1 score
become somewhat obsolete due to the inherent difficulty of predicting the exact string.
Therefore, other evaluation metrics are needed. Metrics typically used in machine trans­
lation can be adopted.
The ROUGE­F1 (Recall­Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation ­ F1 Score) metric
is a common evaluation metric in NLP tasks like automatic summarization and machine
translation. The ROUGE score works by calculating the overlap of n­grams between the
predicted and the target text [21].
The F1 variant combines precision and recall, providing a more balanced perspective of
the model’s performance. In the context of the ROUGE F1 score, 1 represents the highest
possible score.
The SacreBLEU score provides a standard way to compute BLEU (Bilingual Evaluation
Understudy) scores, which are also widely used in NLP. The BLEU score quantifies how
close the machine­generated text is to a set (or single) reference by measuring n­gram
precision at a corpus level. For SacreBLEU scores, 1 is the highest possible value [22].
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
15
==PAGE:22==
A higher SacreBLEU score indicates better performance, with a SacreBLEU score of 1
indicating a perfect score.
The CharErrorRate (CER) calculates the minimum number of ”character­level” operations
(insertions, deletions, or substitutions) required to change the predicted text into the ref­
erence text. The CER is computed as this minimum number of operations divided by the
total number of characters in the reference. Lower CER values indicate better perfor­
mance, with a CER of 0 indicating a perfect match between the predicted and reference
texts.
The Python library TorchMetrics has standardized and simplified the computation of ROUGE­
F1, SacreBLEU, and CER scores.
It is also interesting to validate whether the prediction represents a valid molecule when
predicting SMILES representations. For this task, the RDKit library is ideal.
1.2.12
Class Imbalance
Handling imbalanced classes in datasets presents a significant challenge. Class imbal­
ance arises when the number of samples affiliated with one class greatly exceeds those
associated with another class. Such an imbalance could result in a skewed learning pro­
cess where the model predicts the majority class more frequently, leading to diminished
performance towards the minority class [23].
Moreover, conventional performance metrics like accuracy may be misleading in such
scenarios. A model or method consistently assigning all samples to the majority class
could appear highly accurate. Therefore, more appropriate performance metrics should
be applied when dealing with imbalanced datasets [23].
1.2.13
Cross­Validation
Cross­validation (CV) is a statistical method used to evaluate the performance of models.
It accomplishes this by resampling and partitioning the data into training and testing sets.
K­fold CV is a widely used method where the data is partitioned into k parts, where one
part is used for testing and the rest for training.
In k­fold CV, the data is partitioned randomly or stratified into k equal­sized subsamples.
An iteration process occurs in a setup that only includes training and testing sets. Each
iteration assigns one subsample as the test set, while the remaining subsamples are
designated as the training set. For each iteration, a new subsample is assigned as the
test set.
This process ensures that all parts of the entire dataset will act as test and training sets.
In each iteration, metrics such as loss and performance can be calculated. After all itera­
tions, the mean of the loss or other metric can be taken to provide a more unbiased result.
This process is represented in Equation 1.15, where the average error E over k folds of
CV is computed [24].
E = 1
k
k
∑
i=1
Ei
(1.15)
The results found in CV provide a better estimate of how the model will generalize to new
independent data [24].
16
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:23==
1.2.14
Support Vector Machine
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) have succeeded in various fields, including text classi­
fication. The objective of an SVM in a binary classification problem is to separate the two
classes by a hyperplane with the maximum possible margin. This means choosing the hy­
perplane such that the distances from the nearest points of each class to the hyperplane
are maximized, as depicted in Figure 1.7 (a) [25].
SVMs can be categorized into linear and nonlinear models. The linear models are for data
domains where the classes can be divided with a hyperplane linearly. For data domains
where it is impossible to separate the data linearly, a transformation can be made to
another space, known as feature space, where linear separation with a hyperplane is
possible [26].
Figure 1.7: The (a) part of the figure depicts a Binary classification using SVM with labeled
data. The (b) part of the figure depicts the classification of unlabeled data (The solid
circles) [25]
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
17
==PAGE:24==
2
Methods
2.1
Tasks in project
The methods section will be divided into sections explaining the scripts, datasets, and
models to be concise about the various tasks or problems addressed in the project.
2.2
Plots and illustrations
All visualizations were made using the matplotlib.pyplot library and all diagrams were
created using the online tool draw.io unless stated or referenced otherwise.
2.3
Short Description of Scripts
The purpose of this section is to describe the main scripts. These are all available in the
GitHub repository Transformer DB Curation MIBiG link here [1].
The methods and models are discussed in the later section of Models.
2.3.1
Data Extraction and Processing Scripts
playing_ground.py
This script extracts JSON data from the MIBiG DB and optionally creates datasets with
the retrieved information.
download_pubmed_abstracts.py
As this script’s title suggests, the script’s purpose is to download scientific abstracts or full
texts. The script’s primary function, fetch_abstract(pubmed_id), takes a PubMed ID as an
input, constructs a URL for that ID, sends a GET request to that URL, and extracts/scrapes
the abstract or full text of the related publication from the returned HTML content. It then
constructs a dataset with this information.
Given a specific journal, the script can also get all the PubMed ids for articles between a
start and end date.
validating_MIBiG_data.py
Due to some of the scientific references in the MIBiG DB entries pointing to invalid or
wrong articles, the script validating_MIBiG_data.py was created to automate the control
of reference correctness in MIGiG DB.
get_protein_seqs_ncbi.py
This script can retrieve protein/DNA sequences, gene names, or gene products from NCBI
using an accession number pointing to an NCBI­registered BSG. Alternatively, it can use
an accession number pointing to an organism along with the start and end locations in
the organism’s genome. The script further constructs a dataset with this information.
CV_file_creation.py
This script contains two methods of splitting data. The first method shuffles all the data
and performs a k­fold split into training and test sets (and validation sets if necessary).
The second method implements stratified splits. Furthermore, the implementation en­
sures that entries with the same label (either input or target) end up in the same splits.
18
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:25==
This situation can occur when multiple entries in the data share the same target or when
the target of one entry is used as the input for another. This is mainly observed in very
large, semi­redundant, multitasking datasets.
2.3.2
Data Understanding and Visualization
understand_text_dataset.py
This script is an extensive collection of functions for producing various plots, dimension
reduction, and visualizations, such as histograms, PCA, word clouds, and others. The
functions in this script focus on the task of binary abstract classification.
journal_distribution_of_pos_data.py
This script generates a histogram plot depicting the distribution of academic journals in
which the scientific abstracts used in the binary abstract classification study were pub­
lished. This allows for insights into the diversity of sources.
2.3.3
Model Scripts
BERT_abstract.py
This script applies BERT, pre­trained on PubMed articles, to predict if new literature is
relevant for inclusion in the MiBIG DB.
bioGPT.py
This script applies GPT­2, pre­trained on PubMed articles, to predict if new literature is
relevant for inclusion in the MiBIG DB.
simple_models_for_pos_neg_classifier.py
This script features three simple classifier models: majority voting, a novel model based
on word frequencies in the abstract, and a Support Vector Machine. All three models are
used to predict if new literature is relevant for inclusion in the MiBIG DB.
T5.py
This script contains a T5 encoder­decoder model. It is used for various text2text problem­
s/tasks, including multitasking. The script has been used to predict SMILES, functions,
activities, and more.
ESM2_to_T5.py
This novel approach predicts SMILES molecule representations from all the protein se­
quences in a gene cluster. It uses ESM­2 encoder embeddings passed directly to a T5
decoder.
Attention_made_simply.py
This script explains the self­attention mechanism in transformer models using simple base
Python and NumPy implementations.
2.4
Datasets
This section describes the datasets used in the project.
In this project, nine distinct
datasets have been created to test various hypotheses.
2.4.1
Short description of datasets and creation
All datasets can be found and used from the GitHub repository, link here [1].
All datasets are formatted in the same manner, as follows:
Symbol
Description
<Task: >
The task or problem to be solved.
<Input_text>
Inputted text for the task.
<target_string>
The target string or expected output.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
19
==PAGE:26==
Where each entry/line has the following format:
<Task: ><Input_text>\t<target_string>
.
dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt
The Abstract dataset contains 5645 entries. Each entry’s ”input_text” is a scientific ab­
stract, and the ”target_string” is either 0 or 1, indicating binary classification.
Out of these 5645 entries, 2760 are derived from the scientific references in the MIBiG
database. These 2760 articles describe specific BGCs and have been labeled ”1”.
Upon retrieval of the entries labeled ”1”, the journals in which the papers were published
were also identified. This was done to minimize potential biases to construct a dataset
of entries labeled ”0”. The abstracts from these entries are intended to reflect the same
journal distribution as entries labeled ”1” but do not discuss a BGC.
The script ”download_pubmed_abstracts.py” was used to retrieve or scrape abstracts.
The journal distribution is illustrated in Fig 2.1. It can be seen in Fig 2.1 that some journals
are not represented due to a computing error found late.
20
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:27==
0
50
100
150
200
Number of publications
Journal of the American Chemical Society
Applied and Environmental Microbiology
ChemBioChem
Journal of Bacteriology
Chemistry and Biology
Angewandte Chemie - International...
Proceedings of the National Academy...
ACS Chemical Biology
Organic Letters
Journal of Biological Chemistry
Journal of Natural Products
Molecular Microbiology
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
Microbiology
Biochemistry
PLoS ONE
Fungal Genetics and Biology
FEMS Microbiology Letters
Nature Chemical Biology
Nature Communications
Journal of Antibiotics
Chem Sci
Journal of Industrial Microbiology...
Environmental Microbiology
The Journal of Antibiotics
Organic and Biomolecular Chemistry
Bioscience, Biotechnology and...
Chem Biol
BMC Microbiology
Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions
Marine Drugs
Molecules
Front Microbiol
Gene
Science
Archives of Microbiology
Nature
Microorganisms
Cell Chemical Biology
BMC Genomics
Molecular Genetics and Genomics
ACS Synthetic Biology
Journal of Molecular Biology
Molecular BioSystems
Chemical Communications
Microbial Cell Factories
Scientific Reports
Appl Environ Microbiol
FEBS Letters
MGG Molecular & General Genetics
Molecular and General Genetics
Biochemistry (Moscow)
Microbiology (United Kingdom)
J Am Chem Soc
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
Nat Chem Biol
Journal of bacteriology
Angew Chem Int Ed Engl
mBio
Infection and Immunity
European Journal of Biochemistry
Chemical Science
Journal of Biotechnology
Journals
Distribution of journals
dataset_positive_pubmedID.txt
dataset_negtive_pubmedID.txt
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.1: The figure illustrates the journal distribution of the dataset containing abstracts.
The blue rows represent the count of abstracts that describe BGCs (label 1), while the
orange ones represent abstracts that do not (label 1). The figure does not display journals
that contribute to fewer than ten articles.
dataset_protein_peptides_complete_v3.txt
This dataset consists of 1,056 entries. Each entry has a full BGC as its ”Input_text,”
represented by protein sequences. Each protein sequence is separated by an underscore
(”_”). The ”target_string” is the secondary metabolite molecule, represented as a SMILES
string.
The gene positions in the specific organism of the BGC, as well as the molecule, are
identified through the MIBiG database. All protein sequences are retrieved using the
script: get_protein_seqs_ncbi.py.
The individual proteins in each BGC can potentially be lengthy, with the longest protein
consisting of 15,259 amino acids.
dataset_geneProduct2SMILES_v1.txt and dataset_genename2SMILES_v3.txt
Both datasets consist of 1,052 entries. Each entry has a full BGC as its ”Input_text,”
represented by protein products or gene names (like Polyketide synthase or gene belA,
respectively). Each protein product or gene is separated by an underscore (”_”). The
”target_string” is the secondary metabolite molecule, represented as a SMILES string.
The BGC information is identified through the MIBiG database. All protein products/gene
names are retrieved using the script: get_protein_seqs_ncbi.py.
dataset_SMILE_biosyn_class_v2.txt
This dataset consists of 2,456 entries. Each entry has a secondary metabolite molecule
represented as a SMILES string as ”Input_text,” and the molecule’s biosynthetic class as
the ”target_string”.
A single secondary metabolite molecule can have multiple biosynthetic classes as the
”target_string”.
All information for this dataset is retrieved from MIBiG DB.
dataset_SMILE_activity_v2.txt
This dataset consists of 1,494 entries. Each entry has a secondary metabolite molecule
represented as a SMILES string as ”Input_text,” and the molecule’s function as the ”tar­
get_string.”
A single secondary metabolite molecule can have multiple activities as the ”target_string”.
All information for this dataset is retrieved from MIBiG DB. The dataset is very imbalanced,
and there are classes with a single entry/label in them. These cases of classes with single
entries/labels have been removed, as it is not possible to evaluate them fairly when they
can only be in the testing or training set.
invalid2valid sets
Multiple invalid2valid datasets have been produced, each consisting of approximately 700
to 2,500 entries.
These datasets are somewhat unique because they use the predictions from earlier pre­
dictive models like those predicting secondary metabolites or molecule classes. Predic­
tions are used as input text in the dataset, and the target labels are the same as the earlier
model used.
This format also makes it extremely easy to expand the dataset with new novel ”In­
put_text.” The only thing needed to expand the dataset is to train a new model and use
its predictions as new data.
The splits must be preserved to avoid biases associated with data leakage from the splits
used in training the model. This same train/test split is applied to both models in tandem.
22
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:29==
Fig. 2.2 illustrates the creation and workflow. Figure 2.2 uses the example of predicting
secondary metabolite molecules, but the technique is also possible for other predictions.
Figure 2.2: The figure illustrates the architecture of the tandem model, where the first
(left) T5 model generates initial predictions, and the subsequent T5 model refines these
predictions to produce a result closer to the correct answer.
In the process, a dataset named ”invalid2valid” is created. This T5 tandem workflow can
be applied to most tasks in the project. The figure serves as an example, illustrating the
task of protein2SMILES.
dataset_multitask_v2.txt
This dataset is a combination of all the above datasets.
When creating the test­
ing and training,
the script CV_file_creation.py is used to avoid introducing bi­
ases related to the conflicts of datasets of e.g., ”dataset_SMILE_activity_v2.txt” and
”dataset_geneProduct2SMILES_v1.txt”. The conflict is that the same SMILES represen­
tations are used as ”Input_text” and ”target_string.”
2.4.2
Meaningful Data Reduction for Large Datasets
Memory consumption becomes a significant issue when dealing with large language
transformer models such as T5 and ESM­2. These models consist of hundreds of millions,
or even billions, of parameters, which can pose a challenge for even the most powerful
computers. A recurring problem in this project has been that the GPUs (A100 w. 40 or 80
GB memory) provided by DTU HPC run out of memory when dealing with long sequence
data. This issue was evident in two datasets. The first dataset, which describes the full
gene names (dataset −protein −in −text.txt), is used to predict secondary metabolite
molecules. The second dataset that posed memory problems was the one with protein
sequences (dataset −protein −peptides −complete −v2.txt), also used to predict sec­
ondary metabolites molecules.
The proposed solutions to these memory­related issues are described here.
2.4.3
Data Reduction Possibilities for Dataset with Gene Names/products
One option is to use a smaller model, which will have fewer parameters and therefore re­
quire less memory to store and process these parameters. The trade­off to this approach
is that larger models generally have more expressive power due to their increased capac­
ity to learn and represent complex patterns in the data. Therefore, while using a smaller
model can help with memory consumption problems, it could also potentially lead to poorer
performance.
The second option is to employ various ”model­measures” designed to reduce memory
consumption, such as techniques like gradient checkpointing[27], mixed precision train­
ing[28], and parameter­efficient fine­tuning (PEFT)[SayakpaulPaul2023PEFT]. These
techniques aim to decrease computational demands, providing speed and memory sav­
ings. Both gradient checkpointing and PEFT were applied to some of the models where
feasible.
The final approach to reducing memory consumption involves modifying the model inputs
by adjusting the datasets used for training. This strategy might involve techniques such
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
23
==PAGE:30==
as reducing sequence length, sub­sampling, or using data augmentation to manage the
computational load effectively. Meaningful data augmentation of datasets has been used
for the two problematic datasets.
The first dataset consists of full gene/product names for every gene in a BGC, with all
genes concatenated into a continuous string. An example of a single gene name in the
dataset could be trans­acting­acyl­transferase/thioesterase­fusion­protein. With multiple
genes in a cluster, these long sequences may cause the GPU to run out of memory.
The script shorten-words.py attempts to create meaningful abbreviations for long gene
names by applying simple rules, such as shortening a gene name if it’s longer than 4
characters. Abbreviations can only be used for the exact words, among the other rules.
As a result, the gene name trans­acting­acyl­transferase/thioesterase­fusion­protein was
abbreviated to TAATFP. The overall size reduction of the dataset achieved through this
process is illustrated in Figure 2.3. The figure shows that the shortening of gene names
leads to a 3.4­fold change in size.
Original
shortened
0
100
200
300
400
500
File Size (KB)
Fold difference in size 3.4
Figure 2.3: Size difference of 3,4 fold between the original and shortened datasets after
applying abbreviation of long gene names
2.4.4
Data reduction for the dataset with protein sequences
The second dataset contains protein sequences and presents a greater challenge for
creating biologically meaningful data augmentation. The question of what to change and
which sub­sequences or amino acids of the protein sequence are non­essential and can
be removed is not easily answered.
The ESM­2 encoder runs out of memory for protein sequences longer than approximately
850 amino acids. Currently, how each gene in a BGC is processed implies that if a single
gene exceeds 850 amino acids, the entire gene cluster is discarded. This situation has
significant implications because out of all BGC present in the dataset dataset −protein −
peptides −complete −v3.txt, most of the BGC contain at least one gene longer than 850
amino acids. Consequently, only leaving a few BGCs be fed to the model.
To address this problem, we adopted an approach inspired by AlphaFold’s pipeline [29].
Some of the first steps in AlphaFold’s pipeline employ the BLAST algorithm and multiple
sequence alignment (MSA). Initially, BLAST is used to identify sequences homologous
to the query sequence. Then, MSAs are performed on these homologous sequences,
providing information about the evolutionary conservation of the parts of the query protein
[29].
With AlphaFold’s approach in mind, the idea is to use BLAST on sequences longer than
24
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:31==
850 amino acids, perform MSAs on the query and homologous sequences found, and then
calculate an amino acid­specific conservation score. Then, the least conserved amino
acids would be removed until the total length of the protein sequence equals 850 amino
acids. This concept is illustrated in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: The figure depicts the workflow for reducing the number of amino acids in
protein/gene sequences in BGC. This process involves taking protein sequences longer
than 850 amino acids, performing a BLASTp search on each sequence, and extracting 8
homologous sequences from the BLASTp results. Next, an MSA is conducted on the 8
homologous sequences and the query sequence, then calculating a conservation score
for the alignment. Finally, the least conserved amino acids are removed until the sequence
is 850 amino acids long.
Shannon entropy (SE) was chosen to calculate an amino acid­specific conservation score.
SE is defined as follows. [30]:
SE(i) = −
N
∑
i=1
Pi log2(Pi)
(2.1)
Where P is the probability of a particular amino acid
The primary limitation of this approach is its computational demand. Using NCBI’s online
service isn’t viable due to their policy and the potential for temporary bans when multiple
sequences are submitted simultaneously.
In addition, implementing BLAST locally posed substantial difficulties; the non­redundant
protein dataset demands over 500GB of space, and processing a single sequence com­
posed of 900 amino acids takes approximately 10 minutes, where the computational time
increases proportionately with sequence length. The computational demand of BLAST
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
25
==PAGE:32==
(and MSA) requires utilizing parallel computing.
The size reduction was more moderate, from 12.460 kb to 8.000 kb, equal to a reduction
1.6 fold in size.
A second approach to reducing the size of the dataset protein sequence dataset −
protein −peptides −complete −v3.txt is to use PFAM or TIGRFAM domains of each
sequence in the gene cluster, then let the sequenced PFAM or TIGRFAM domains be the
dataset with associated SMILE as a label.
2.5
Models
2.5.1
Support Vector Machine
To
create
an
SVM,
the
abstracts
from
the
dataset
”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt” were first vectorized with the TfidfVec­
torizer from scikit­learn library. These vectorized abstracts served as the input to the
SVM model with a linear kernel.
The library scikit­learn implementation of SVM was
used.
2.5.2
Principal Component Analysis
Principal
Component
Analysis
(PCA)
was
performed
on
the
dataset
”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt”.
Higher­dimensional embeddings for each
abstract were derived from the last hidden state in a fine­tuned transformer RoBERTa
model. The fine­tuning was on the same data and for 4 epochs. The reason for using
the last hidden state is that it may reflect a high­level semantic representation of the
abstracts.
The Scikit­learn library was used to perform the PCA.
2.5.3
Word Cloud Models
The word clouds were created by first isolating all the words in the abstracts present in
the dataset ”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt”. Next, the WordCloud library was
used to create illustrations.
2.5.4
Frequency of Words Method
This is a simple, homemade method that essentially uses a majority vote mechanism
based on word frequencies. This was done to see how well an even simpler model per­
forms on this binary task.
It can be described by a formula that calculates the frequency of a word (in lemma format).
Count(w, D) is the count of words ”w” in a given document ”D”, and |D| is the total num­
ber of words in the document. This is done for a stratified training set, resulting in word
frequencies for negatively and positively labeled training sets saved as frequency dictio­
naries.
f(w, D) = Count(w, D)
|D|
(2.2)
The model operates as follows: for each word in a new entry, the model checks the
likelihood of that word appearing in each category (positive/”1” or negative/”0”). It then
increments a counter for that category. The formula for the classification decision can be
represented as follows:
if Fpos ≥Fneg for a word, then increment positive_counter
(2.3)
if Fpos < Fneg for a word, then increment negative_counter
(2.4)
Here, Fpos and Fneg represent the frequency of a given word ”w” in the positive and neg­
ative categories, respectively.
26
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:33==
After iterating through all the words, the category with the highest counter value is the
predicted category for the text. If the positive_counter is greater than or equal to the neg­
ative_counter, then the text is classified as positive; otherwise, it’s classified as negative.
2.5.5
BioGPT
BioGPT is a GPT­2 architecture that Microsoft fine­tuned on PubMed publications. The
checkpoints/weights for BioGPT were downloaded from Hugging Face.
The model was trained on the dataset ”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt” for
more than 10 epochs, with a training batch size of 5. The AdamW optimizer was used
with a learning rate of 3e­5.
2.5.6
RoBERTa and Biomed­RoBERTa
AllenAI trained the biomed_roberta_base, while the RoBERTa­base model was developed
by [31].
The model was trained on the dataset ”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt” for
more than 10 epochs, with a training batch size of 5. The AdamW optimizer was used
with a 3 · 10−5 learning rate.
2.5.7
T5
For the binary abstract classification task, Google’s Flan­T5­base model was used. It was
trained for over 10 epochs, with a training batch size of 5. The AdamW optimizer was used
with a 3 · 10−5 learning rate.
For all other tasks, Text chem T5­base [11] was used. The models were trained with
varying training parameters. The AdamW optimizer was used with a 3·10−5 learning rate.
Sometimes, weight decay learning was utilized.
2.5.8
ESM2­chemT5
The ESM­2, as mentioned in the introduction, was built and pre­trained solely on protein
sequences and has previously achieved very good results.
Of the imaginable scenarios for model ”inputting texts” to predict secondary metabolite
molecules, one representation is to use all the raw protein sequences in BGC as ”input
text.” The protein sequences provide arguably the most information concerning which
substrates the protein uses and the enzymatic effects of the protein.
But it is not feasible to pass raw protein sequences into a T5 model because it is not pre­
trained in that area, and the flan T5’s tokenizer vocabulary does not understand amino
acids.
To overcome these issues comes the idea of the experimental ESM2­Text chemT5, which
uses the best of both worlds. It combines the robust protein­sequence­based ESM2 en­
coder with the finely tuned decoder of Text chemT5.
A nice thing about this method is the problem of normal text/language transformer models’
tokenizers. Those tokenizers are very biased in the case of handling protein sequences,
simply because they would create words out of the amino acids. For example, if the amino
acids ”PROTEIN” were in a protein string, the tokenizer would treat it as a single token
instead of 7 individual tokens.
The workings of the ESM2­chemT5 model are illustrated in Fig 2.5. Firstly, each protein
sequence in a BGC is fed to the ESM2 model. The output encoder embeddings are all
concatenated into a single tensor.
A projection layer with the input dimension of the ESM2’s last hidden state and the first
layer of the decoder in Text chemT5. This projection enables the Text chemT5 decoder
to use the ESM2 encoder embeddings as input.
The model was trained with varying training parameters. The AdamW optimizer was used
with a learning rate of 2e­5 to 5e­5. Sometimes, weight decay learning was utilized. The
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
27
==PAGE:34==
most success was achieved by only fine­tuning Text chemT5 in the training phase, leaving
the ESM2 on touch.
The Parameter­Efficient Fine­Tuning PEFT library was used to efficiently train/fine­tune
the models, thereby saving memory and allowing for a large model to be used.
Figure 2.5: The architecture of ESM2­chemT5 is depicted in the figure. First, each indi­
vidual protein sequence from a BGC is fed into an ESM­2 encoder. The embeddings from
the ESM­2’s last hidden layer for all the protein sequences are concatenated into a single
tensor, which is then projected to match the dimensions of the first hidden layer of a text
chem T5 model.
2.5.9
Reinforcement learning
This model approach uses reinforcement learning to boost the validity of predicted sec­
ondary metabolite molecules. In this approach, the agent would be a Deep Learning­RL
model. The environment would be the Text chem T5 model. The current state would be
defined as the present molecule, and the reward function would be based on the validity
of the molecule. Lastly, the action space might be the prediction of the next token.
28
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:35==
3
Results
3.1
Overview and understanding of data
Understanding data is crucial for solving a machine­learning task. This is partly because
a model’s performance depends on the quality of its underlying data. Determining the
quality requires understanding it, which involves thoroughly knowing its characteristics,
structure, and quirks.
3.2
Understanding the Abstract data for binary classification
The dataset ”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt” contains 5,645 abstracts, of
which 2,760 come from the MIBiG DB and are referred to as ”positive.” The remaining
abstracts are not present in DB and are referred to as ”negative.”
A concise and insightful way of illustrating the difference between the positive and negative
abstracts in the dataset is using Word Clouds built on separate portions.
Figure 3.1: The word clouds are based on all the words in the abstracts. The word cloud
on the left is based solely on the negative abstracts, while the word cloud on the right is
based exclusively on the positive abstracts.
A clear distinction can be observed between the two word clouds. The word cloud corre­
sponding to the positive label (the one on the right) notably features characteristic words
such as ”biosynthetic” and ”cluster.”
By looking at the word clouds in Fig 3.1, it is clear that there is a difference in the words/­
nouns present in the two partitions of the data. The most telling words present in the right
word cloud illustration are biosynthesis, cluster, polyketide, and pathway.
After establishing a clear distinction in word choice in the positive abstracts versus the
negative, the ten most common/nouns were found in the dataset’s two potions. This is
illustrated in Fig 3.2.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
29
==PAGE:36==
gene
cluster
biosynthesis
biosynthetic
produce
acid
production
sequence
analysis
product
protein
cell
activity
study
result
bind
high
strain
Words
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
Frequencies
Frequencies of words in each dataset
Positive dataset
Negative dataset
Figure 3.2: The histogram presents the ten most common words in the positive and neg­
ative portions of the dataset. It can be observed that the three most common words in the
positive subset are ”gene,” ”cluster,” and ”biosynthesis.” In contrast, the most common
words in the negative subset are generic biology terminology.
From both Fig 3.1 and 3.2, it is clear that the difference in word choice between the positive
and negative labels could be significant for use in binary classification.
A PCA was performed to see if the clear trend of different selections of words also gave
a clear separation in a PCA plot. Each word in the abstract was embedded in a high­
dimensional space, using the last hidden states of a fine­tuned RoBERTa model.
30
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:37==
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
PCA 1
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
PCA 2
PCA Plot
0
1
Figure 3.3:
The PCA plot employs the encoder embeddings from the last hid­
den
states
of
a
fine­tuned
RoBERTa
model,
applied
to
the
dataset
named
”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt”.
This PCA plot reveals a clear separation
along the first PC axis, but the separation is not clear along the second PC axis
The same plot as 3.3 but just an illustration of the first PC, seen in Fig 3.4. This is done
to show the large impact of the first PC on separating the two classes.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
31
==PAGE:38==
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
Principal component 1
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency
Distribution of the first principal component
Positives
Negatives
Figure 3.4: Only the first PC of the PCA seen in 3.3.
The variance explained by each principal component can be seen in the appendix in Fig
A.2. It can be seen from that plot that almost all the variance (more than 80 %) is explained
by the first PC.
There is a clear separation of classes which can be seen on the first PC in Fig 3.3 and 3.4
in the dataset: ”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt”. Only a few (≈25) data points
appear in the opposite class’s space, given a threshold of 0 on the 1. PC.
3.3
Understanding text2text MIBiG data
3.3.1
Understanding predictive data for secondary metabolite molecules
The number of unique secondary metabolite molecules in the MIBiG DB is nearly
equivalent to the number of entries in the database. The distribution of these different
molecules is visualized in Fig. 3.5.
32
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:39==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Number of different SMILES
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Occurrences
Distribution of SMILES
Figure 3.5: Distribution of secondary metabolites molecules in MIBiG DB
Figure 3.6 depicts the distribution of the lengths of the SMILES (representing secondary
metabolites molecules) contained in the MIBiG DB. The distribution appears to exhibit
characteristics for a positively skewed normal distribution (or maybe gamma distribution).
Insights regarding the model’s requirements can be derived through analyzing the dis­
tribution of SMILES lengths. Both Figs 3.5 and 3.6 display a substantial variance in the
target labels, adding to the intricacy involved in developing a predictive model.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
33
==PAGE:40==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Count
Distribution of SMILES String Lengths
Figure 3.6: Distribution of string lengths of secondary metabolites molecules in the MIBiG
DB
3.3.2
Understanding predictive data for molecular class and activity
The distribution of activities of secondary metabolites in MIBiG is illustrated in the upper
plot of Fig 3.7.
The dataset contains 61 unique labels. The most common label is ”antibacterial,” which
appears 511 times. ”cytotoxic” appears 356 times. ”antifungal” appears 224 times.
Many labels appear only once, such as ”fluorescent,” ”antineoplastic,” and ”anticancer.”
Excluding labels that only appear once, then there are 34 unique labels.
A challenge in the data is that a single secondary metabolite can have multiple target
labels. This can be seen in the lower part of Fig 3.7. A simple approach to solve this is
to make a label power set, creating a unique class for every possible label combination
in the dataset. However, this is not necessary due to the text­abilities of the T5 decoder,
which in principle, can output any text string. The multi­label can be separated by some
delimiter ”;” in the dataset.
The distribution of labels is very imbalanced, as seen in the upper part of Fig 3.7, with the
data being skewed towards the three most common labels. This could pose challenges
for predictive modeling, as the model could be biased toward predicting the more common
classes.
34
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:41==
antibacterial
cytotoxic
antifungal
inhibitor
siderophore
antiviral
antiprotozoal
surfactant
signalling
insecticidal
antioxidant
anthelmintic
immunosuppressive
phytotoxic
antimalarial
other
pigment
herbicidal
neurotoxic
antiproliferative
virulence factor
antiparasidal
neuroprotective
antiplasmodial
cell envelope
cold stress
antitubulin
regulatory
UV protective
flavor
odorous metabolite
antitumor
ionophore
antioomycete
Avtivities
0
100
200
300
400
500
Occurrences
Distribution of molecular activities (labels) in the dataset
1
2
3
4
5
6
Number of labels per secondary metabolite
0
100
200
300
400
500
Occurrences
Number of molecular activities (labels) per secondary metabolite
Figure 3.7: The upper figure illustrates the distribution of activities of secondary metabo­
lites in MIBiG.
The lower figure illustrates the number of molecular activities per secondary metabolite
The distribution of molecular classes of secondary metabolites in the MIBiG DB is illus­
trated in Fig 3.8.
It can be seen in Fig 3.8 there are 7 unique classes, with the two most common classes in
the dataset being ”polyketide,” and ”NRP,” which appear 945 and 728 times, respectively.
The distribution of the molecular class data, as depicted in Fig 3.8, reveals a substantial
imbalance in the data. The two largest classes collectively account for approximately 68
percent of the total number of entries in the data, underscoring a clear disproportion.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
35
==PAGE:42==
Polyketide
NRP
Other
Terpene
RiPP
Saccharide
Alkaloid
Classes
0
200
400
600
800
Occurrences
Distribution of classes
Figure 3.8: Distribution of molecular classes of the secondary metabolite molecules in
MIBiG
3.4
Performance of abstract binary classifier
Because the binary classification dataset of abstracts is a very balanced dataset with
evenly distributed binary classes, accuracy is a meaningful evaluation measure.
A majority­vote binary classifier classifies all entries as the negative class. The majority­
vote classifier has an accuracy of 0,51.
Based on the observation that the two classes differ in characteristics, as seen in Fig 3.3
and 3.2, an idea emerged of making a classifier solely based on the most frequent words
in each class. This improvised method (explained in 2.4) performs much better than the
majority­vote and achieves an accuracy of 0,91.
An SVM was created to act as a baseline for further results. To make an SVM model,
all the abstracts were vectorized with word embeddings, and these vectors were used to
create a linear kernel SVM.
The performance of the SVM achieved better results than the ”frequent words model,”
with an accuracy score of 0,94.
A few different transformer models were fine­tuned on the problem, and all the transformer
models had roughly the same accuracy score. All the accuracy scores of the binary clas­
sification abstract task are displayed in Fig 3.9.
Interestingly, there is only a very small drop in performance for the transformer models if,
instead of 10 epochs, they are trained for a single epoch. This effect can be seen in the
appendix in Fig A.3. This also illustrates the significant effect of transformer models on
learning quickly and transfer learning.
36
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:43==
Freqs of words
SVM
Roberta-encoder classifier
Flan T5
GPT-2
Bio Roberta-encoder classifier
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
0.909
0.944
0.948
0.948
0.950
0.954
Different Models Accuracy
Figure 3.9:
Accuracy scores for the models all trained/fine­tuned on the dataset
”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt”. It can be observed in the figure that the SVM
baseline achieves almost the same accuracy as all the transformer models, with the bio­
RoBERTa having the slightly best score.
A confusion matrix for the SVM can be seen in Fig 3.10 to illustrate a deeper picture of
the performance. From the confusion matrix in Fig 3.10, the model is clearly performing
reasonably well. It has more true positives and true negatives than false positives and
false negatives, which suggests that it is accurately predicting the class for most of the
instances.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
37
==PAGE:44==
Class 0
Class 1
Predicted Class
Class 0
Class 1
Actual Class
520
37
26
546
Confusion Matrix for SVM
100
200
300
400
500
Figure 3.10: The confusion matrix represents the predictions made by the SVM on the
dataset ”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt”. The matrix indicates a good perfor­
mance, with only a small portion of the results being false positives or false negatives.
The F1­score of the SVM was calculated to be 0.95.
3.4.1
Capabilities of few­shot learning of GPT 3.5 on the abstract
classification
To demonstrate the rapid learning capabilities of the transformer model, a ”few­shot learn­
ing” experiment with the OpenAI API using the model GPT 3.5 was conducted.
The setup of the experiment was to give the model 15 randomly selected abstracts and
their associated labels. Then let the model predict the remaining abstracts.
The GPT 3.5 few­shot learning model achieves an accuracy of 0,76.
3.5
Performance of models predicting secondary
metabolites molecules
Figure 3.11 illustrates the performance of Rouge F1 score for both the test and training
sets from a Flan T5 base model trained on all gene names abbreviated and represented
as a string of all the genes in each BGC. The test data outperforms the training data
in terms of Rouge F1 score. While unexpected, this could be explained if the SMILES
representations in the test set are simpler or shorter.
The test and training sets achieve a Rouge F1 score of approximately 0.3, indicating
substantial room for improvement. It is expected that the performance isn’t great. One
of the reasons for this is that the different gene names can have the same function. This
leads to a significant variance of input text to the model, which requires more training data.
38
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:45==
2
4
6
8
10
12
Epoch
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
ROUGE-1 F1 Score
Gene names shorten - flan T5-base - ROUGE-1 F1 Score vs. Epoch
Train
Test
Figure 3.11: Performance in Rouge F1 score. The Figure shows the results of a fine­
tuned flan T5 model, which processes input text containing shorted gene products in a
BGC and predicts secondary metabolites in SMILES format.
The ESM2­T5 approach projects the ESM­2 encoder embeddings onto the Text chem T5s
decoder. Using raw protein sequences as input.
The performance of ESM2­T5 was significantly better than that of flan T5. A comparison
of the two models/approaches can be seen in Fig 3.12. It can be seen in Fig 3.12 that the
performance of the test and train sets of the ESM2­T5 is in the range of 0,55 of Rouge
F1 score. Furthermore, the zero­shot predictions of the ESM2­T5 are above 0,1 rouge f1
score, which indicates that the model already has intrinsic knowledge of the problem.
However, there is an obvious bias in comparing the two model approaches illustrated in
Fig 3.12: the two models have completely different input text, protein sequences versus
gene products.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
39
==PAGE:46==
2
4
6
8
10
12
Epochs
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
ROUGE-1 F1 Score
ROUGE-1 F1 ESM-T5 and plain T5
Train T5
Test T5
Train ESM-T5
Test ESM-T5
Test ESM-T5, zero-shot
Figure 3.12: The figure illustrates the performance of the Rouge F1 score for two different
models, both predicting the same secondary metabolite molecules.
The orange and dotted blue lines represent a fine­tuned T5 model applied to input text
featuring shortened product names in a BGC.
The red and dotted green lines illustrate the performance of the combined ESM2­T5 archi­
tecture (ESM­2 encoder and fine­tuned T5 base decoder, as shown in Fig 2.5) fine­tuned
on proteins sequences. The dotted line represents the zero­shot prediction of the ESM2­
T5 model.
A clear performance gain can be observed for the ESM2­T5 compared to the T5 model
alone.
Another approach is to use the Pfam and TIGR domains of genes in the BGC as input
text.
This approach is great for memory consumption for the model because the Pfam and
TIGR domains are represented as short strings.
This is illustrated in Fig 3.13 where four performance metrics: ROUGE­1 F1 Score, Char­
acter Error Rate, SacreBLEU Score, and the Number of Correctly Predicted Molecules
(Num Correct Mols) are displayed. While this result in Fig 3.13 is better than the results
produced by using protein sequences as input text, as seen Fig 2.5, it is also better when
compared to the other evaluation metrics. There are large fluctuations in evaluation met­
rics during the epochs. This is most likely due to a much higher learning rate, which might
lead to overshooting the optimal solution during gradient descent, causing it to bounce
around the solution space and leading to instability in the training process.
The accuracy of the model’s performance shown in Figs 3.13 and 2.5 was zero.
40
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:47==
Type
SMILES
True Label
COC(=O)/C(C)=C/C(C)C(=O)C[C@H](O)CC1CC(=O)NC(=O)C1
Prediction
CC1=O)C1=C==C(NH+](=)=C1C(===C(C))C(=O3)C3=O3)=O]
True Label
CCC/C=C/C1=C(OC)C(=O)C2=C(O1)[C@@H](O)NC2=O
Prediction
C[CCC=C/C==C(C(C(=O)C(=C(O)CC@@H](C)C(=O)
True Label
CC1C/C=CC(=O)C2C(O2)CC([C@H](C3=CC(=CC(=C3C(=O)O1)O)OC)O)O
Prediction
CCCCC=(C=C/C(=O)N(=(=)C(CC@@](C(=C==C(=C3)O(=O)O1)C)O)O)O)
Table 3.1: Comparison of true labels and predicted labels for secondary metabolites. The
shown predictions are randomly picked from the test set (at the 10 epoch).
While the model demonstrated some ability to predict aspects of the secondary metabo­
lites molecules (SMILES strings) correctly, the overall performance suggests room for
improvement.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Epoch
0.62
0.63
0.64
0.65
0.66
0.67
0.68
0.69
0.70
rouge1
rouge1 vs. Epoch
Test pfam
Test tigrfam
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Epoch
0.28
0.29
0.30
0.31
0.32
0.33
0.34
char_error_rate
char_error_rate vs. Epoch
Test pfam
Test tigrfam
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Epoch
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.50
sacrebleu
sacrebleu vs. Epoch
Test pfam
Test tigrfam
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Epoch
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
num_correct_val_mols
num_correct_val_mols vs. Epoch
Test pfam
Test tigrfam
ChemT5 train on tigrfams or pfam domains - Test data
Figure 3.13: The figure illustrates different performance metrics for the test set: Rouge F1,
character error rate, sacreBLEU, and the number of valid molecules. These are shown for
the task of using TIGRfam and Pfam domains as input text to predict secondary metabo­
lites. The model used is chemT5­base. As shown in the figure, TIGRfam, and Pfam
exhibit similar performances.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
41
==PAGE:48==
After inspecting the predictions made, which are depicted in Fig. 3.13, Fig. 2.5, and Table
3.1, the idea of using the mapping method, as illustrated in Fig. 2.2, was conceived. The
input text is the predictions (where some can be seen in Table 3.1) and the original true
labels. This data serves as the training and testing material for a Text chem T5 model.
In practice, the Text chem T5 model was trained four times on the Pfam dataset using
the same training and testing splits. The predictions of those four models were the train­
ing/testing data for a single model, thus letting two models work in tandem.
The significant improvement in the performance of a sequential mapping model is demon­
strated in Fig. 3.14
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Epoch
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
ROUGE-1 F1 Score
Train
Test
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Epoch
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
0.225
Char Error Rate
Train
Test
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Epoch
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
SacreBLEU Score
Train
Test
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Epoch
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Relative Num Val Mols
Train
Test
Different performance matrices vs. Epoch - invalid2valid SMILES
Figure 3.14: The figure shows performance metrics such as Rouge F1, character error
rate, sacreBLEU, and the number of valid molecules for training and test sets in mapping
”invalid” to ”valid” secondary metabolite molecules using the Text chem T5­base model.
Training data outperformed test data, and a clear performance boost is evident compared
to Figure 3.13 across all metrics.
Type
SMILES
True Label
COC(=O)/C(C)=C/C(C)C(=O)C[C@H](O)CC1CC(=O)NC(=O)C1
Prediction
COC(=O)/C(C)=C/C(C)C(=O)C[C@H](O)CC1CC(=O)NC(=O)C1
True Label
CCC/C=C/C1=C(OC)C(=O)C2=C(O1)[C@@H](O)NC2=O
Prediction
CCC/C=C/C==C(C)C(=O)C2=C(O1)[C@@H](O)CC2=O
True Label
CC1C/C=CC(=O)C2C(O2)CC([C@H](C3=CC(=CC(=C3C(=O)O1)O)OC)O)O
Prediction
CC1C/C=C(=O)C2C(O2)CC([C@H](C3=CC(=CC(=C3C(=O)O1)O)OC)O)O)
Table 3.2: Comparison of true labels and predicted labels of the task of mapping ”invalid”
secondary metabolite molecules to valid ones. The shown predictions are based on the
same picked labels from the table 3.1. The predictions shown are from the test set.
42
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:49==
3.6
Model performance for the task of predicting molecular
classes
Two pre­trained T5 models, Text Chem T5 base and Flan T5 XL, were used for class
prediction of secondary metabolite molecules, with similar results. Both models gave
very similar performance results with accuracy performances and balanced accuracy with
scores around 0,55 and 0,5, respectively. The performances in the matrices of recall and
F1­score had much worse scores of 0,1 and 0,12, respectively. These results can be
seen in Fig 3.15.
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Accuracy
Chem T5
Flan T5
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Balanced Accuracy
Chem T5
Flan T5
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Recall
Chem T5
Flan T5
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
F1 Score
Chem T5
Flan T5
Figure 3.15: The figure presents these performance metrics accuracy, balanced accuracy,
recall, and F1 score for the test set for the task of secondary metabolite molecules to their
classes. The models compared are Text chem T5­base and flan T5. Both models show
similar performance across different evaluation metrics.
Upon further inspection, there is a noticeable contrast between the high Accuracy/Bal­
anced Accuracy and low F1/Recall. This may seem a bit strange at first glance.
A low F1 score indicates that the model has false positives and negatives, reflecting low
precision and recall. The score in balanced accuracy means that the model is performing
relatively well in each class, not favoring one over the other.
To further investigate the results seen in Fig 3.15, a confusion matrix was made. All the
different string mispredictions are put into the same category of ”misprediction.” The two
confusion matrices are illustrated in Fig 3.16.
A prominently highlighted diagonal line can be observed in both confusion matrices de­
picted in Fig 3.16. This line signifies that the predicted class matches the true class.
Furthermore, there is a line of mispredicted labels in all classes, with a rough class distri­
bution of predictions in the ”mispredicted” class. This distribution matches the size of the
individual true classes.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
43
==PAGE:50==
Alkaloid
NRP
Other
Polyketide
RiPP
Saccharide
Terpene
misprediction
Predicted Label
Alkaloid
NRP
Other
Polyketide
RiPP
Saccharide
Terpene
misprediction
True Label
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
0
72
0
0
0
0
0
62
0
0
42
0
0
0
0
29
0
0
0
120
0
0
0
64
0
0
0
0
20
0
0
11
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
23
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Confusion Matrix - Chem T5 (last epoch, with mispredictions)
Alkaloid
NRP
Other
Polyketide
RiPP
Saccharide
Terpene
misprediction
Predicted Label
Alkaloid
NRP
Other
Polyketide
RiPP
Saccharide
Terpene
misprediction
True Label
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
0
94
0
0
0
0
0
40
0
0
33
0
0
0
0
38
0
0
0
117
0
0
0
67
0
0
0
0
18
0
0
13
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
18
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Confusion Matrix - Flan T5 (last epoch, with mispredictions)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 3.16: This is the confusion matrix for the test set of the task: classifying secondary
metabolites. All incorrect predictions have been aggregated into a single group termed
”misprediction.” The confusion matrix on the left represents the test predictions made by
Text Chem T5 Base, while the one on the right shows the predictions made on the test
set by Flan T5 XL.
In both confusion matrices, a clear diagonal line can be observed, representing correct
predictions.
It is also evident from both confusion matrices that mispredictions occur
evenly in all the classes.
The results seen in Fig. 3.16 prompted a closer inspection of the predictions made by
the models. From this inspection, it became evident that there were numerous ”spelling
mistakes” in the models’ predictions. Some of the ”spelling mistakes” from the last epoch
are shown in Table 3.3.
Interestingly, as shown in Table 3.3, the first part of the predicted string is incorrect, while
the last part of the string is predicted correctly.
True label
Predicted label
Saccharide
Polycharide
Polyketide
Nketide
Polyketide
Riketide
RiPP
OtherPP
NRP
PolyRP
Saccharide
Polycharide
Table 3.3: Table of incorrect predictions from the last epoch of the test set by the Text
Chem T5 model
To overcome the ”spelling mistakes” illustrated in Table 3.3, the idea was to train a new
model tasked with mapping these ”spelling mistakes” to their correct spelling/class.
The same training and testing splits were used for mapping and initial models.
This
mapping approach follows the same methodology explained in the methods section and
is represented in Fig 2.2, with different data.
A dataset was created by combining the predictions from both the Flan T5 and Text Chem
T5 models. After just a single epoch of training a new Text Chem T5 base model on this
44
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:51==
combined dataset, the model’s performance achieved perfection, with every class being
predicted correctly. This is illustrated in the confusion matrix in Fig ??.
Alkaloid
NRP
Other
Polyketide
RiPP
Saccharide
Terpene
Predicted Label
Alkaloid
NRP
Other
Polyketide
RiPP
Saccharide
Terpene
True Label
76
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
536
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
284
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
736
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
124
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
92
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
120
Confusion Matrix
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Figure 3.17: Confusion matrix of the test set for the tandem approach (seen in Fig 3.14).
The model is trained to map the ”spelling mistakes” to the correct classes. The model
used is Text Chem T5 base
This section pertains to predicting the activities of secondary metabolite molecules rep­
resented as SMILES strings. The challenge lies in a large number of small classes, as
illustrated in Fig 3.7. Notably, a single secondary metabolite can have multiple activities
assigned to it; each specific activity is separated by a semicolon in the dataset.
The performance of the Text Chem T5 base model, when trained on the SMILES2Activities
dataset, is depicted in Fig 3.18. The figure underscores substantial room for improvement.
It was possible to use the same tandem mapping approach as explained in the previous
results section ”Model performance for the task of predicting molecular classes” and in
the methods section with the Fig 2.2.
Based on an inspection of the predictions made, two wrong predictions are illustrated
here:
True label: ’antibacterial;antifungal;cytotoxic;inhibitor’
Predicting: ’antibacterialantifungalcytotoxicinhibitor’
With the help of a mapping model in tandem with the original model, the pre­
diction of:
’antibacterialantifungalcytotoxicinhibitor’.
was changed to ’antibacte­
rial;antifungal;cytotoxic;inhibitor’ which is identical to the true label.
Also, A very common misprediction is:
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
45
==PAGE:52==
True: [’cytotoxic’] Pred: [’anticytotoxic’],
The difference in performance is obvious, with all the measured evaluation metrics being
improved significantly, as seen in 3.18.
But it is still clear when comparing the accuracy and balanced accuracy that some of the
many classes are never predicted, as seen in 3.18.
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Accuracy
Accuracy per Epoch
SMILES2Activities
FormattingMapping
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Recall
Recall per Epoch
SMILES2Activities
FormattingMapping
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
F1 Score
F1 Score per Epoch
SMILES2Activities
FormattingMapping
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Balanced Accuracy
Balanced Accuracy per Epoch
SMILES2Activities
FormattingMapping
Performance comparison of SMILES2Activities and FormattingMapping
Figure 3.18: The figure presents the performance metrics of accuracy, balanced ac­
curacy, recall, and F1 score, for the test sets related to the tasks of secondary
metabolites to activities (SMILES2Activities) and formatting/mapping the predictions from
SMILES2Activities to more accurate targets.
A significant performance boost can be observed when the mapping model has been
applied afterward (using a tandem approach). The model used for both tasks is chemT5­
base.
3.7
Multitasking
Multitasking refers to the process of training a T5 model on different tasks, as illustrated
in Fig. 1.4.
In this project, we trained a chem­T5 on a combined dataset that includes sub­
sets of the following datasets: ’GeneProduct2SMILE’, ’SMILE2Activity’, ’SMILE2Class’,
’Pfam2SMILE’, ’Tigrfam2SMILE’, ’geneName2SMILES’, and ’invalid2validSMILE’. This
combined dataset consists of nearly 11,000 individual data entries.
The performance of a multitasking model is evaluated based on the individual tasks it
has been trained on. However, depending on how the training and testing splits are con­
structed, there can be significant variations in the performance of the multitasking model.
Fig. 3.19 shows the performance of mapping invalid SMILES representations of sec­
ondary metabolites to valid ones. For comparison, we have also included the performance
data from Fig. 3.14. As shown in Fig. 3.19, the performance is better for the ’invalid2valid’
task when trained in a multitasking environment instead of training solely on this task.
46
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:53==
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Test Accuracy
Test Accuracy
Multitasking i2v
uv2
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
0.900
0.925
0.950
Test ROUGE-1 F1 Score
Rouge
Multitasking i2v
iv2
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Test Char Error Rate
Character Error Rate
Multitasking i2v
iv2
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Epoch
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Relative Number of Valid Smiles
Relative Number of Valid Smiles
Multitasking i2v
i2v
Figure 3.19: The figure presents the performance metrics of accuracy, balanced accu­
racy, recall, and F1 score, for the test sets of the formatting/mapping the predictions from
SMILES2Activities to more accurate targets, seen in Fig 3.18 and the performance of the
same task, but in a multitasking environment.
A slightly higher performance can be observed when the formatting/mapping happens in
a multitasking environment. The model used for both tasks is chemT5­base.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
47
==PAGE:54==
4
Discussion
This chapter discusses the complexities, challenges, perspectives, results, and potential
future work in the project.
4.1
Model performance
4.1.1
Model performance in the task of binary classifying Abstracts
In the task of binary classification of abstracts as either belonging to the MIBiG database or
not, six different models were tried on the task, the results of which can be seen in Fig A.3.
The four other transformer models and the SVM model had very similar results. Given that
the SVM is less complex, it could be considered the preferred choice for this classification
problem. Its more straightforward model structure offers comparable performance while
potentially reducing computational cost and complexity.
4.1.2
Model performances for models prediction of the secondary
metabolites
The task of predicting secondary metabolites was the most time­consuming task in the
project. Because of the significant variance in molecules (Fig 3.5 and 3.6) and the fact
that these molecules are represented as SMILES, a text2text approach for predicting
secondary metabolite molecules is very feasible.
There are a lot of imaginable scenarios for inputting texts into a text2text model for
predicting secondary metabolite molecules.
Like the gene products, Pfam domains,
or gene names of all the genes in a BGC. Because they are all strings, it would be
possible to pass them directly into a T5 model, which could be fine­tuned for predicting
the secondary metabolite molecules.
In the pursuit of solving the task of predicting secondary metabolites, several transformer
models were trained on a broad range of datasets. Various strategies were explored,
including using gene products, protein sequences, Pfam, and TIGR domains as inputs.
The model’s performance for predicting secondary metabolite molecules was alright, with
the best­performing models being the ones trained on Pfam/TIGRfam domains. Both
models performed similarly; see Fig 3.13. The model trained on gene products performed
worst; see 2.5. The approach of using protein sequences as input was imagined to pro­
vide the most detailed information about the substrate usage and enzymatic effects of
the proteins. But the performance of the hybrid ESM2­T5 model showed slightly lower
performance than the models trained on Pfam/TIGRfam. The less­than­expected model
performance of the hybrid ESM2­T5 model may be due to memory limitations, with the
model struggling with large protein sequences.
The solution to the memory limitations of removing the least conserved amino acids in the
proteins (the full description of this method is explained in the methods section and Fig
2.5), can also be the reason for the less­than­expected model performance of the hybrid
ESM2­T5, because of it not being robust enough for keeping conserved regions intact,
more on this is discussed in the section 4.5.
The models trained on the Pfam and TIGRfam domains datasets were beneficial for
memory consumption due to the domains being represented as short strings.
This
approach showed substantial fluctuations in evaluation metrics during the epochs, likely
due to a high learning rate that caused instability in the training process. Those models
gave the best initial results as seen in Fig 3.13, but there was still room for improvement,
which gave birth to the mapping approach, illustrated in Fig 2.2. This involved using
48
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:55==
the predictions made by the models trained on the Pfam and TIGRfam domains data as
input to a Text chem T5 model, which then was trained to map the ”invalid” secondary
metabolite molecules to ”valid” ones. This approach led to a significant improvement in
performance, which can be seen in Fig 3.14.
To sum up, predicting secondary metabolites was a complex task that required the explo­
ration of different model architectures and inputs to try to fulfill the expectation of accurate
predictions. In the end, using the mapping method in tandem with the Pfam/TIGRfam Text
chem T5 model was satisfactory.
4.1.3
Performance of the models SMILES2Class and SMILES2Activity
The T5 models, trained on the tasks/datasets of SMILES2Class and SMILES2Activity,
were designed to predict the classes and activity of given secondary metabolites.
Both training datasets used for these models exhibited class imbalance. For the task of
SMILES2Class, two different T5 models, Chem­T5 and flan­T5, were compared to eval­
uate any significant performance gains. The models demonstrated similar performances
with an F1 score of 0.7, as seen in Fig 3.15.
After discovering that many classes predicted by Chem­T5 and Flan­T5 contained spelling
mistakes, a new Chem­T5 model was trained to map the wrongly predicted classes to the
correct ones. This resulted in a test­set accuracy of 1, as seen in Fig 3.17. A test­set
accuracy score of 1 is impressive and rarely achieved, indicating that the newly trained
Chem­T5 model was able to map the wrongly predicted classes to the correct ones per­
fectly. It is essential in future work to cross­validate the model’s performance to ensure
its generalizability.
The SMILES2Activity model aimed to predict the activities of secondary metabolites,
a task made particularly challenging due to the large number of small classes and the
fact that a single secondary metabolite could be associated with multiple activities,
illustrated in Fig 3.7. Initial training with a Text chem T5 model indicated an opportunity
for improvement, with an F1 score of 0.15, as shown in Fig 3.18. However, a mapping
approach was developed to enhance predictions, which raised the performance to just
over an F1 score of 0.7, as seen in Fig 3.18.
In summary, the SMILES2Class and SMILES2Activity models demonstrated promising
results but highlighted the complexity of predicting classes and activities of secondary
metabolites from their SMILES representations. It is imaginable that a less ”data­heavy”
model could perform better than a transformer model in the task of SMILES2Activity, since
there is not a lot of data in the small classes, making these classes more challenging for
a transformer model to learn and predict.
4.1.4
Multitasking vs individual models
The goal of deploying a multitasking model was to investigate whether such a model could
perform at a comparable or superior level to individual models trained on single tasks.
In the task of mapping ”invalid” SMILES representations of secondary metabolites to
”valid” ones, the multitasking model demonstrated slightly better performance compared
to the model trained solely on this task, as illustrated in Fig 3.19. This intriguing finding
suggested that the multitasking environment might provide some form of regularization or
additional transfer learning that could enhance the model’s performance on this specific
task.
However, for the remaining tasks, the performance of the multitasking model was either
equal to (or worse) than that of the models trained exclusively on those respective tasks.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
49
==PAGE:56==
4.2
Bias in the task of binary classifying Abstracts
In the task of binary classification of abstracts as either belonging to the MIBiG database
or not, an issue arose due to the fact that some of the scientific references in the MIBiG
database are incorrect. These erroneous references needed to be identified and removed
from the dataset. The bias introduced here stemmed from the author of the project be­
ing responsible for verifying whether an abstract actually belongs to the MIBiG database
or not. This introduces the possibility of the author misclassifying a reference as accu­
rate when it’s not, and vice versa. This could potentially explain why approximately 25
abstracts are located in the opposite class space in the PCA seen in Fig 3.3.
4.3
RL vs supervised learning for making the predictions
better of SMILES
After observing the performance of models that predict secondary metabolites from BGC
representations, the idea was born to create a new model that could work in tandem to
improve performance. The initial concept involved using RL to enhance the validity of the
predicted molecules. The approach is explained more in detail in the section 2.5.9.
The purpose of this tandem approach is to leverage the strengths of both methods: su­
pervised learning can help the model learn a good initial policy, while RL can fine­tune
this policy based on the reward function to validate the molecules.
This idea was pursued and a simple implementation can be found in the GitHub repository
at code/ESM2chemT5_RL_experiment.py.
The implementation faced significant challenges, primarily attributable to an insufficient
understanding of the details involved in the field of RL, but also because the action space
for the RL model is the entire size of the vocabulary of the T5 tokenizer, so a very large
number of possible actions to choose from. Another challenge was the definition of the
reward function. If it’s based solely on the rare validity of molecules, it may not be complex
enough. This could lead to the model rarely receiving positive feedback.
4.3.1
Supervised learning approach
After attempting the idea of an RL model, a simpler supervised tandem­model concept
was explored. This was due to the realization that the performance problems could be ad­
dressed as a supervised learning issue, given that the true target labels are known. The
idea is to have two T5 models in a tandem arrangement, where the first T5 model (model
A) receives the BGC representation as input and produces a preliminary prediction, and
the second T5 model (model B) takes this preliminary prediction as input and refines it to
produce the final output, the model architecture is illustrated in Fig 2.2.
The underlying intuition is that model A could learn to capture the broad patterns and
structures in the data, while model B could focus on refining the outputs, producing a
higher validity of molecules.
A good thing about this T5­tandem approach is it allows for using ensemble methods,
where multiple instances of model A are used, and their combined predictions are used
for model B.
The performance boost of the T5­tandem approach is very clear and is illustrated in Figs
3.14 and 3.19. A great performance boost was also seen in the task of SMILES2Activity
seen in 3.18. This led to the speculation of this T5­tandem approach could be a perfor­
mance booster in more tasks.
The T5­tandem approach has the upper hand over the DL­RL approach primarily due
to it being more simple both conceptually and in terms of implementation. It may be
beneficial to conduct a more comprehensive exploration of the RL approach for potential
improvements.
50
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:57==
4.4
How to evaluate predicted SMILES in a meaningful way?
An interesting debate in this project has been how to evaluate predictions of secondary
metabolites represented as SMILES.
The evaluation metrics used in this project to evaluate SMILES are relatively straightfor­
ward. SacreBLEU, Rouge, and character error rate are all standard metrics for evaluating
machine translation and string predictions. The only unconventional aspect is the metric
for valid SMILES, which deviates somewhat from traditional approaches.
One exciting unconventional way of evaluating SMILES could be to use the already fine­
tuned models of SMILE2bioClass or/and SMILE2Activity to predict the class or/and activ­
ity for predicted SMILES. If the predicted SMILES is predicted as the same class or/and
activity as the true SMILES, then it counts as a correct prediction. This could be a bio­
logically good evaluation based on the fact that different molecules can have the same
function.
It could also be possible to evaluate the predicted SMILES strings by the weighted im­
portance of the sub­parts of the predicted SMILES string. This method tries to capture
that different sub­parts of SMILES do not have the same biological importance. Take
for example the addition/reduction of a single carbon in a linear carbon chain, this may
affect the overall function of the molecule less than making the carbon chain aromatic.
Both circumstances require only a minor character error in the prediction, yet they carry
significant implications for the molecule’s structure.
Another possible evaluation metric to evaluate SMILES is a graph­based method. Where
the SMILES strings could be converted into molecular graphs, where atoms are nodes and
bonds are edges, this graphical representation would allow for the application of graph­
theoretical methods for comparison and analysis of molecular structures, possibly provid­
ing a deeper insight from the text­based approach. Furthermore, different SMILES strings
can represent the same molecule. This method also eliminates that uncertainty.
4.5
Bias in reduction of protein sequences longer than 850
amino acids
Due to the memory constraints of the ESM­2 model, the input text to the model was limited
to approximately 850 amino acids in a sequence. However, this became a problem given
the substantial number of protein sequences exceeding 850 amino acids. To address this,
we removed non­evolutionarily/ non­conserved amino acids, a method explained in the
methods section and illustrated in Fig 2.4.
This approach introduces several biases. First, it only affects sequences longer than
850 amino acids, leaving shorter sequences untouched. Second, it results in a signifi­
cant loss of information for longer sequences. It’s not uncommon for sequences to span
over 10,000 amino acids, and removing over 9/10 of the sequence inevitably leads to
substantial information loss. Third, we are creating a new peptide composition by selec­
tively removing the least conserved single amino acids. This could alter the structure and
function of the protein sequence.
A clear drawback of this sequence reduction approach, depicted in Fig 2.4, is the high
computational cost of BLAST and MSA. This is especially evident during inference, where
the time consumed by BLAST and MSA surpasses that of the ESM2­T5 model itself The
ESM2­T5 model architecture is shown in Fig 2.5.
Future research would benefit from exploring methods that can handle longer sequences
without sequence editing or reduction. Moreover, if sequence reduction remains neces­
sary in future studies, a solution with less computational burden will be essential.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
51
==PAGE:58==
4.6
Improvements and possible future work
4.6.1
Improvement by pre­training
A transformer model pre­trained on molecule representations, such as SMILES, could
potentially improve the performance of predicting secondary molecules significantly. This
is due to the model’s ability to learn the ”language” of molecular structures, understanding
and recognizing various chemical structures and patterns.
However, this approach has a significant drawback: training a model from scratch requires
substantial data and computational resources. While databases with thousands of molec­
ular representations could be used for pre­training, the challenge lies in the computational
resources needed.
4.6.2
ESM2­GPT
A potential enhancement to the ESM2_T5 model architecture, depicted in Fig 2.5, could
involve replacing the T5 decoder part with a decoder­only transformer model like GPT.
This modification may be advantageous because decoder­only models might yield im­
proved performance.
4.6.3
Predicting Protein Sequences Given a SMILES
An intriguing direction for future work is to reverse the task of predicting a secondary
metabolite from a representation of a BGC. Instead of predicting a secondary metabolite,
the model would take a secondary metabolite as input and predict a BGC that could
naturally synthesize the metabolite. This approach would be particularly fascinating if
applied to a model predicting the protein sequences in the BGC from a given secondary
metabolite. Allowing one to express the protein sequences in an organism to yield a
desired secondary metabolite.
This model would need to learn the mapping from the chemical space (of the secondary
metabolites) to the protein sequence space (of the genes in the BGC).
Developing such a model could have numerous applications in synthetic biology, where
it could be utilized to engineer organisms capable of producing desired compounds.
4.7
Project oversights
In this section, we discuss several oversights that occurred during the project and the
potential impact they may have had on the results.
4.7.1
Potential data leakage in multitask dataset
One of the main challenges in this project was creating a dataset for the T5 multitasking
model. This task became complicated as the SMILES2Class and SMILES2Activity tasks
use the same secondary metabolite SMILES representations as input text, which other
tasks use as the target label. This overlap in ”SMILE2Class” and ”invalid2valid” tasks
could potentially constitute a data leakage, influencing the performance positively while
evaluating the models.
However, this is not a data leakage in the traditional sense, where the same data is present
in testing and training sets, so it is also possible that it is not a problem.
4.7.2
Lack of Cross­validation and Stratified Splits
Firstly, all the stated results are not cross­validated, a decision made to conserve time
and computational resources. Secondly, in the SMILES2Activities and SMILES2Classes
tasks, a stratified split is not performed when creating the test and training splits. This
52
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:59==
could potentially affect the models’ generalizability and the performance metrics’ true re­
liability.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
53
==PAGE:60==
5
Conclusion
5.1
Binary classification of scientific abstract
In the task of classifying scientific abstracts, the objective is to determine whether articles
should be included in the MIBiG database or not.
Several transformer models were tested on this problem.
However, none achieved
a significantly higher score than the SVM baseline, as illustrated in Fig 3.9 and 3.10.
Almost all the experimented models performed around 0,95 in both accuracy and F1
score.
Given its performance, the SVM seems suitable for implementation into an automated
scraper designed to review newly published articles. This could alleviate the manual
labor required by those tasked with updating the MIBiG database.
The automatic
scraper could be effectively implemented using the ’download_pubmed_abstracts.py’
script,
which contains all the necessary functions.
Combined with the ’sim­
ple_models_for_pos_neg_classifier.py’ script,
which utilizes the predictive powers
of SVM, this combination system could provide an efficient solution for new article
classification (MIBiG DB inclusive decision).
5.2
prediction of classes and activity of secondary
metabolite molecules
The test­set performance of predicting molecular activities by the tandem Text chem T5
model was around 0,7 in F1 score and 0,9 in accuracy, compared to the Text chem T5
model only scoring 0,1 in F1 score and 0,4 in accuracy. The Tandem Text chem T5 model
gives satisfactory results.
The test­set performance of predicting molecular classes of secondary metabolite
molecules was initially good, with flan T5 and Text Chem T5 achieving an F1 score of
0,7.
Using the tandem Text chem T5 model on the same data was perfect, with all the predic­
tions being predicted to the right classes.
A perfect result was achieved with the text2text ”classifier” model, demonstrating a highly
satisfactory performance.
5.3
Prediction of secondary metabolite molecules
The most challenging task of the project was undoubtedly predicting the molecular com­
position of secondary metabolite molecules from a representation of a BGC.
Various models were experimented with alongside multiple datasets.
Utilizing the pure protein sequences in BGC as model input posed numerous difficulties.
In the process, a novel model architecture was created twice. The first and most innova­
tive was the combination of an ESM­2 encoder model projected directly onto a Text chem
T5 decoder. The second innovative model architecture was the tandem T5 model. The
ESM2­T5 model could achieve a Rouge F1 score of around 0,6 for the test set, and this
number increased when combined with the tandem Text chem T5 to about 0,8.
The best approach for predicting metabolite molecules was to use the Pfam domains of
the proteins in the BGC in conjunction with the tandem Text chem T5 model. This re­
sulted in a Rouge F1 score of 0,9 on a test set. This score was further surpassed by the
multitasking Text chem T5, which achieved a Rouge F1 score of 0,92 and an accuracy
54
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:61==
proportion of 0,25.
The outcomes of the task of predicting secondary metabolite molecules are impressive.
5.4
Final conclusive words
This project, particularly the various text2text tasks, exemplifies the exceptional perfor­
mance of transformer models and their future potential. The tandem T5 approach appears
to enhance the performance of all tasks within this project significantly. This suggests that
the approach could potentially be beneficial for other similar projects as well.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
55
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
Niels Jakob Larsen. Transformer DB Curation MIBiG. 2023. URL: https://github.
com/jakob949/Transformer_DB_Curation_MIBiG.
[2]
Varun Dogra et al. “A Complete Process of Text Classification System Using State­
of­the­Art NLP Models”. In: 2022 (2022).
[3]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 2017­Decem.Nips (2017), pp. 5999–6009. ISSN: 10495258.
[4]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre­training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan­
guage understanding”. In: NAACL HLT 2019 ­ 2019 Conference of the North Amer­
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies ­ Proceedings of the Conference 1.Mlm (2019), pp. 4171–4186.
[5]
Adam Roberts. Exploring Transfer Learning with T5: the Text­To­Text Transfer
Transformer. 2020. URL: https://ai.googleblog.com/2020/02/exploring-transfer-
learning-with-t5.html.
[6]
Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016. URL: http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[7]
Juergen Schmidhuber. “Annotated History of Modern AI and Deep Learning”. In: 22
(2022), pp. 1–75. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.11279.
[8]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. “Fixing Weight Decay Regularization in Adam”.
In: (2017).
[9]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural machine trans­
lation by jointly learning to align and translate”. In: 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 ­ Conference Track Proceedings (2015),
pp. 1–15.
[10]
Colin Raffel et al. “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text­to­text
transformer”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 21 (2020), pp. 1–67. ISSN:
15337928.
[11]
Dimitrios Christofidellis et al. “Unifying Molecular and Textual Representations via
Multi­task Language Modelling”. In: (2023). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12586.
[12]
Yinhan Liu et al. “RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach”. In:
1 (2019). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.
[13]
Tom B. Brown et al. “Language models are few­shot learners”. In: Advances in Neu­
ral Information Processing Systems 2020­Decem (2020). ISSN: 10495258.
[14]
Alexander Rives et al. “Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsu­
pervised learning to 250 million protein sequences”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118.15 (2021), pp. 1–46.
ISSN: 10916490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2016239118.
[15]
Zeming Lin et al. “Evolutionary­scale prediction of atomic level protein structure with
a language model”. In: bioRxiv (2022), p. 2022.07.20.500902. URL: https://www.
biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.07.20.500902v2%0Ahttps://www.biorxiv.org/
content/10.1101/2022.07.20.500902v2.abstract.
[16]
Central dogma. URL: http://sciencewithmsjones.weebly.com/uploads/3/8/6/0/
38609001/central-dogma-of-dna_orig.png.
[17]
Nwokeji Paul Anulika et al. “The Chemistry Of Natural Product: Plant Secondary
Metabolites”. In: International Journal of Technology Enhancements and Emerging
Engineering Research 4.8 (2016), pp. 1–9. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/307858399.
56
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:63==
[18]
Barbara R. Terlouw et al. “MIBiG 3.0: a community­driven effort to annotate exper­
imentally validated biosynthetic gene clusters”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 51.D1
(2023), pp. D603–D610. ISSN: 13624962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac1049.
[19]
Stephen F. Altschul et al. “Basic local alignment search tool”. In: Journal of Molecular
Biology 215.3 (1990), pp. 403–410. ISSN: 00222836. DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)
80360-2.
[20]
Robert C. Edgar and Serafim Batzoglou. “Multiple sequence alignment”. In: Current
Opinion in Structural Biology 16.3 (2006), pp. 368–373. ISSN: 0959440X. DOI: 10.
1016/j.sbi.2006.04.004.
[21]
Chin­yew Lin, Eduard Hovy, and Marina Rey. “Automatic Evaluation of Summaries
Using N­gram Co­Occurrence Statistics”. In: June (2003), pp. 71–78.
[22]
Gregor Wentzel. “Funkenlinien im Röntgenspektrum”. In: Annalen der Physik
371.23 (1922), pp. 437–461. ISSN: 15213889. DOI: 10.1002/andp.19223712302.
[23]
Ajith Abraham and Shaza M. Abd Elrahman. “A Review of Class Imbalance Prob­
lem”. In: Journal of Network and Innovative Computing 1 (2013), pp. 332–340.
[24]
Daniel Berrar. “Cross­validation”. In: 1 (2018), pp. 542–545.
[25]
Rachel Ida Buff. “Support Vector Machine Active Learning with Applications to Text
Classification Simon”. In: American Quarterly 61.2 (2009), pp. 417–421. DOI: 10.
1353/aq.0.0077.
[26]
Deming Mao and Jack R. Edwards. Simulation of chemically­reacting gas­solid
flowfields using a preconditioning strategy. 2003. ISBN: 9781624100864. DOI: 10.
2514/6.2003-4110.
[27]
Tianqi Chen et al. “Training Deep Nets with Sublinear Memory Cost”. In: (2016),
pp. 1–12. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.06174.
[28]
Sharan Narang et al. “Mixed precision training”. In: 6th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018 ­ Conference Track Proceedings (2018),
pp. 1–12.
[29]
Olaf Ronneberger et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with Al­
phaFold”. In: Nature 596.May (2021). ISSN: 1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-
03819-2. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
[30]
Sagnik Sen. “Understanding the evolutionary trend of intrinsically structural disor­
ders in cancer relevant proteins as probed by Shannon entropy scoring and struc­
ture network analysis”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 19.Suppl 13 (2019). ISSN: 1471­
2105. DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2552-0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12859-
018-2552-0.
[31]
Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco Guzm, and Luke Zettlemoyer. “Unsupervised Cross­
lingual Representation Learning at Scale”. In: ().
[32]
Raimi Karim. Illustrated: Self­Attention. URL: https : / / towardsdatascience . com /
illustrated-self-attention-2d627e33b20a.
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
57
==PAGE:64==
58
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Intuitive illustration of the self­attention architecture. [32]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Principal Components
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Variance
Explained Variance of Principal Components
Figure A.2: The variance explained by each principal component for the Fig 3.3
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
59
==PAGE:66==
Freqs of words
SVM
Roberta-encoder classifier
Flan T5
GPT-2
Bio Roberta-encoder classifier
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
0.909
0.944
0.948
0.948
0.950
0.954
Different Models Accuracy
Figure
A.3:
Accuracy
scores
for
different
models
where
the
transformer
models
in
fine­tuned
for
a
single
epoch.
Dataset
used
for
training
”dataset_combined_titles_abstracts_v2.txt”.
60
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
==PAGE:67==
Applying Natural Language Processing for the curation of Biological Databases
61
==PAGE:68==
Author Niels Jakob Larsen,
MSc Bioinformatics and systems biology, DTU
Giorgio Giannone, PhD­student, DTU Compute
Supervisor
Kai Blin, Senior Researcher, DTU biosustain
Supervisor
Ole Winther, Professor, DTU Compute
Supervisor
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
