==PAGE:1==
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and
translator for automated privacy
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Matej Majtan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science (MSc) in Computer Science and Engineering.
The project was realized from February 27th 2023 to August 27th 2023. The workload
amounts for 35 ECTS points. The supervisor for this project is Associate Professor Se­
bastian Mödersheim from DTU Compute.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science
especially in the field of computer security.
Matej Majtan ­ s184457
Signature
Date
ii
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As the security of protocols is becoming more and more of a concern in everyday life,
new approaches to ensure privacy goals are being developed. One of these approaches
is (αβ)­privacy, that together with the noname tool allows for privacy goals to be defined
formally and then verified. In order to make the protocol definition simpler and more intu­
itive than the noname’s own language, we now introduce an alternative language AnnB
for the noname tool based on the Alice and Bob notation. This language defines the
agents’ behaviour in a form of actions as supposed to the transactions in noname. This
results in behaviour definitions that define the clear order of interactions between agents.
It additionally introduces the notion of knowledge which ensures that agent can maintain
certain information throughout the whole execution of the protocol, which is not implicitly
supported by noname. The result of this thesis is a translation algorithms implemented in
a tool which is capable of translating the AnnB language into noname tool, while ensuring
that the semantics introduced in this language still hold in the resulting noname code.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sebastian Mödersheim, Associate professor, DTU Compute
I would like to thank Sebastian Mödersheim for guiding me through the process of de­
signing the AnnB language and the translator tool, the report writing process as well as
for the continuous encouragement throughout the whole work on this thesis.
iv
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminaries
3
2.1
Dolev Yao deduction model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
(αβ)­privacy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Noname tool and language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Alice and Bob notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Language design
7
3.1
Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Projections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Analysis and translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Finalizing transactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Limitations of the design and possible improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Example case studies
25
4.1
Simple protocol example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Nested branching example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Implementation
31
5.1
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Optimization of transaction generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
A Context free grammar of AnnB
37
B Nested branching translated noname code
38
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In a world where people interact more and more with technology, it is crucial to ensure
these interactions stay secure. Almost every modern system relies on communication be­
tween different subsystems over some network using a communication protocols, there­
fore it is crucial that these protocols are designed in a secure manner ensuring several
security goals. The most common goals in security are confidentiality ­ ensuring the data
stays a secret, integrity ­ ensuring the data is not altered with, authenticity ­ ensuring that
the actors in the communications are truly who they claim that they are.
Although a protocol that fulfills these security goals guarantees a secure communication
between two agents, it still could expose some unwanted information. This information
could be in a form of some relation that the messages sent between agents expose. This
information can then be exploited by an intruder to gain more information about the votes
or interfere with the elections.
This situation is a problem of ensuring the privacy of the protocol, therefore the perspective
has to change and the question is not only what the intruder can deduce from the protocol’s
messages but also whether the intruder can distinguish two different messages apart.
This problem can be solved by using the (αβ)­privacy [1].
A practical implementation of (αβ)­privacy is a tool currently named noname tool [2]. This
tool formally analyses the privacy properties of protocols based on the (αβ)­privacy. The
tool introduces its own input language, which although being very flexible may cause
some protocol definitions to become very complex due to its verbose nature. Additionally
the language defines each of the step in the protocol as a separate transaction meaning
it might be hard to track the order in which the steps should be executed. This is true
especially for simple protocols with mainly sequential execution and minimal amount of
branching.
In those cases, a simpler protocol definition based on Alice and Bob notation (AnB no­
tation) used for instance in OFMC tool [3], would be more preferable. AnB notation is
based on defining actions which are executed by agents and represent some local action
done by agent on their own machine or a communicate action which represents sending a
message to another agent. This way of defining protocols is sufficient for many protocols
and can be more familiar for users that have experience with tools as OFMC.
Another advantage of protocols defined in AnB­style language as supposed to the non­
ame tool’s own language is the possibility of abstracting away many of the destructor
application steps that the noname language expects the user to input. Making changes
to the protocol definition simpler as well as improving the readability of the protocol.
The goal of this thesis is to explore possibilities of how to design a simpler and more
intuitive Alice and Bob style language used to describe protocols for the noname tool.
Further the goal is to develop a translation tool for this language with analysis of execution
as well as abstraction of certain aspects of the noname language.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:11==
2
Preliminaries
2.1
Dolev Yao deduction model
Dolev­Yao deduction model is a formal model commonly used to analyze security pro­
tocols and uncover possible security problems. It was introduced in [4] by Danny Dolev
and Andrew Yao. Intruder in this model has an access to the whole network, meaning
they can intercept any of the messages and reroute, replay or modify them. However the
intruder is not capable of breaking any of the cryptographic primitives. [5]
An example of this could be that one agent sends to another a symmetrically encrypted
message {|M|}K, the intruder is allowed to send this message to other agents, it can also
include it in other messages, however it is not able to learn what message M is unless it
has learned previously the key K.
2.2
(αβ)­privacy
(αβ)­privacy is a declarative method of defining privacy goals.[1] It defines a state transi­
tion system where every state contains two formulae α and β. The α formula represents
the information that is intentionally released and the intruder can learn this information
as it does not go against the privacy goals. Then there is β formula which describes the
technical knowledge of the intruder i.e. the actual information that the intruder can de­
duce. This could also include that the intruder learns about a structure of an encrypted
message that they aren’t able to decrypt. The goal then is that the intruder cannot find
out more than we decide to release i.e. β does not imply more information than can be
deduced from α.
In a weak voting protocol, the intruder may be able to tell that two agents have voted the
same, but does not know how they voted. This is however still a violation of privacy, since
if α specifies that the intruder may only learn the total result of the votes, but nothing more
about the individual votes.
2.3
Noname tool and language
A tool that practically applies the (αβ)­privacy analysis is called noname tool. [2, 6, 7] The
tool allows a user to define what information should be released in the α, however instead
of mentioning what should be included in β directly, a set of transactions is defined. The
transactions describe the messages that agents send or receive as well as the actions
agents do to update their local state. Thus the tool allows the user to define the protocol
itself and the released information in α and the noname tool then runs the analysis and
presents the results.
The language used for the noname tool is divided into several sections each defining a
different aspect of the protocol. These sections are:
Sigma0 describing the non­technical information, that should be added to α. All defini­
tions made in this section are therefore public.
Sigma contains the technical information, for which holds that Σ \ Σ0 is information that
is contained in β and not in α. The definitions in this section can be public or private
as some cryptographic functions could be available to the intruder.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
3
==PAGE:12==
gamma0 is a section containing the initial interpretation of protocol variables. It takes a
form of relations which define what constants can represent the given variables.
Algebra is used to define custom rewrite rules for functions. The functions then act as
destructors for custom constructors defined in the Σ0 and Σ.
Cells defines all the memory cells used in the protocol. These cells are also initialized in
this section.
Transactions contains a set of transactions, which are built from processes. These pro­
cesses describe how agent creates the messages that are sent and how it handles
received messages. These transactions are then run in all possible combinations
depending on the Bound limit.
Bound states the the number of transitions executed by the tool.
There are two kinds of processes that form the transactions. There are left processes
used mostly for input of the data to a transaction, whereas the right processes usually
denote an output of the data from a transaction.
Pl ::= mode x ∈D.Pl
Non­deterministic choice
| rcv(X).Pl
Receive
| X := cell(t).Pl
Cell read
| try X .= d(m)
Destructor application
in Pl catch Pl
| if ϕ then Pl else Pl
Conditional statement
| νn1, . . . , nk.Pr
Fresh constant
(2.1)
The equation 2.1 shows the left processes, namely non­deterministic choice which cre­
ates a new variable and picks its value from a given domain, receive process receiving a
message, cell read process for reading from a memory cell into a new variable, destruc­
tor application used to extract messages from other composed messages, conditional
statement used for branching of the protocol and finally fresh constant generation. The
right processes are shown in the equation 2.2 and include send process for sending a
message, cell write process for writing a message into a memory cell, release process
to release a formula to the intruder and finally nil process which is used to terminate the
transactions. Each of the transactions starts with a left process and the fresh constant
process is used to bridge the left and right processes.
Pr ::= snd(t).Pr
Send
| cell(t) := t.Pr
Cell write
| mode ϕ.Pr
Release
| 0
Terminate
(2.2)
The messages in noname can be built in two ways. A message is either an atomic iden­
tifier represented by a public constant or a variable or it could be a composed message
which is built using a constructor function. A composed message could look like h(a,b),
where h is a constructor with arity 2 (defined in Σ as h/2) and a and b are two public
constants. The intruder model analysing the intruder knowledge also reflects this since
the deduction rules used in noname support only axiom rule (intruder can deduce what is
4
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:13==
in their knowledge) and composition rule (intruder can compose messages using public
constructors). Noname tool as of now does not support equivalence rule for message
deduction which would allow for arithmetic rules to be taken into consideration when de­
ducing messages from knowledge.
The message decomposition process in noname however isn’t as straight forward as
the constructors. It combines the message verification process with the decomposition
process, meaning that if a message that is being destructed does not fulfill conditions
specific for each destructor it simply fails with ff. For each of the custom destructors
defined in Algebra section the condition is that the message has the structure defined in
the decomposition definition. The destructor condition is checked in the processes by the
try X .= d(m) in p1 catch p2 process, that executes the processes in the catch clause
(p2) in the case that the destructor d returns ff, nonetheless if it succeeds then it sets the
destructed message to the variable X and executes the in clause (p1).
As mentioned before the constructors and destructors in noname can be defined in the
Sigma0, Sigma and Algebra sections, however the language comes with several built­in
constructors and corresponding destructors. These include the constructor for symmetric
encryption scrypt(k, m, r), asymmetric encryption crypt(k, m, r), cryptographic sig­
nature sign(inv(k),m), message pair pair(m1, m2) and finally inv(k) for private key.
The k represents the key, m, m1 and m2 are messages and r is a random factor used for
encryption. The built­in destructors are used to decrypt the encrypted messages, verify
the signatures, parse pairs as well as match private and public keys. The destructors and
the corresponding conditions are shown in equation 2.3. [2] The ≈operator shows the
equivalence between the messages.
dscrypt(t1, t2) ≈m
if t1 ≈inv(k) and t2 ≈crypt(k, m, r)
dcrypt(k, t) ≈m
if t ≈scrypt(k, m, r)
open(k, t) ≈m
if t ≈sign(inv(k), m)
pubk(t) ≈m
if t ≈inv(k)
proj1(t) ≈m1
if t ≈pair(m1, m2)
proj2(t) ≈m2
if t ≈pair(m1, m2)
ff
otherwise
(2.3)
2.4
Alice and Bob notation
Alice and Bob (AnB) notation is a simple way of defining protocols. [8] The simplicity
of the definition lies in an intuitive way of defining actions which are usually represented
by an act of sending a message by a one agent to another. The name Alice and Bob
implies the common use of A and B as agent identifiers, where A represents an Alice and
B represents Bob. As AnB notation is not a formalized language and it is merely a loose
set of conventions many languages adapt these rules to the given application. However
several common characteristics can be seen in most implementations.
AnB notation is split into several sections, each defining a different part of the protocol.
The most common sections are:
Protocol defining the name of the protocol
Types is used to define types of all identifiers. The most common types are Agent, Num­
ber and Function
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
5
==PAGE:14==
Knowledge describes the initial knowledge of each agent in defined in the Types section.
The knowledge has a form of agents name followed by a list of messages.
Actions is the main part of AnB protocol definition. The actions describe the messages
that the agents send to each other. In some interpretations of the AnB there might
also be local actions which are operations done by agent themselves and do not
have affect on other agents.
Goals is the final section and denotes the security goals that are meant to be analyzed.
These usually describe authentication or secrecy goals.
Although these are the most common sections in AnB­style languages, some languages
like SPS [9] define additional sections. Namely Mappings and Formats which represent
pre­existing setup of keys and function symbols describing data structures respectively.
What is worth noting that identifiers in AnB distinguish between protocol variables (starting
with uppercase letter) and constants or function identifiers (starting with lowercase letter).
A specific case of this is for identifier of type Agent. In the case that this kind of identifier
is variable we talk about a role, meaning that any agent can play this role including the
intruder. In the case that it is a constant we talk about agent being a trusted third party.
Most AnB­style languages compose the messages passed around using the initial knowl­
edge from Knowledge section. The variables that are not in the agent’s knowledge are
generated on the spot as a new nonce, these however need to be also declared in the
Types section with the type of Number.
All AnB­style languages provide an action representing sending of a message. This has
a form of a channel between two agents e.g. A →B for channel from agent A to agent B
separated by a colon from the message sent between the two agents. The form of the
message differs between implementations. An example of this kind of action from OFMC
can be B -> A: {N}pk(A), representing an agent B sending agent A an asymmetrically
encrypted nonce N by a public key of agent A. Some AnB­style languages introduce a local
action which is executed only by one agent and has a form of agent name separated by the
local action using a colon. In this case the local action depends on the implementation.
Example of such action from SPS can be A: new N, where an agent A creates a new
nonce N.
6
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:15==
3
Language design
The design of the language was inspired by the target language of the noname tool [2] as
well as several languages based o Alice and Bob notation as AnB language for OFMC [3]
and SPS [9]. Intention is to create a language that is familiar for users that have experience
with the Alice and Bob notation as well as provide the necessary features found in noname
language. Since the language is combining parts from AnB and noname (nn) it will be from
now on referred to as AnnB.
The main inspiration coming from Alice and Bob style languages to AnnB is the use of
actions as a way of defining agents’ behaviour. The actions make the definition of proto­
cols much more intuitive and simpler since they chronologically show which agent does a
specific action, however because of this they are fundamentally different from the way that
the noname language defines agents’ behaviour. Whereas the transactions in noname
describe single chain of processes and each transaction could be executed in any order
by any agent, the actions in Alice and Bob style languages represent a chain of actions
of specific agents out of which only some may be dishonest and have to be executed
in a certain order. This means that actions could be defined as a more restricted form
of transactions. These restrictions come in a form of the transaction order check, that
ensures that each agent executes their actions in order.
As the target language of noname tool has no notion of agents and therefore has no
form of agents’ knowledge that holds all information gathered by the agent throughout
the execution of the protocol, this behaviour has to be simulated. Further the translation
tool should do an analysis of executability of the defined protocol making sure that the
translated protocol can indeed be executed using the agents knowledge and does not
contain messages that given agent cannot compose. For this reason the idea is to run
the language translation through several layers of analysis. (fig. 3.1)
Figure 3.1: The visualization of the translation steps
Initially the AnnB definition has to be parsed into an abstract syntax tree (AST). Afterwards
the actions are projected into projections which represent each agent’s perspective of the
protocol execution. This allows us to analyze each agent separately focusing on the parts
of the protocol only related to them. This further simplifies the executability check as well
as the transaction order check, which are necessary as they allow us to generate a sound
noname code which is semantically equivalent to the defined protocol in AnnB. The pro­
jections are then analyzed, translated and expanded with message decomposition checks
in noname which are abstracted away in AnnB. Finally the transactions are finalized and
converted into a form that can be used to generate the noname source code, which can
later be used in the noname tool.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
7
==PAGE:16==
3.1
Syntax
An example of a protocol defined in AnnB can be seen in listing 3.1. This protocol defines
a simple way of a receiver authenticating a tag using a shared key. In this protocol a
tag A is picked from four possibilities one of them being dishonest. Afterwards the tag
sends an encrypted message in order to authenticate itself to the reader and the reader
acknowledges the process by sending ok and storing the result in a memory cell.
1
Protocol: BasicHash
2
3
Sigma0:
4
ok
5
6
Sigma:
7
pk/1, h/2
8
private sk/1, fresh
9
10
Agents:
11
t1, t2, t3, r
12
dishonest i
13
14
Roles:
15
A: t1, t2, t3, i
16
17
Knowledge:
18
A: A, sk(A)
19
r: inv(pk(r)), sk(t1), sk(t2), sk(t3), sk(i)
20
i: sk(i)
21
22
Cells:
23
isOk[N] := fresh
24
25
Actions:
26
A: new N
27
A -> r: crypt(pk(r), pair(pair(N,A),h(sk(A),N)), N)
28
r -> A: ok
29
A: isOk[N] := ok
30
31
Bound: 4
Listing 3.1: Example of simple protocol in AnnB
Before looking into the structure of the protocol definition, it is important to mention several
common symbols used throughout the language. Identifiers starting with an uppercase
character followed by any combination of alphanumeric characters including underscore
”_” are variable identifiers used to mark a value created during the protocols execution.
Similarly identifiers starting with lowercase character and followed by the same set of
characters is a constant identifier, representing the values that are predetermined before
the protocol execution as well as the identifiers for functions or cell names. At last there
are integer values.
Msg ::= x
Atomic message
| id(m1, . . . mn)
Composed message
(3.1)
A common construct throughout the protocol definition is a notion of a message (similar to
noname [7]) shown in eq. 3.1. There are two types of messages: atomic and composed.
The atomic type of a message represents a simple value that can be represented by either
variable or constant, whereas the composed messages implies the use of a constructor
8
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:17==
function on some arguments. Each composed message has an identifier id which serves
as the function name and a list of messages representing the arguments of the given
function. The amount of arguments is given by the arity n defined in the function definition.
The definition starts with a protocol name as seen in other Alice and Bob style languages,
which is mentioned after the Protocol: section label. Further it defines Σ0 and Σ used
by the noname analysis tool. In our example Σ0 only includes the constant ok and Σ
defines two public functions h and pk for hashing and public key respectively. Finally Σ
also defines a private function sk used to define shared keys between tags and the reader
and a constant fresh used to initialize the memory cell. Any function definition in Σ0 or
Σ is considered a custom constructor function. The syntax of these definitions is heavily
inspired by the noname language as is uses the same arity definition structure, where the
function identifier is separated by a forward slash ”/” from the function’s arity e.g. pk/1
for a function pk with one parameter. However in order to simplify the definitions, in the
cases of constants i.e. identifiers with arity 0, we allow these definitions to omit the arity
definition and just simply mention the identifier as in the case of ok or fresh. Another
syntactic improvement over the way these sections are defined in noname language,
is in the way of defining public identifiers which have to be explicitly mentioned in the
noname language. In AnnB these are implicit and any definition without the private
label is considered public, further simplifying the definitions. Set of public constructors
Σpub contains all public functions defined in the Σ0 or Σ sections.
The next section in defining the protocol using AnnB is used to denote all agents taking
part in the protocol. In the Agents section, we specify which agents are honest and which
can take a role of an intruder i.e. are dishonest. The example code (listing 3.1) defines
three tags t1, t2 and t3 as well as the reader r as honest agents and the intruder i as
dishonest. Similarly as with public and private labels in Σ0 and Σ, when defining dishonest
agents, a dishonest label has to precede the agent definition. In the honest agent’s case,
the label can be omitted as it is implicit. It is important that all these agents are defined
as constants i.e. using lowercase identifiers as they represent actual agents that could
possibly play several other roles. This section however also includes any agents that do
not play a role but are agents executing an action.
Further we define the roles, where we specify what agents can play a certain role. This
is simply done by mentioning a role name i.e. variable agent represented by identifier
starting with an uppercase letter and separated by a colon from a list of agents that may
play the role, defined previously in the Agents section. In our example (listing 3.1), there
is only one role A, that can be played by any of the tags as well as the intruder.
Following this section is the Knowledge section defining the initial knowledge of each par­
ticipant. This section is defined as the name of a participant followed by a colon and
then list of messages representing the initial knowledge. A and r are the participants in
our example with A knowing themselves as well as a shared key related to them sk(A),
whereas the reader r knows their own private key inv(pk(r)) and shared key with each
of the other agents. Since agent i is defined as a dishonest agent, any knowledge as­
signed to this agent is considered intruder knowledge. In this case intruder knowledge
contains the shared key sk(i).
The protocol definition then continues with the Cells section. This section is the same
as in noname and it is used for defining and initializing the memory cells used in the
protocol. Each of the defined memory cell has a name, index and the initial value in the
format cell[index] := value. The example shows a cell with name isOk indexed by N
and initialized to fresh constant.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
9
==PAGE:18==
Second to last section in AnnB language is the Actions section. As mentioned before
this section defines the behaviour of the participants in the protocol. There are two types
of actions, namely a local and communicate actions. The local action has a form of ag :
L, where the agent ag performs an action L i.e. can be modeled as Localag(L). The
second type is a communicate action in a form of ag1 →ag2 : msg, and represents
the action of agent ag1 sending a message msg to the agent ag2. This is modeled as
Commag1→ag2(msg). The abstract syntax model of actions shown in eq. 3.2 models
actions as a tree meaning that each of the actions is followed by another action. This
approach however requires a terminal action, which is modelled as an End action and
can also be seen in the model.
A ::= Localag(L) A
Local action
| Commag1→ag2(msg) A
Communicate action
| End
Terminal action
(3.2)
L ::= New(x1, . . . , xn)
New variables generation
| Choice(m, v, d)
Choice from a domain
| Read(v, c, t)
Read from a cell
| Write(c, t1, t2)
Write to a cell
| Release(m, ϕ)
Release
| If (ϕ, A, A)
Conditional branching
(3.3)
There are several local actions that an agent is able to execute. These all follow from the
processes introduced in noname language and therefore are syntactically similar. The first
of these actions is generation of fresh constants, which uses identical syntax to noname
language: new x1, . . . xn, where x1, . . . xn represent a list of comma separated variables.
The next local action is the non­deterministic choice from a domain. This local action
introduces the mode marker m which can be either ⋆or ⋄(in the language stylized as *
and <>). The ⋆denotes a variable of high security level, hence the intruder should not
learn this information unless it is released, whereas ⋄is the opposite where it is not critical
if the intruder learns this information. The local action then looks like: m v in {d}, where
m is the mode marker, v is the new variable name, d is a domain in a form of comma
separated constants.
Further there are two memory related local actions. One is for reading from a memory
cell and one for writing into a memory cell. The former one has a form of v := c[t], where
v is the new variable name, c is the cell name and t represents a message serving as an
index. Writing action has a form of: c[t1] := t2, where c again serves as a cell name, t1 as
an index and t2 is the message that is being written to the cell.
Second to last of the local action is the release action which releases a formula ϕ and has
a form of: m ϕ, where m is the mode and ϕ is the released formula. The final local action is
the conditional branching action which allows us to branch the flow of actions depending
on the condition ϕ. This conditional branching has a form of if ϕ then A1 else A2 end.
The ϕ denotes the condition and A1 and A2 are the actions or rather choreographies
taken by the protocol depending on the result of the condition. The equation 3.3 shows
the model for the local actions.
The release and branching local actions also introduce the type of a formula ϕ, which
can take a form of an equality check between two messages (msg1 = msg2), negation
10
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:19==
of a formula (not ϕ), conjunction of two formulas (ϕ1 and ϕ2), disjunction of two formulas
(ϕ1 or ϕ2) and a terminal value representing true value (true). The model for formulae is
shown in equation 3.4.
ϕ
::=
t .= t
Equality check
| ¬ϕ
Negation
| ϕ ∧ϕ
Conjunction
| ϕ ∨ϕ
Disjunction
| ⊤
True value
(3.4)
The final section Bound is identical to the noname language. The bound is represented
by a simple integer value which represents the number of transactions that should be
executed by the noname tool. The context free grammar for AnnB describing the syntax
in more detail can be found in the appendix A.
3.2
Projections
The next step in the analysis after obtaining the AST from the parsing process is to gen­
erate projections. Projections serve as a perspective of each individual agent on the
protocol. Benefits are that in later stages of analysis we are able to analyse each agent’s
knowledge independently and therefore ensure that each of the agents has or can obtain
all the necessary information for executing the actions defined in the protocol.
Similarly as the actions in the abstract syntax tree, the projections are represented as a
tree structure consisting of projection elements. The elements are for the most part the
same as the local actions introduced in eq. 3.3, namely new, choice, read, write, release
and if with addition of split, txnEnd, send, receive and nil. The projection model can be
seen in the eq. 3.5.
P ::= new(x1, . . . xn).P
Fresh variables
| choice(m, v, d).P
Non­deterministic choice
| read(v, c, t).P
Cell read
| write(c, t1, t2).P
Cell write
| release(m, ϕ).P
Information release
| send(m).P
Send
| receive(m).P
Receive
| if (ϕ, P, P)
Conditional branching
| split(P, P)
Non­deterministic split in execution
| txnEnd.P
Transaction end
| nil
Projection termination
(3.5)
The meaning behind the projection elements coming from local actions is the same as
described in section 3.1, however there are several new concepts introduced as supposed
to the actions. The first are the send and receive projection elements. These represent
agent’s perspective at the communicate action, meaning if the agent is the one sending
a message the communicate action is translated to send element. In the opposite case it
is translated as receive.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
11
==PAGE:20==
In similar way looking at a branching action If , if an agent is the one that executes the
branching action, then this agent knows which branch they selected, meaning this agent
knows what actions they need to execute afterwards. This holds even in the case that
part of the branched execution is done by a different agent.
1
A: if X = yes then
2
A -> B: ok
3
B -> A: N1
4
A -> B: ok
5
else
6
A -> B: wrong
7
B -> A: N2
8
A -> B: tryAgain
Listing 3.2: Example of branching actions in AnnB
An example in listing 3.2 shows an agent A branching on a condition, in the case this
condition is true then it sends ok to B, who afterwards replies with a nonce N1 and A again
replies with ok. If the condition is not true then A sends wrong, B replies with another nonce
N2 and A sends tryAgain message to B. This interpretation then implies that agent A knows
that if they send ok to B then the next action they are to do after receiving a message is
to send ok again instead of sending tryAgain message. The same goes for sending
tryAgain after sending wrong if the condition is false. However the situation is different
when it comes to B, since they don’t know what branch A chose and therefore B has to
non­deterministically decide which of the actions to pick. This is where the split element
comes in. This projection element models this non­deterministic ”split” in execution of
actions i.e. either of the two projections can be run at that point.
The last two new elements are txnEnd and nil, which are pretty straightforward. The for­
mer is used to distinguish where one transaction ends and where another starts. txnEnd
always follows the send projection however is a much more explicit division between the
transactions and can be easier translated during the translation stage. The latter element
simply serves as a terminal element, since projections are modelled as a tree structure.
We now introduce a function L · Mag which defines the projection of actions used in the
protocol. The subscript ag denotes the agent from whose perspective is the projection
generated from. It can be seen in the equation 3.6. The projection function takes actions
as an input and generates the projections. For each of the local action besides If action
the function simply converts these to corresponding projection elements. In the case of
If action the function either generates an if or split element depending on the agent
executing the action ag′ and the agent being analyzed ag as explained before. It is worth
noting that the projection function is a partial function as in the case that an If local action
is followed by any other action it fails i.e. if rest in Localag(If (ϕ, rest1, rest2)).rest is not
End then the projection throws an error. This will however not be an issue in the real
implementation as the parser should never generate such syntax tree. Last two cases
are the communicate action that projects to send or receive depending on the agent being
analyzed and finally End action is simply translated as the terminal nil.
12
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:21==
LLocalag′(New(x1, . . . xn)).restMag =
{
new(x1, . . . xn).LrestMag,
if ag = ag′
LrestMag,
otherwise
LLocalag′(Choice(m, v, d)).restMag =
{
choice(m, v, d).LrestMag,
if ag = ag′
LrestMag,
otherwise
LLocalag′(Read(v, c, t)).restMag =
{
read(v, c, t).LrestMag,
if ag = ag′
LrestMag,
otherwise
LLocalag′(Write(c, t1, t2)).restMag =
{
write(c, t1, t2).LrestMag,
if ag = ag′
LrestMag,
otherwise
LLocalag′(Release(m, ϕ)).restMag =
{
release(m, ϕ).LrestMag,
if ag = ag′
LrestMag,
otherwise
LLocalag′(If (ϕ, rest1, rest2)).EndMag =
{
if (ϕ, Lrest1Mag, Lrest2Mag),
if ag = ag′
split(Lrest1Mag, Lrest2Mag),
otherwise
LCommag1→ag2(m).restMag =





send(m).txnEnd.LrestMag,
if ag = ag1
receive(m).LrestMag,
if ag = ag2
LrestMag,
otherwise
LEndMag = nil
(3.6)
In order to better understand the projection function, an example of projection of the AnnB
definition from listing 3.2 can be seen in eq. 3.7 from the agent A’s perspective and in eq.
3.8 from the agent B’s perspective. In these examples it apparent how and If action is
projected, showing that in A’s case it is understood simply as conditional branching but in
the B’s case it is a non­deterministic decision which of the branches should be selected.
Additionally the example shows the way that the projection models the transaction end.
This can be seen in both of the branches of the A’s projection where the transaction ends
after sending a message and a new one starts by receiving a message from B.
LexampleMA =if (X = yes,
send(ok).txnEnd.receive(N1).send(ok).nil,
send(wrong).txnEnd.receive(N2).send(tryAgain).nil)
(3.7)
LexampleMB =split(receive(ok).send(N1).nil,
receive(wrong).send(N2).nil)
(3.8)
3.3
Analysis and translation
When we have successfully generated the projections for each of the agent, the next
step is to translate the projections into process chains. The process chains represent a
structure built up from processes same as used by transactions in noname, however the
overall form is of one large tree as with the projections instead of being a divided into
individual transactions as in noname. The reason for this structure is that this approach
simplifies the definitions of the translation and the chains can be easily split in later stages.
The process chain model is shown in the eq. 3.9. The newly introduced constructs are
try process which represents the destructor application known from the noname language
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
13
==PAGE:22==
and the break process used to build up the process chains. The break process serves a
similar purpose as the txnEnd projection element i.e. separate the transactions, however
it merely serves as a step between the process chains and the final list of transactions
and is not translated into any other processes as in the case of txnEnd.
P ::= new(l1, . . . ln).P
Fresh variables
| choice(m, l, ls).P
Non­deterministic choice
| read(l, c, r).P
Cell read
| write(c, r1, r2).P
Cell write
| release(m, ϕ).P
Information release
| send(r).P
Sending process
| receive(l).P
Receiving process
| if (ϕ, P, P)
Conditional branching
| try(l, r, P, P)
Destructor application
| break(P, P)
Transaction separator
| nil
Process chain termination
(3.9)
Another difference of the process chains from the projections is the use of recipes in­
stead of messages to denote the terms. Recipes are similar as the messages in their
structure i.e. there are atomic and composed recipes. However the main difference from
messages is that the recipes represent how an agent can build a certain message from
their knowledge. The atomic recipes therefore mark at which label a certain message is
in agent’s knowledge or what public constant should be used to compose the message.
Whereas the composed recipes define the recipes needed to compose the underlying
function arguments.
Further we introduce a notion of a frame F which contains the knowledge of the agent.
Each agent is assigned their own frame, which simply serves as a map from a recipe label
to a message e.g. F = [X1 7→pk(A)] shows a frame with one entry of pk(A) at a label X1.
One of the main aims of the translation step is to guarantee that the agents can indeed
deduce the messages from their knowledge. However there are some situations that
make this goal less straight­forward. This is due to the nature of these protocols, since
an agent might want to compose a message containing information that is a part of a
composed message received before. This means that the agent needs to first decompose
this message to get access to the information inside. Another case could be that an agent
receives an encrypted message, however they learn the key at a later stage and therefore
need to wait to decompose this message later. These are some of the problems that have
to be taken into consideration when designing the translation function.
3.3.1
Message deduction
The goal now is to define the way an agent can deduce a message from their knowledge
and provide a corresponding recipe. Similarly as in SPS [9], the Dolev­Yao deduction
relations are extended to use labeled messages i.e. F ⊢msgl, where F is the frame and
msgl is a labelled message. The least relation ⊢takes in consideration these two rules:
F ⊢msgl l 7→msg ∈F, Ax
(3.10)
14
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:23==
The equation 3.10 shows the axiom rule, where F is the agent’s frame, msg is the mes­
sage that is being deduced following the recipe l i.e. the agent can deduce any message
that it has in its knowledge. The mapping l 7→t therefore is a part of the agent’s frame F.
F ⊢msgr1
1 . . . F ⊢msgrn
n
F ⊢f(msg1 . . . msgn)f(r1...rn) f/n ∈Σpub, Cmp
(3.11)
The composition rule is shown in eq. 3.11, where F again is the agent’s frame, msg1 . . . msgn
are the arguments of the the function f, r1 . . . rn are the recipes for the arguments and n
is the arity of the function f. The function f has to be a the public constructor defined in
the set Σpub, which contains all custom constructor functions defined in Σ0 and Σ as well
as several built­in functions from noname language1. As the public constants are treated
as a public function with arity 0, this rule also covers the deduction process for them. SPS
also implements an equivalence rule used to simulate algebraic rules (e.g. the exponenti­
ation during Diffie­Hellman key exchange), however since noname tool does not support
this rule is has been omitted for AnnB.
An example of message deduction is as follows. Let’s say that we have a frame F =
[X1 7→pk(A), X2 7→M, X3 7→N] and we extend the Σpub with custom constructor function
hmac/2 and constant k. If we try to deduce crypt(pk(A),hmac(k, M), N) we get:
F ⊢pk(A)X1Ax F ⊢kkCmp F ⊢MX3Ax
F ⊢hmac(k, M)hmac(k,X2) Cmp F ⊢NX3Ax
F ⊢crypt(pk(A), hmac(k, M), N)crypt(X1,hmac(k,X2),X3)
Cmp
(3.12)
Using the deduction in eq. 3.12 we get that the recipe for crypt(pk(A),hmac(k, M), N)
is indeed crypt(X1, hmac(k, X2), X3).
3.3.2
High level translation function
We now define a translation function J·KH. This function gives a high level view of the
translation process from the projections into process chains. We additionally define an
initial case function J·KH0. These functions are defined in eq. 3.13
The initial case for the translation starts out by injecting the initial knowledge K0 using
the initKnowledge function, ensuring that each of the agents have received their initial
knowledge before executing any further actions. In the case of receive, read and choice
elements, we create a new label X|F|+1 used for the message as the variable name and
the label in agent’s frame. Similarly for the new element we create a new label for each
of the newly created elements. Each of these messages are then matched with a label
and added to the agent’s frame.
1The built­in constructor functions from noname language include crypt, scrypt, sign and pair.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
15
==PAGE:24==
JF : projectionKH0(K0) = F : initKnowledge(F ∪K0).JprojectionKH(F ∪K0)
Jreceive(msg).restKH(F) = receive(X|F|+1).JrestKH(F ∪X|F|+1)
Jread(v, c, t).restKH(F) = read(X|F|+1, c, l).JrestKH(F ∪X|F|+1)
where F ⊢tl
Jchoice(m, v, d).restKH(F) = choice(m, X|F|+1, d).JrestKH(F ∪X|F|+1)
Jif(ϕ, rest1, rest2)KH(F) = if (l, Jrest1KH(F), Jrest2KH(F))
where F ⊢ϕl
Jnew(x1, . . . xn).restKH(F)
= new(X|F|+1, . . . X|F|+n).JrestKH(F ∪X|F|+1 ∪· · · ∪X|F|+n)
Jsend(msg).restKH(F) = send(l).JrestKH(F)
where F ⊢msgl
Jwrite(c, t1, t2).restKH(F) = write(c, l1, l2).JrestKH(F)
where F ⊢tl1
1 and F ⊢tl2
2
Jrelease(m, ϕ).restKH(F) = release(m, l).JrestKH(F)
where F ⊢ϕl
JtxnEnd.restKH(F) = end(F, ntxn).break(start(F, ntxn).JrestKH(F), nil)
where ntxn = new label
Jsplit(rest1, rest2)KH(F)
= end(F, ntxn).break(start(F, ntxn).Jrest1KH(F), start(F, ntxn).Jrest2KH(F))
where ntxn = new label
JnilKH(F) = nil
(3.13)
There are several instances where the messages are defined as arguments for certain
process. These instances, namely read, send and write, require that we confirm that
these messages can be composed, we use the least relation to denote this. So far these
measures guarantee that the executability check of the protocol from each agent’s per­
spective succeeds, however we have to make sure that also the other concerns related to
knowledge simulation and transaction order are addressed. This is done by the end and
start functions. The end function handles the storing of the newly acquired knowledge and
sets the expected step label ntxn. The start function takes this label and checks whether
the stored step label is matching the expected one afterwards it retrieves the knowledge
so it can be used in the next transaction.
This however does not give us a concrete definition of how the translation function should
be implemented, but merely an idea of how it should work. Additionally this does not take
in consideration the fact that we want to be able to decompose some messages in order to
use their contents further to compose new messages. Therefore we first formalize these
aspects and define a low level implementation of the translation function.
3.3.3
Formal message composing and decomposing
A function in eq. 3.14 formalizes the least relation on labeled messages. It describes the
way we compose messages from a frame F and returns all recipes of the given message.
The function returns all labels that match the message msg in the frame F and additionally
returns all the recipes for a composed message as long as all the terms of the composed
16
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:25==
message can be composed and the function is in the public constructor set Σpub.
composeF (msg) = {Xi | Xi 7→t ∈F} ∪
{f(l1, . . . ln) | f ∈Σpub ∧
l1 ∈composeF (t1) ∧· · · ∧ln ∈composeF (tn)}
(3.14)
Additionally it is required that we can deduce formulae. This is formalized in eq. 3.15. The
function simply iterates all the sub­terms and in the case of equality check it composes
the sub­terms. The composeϕF function is a partial function as it may fail in the case that
one of the sub­terms cannot be composed.
composeϕF (ϕ1 and ϕ2) = composeϕF (ϕ1) and composeϕF (ϕ2)
composeϕF (ϕ1 or ϕ2) = composeϕF (ϕ1) or composeϕF (ϕ2)
composeϕF (not ϕ) = not composeϕF (ϕ)
composeϕF (true) = true
composeϕF (t1 .= t2) = l1 .= l2
where l1 ∈composeF (t1) and l2 ∈composeF (t2)
(3.15)
Now that we know how to compose messages we look at the decomposition of messages.
AnnB similarly as noname includes several built­in constructors used to represent encryp­
tion (scrypt, crypt), cryptographic signature (sign), pair composition (pair) and private
key (inv). The idea is to check whether these composed messages can be decomposed
and if so, extend the frame with the contents of these messages. Additionally for noname
tool to properly analyse the contents of these messages we need to extend the gener­
ated code with destructor application processes. Therefore this analysis serves double
purpose as it allows us to extensively analyse the agent’s frame during the executability
check, while also generating the necessary code for noname tool to function as expected.
The way of analysing these composed messages is by the use of analyse function in­
spired by the approach in SPS [9]. This function is given a message from agent’s frame
and checks the corresponding condition. If the condition is true it returns a recipe. These
recipes however can take two forms. So called try recipes, which are used to derive new
terms and describe how to decompose the message in order to extract its contents, which
is then used to generate a destructor application process and if recipes which are used
to simply verify whether two values match or not. The table 3.1 shows the specific cases
that the analyse function handles.
Term
Condition
Derive
Recipe
Xi 7→pair(t1, t2)
true
Xi′
1 7→t1
Xi′
2 7→t2
try Xi′
1 := proj1(Xi)
try Xi′
1 := proj2(Xi)
Xi 7→scrypt(k, m, r)
l ∈composeF (k)
Xi′ 7→m
try Xi′ := dscrypt(l, Xi)
Xi 7→crypt(k, m, r)
l ∈composeF (inv(k))
Xi′ 7→m
try Xi′ := dcrypt(l, Xi)
Xi 7→sign(inv(k), m)
l ∈composeF (k)
Xi′ 7→m
try Xi′ := open(l, Xi)
Xi 7→inv(k)
l ∈composeF (k)
­
try Xi′ := pubk(Xi),
if l .= Xi′
Xi 7→t
{l1, . . . ln} = composeF (t)
­
if l1 .= · · · .= ln
Table 3.1: analyse function
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
17
==PAGE:26==
In the case that a pair function is being analysed, the condition is always true, this is
due to the function simply representing a pair of messages. This is then reflected in the
derivation as it derives two new labels for each of the elements of the pair and finally it
generates the try recipe for each of these terms.
The cryptographic functions each require the agent to be able to compose a key. For
symmetric encryption this key is the same as the one used for encryption. For asymmetric
encryption it is the private key and for signature it is the public key. All of these functions
result in a corresponding try recipe. There is however one difference with the inv function
as we do not need to derive the key k, but merely check whether it matches the one we
can deduce from the frame, therefore we first generate a try recipe extracting the key,
followed by the if recipe checking whether it is the same as the deduced one. This is
done so that we can confirm that the private key indeed belongs to the expected public
key.
At last we introduce a case, where the structure of the message is not important. In this
case we simply gather all the recipes that can be used to compose a given message and
compare them to each other. This case is meant to check composed messages using
custom constructors.
3.3.4
Low level translation function
We now define a more detailed version of the translation function, which uses previously
defined functions for composing messages (composeF ), formulae (composeϕF ) and for
decomposing (analyse) for the sake of generating a valid noname code. It further expands
and defines the initKnowledge, start and end functions to the relevant processes. This
function J·KL giving a low level view is outlined in the eq. 3.16 and 3.17.
Comparing with the high level translation function, the low level one introduces several
new parameters, these are namely the φtry representing the set of all already executed
try checks, φif representing a formula of all the if checks, a set X which is used to
collect all newly created variables in a transaction and finally a set Y collecting all created
variables of an agent throughout the whole protocol. The φtry and φif help us keep a
track of what messages were already analysed and the X and Y are used to simulate the
agent’s knowledge.
The function starts out the same way as the high level function however the initKnowledge
function is replaced by a receive(IK), where IK is a wrapped message containing the
agent’s initial knowledge. The wrapper function ensuring that only the right agent can ac­
cess the information that it contains. The next step is to apply a custom destructor in order
for the agent to extract the data. This destructor is matched with the wrapper function and
is defined in the Algebra section of the generated noname code. The rewrite rule for the
extraction function is always the same i.e. int_IK_extract_ag(int_IK_ag(m)) -> m,
where ag is replaced by the participants name e.g. for role A it would be int_IK_extract_A.
During the extraction of the initial knowledge, we have created a label for the extracted
knowledge and we can simply add it to the frame and run the analysis on it. The re­
sulting check recipes are then translated to corresponding processes and added before
continuing with the translation.
In the case of the receive projection element, the message has to also run through de­
composition analysis and the resulting checks are added to process chain as previously.
As for most protocols it is sufficient that the execution continues only after the checks
succeed, the execution of the protocol is simply stopped in the case they fail. This means
that the else and catch clauses of the related processes are generated as nil.
18
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:27==
JF : projectionKL0(K0) = F : receive(IK).try(X|F|+1,
int_IK_extract_ag(IK), φtry.φif.JprojectionKL(F ′, φif, φtry, {IK}, ∅), nil)
where (F ′, φif, φtry) = analyse(F ∪[X|F|+1 7→K0], ⊤, ∅)
Jreceive(msg).restKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
= receive(X|F|+1).φ′
try.φ′
if.JrestKL(F ′, (φif ∧φ′
if), (φtry ∪φ′
try), X ∪X|F|+1, Y )
where (F ′, φ′
if, φ′
try) = analyse(F ∪[X|F|+1 7→msg], φif, φtry)
Jread(v, c, t).restKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
= read(X|F|+1, c, l).JrestKL(F ∪[X|F|+1 7→v], φif, φtry, X ∪X|F|+1, Y )
where l ∈composeF (t)
Jchoice(m, v, d).restKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
= choice(m, X|F|+1, d).JrestKL(F ∪[X|F|+1 7→v], φif, φtry, X ∪X|F|+1, Y )
Jif (ϕ, rest1, rest2)KL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
= if (composeϕF (ϕ), Jrest1KL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y ), Jrest2KL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y ))
Jnew(x1, . . . xn).restKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
= new(X|F|+1, . . . X|F|+n).
JrestKL(F ∪[X|F|+1 7→x1, . . . X|F|+n 7→xn], φif, φtry, X ∪X|F|+1 ∪· · · ∪X|F|+n, Y )
Jsend(msg).restKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y ) = send(l).JrestKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
where l ∈composeF (msg)
Jwrite(cell, t1, t2).restKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y ) = write(cell, l1, l2).JrestKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
where l1 ∈composeF (t1) and l2 ∈composeF (t2)
Jrelease(m, ϕ).restKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
= release(m, composeϕF (ϕ)).JrestKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y )
JnilKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y ) = nil
(3.16)
Further during the translation of the read, write, send, if and release projection elements
we use the composeF and composeϕF to formally compose the messages and formulae.
This however implies that J·KL is also a partial function as it can fail when a message
cannot be deduced from a frame or if composeϕF function fails.
The last two changes are related to the knowledge simulation and transaction order. In
the high­level function this was represented by the start and end functions. The idea in
the low level function is to use an identifier for a session (int_SID) to link up an instance of
the protocol execution. Then we define memory cells which store the expected step label
for an agent (e.g. int_STEP_ag) and all the generated variables (e.g. int_MEM_x1).
For the sequential termination of a transaction, which in projections is represented by the
txnEnd element followed by a receive element. As this implies that one transaction ended
and the next one starts we can simply update the memory cell storing the expected step
label with a new label as well as write all newly created variables in set X to their respective
memory cells in the end we send the session ID. The last process of this transaction is
then linked using break process to the next one. As there is only one transaction following
the second branch of break is set to nil. Afterwards we make sure that the next transaction
receives the session ID, makes sure that the expected step label in the memory cell is the
same as the new label and read all accumulated variables in a combined set Y ′ = Y ∪X
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
19
==PAGE:28==
which contains all the variables defined up to this stage. The set Y ′ is then used for further
translation and the set X is cleared for the next transaction.
The second situation is when txnEnd element is followed by split element, which implies
that there is a non­deterministic split of execution this means that the expected step label
set in the end of the first transaction is the same step label that is expected in both of the
branches of the split element. The break process now has two branches meaning that
the processes which initiate the transactions need to be done for each of the branches.
Both branches are initiated using the same state as we are modeling a split in execution
that this agent is not capable of differentiating, therefore the situation in both branches is
identical from the stand point of the agent.
JtxnEnd.restKL(F, φif, φtry, {x1, . . . xn}, Y )
= write(int_STEP_ag, int_SID, ntxn).
write(int_MEM_x1, int_SID, x1). · · · write(int_MEM_xn, int_SID, xn).
send(int_SID).
break(receive(int_SID).read(int_STEP, int_STEP_ag, int_SID).
if(int_STEP = ntxn,
read(y′
1, int_MEM_y′
1, int_SID). · · · read(y′
m, int_MEM_y′
m, int_SID).
JrestKL(F, φif, φtry, ∅, Y ′), nil),
nil)
where ntxn = new label and Y ′ = {y′
1, . . . y′
m} = Y ∪{x1, . . . xn}
JtxnEnd.split(rest1, rest2)KL(F, φif, φtry, {x1, . . . xn}, Y )
= write(int_STEP_ag, int_SID, ntxn).
write(int_MEM_x1, int_SID, x1). · · · write(int_MEM_xn, int_SID, xn).
send(int_SID).
break(receive(int_SID).read(int_STEP, int_STEP_ag, int_SID).
if(int_STEP = ntxn,
read(y′
1, int_MEM_y′
1, int_SID). · · · read(y′
m, int_MEM_y′
m, int_SID).
Jrest1KL(F, φif, φtry, ∅, Y ′), nil),
receive(int_SID).read(int_STEP, int_STEP_ag, int_SID).
if(int_STEP = ntxn,
read(y′
1, int_MEM_y′
1, int_SID). · · · read(y′
m, int_MEM_y′
m, int_SID).
Jrest2KL(F, φif, φtry, ∅, Y ′), nil))
where ntxn = new label and Y ′ = {y′
1, . . . y′
m} = Y ∪{x1, . . . xn}
(3.17)
3.4
Finalizing transactions
At the end of the translation process we need to ensure that the processes are in the
right form and that all necessary code for noname tool is generated. This means that
the previously obtained process chains need to break down into individual transactions.
Additionally we ensure that the initial knowledge is provided to the right agents as well as
the intruder knowledge is released. A small adjustment that also needs to take place in
this step is the removal of the definition of pk function from Σ or Σ0 in the case that it is
defined. This is due to the noname tool having this function built­in and not allowing such
20
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:29==
a function to be defined manually.
3.4.1
Breaking the process chains
In order to simplify the process of generating the noname transactions we would like to
have the process chains broken down into a list of processes. The breakProtocol function
(defined in eq. 3.18) does just that. It uses a helper function breakTxn (eq. 3.19 which
iterates over the processes in a process chain and separates the first transaction from the
process chain while also returning a list of following process chains.
breakProtocol(p) = p′ + breakProtocols(rest′)
where (p′, rest′) = breakTxn(rest)
(3.18)
In the case of a simple process the breakTxn function simply ignores the process and
recursively runs the itself on the next process. If it reaches either branching if or destructor
application try process, the function then recursively runs itself on both of the branches
of the processes and combines the the results i.e. the sub­processes p1 and p2 found are
then put into the corresponding processes, while the remaining process chains from both
branches are combined into one list of process chains that need to be further analysed.
The last situation is when breakTxn function comes across a break process. In this case
it terminates the transaction and returns the process chains that it is followed by. Note that
break may have only one of the process chains provided, this is in the case that we have a
sequential transition from one transaction to another. However there is also a case where
the break process provides two process chains, this is in the case of non­deterministic
split as both of the process chains may be executed and therefore should be two different
transactions.
breakTxn(break(rest, nil)) = (nil, [rest])
breakTxn(break(nil, rest)) = (nil, [rest])
breakTxn(break(rest1, rest2)) = (nil, [rest1, rest2])
breakTxn(if (ϕ, rest1, rest2)) = (if (ϕ, p1, p2), rest′
1 + rest′
2)
where (p1, rest′
1) = breakTxn(rest1)
(p2, rest′
2) = breakTxn(rest2)
breakTxn(try(l, r, rest1, rest2)) = (try(l, r, p1, p2), rest′
1 + rest′
2)
where (p1, rest′
1) = breakTxn(rest1)
(p2, rest′
2) = breakTxn(rest2)
breakTxn(p.rest) = (p.p′, rest′)
where (p′, rest′) = breakTxn(rest)
(3.19)
After the breakTxn returns the transaction and the list of the process chains to be analyzed
the breakProtocol runs a breakProtocols function on the remaining process chains. The
breakProtocols function represents an aggregate function that applies the breakProtocol
function to each process chain element in the list and combines the result in one resulting
list. The function terminates in the case that the breakTxn does not return any more
process chains to be analyzed.
3.4.2
Generating initial and intruder knowledge transactions
For the generated protocol in noname to behave as expected, we have to ensure that all
necessary components are generated. These include the transactions that send the initial
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
21
==PAGE:30==
knowledge to the agents, but it also includes the transaction that releases the intruder
knowledge so that noname tool’s intruder has access to this information. Moreover the
session ID also needs to be generated. For this reason we design the transactions that
are necessary to ensure that this information is created and sent to the right places.
Initial knowledge
The initial knowledge is defined in the Knowledge section for each of
the participants separately. The knowledge however sometimes contains a role, which
has to be selected from the list of agents defined in the Roles section. Additionally the
first of the participants needs to initiate the session i.e. generate the session ID. Therefore
a transaction used to provide the initial knowledge is shown in eq. 3.20, where r1 . . . rn
represents the roles in the participant’s knowledge and d1 . . . dn are the corresponding
agent domains for these roles. Further the transaction sends an initial knowledge K0
which is wrapped in an agent specific wrap function, which ensures that only the right
agent can access the initial knowledge stored inside. It is important to mention that in the
case that this transaction is generated for the first participant we need to extend it with
new(int_SID).send(int_SID) which is put in between the role picking processes and the
initial knowledge sending process. This ensures that the session ID is generated in the
beginning of the protocol execution.
choice(⋆, r1, d1) . . . choice(⋆, rn, dn).send(int_IK_ag(K0)).nil
(3.20)
Intruder knowledge
Similarly as for the initial knowledge we want to generate a transac­
tion which releases the knowledge defined for dishonest agents in the Knowledge section
to the intruder. The transaction would then look like send(Ki).nil where Ki signifies all
the knowledge defined for dishonest agents combined.
All of these generated transactions are in the end prepended to the list of already gener­
ated transactions from the protocol breaking process in 3.4.1.
3.5
Limitations of the design and possible improvements
Although the algorithm is capable of translating a range of protocols, it is still not capa­
ble of utilizing all the functionalities offered by the noname tool. The noname tool offers
the user the ability to specify the initial interpretation of variables in the gamma0 sec­
tion as well as define custom destructor functions in Algebra section. AnnB could fairly
simply be extended by the gamma0 section as it could be easily passed to the noname
tool, however it would not be that simple when it comes to the custom destructors. Since
AnnB intentionally removes the requirement of manually decomposing the messages, the
language would have to be extended to support analysis of messages composed using
custom constructor functions. This could make the implementation fairly complicated but
it is still possible. Alternatively one could allow for the users to specify the noname trans­
actions in verbatim, meaning that the transaction would be specified the same way as in
noname using the noname language which supports the destructor application and this
would be transplanted into the generated code.
Moreover by abstracting away the decomposition process, AnnB does not allow the user
to specify what should be done in the case that the process fails. The decision in AnnB was
to simply fail as that is the expected behaviour in most of the protocols, however in some
cases the user might want the protocol to execute some other sequence of processes in
the case that decomposition fails. This issue can be however solved for the checks that
result in conditional branching. As AnnB does support branching, the behaviour can be
22
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:31==
specified for the failure cases. On the other hand this is again not possible for destructor
application as this is not available in AnnB.
Another limitation that AnnB has is that it does not check whether the cells used in the
reading or writing processes are defined in the Cells section. This is however a small issue
as the noname tool does this check. Another minor issue is with the order of the processes
in the transactions. The noname language has a notion of left and right processes, which
is not enforced in the AnnB model for processes, this means that the processes may be
generated out of the allowed order for the noname tool. However this is again handled by
the noname tool therefore it is disregarded and not treated in AnnB.
Finally, not so much of a limitation than a suggestion for improvement is that the way
the agent’s knowledge is simulated in the translation function using the X and Y sets of
variables is not very efficient. Only in rare cases it is desirable for the whole knowledge
of an agent to be retrieved at the beginning of the transaction. In the same way not all
variables need to be stored for later use as they might never be needed again. For this
reason it would be beneficial to analyse the code for uses of these variables and limit the
amount of read and write processes.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:33==
4
Example case studies
This section aims to exemplify the algorithms introduced in chapter 3. There are two
examples showing the several aspects of the algorithm. The first example shows a simple
protocol used to demonstrate a common linkability privacy violation. The second example
focuses on showing the algorithms handling of nested branching.
4.1
Simple protocol example
This example is based on a runex protocol example provided with the noname tool. The
intruder in this protocol should not be able to find out anything else besides the fact that
the messages are being sent to an agent A played by one of the agents a, b, c and that
the choice of Y is yes or no. The listing 4.1 shows an example of this protocol in AnnB.
1
Protocol: Runex
2
3
Sigma0:
4
yes, no
5
6
Sigma:
7
pk/1
8
9
Agents:
10
a, b, c, s
11
dishonest i
12
13
Roles:
14
A: a, b, c
15
16
Knowledge:
17
s: A, pk(A)
18
A: A
19
i: inv(pk(a))
20
21
Actions:
22
s: * Y in {yes, no}
23
s: if Y = yes then
24
s: new N1, N2
25
s -> A: crypt(pk(A), pair(yes, N1), N2)
26
else
27
s: new N2
28
s -> A: crypt(pk(A), no, N2)
29
end
30
31
Bound: 4
Listing 4.1: Example of simple protocol in AnnB
In the example, we define two public constants yes and no and a public function pk. As
for agents we have four honest ones a, b, c and s. The first three are used for the role
A and s is a trusted third party i.e. server. The last agent is a dishonest agent i i.e. the
intruder.
Further the example defines the initial knowledge for all the participants. Here the server
knows about A and their public key, A knows themselves and i knows a private key of a.
Finally we define the actions, where the server first picks Y from yes or no. Depending on
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
25
==PAGE:34==
the decision it first generates the necessary nonces and sends a message encrypted by
the A’s public key. In the case that the choice was yes then it sends a pair of yes and one
of the nonces otherwise it sends no.
1
Sigma0:
2
public yes/0 no/0 a/0 b/0 c/0 s/0 i/0
3
Sigma:
4
private int_IK_s/1 int_IK_A/1 int_IK_extract_s/1 int_IK_extract_A/1
5
6
Algebra:
7
int_IK_extract_s(int_IK_s(m)) -> m
8
int_IK_extract_A(int_IK_A(m)) -> m
9
10
Transaction T1:
11
* A in {a,b,c}.
12
new int_SID.
13
send int_SID.
14
send int_IK_s(pair(A,pk(A))).
15
nil
16
17
Transaction T2:
18
* A in {a,b,c}.
19
send int_IK_A(A).
20
nil
21
22
Transaction T3:
23
send inv(pk(a)).
24
nil
25
26
Transaction T4:
27
receive int_SID.
28
receive IK.
29
try X1 = int_IK_extract_s(IK) in
30
try X2 = proj1(X1) in
31
try X3 = proj2(X1) in
32
if (X3 = pk(X2)) then
33
* X4 in {yes,no}.
34
if (X4 = yes) then
35
new X5,X6.
36
send crypt(pk(X2),pair(yes,X5),X6).
37
nil
38
else
39
new X7.
40
send crypt(pk(X2),no,X7).
41
nil
42
else nil
43
catch nil
44
catch nil
45
catch nil
46
47
Bound: 4
Listing 4.2: Example of the simple protocol translated to noname language
Now we have a look at the code generated by the tool, which can be seen in listing 4.2.
Here we see that compared to Sigma0 in AnnB the generated one additionally contains
all the agents defined in AnnB. Further the Sigma section loses the definition of a public
pk as noname tool has this function defined by default and our custom definition would
fail the analysis. On the other hand it gains 4 private functions used to represent the
wrapper functions as well as the matching extractor functions used to encapsulate the
26
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:35==
initial knowledge. These functions are then used in the Algebra section to define the
rewrite rules necessary for the decomposition to work.
Afterwards the generated code defines the transactions. The first two transactions T1 and
T2 are used to provide the initial knowledge to both of the participants. Since the the agent
s initiates the protocol they are in charge of creating the session ID, therefore the trans­
action T1 sends the wrapped initial knowledge together with the session ID. In the case
of T2 we simply send the wrapped initial knowledge to A. Since both of the participants
know A they both pick the agent from the domain defined in Roles section. Next is the
transaction T3, which represents the intruder knowledge being released, hence not being
wrapped as in the case of T1 and T2.
Finally T4 is the transaction that represents the actual actions of agent s defined in the
example code. Here the agent first receives the session ID and the initial knowledge from
the transaction T1 and decomposes it. Afterwards we can see three checks. Two in form
of pair decomposition of the initial knowledge and then third one that checks whether the
received public key is indeed related to the agent that was also received. Afterwards the
algorithm itself is executed as seen in the AnnB.
4.2
Nested branching example
The second example’s purpose is to demonstrate how the algorithm handles nested
branching. The algorithm defines several public constants in Sigma0 as well as a pri­
vate constant fresh used to initialize the memory cell. Agent A first pick a value for X and
sends it to B. B then depending on this value either sends ok or wrong, A stores this value
in a memory cell and sends matching response. In the first branch B simply replies with
ok and in the other branch B checks X again and sends ok or wrong depending on the
condition.
1
Protocol: NestedBranching
2
3
Sigma0:
4
ok, wrong, res1, res2, c, d
5
6
Sigma:
7
pk/1
8
private fresh
9
10
Agents:
11
a, b
12
dishonest i
13
14
Roles:
15
A: a, b
16
B: a, b, i
17
18
Knowledge:
19
A: A, B, inv(pk(A))
20
B: A, B, inv(pk(B))
21
i: pk(i)
22
23
Cells:
24
cell[N] := fresh
25
26
Actions:
27
A: * X in {c, d}
28
A -> B: X
29
B: if X = c then
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
27
==PAGE:36==
30
B -> A: ok
31
A: cell[A] := ok
32
A -> B: res1
33
B -> A: ok
34
else
35
B -> A: wrong
36
A: cell[A] := wrong
37
A -> B: res2
38
B: if X = d then
39
B -> A: ok
40
else
41
B -> A: wrong
42
end
43
end
44
45
Bound: 2
Listing 4.3: Example of simple protocol in AnnB
As the generated noname code for this example is very lengthy we will look only at se­
lected sections. Some of these sections were further simplified. The full code can be
found in the appendix B.
We start by looking at Sigma0 which also contains the agents as in the previous example,
however we also get a constant int_FRESH used to initialize the generated knowledge
and step cells. Moreover the Sigma0 is also extended by the step labels which are used
to tie transactions together. An example of step label is int_A1 which is ties transactions
of agent A together. Sigma and Algebra is extended as previously seen in the simple
protocol example.
A change from previous example is the Cells section. In this example it defines besides
the custom cell all the generated cells used to simulate agent knowledge as well as to
store expected step labels. These take a form of int_STEP_A[int_SID] := int_FRESH
for the step labels of agent A and int_MEM_X1[int_SID] := int_FRESH for the variable
X1 which is a part of agent A’s knowledge.
Looking at the first three transaction (listing 4.4) we see a lot of similarities as in previ­
ous example. T1 and T2 are providing the initial knowledge and T3 releases the intruder
knowledge. What is worth mentioning is that the initial knowledge now consists of more
messages and therefore it is represented as a chain of nested pairs of messages.
1
Transaction T1:
2
* A in {a,b}.
3
* B in {a,b,i}.
4
new int_SID.
5
send int_SID.
6
send int_IK_A(pair(A,pair(B,inv(pk(A))))).
7
nil
8
9
Transaction T2:
10
* A in {a,b}.
11
* B in {a,b,i}.
12
send int_IK_B(pair(A,pair(B,inv(pk(B))))).
13
nil
14
15
Transaction T3:
16
send pk(i).
17
nil
Listing 4.4: The generated transactions T1, T2 and T3
28
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:37==
The T4 transaction shows A choosing between c and d and sending this message to B. In
the end of the transaction the expected step label is set to int_A1. This can be seen in the
listing 4.5. Due to significant amount of decomposition checks and cell writing processes
these have been left out of the listing.
1
Transaction T4:
2
receive int_SID.
3
receive IK.
4
try X1 = int_IK_extract_A(IK) in
5
...
6
if (pk(X2) = pubk(X5)) then
7
* X6 in {c,d}.
8
send X6.
9
int_MEM_X6[int_SID] := X6.
10
...
11
int_STEP_A[int_SID] := int_A1.
12
send int_SID.nil
13
else nil
14
...
15
catch nil
Listing 4.5: The generated transaction T4
The listing 4.6 shows the following two transactions. Both of the transactions are ex­
ecuted by A, however each represents one of the respective branches of the if action
defined in the example. Since A is not the agent that does the branching, A has to non­
deterministicaly choose which of these transactions to execute. This is ensured by the
fact that both of these transactions check for the same step label int_A1. Both of the
transactions store respective values in the memory cell and send a response.
1
Transaction T5:
2
receive int_SID.
3
int_STEP := int_STEP_A[int_SID].
4
if (int_STEP = int_A1) then
5
X6 := int_MEM_X6[int_SID].
6
receive X7.
7
if (X7 = ok) then
8
cell[X2] := ok.
9
send res1.nil
10
else nil
11
else nil
12
13
Transaction T6:
14
receive int_SID.
15
int_STEP := int_STEP_A[int_SID].
16
if (int_STEP = int_A1) then
17
X6 := int_MEM_X6[int_SID].
18
receive X8.
19
if (X8 = wrong) then
20
cell[X2] := wrong.
21
send res2.nil
22
else nil
23
else nil
Listing 4.6: The generated transactions T5 and T6
This is where the A’s transactions end and from now on all transactions are from B’s stand­
point. The transaction T7 (shown in listing 4.7) similarly as T4 receives and decomposes
the initial knowledge. Afterwards it receives the message from A and branches the exe­
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
29
==PAGE:38==
cution. In the case that the condition holds, B sends ok and sets the expected step label
to int_B1. If the condition is false, B sends wrong and sets the label to int_B2.
1
Transaction T7:
2
receive IK.
3
try X9 = int_IK_extract_B(IK) in
4
...
5
if (pk(X12) = pubk(X13)) then
6
receive X14.
7
if (X14 = c) then
8
send ok.
9
int_MEM_X14[int_SID] := X14.
10
...
11
int_STEP_B[int_SID] := int_B1.
12
send int_SID.nil
13
else
14
send wrong.
15
int_MEM_X14[int_SID] := X14.
16
...
17
int_STEP_B[int_SID] := int_B2.
18
send int_SID.nil
19
else nil
20
...
21
catch nil
Listing 4.7: The generated transaction T7
The last two transactions represent the respective branches of the branching done by B
in T7. The transaction T8 is checking for step label int_B1, hence executing after the first
branch was selected, whereas T9 checks for int_B2 meaning it is executed only in the
case of the second branch.
1
Transaction T8:
2
receive int_SID.
3
int_STEP := int_STEP_B[int_SID].
4
if (int_STEP = int_B1) then
5
X14 := int_MEM_X14[int_SID].
6
receive X15.
7
if (X15 = res1) then
8
send ok.nil
9
else nil
10
else nil
11
12
Transaction T9:
13
receive int_SID.
14
int_STEP := int_STEP_B[int_SID].
15
if (int_STEP = int_B2) then
16
X14 := int_MEM_X14[int_SID].
17
receive X16.
18
if (X16 = res2) then
19
if (X14 = d) then
20
send ok.nil
21
else
22
send wrong.nil
23
else nil
24
else nil
Listing 4.8: The generated transactions T8 and T9
30
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:39==
5
Implementation
In order to make the AnnB translation tool compatible with the noname tool, the technolo­
gies used for implementation were kept the same. This means that the tool was written
in the Haskell programming language by the use of libraries as Alex [10] and Happy [11],
for lexing and parsing respectively. The tool was designed purely as a translation tool,
therefore currently it does not integrate with the noname tool. However in the future these
two tools could be combined as the translated protocol could be used as an input for the
noname tool.
The source code is divided into several files:
Main is the entry point of the program. Its main purpose is to coordinate each of the steps
of the translation process.
Types gathers all the type definitions used during the translation.
State defines state types and all functions related to state handling.
Analysis contains the algorithms and all related functions to the projections, translation
and analysis.
Generator gathers all functions that are used to generate the actual noname code.
Helper contains some simple helper functions e.g. conversions between types and string
formatting functions.
AnnB_Lexer is the generated lexer code by the Alex library.
AnnB_Parser is the generated parser code by the Happy library.
5.1
Implementation details
There are several places where the implementation of the algorithms deviates from the
formal definitions defined in the chapter 3. These differences are mostly dictated by the
technologies used as some of them allow for a more convenient way of implementing the
algorithms.
One of these differences are related to the way the message decomposition checks are
defined in the code. Since the necessary try and if processes are generated during the
analysis, there is no further need to store the recipes used in these processes i.e. we do
not need to store the φif and φtry as it is described in the algorithm in 3.3.4. The solution
for this was to extend the frame with an additional value where a label maps not only to a
message but also to a marking denoting the state of that message. There are two types of
markings: to do and done. As the names suggest the to do marking denotes those entries
in the frame that are to be analysed, these include all the newly received messages as
well as messages that cannot be decomposed due to the conditions in table 3.1 not being
fulfilled. By keeping these entries marked as to do when the necessary information is
received these messages are decomposed and marked as done. For atomic values the
marking is always set to done.
In order to simplify the code the X and Y variables used to simulate the agent’s knowledge
are also a part of the frame state. The reason is that this way we can avoid passing
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
31
==PAGE:40==
unnecessary amount of parameters as these are always bound to an agent and therefore
a frame of that agent.
Because of the nature of Haskell as being pure functional programming language, there
is no concept of a global variable. For the sake of the translation tool, there is a need
for several globally shared values as counters and accumulators for generated labels.
Luckily Haskell provides a mechanism that can solve this problem by providing a syntactic
shortcut in defining a state that is being passed between the functions. The mechanism
is a state monad. The program uses a state monad to keep track of a global variable
counter which is used to generate the labels used in the frames as well as in the resulting
noname code. Further it keeps track of transaction counter used to generate the step
labels when binding two transactions together. It also keeps track of all the generated cell
names, all generated public labels that are to be added to Σ0, all the initial knowledge
wrapping functions as well as the corresponding extractor functions.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the algorithm defines of some partial functions e.g. J·KL,
composeϕF or L · Mag. The failure of any of these functions results by the program throwing
an error with explanatory message and terminates the translation process. This way we
ensure that the program only generates valid noname code.
5.2
Optimization of transaction generation
When implementing the algorithms used for translating the AnnB language to noname
language, we came across several places where the algorithms may be improved. These
improvements do not change the semantics of the generated code, they merely clean the
output out of unnecessary transactions which make the generated code hard to read.
The first optimization is related to the projection function L · Mag. The case when the function
projects a communicate action between two agents, however it is not followed by any
other action i.e. it is terminated with End action, which results in generating an empty
transaction. The message sent during this action is simply received in the generated
transaction however it immediately terminates with nil, therefore the transaction is not
necessary. For that reason we terminate the sending agent’s projection with nil and we
do not generate for the receiving agent the receive element an in that way we avoid the
rest of the program to generate these empty transactions. This change to the projection
function can be seen in eq. 5.1.
LCommag1→ag2(m).EndMag =
{
send(m).nil,
if ag = ag1
nil,
otherwise
(5.1)
Similarly during the translation function J · KL there are cases that may generate empty
transactions. This is the case when the txnEnd is followed up with nil as the txnEnd
serves as a divider between transactions the nil would be considered separate transaction
and therefore would generate an empty transaction. The other situation is when a split
element is terminated in both branches by nil, which could happen in the case that one
agent branches the protocol however the analysed agent does not perform any actions
in any of the branches. This therefore generates two empty transactions. The remedy in
these cases is to simply map these as nil and therefore terminating the processes on the
spot. The adjustments to the translation function can be seen in eq. 5.2.
JtxnEnd.nilKL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y ) = nil
JtxnEnd.split(nil, nil)KL(F, φif, φtry, X, Y ) = nil
(5.2)
32
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:41==
6
Conclusion
The goal of the thesis was to design a simpler and more intuitive language for the non­
ame tool as well as a tool used to translate this language to noname language. This effort
resulted in AnnB language, which was inspired by the Alice and Bob notation while still
using elements from the noname tool’s language. Some aspects inspired by the noname
tool are the way of constructing and analysing messages as well as defining the initial sig­
nature in Σ0 and Σ. The AnnB also draws inspiration from Alice and Bob style languages
in a form of initial knowledge definition and most significantly in a form of the actions. The
actions provide a way of defining behaviour of agents in a protocol that is more intuitive
as it defines the agent actions in a sequential way clearly stating the interactions between
agents. This approach is however completely different from the approach that noname
tool uses to define agent behaviour as noname relies on transactions that act as inde­
pendent systems meaning each can be run out of order and does not implicitly share any
information between each other.
The translation process described in this thesis analyses these differences and proposes
a solution for these issues. The three analysed challenges were: executability check,
transaction order check and agent knowledge simulation. The executability check was
concerned by ensuring that the composed messages can indeed be composed. This was
further extended by decomposition of certain composed messages which had to be trans­
lated into noname language. The transaction order check extends the generated noname
code with additional checks which make sure that agent executes actions in order. Finally
knowledge simulation guarantees that each agent indeed has all necessary information
when necessary as it stores all obtained information and retrieves it when needed. The
AnnB language was designed in such way that all these issues are addressed and solved
in one way or another.
Since the designed language is fundamentally different from the original noname lan­
guage, it comes with some limitations. First of all not all functionalities in noname could
be ported. These include some that could be added in future e.g. gamma0 section for ini­
tial interpretation, as well as some that will not be easily added to the tool e.g. alternative
handling of failed destructor application.
Given these points, it can be said that the translation tool is able to analyse and translate
simple protocols fulfilling the main goal of the thesis. Although the tool has some limi­
tations, it supports many protocols with support for most of the features of the noname
tool.
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Sebastian Alexander Mödersheim and Luca Viganò. “Alpha­Beta Privacy”. English.
In: ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security 1.1 (2018). ISSN: 2471­2566. DOI:
10.1145/3289255.
[2]
Laouen Fournet, Sebastian Mödersheim, and Luca Viganò. “A Decision Procedure
for Alpha­Beta Privacy for a Bounded Number of Transitions”. English. In: 2024
IEEE Computer Security Foundations Symposium. IEEE Computer Society Press,
July 2023.
[3]
Sebastian Mödersheim and Luca Viganò. “The Open­Source Fixed­Point Model
Checker for Symbolic Analysis of Security Protocols”. In: Foundations of Security
Analysis and Design V: FOSAD 2007/2008/2009 Tutorial Lectures. Ed. by Alessan­
dro Aldini, Gilles Barthe, and Roberto Gorrieri. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 166–194. ISBN: 978­3­642­03829­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
642-03829-7_6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-03829-7_6.
[4]
D. Dolev and A. Yao. “On the security of public key protocols”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory 29.2 (1983), pp. 198–208. DOI: 10.1109/TIT.1983.1056650.
[5]
Farid Hajji. The Dolev­Yao vs. Computational Model. URL: https://hajji.org/en/
crypto/verified-crypto/the-dolev-yao-vs-computational-model. (accessed: 22.8.2023).
[6]
Laouen Fernet and Sebastian Mödersheim. “Private Authentication with Alpha­Beta
Privacy”. In: Open Identity Summit 2023. Bonn: Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V.,
2023, pp. 61–72. ISBN: 978­3­88579­729­6. DOI: 10.18420/OID2023_05.
[7]
Sébastien Gondron, Sebastian Mödersheim, and Luca Viganò. “Privacy as Reach­
ability”. English. In: Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE 35th Computer Security Foun­
dations Symposium (CSF). 2022 IEEE 35th Computer Security Foundations Sym­
posium, CSF ; Conference date: 07­08­2022 Through 10­08­2022. United States:
IEEE, 2022, pp. 130–146. ISBN: 978­1­6654­8418­3. DOI: 10.1109/CSF54842.2022.
9919668.
[8]
Sebastian Mödersheim. “Algebraic Properties in Alice and Bob Notation”. In: 2009
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. 2009, pp. 433–440.
DOI: 10.1109/ARES.2009.95.
[9]
Omar Almousa, Sebastian Mödersheim, and Luca Viganò. “Alice and Bob: Recon­
ciling Formal Models and Implementation”. In: Programming Languages with Appli­
cations to Biology and Security: Essays Dedicated to Pierpaolo Degano on the Oc­
casion of His 65th Birthday. Ed. by Chiara Bodei, Gianluigi Ferrari, and Corrado Pri­
ami. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 66–85. ISBN: 978­3­319­
25527­9. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-25527-9_7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-25527-9_7.
[10]
Simon Marlow and the Alex developers. Alex User Guide. URL: https://haskell-
alex.readthedocs.io/en/latest/. (accessed: 22.8.2023).
[11]
Simon Marlow and the Happy developers. Welcome to Happy’s documentation!
URL: https://hajji.org/en/crypto/verified-crypto/the-dolev-yao-vs-computational-
model. (accessed: 22.8.2023).
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:45==
A
Context free grammar of AnnB
The equation A.1 shows the context free grammar for the AnnB language. The symbols
that are followed with an s e.g. VARs are comma separated values in a form VAR(, VAR)∗.
There are four terminal symbols in the definition STRING represents a string starting with
letter and is followed by any alpha­numeric character or underscore. VAR and CONST
are very similar to STRING with the difference that VAR has to start with an uppercase
letter representing the variable names in the protocol and CONST starts with lowercase,
representing the constants or function names in the protocol. Final terminal symbol is INT
representing numeric values.
AnnB ::= Protocol: STRING
(Sigma0: DEFs)?
(Sigma: (DEFs | private DEFs)+)?
Agents: (CONSTs | dishonest CONSTs)+
Role: (ROLE: CONSTs)+
Knowledge: (ROLE: MESSAGEs)+
(Cells: (CONST[ MESSAGE ] := MESSAGE)+)?
Actions: ACTION
Bound: INT
MESSAGE ::= VAR | CONST | CONST(MESSAGEs)
ROLE ::= VAR | CONST
DEF ::= CONST | CONST/INT
ACTION ::= ROLE: LOCAL_ACTION ACTION
| ROLE -> ROLE: MESSAGE ACTION
| ϵ
LOCAL_ACTION ::= new VARs
| VAR := CONST[ MESSAGE ]
| CONST[ MESSAGE ] := MESSAGE
| MODE VAR in { CONSTs }
| MODE FORMULA
| if FORMULA then ACTION else ACTION end
FORMULA ::= FORMULA and FORMULA
| FORMULA or FORMULA
| not FORMULA
| (FORMULA)
| MESSAGE = MESSAGE
| true | false
MODE ::= * | <>
(A.1)
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
37
==PAGE:46==
B
Nested branching translated noname
code
The listing B.1 shows the generated noname code for the second example in chapter 4.
1
Sigma0:
2
public ok/0 wrong/0 res1/0 res2/0 c/0 d/0 int_FRESH/0 int_B2/0 int_B1/0
int_A1/0 a/0 b/0 i/0
3
Sigma:
4
private fresh/0 int_IK_A/1 int_IK_B/1 int_IK_extract_A/1 int_IK_extract_B/1
5
6
Algebra:
7
int_IK_extract_A(int_IK_A(m)) -> m
8
int_IK_extract_B(int_IK_B(m)) -> m
9
10
Cells:
11
int_STEP_B[int_SID] := int_FRESH
12
int_MEM_X9[int_SID] := int_FRESH
13
int_MEM_X10[int_SID] := int_FRESH
14
int_MEM_X11[int_SID] := int_FRESH
15
int_MEM_X12[int_SID] := int_FRESH
16
int_MEM_X13[int_SID] := int_FRESH
17
int_MEM_X14[int_SID] := int_FRESH
18
int_STEP_A[int_SID] := int_FRESH
19
int_MEM_X1[int_SID] := int_FRESH
20
int_MEM_X2[int_SID] := int_FRESH
21
int_MEM_X3[int_SID] := int_FRESH
22
int_MEM_X4[int_SID] := int_FRESH
23
int_MEM_X5[int_SID] := int_FRESH
24
int_MEM_X6[int_SID] := int_FRESH
25
cell[N] := fresh
26
27
Transaction T1:
28
* A in {a,b}.
29
* B in {a,b,i}.
30
new int_SID.
31
send int_SID.
32
send int_IK_A(pair(A,pair(B,inv(pk(A))))).
33
nil
34
35
Transaction T2:
36
* A in {a,b}.
37
* B in {a,b,i}.
38
send int_IK_B(pair(A,pair(B,inv(pk(B))))).
39
nil
40
41
Transaction T3:
42
send pk(i).
43
nil
44
45
Transaction T4:
46
receive int_SID.
47
receive IK.
48
try X1 = int_IK_extract_A(IK) in
49
try X2 = proj1(X1) in
50
try X3 = proj2(X1) in
51
try X4 = proj1(X3) in
52
try X5 = proj2(X3) in
38
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:47==
53
if (pk(X2) = pubk(X5)) then
54
* X6 in {c,d}.
55
send X6.
56
int_MEM_X6[int_SID] := X6.
57
int_MEM_X5[int_SID] := X5.
58
int_MEM_X4[int_SID] := X4.
59
int_MEM_X3[int_SID] := X3.
60
int_MEM_X2[int_SID] := X2.
61
int_MEM_X1[int_SID] := X1.
62
int_STEP_A[int_SID] := int_A1.
63
send int_SID.nil
64
else nil
65
catch nil
66
catch nil
67
catch nil
68
catch nil
69
catch nil
70
71
Transaction T5:
72
receive int_SID.
73
int_STEP := int_STEP_A[int_SID].
74
if (int_STEP = int_A1) then
75
X6 := int_MEM_X6[int_SID].
76
receive X7.
77
if (X7 = ok) then
78
cell[X2] := ok.
79
send res1.nil
80
else nil
81
else nil
82
83
Transaction T6:
84
receive int_SID.
85
int_STEP := int_STEP_A[int_SID].
86
if (int_STEP = int_A1) then
87
X6 := int_MEM_X6[int_SID].
88
receive X8.
89
if (X8 = wrong) then
90
cell[X2] := wrong.
91
send res2.nil
92
else nil
93
else nil
94
95
Transaction T7:
96
receive IK.
97
try X9 = int_IK_extract_B(IK) in
98
try X10 = proj1(X9) in
99
try X11 = proj2(X9) in
100
try X12 = proj1(X11) in
101
try X13 = proj2(X11) in
102
if (pk(X12) = pubk(X13)) then
103
receive X14.
104
if (X14 = c) then
105
send ok.
106
int_MEM_X14[int_SID] := X14.
107
int_MEM_X13[int_SID] := X13.
108
int_MEM_X12[int_SID] := X12.
109
int_MEM_X11[int_SID] := X11.
110
int_MEM_X10[int_SID] := X10.
111
int_MEM_X9[int_SID] := X9.
112
int_STEP_B[int_SID] := int_B1.
113
send int_SID.nil
114
else
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
39
==PAGE:48==
115
send wrong.
116
int_MEM_X14[int_SID] := X14.
117
int_MEM_X13[int_SID] := X13.
118
int_MEM_X12[int_SID] := X12.
119
int_MEM_X11[int_SID] := X11.
120
int_MEM_X10[int_SID] := X10.
121
int_MEM_X9[int_SID] := X9.
122
int_STEP_B[int_SID] := int_B2.
123
send int_SID.nil
124
else nil
125
catch nil
126
catch nil
127
catch nil
128
catch nil
129
catch nil
130
131
Transaction T8:
132
receive int_SID.
133
int_STEP := int_STEP_B[int_SID].
134
if (int_STEP = int_B1) then
135
X14 := int_MEM_X14[int_SID].
136
receive X15.
137
if (X15 = res1) then
138
send ok.nil
139
else nil
140
else nil
141
142
Transaction T9:
143
receive int_SID.
144
int_STEP := int_STEP_B[int_SID].
145
if (int_STEP = int_B2) then
146
X14 := int_MEM_X14[int_SID].
147
receive X16.
148
if (X16 = res2) then
149
if (X14 = d) then
150
send ok.nil
151
else
152
send wrong.nil
153
else nil
154
else nil
155
156
Bound: 2
Listing B.1: Example of the generated nested branching protocol in noname language
40
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
==PAGE:49==
Formal Alice and Bob­style language and translator for automated privacy
41
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
