==PAGE:1==
WaatLand:
A Cognition Training Game For
Healthy People
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Sixian Zuo & Kewei Du
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at Department of Health Technology, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Human-Centered Artificial-Intelligence during the spring semester of 2023.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science,
user interface and experiences design, and statistics.
Sixian Zuo & Kewei Du - s210365 & s220059
Signature
Date
ii
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
cognitive ability ranges widely from perception, comprehension, memory to abilities to
think and learn, and enhancing cognitive abilities plays an important role in improving
life quality and ensuring safety. Extensive studies have focused on cognitive training
for individuals with cognitive impairments such as ADHD and dementia, but research on
healthy people remains relatively limited. Most training programs designed in the studies
were visually simplistic, and featured outdated gamification techniques, thus appear to be
less appealing to healthy people.
To facilitate long-term engagement and usage among healthy individuals, a mobile game
named WaatLand was designed and implemented in this thesis. WaatLand integrates
four mini-games targeting working memory, inhibitory control, and cognitive flexibility within
a role-playing game framework. WaatLand was designed with various user-centered de-
sign methods, and validated for usability.
A 12-day study was conducted to compare an experimental group with a passive control
group, aiming to validate the efficacy of the game for cognition training. Results indi-
cate a significant difference between the two groups in cognitive flexibility and response
time related tasks, such as the Deary-Liewald task, the SART task and the Stroop task.
The benefits derived from WaatLand varied between different age groups, and between
gamers and non-gamers. The findings suggest the potential of integrating gamification
into cognitive training programs, and underscore different concerns should be adopted
when approaching different user groups when designing such programs.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to first express our gratitude towards everyone around us to have stayed
alive through our years in the Master’s education. The COVID time was a bit tough, but
we gained countless support and courage from all of you, and learned to cherish more
the love and connection we share together.
Special thanks to our family, - Thanks for your being supportive and accompanying us
alongside on our path to the Master’s degree, and also for supporting us all along finan-
cially in the years of education after adulthood.
We would like to send our sincere gratitude to our supervisor, Jakob E. Bardram, for his
inspiring remarks and patient supervision over the past six months. The study experience
with Jakob was one of the most valuable experience we gained here in DTU.
We would also like to thank all the participants to this research, either involving directly
or indirectly throughout the journey, for being incredibly helpful to inspire us with your
perceptive and priceless feedback.
Countless thanks to our friends. - It was such a nice thing to get to know you all, and wish
you all best luck to achieve your every single dream.
Personal thanks from Sixian to Bochen Wu, - Thank you for being with me through highs
and lows. ”Long live and prosper!”, my dearest friend. Also thanks to Ziwen Wang, who
kindly paid me 5 RMB for mentioning his name in particular. Thank you for so many years’
kindness and support, and wish you a bright future in the following years.
In the end we would like to extend gratitude towards each other. Despite of many dis-
agreements during the project, we are still each other’s soul mate. Thanks to both the
good and bad times we shared through years, and wish there are more in the future.
iv
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goals and Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Overview of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work
5
3
Game Ideation
11
3.1
Personas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
User Story Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Low-fidelity Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Workshop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Interactive Design
17
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Narrative
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Gameflow Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Environment Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Character Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.6
Dialogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.7
Sound Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.8
Cognitive Game Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.9
Usability Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Technical Implementation
33
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Software Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Artificial-Intelligence Generated Non-player Character and Dialogue . . . . 36
5.4
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Study
41
6.1
Standard Test Batteries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7
Results
45
7.1
Pre-Post Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
Correlation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8
Discussion
57
8.1
Study Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.2
Technical Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
9
Conclusion
59
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
61
A Distribution of Contributions
67
B Acronyms
69
C Gameplay Demo Video
70
D Low-fidelity Prototype
71
E
Game Mechanisms Brainstorming Results
72
F
Usability Test Comments
73
G PseudoMonoBehavior Class
74
H Assets in Project
75
I
Psytoolkit Test Screeshots
76
J
Individual Pre-Post Changes Plotting
81
K Correlation: Baseline
83
L
Correlation: Pre-Post Differences
84
M Post-survey questions
85
N SUS
86
vi
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
A human being functions with versatile cognitive abilities – the ability to perceive, to un-
derstand, to remember, to think and to learn; in other words, the ”backstage” brain ability
backing up every human activity. The concrete definition of cognitive ability is often ex-
pressed differently from different perspectives, but very often it is a considered a synonym
to ”intelligence”. According to the Sternbergs [1], there are approximately 70 different def-
initions of intelligence.
Speaking of the importance of cognitive ability, apart from the socially defined ”success”
in terms of social status, education or income one is more likely to gain with higher in-
telligence, better cognitive abilities is crucial in more extensive circumstances than what
is commonly perceived. It has been studied that many accidents happening in such as
highway or construction site is related to human cognition failure [2, 3], and the physical
hazard-injury rate relationship is stronger among occupations with high cognitive ability
and skill requirements [4]. People with better cognitive functions appear to perform their
tasks with lower risk of minor injury involvement [5]. The human mistakes or failures
could happen in any stage of human cognition process, from obtaining information, un-
derstanding information to response selection and execution, but a slightest mis-click or
signal neglect could sometimes lead to disastrous accidents.
Production management and system design might be the safety net of the fatal man-
made errors on-site, but in personal tasks such as driving where the responsibilities are
laid on individuals, it is more about the personal ability to notice danger and avoid mis-
takes. Working memory, visual perception, sustained attention, divided attention, logical
reasoning and many other basic cognitive functions are proved to be closely related with
driving and affecting driver’s safety [6, 7]. Among people with cognitive dysfunction, such
as patients with dementia or cancer, maintaining better cognitive functions links directly
to higher life quality [8, 9, 10].
Therefore, there have existed abundant researches and commercial products about inter-
vention on cognitive ability among people, covering both healthy and cognitively impaired
groups. They are developed on a ground truth that human brain has a lifelong plasticity
[11], meaning it’s a two-way channel for human brain’s progression, that it could either
function worse due to aging and diseases, or better through manual intervention.
As human brains work non-stop, any daily task stimulates some brain exercise that has
implications in cognitive ability. ”Cognitive training” (in many cases sharing the same
meaning as ”brain training”) usually involves with tasks requiring intense brain activity.
In a broad sense, education is perhaps the most rooted endeavor implicitly providing
brain training. The mandatory class activities such as read, write and calculate are all
good intentional brain practices at a young age composed of many minimal cognitive
processes. In a narrower sense, which is also the scope this thesis is written under,
cognitive training refers to interactive digital multi-media programs designed specifically
to improve cognitive abilities such as memory, reaction speed, perception, etc.
A cognitive training product should differ between whether it’s designed for cognitively
impaired users or healthy users. When it’s used by the former group, the top design
principle should be easy to understand and easy to use, so that the training is carried out
with minimal effort in guidance or instruction. However, for the latter larger user group,
the way of training will significantly influence the experience and then their motivation.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
1
==PAGE:10==
Still, for anyone who attempts to gain some cognitive training, the experience should be
enjoyable. As concluded in Anguera and Gazzaley’s review, ”fun, motivation to play, and
underlying game mechanics in the form of adaptivity” are the intervention design factors
that deserve attention [12].
Gamification refers to the utilization of game design elements in non-game contexts [13].
Over the past years, gamification has gained significant attention and generated consid-
erable excitement as a strategy for promoting user engagement and enhancing positive
patterns in service use. This includes foresting user activity, social interaction, or quality
and productivity of actions [14]. The implementation of gamification has the potential to
achieve improvements from two aspects: elevating the level of enjoyment of activities, and
enhancing long-term engagement of tasks that individuals might otherwise find discour-
aging [15]. The examination of literature in [14] indicates that gamification indeed works,
although certain limitations should be noted. The majority of the examined research did
find positive results from incorporating gamification.
The current mainstream commercial products targeting at brain training all partly con-
tribute to making their product enjoyable in use. For example, the leading company in
brain training, Lumosity, states on their homepage to be ”Scientific rigor, made fun”, with
50 mini-games designed to train seven cognitive domains. Many other products are de-
signed in the similar ”mini-games bundle” fashion, such as CogniFit, BrainHQ. The market
size of brain training has grown quite considerably in recent years, as reported by Sharp-
Brains [16] the market should have been over six billion dollars in 2020, which is six times
of that in 2012. Nonetheless, compared to the explosive numbers in several years, the
mainstream products do not show much progress – in terms of game mechanisms and the
way games being organized on a website – to the gaming platforms when Flash games
just became popular in the beginning of the century, but only with a scientific claim to be
healthy for human brains. Despite the fact that rather clean aesthetics and simple game-
play might lower the barrier for people with less competent cognition (such as the elderly
and pre-school children), it could lose to the more modern and attractive video/computer/-
mobile games from a flourishing market that covers a large portion of people and rapidly
absorbs more and more fascinating game elements; In the meantime, the volume of the
voices prompting that video games can also benefit cognitive abilities increases [17, 12].
Regarding the choice of training devices/platform, porting traditional programs to portable
devices, such as smartphones and tablets, is currently a popular practice. These portable
devices provide a greater flexibility in terms of timing and location, making it convenient to
merge cognitive training into daily routines. However, this shift also introduces new design
challenges, including addressing the differences of transitioning from mouse-clicking and
keyboard typing to screen touch in user interaction, and optimizing the performance based
on computational capability of the device.
In today’s fast-pacing world, maintaining strong cognitive abilities is essential for the well-
being of individuals, yet its importance is often overlooked. There remains great potential
in engaging new forms, advanced technologies, and cutting-edge devices into the cogni-
tive training. This thesis aims at designing and developing a cognitive training tool that
aligns with the latest trends in cognitive training.
1.1
Research Question
As previously mentioned, gamification can enhance the user experience and inject more
enjoyment into a product. However, the actual implementation of gamification appears to
be on a spectrum rather than one concrete methodology. On one end of this spectrum,
2
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:11==
minimal changes are made to the core mechanics of the product. Instead, artistic ele-
ments are added to the graphics and interaction: tweaks such as changing button-clicked
feedback, inserting seamless transition pages, and substituting certain interface elements
with symbolic icons like flowers or medals, belong to this category. Here, users experi-
ence little more than a reward system and a weak storyline justifying these rewards lon
top of the original product.
On the opposite end of the gamification spectrum lies a ”complete” gamification approach,
where the original components are broken down into an immersive scenario with plenty
of game elements being presented. This comprehensive approach requires a thorough
storyline as a game, and a high-level creativity to provide a rich game dynamics and
mechanics.
This project seeks to create a cognitive training program sharing resemblance with a typ-
ical game, designed to engage individuals with normal cognitive function by offering a
more enjoyable user experience, and to encourage a sustained use over in the long run.
The research question is expressed as such:
What is the design of a digital cognitive training program that facilitates long-term
engagement and use?
It is our design hypothesis that utilizing gamified elements will assist us in creating an
engaging and user-friendly cognitive training tool. Hence our sub-questions are:
• What is the user experience (UX) design of an engaging cognitive training tool that
utilizes game elements such as game settings, storyline, and game mechanisms?
• What is the technical implementation of such a digital game in terms of hardware
and software?
• Will such a tool improve users’ cognitive ability?
1.2
Goals and Methods
For the first sub-research question, ”What is the user experience (UX) design of an engag-
ing cognitive training tool that utilizes game elements such as game settings, storyline,
and game mechanisms?”, user-centered design methods were used as the guiding tool
to optimize user experience, and gamification was done based on game theories. Design
thinking defines 5 steps to design products: 1) Empathize, 2) Define, 3) Ideate, 4) Pro-
totype, 5) Test [18], and followed this pattern, different tests for validation were used to
iterate our design.
The game was ideated through a design workshop, where ideas of game settings, story-
line, and game mechanisms were collected and concluded to define the final design. The
UX details was validated through a usability test where a play test and interviews were
structured, and a System Usability Scale (SUS) was used to evaluate its general usability.
Iteration was then made according to the feedback.
To respond to the second question, i.e. What is the technical implementation of such
a digital game in terms of hardware and software?, Unity as a game engine offered an
effective workflow for game development, hence served as our development platform on
which the game was built. We also lent help from the trending artificial-intelligence driven
chatting platform ChatGPT for the speedy generation of the characters and dialogues
within the game. A cloud-save function powered by Unity Gaming Service has also been
integrated to remotely receive the participants’ performance.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
3
==PAGE:12==
For the last question, Will such a tool improve users’ cognitive ability?, a 12-day ”in-the-
wild” study with a passive control group was conducted. Participants from both groups
were asked to take a series of standard cognitive tests to evaluate their cognitive capability
at the beginning and the end of the study. Statistics of the pre-post results between groups
were analysed and compared as the evidence of the training efficacy.
1.3
Overview of the thesis
The thesis begins with discussing existing work in the field of human cognition and cog-
nition training as our inspiration and theoretical foundation of the project in chapter 2.
Next chapter 3 talks about the user experience tests during the design and development
process, followed by chapter 4 introducing the UX design and game design in detail.
Chapter 5 discusses the software implementation with the game engine Unity and Chat-
GPT.
A 12-day use study was carried out to prove the efficacy of the product. The study is
introduced in chapter 6, whose results are shown and analyzed in chapter 7.
The thesis is summed up with chapter 8 focusing on the limitations and potential future
work.
4
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
This chapter will offer a brief review of the related works in the cognitive training study,
based on which our game is designed and developed. This part will first expand on the
concrete domains eligible for training in scientific research, then on the main topics of
”cognitive training” in the academia. Literature on Gamification and mobile-based cogni-
tive training and related efficacy were also reviewed.
To date, the ”cognitive abilities” this thesis looks to address still misses a definition in a
unified manner from academia. The term ”cognitive training” is often a synonym to ”brain
training”, namely better cognitive abilities equal to being smarter. The statement was
made based on the concept of fluid intelligence, defined to be a part of human intelli-
gence, encompassing human’s problem-solving and information processing ability [19].
Examples of other components of human intelligence include general memory, process-
ing speed and visual perception, which all been studied to be able to improve through
intervention .
On the other hand, some studies regarding cognitive training is set under the construct
of executive functions (EF). The EF distinguishes from fluid intelligence by underlying the
intentionally-used mental abilities during task operation, as concluded in Diamonds et al.’s
review [20], when “going on autopilot” or relying on instinct or intuition would be ill-advised,
insufficient, or impossible. The review concluded the widely accepted EF structure, and
explained how the three core EFs: inhibitory control, working memory and cognitive flex-
ibility link to higher-level EFs: reasoning, problem-solving and planning.
In a less scientific context, the scope of ”cognitive training” is conveyed in more vague and
diverse terms. Among massive online posts and products about cognition/brain health,
”cognitive functions”, ”cognitive skills” and ”cognitive abilities” often refer to the same con-
cept, and in small amount of cases, ”cognitive performance” evaluates performance in the
similar range. All of the terms make division of human intelligence/cognitive abilities in a
similar way, as on any related website, one can easily find key words such as perception,
attention, spatial processing, memory, reaction speed, language, calculation, reasoning
and decision making [21, 22, 23].
As said, cognitive abilities are the backstage abilities used for any activity, and thus the
intervention is also often an influence on multiple cognitive aspects at a time, no matter
what a product claims to target at. For example, any training program on reading ability
can’t be performed without using working memory to remember the context; Any auditory
perception training can’t be performed without asking for attention to notice the sound.
Nonetheless, the intertwined cognitive abilities used for daily tasks generate ambiguity
for both quantitative and qualitative study to specify the intervention efficacy.
The majority of research of cognitive training study, no matter run in the lab or in the
wild, often conform to a similar process of ”pretests-train-posttests”. In the pretests and
postests, measurement of processing speed, reasoning, intelligence, pattern recognition,
and similar constructs [24] were adopted to evaluate the changes in cognitive ability. The
results are then analyzed with statistical methods, to discern any significant difference
via intervention. There also exist a large amount of meta-analyses to further validate the
efficacy of cognitive training. On the other hand, to prove efficacy in cognitive science has
a unique consideration compared to other medical experiments, that it not only needs to
consider the direct training effects, but also the near and far transfer effects implying how
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
5
==PAGE:14==
the training could benefit general daily tasks rather than only the trained tasks. Besides
this, it is also important to distinguish which group of people benefits from such training,
and how the training benefits last through time [24, 11].
The most studied efficacy is of working memory, as it plays a foundational role in all
sorts of tasks and is closely relates to diseases such as dementia and ADHD. In many
studies, the training effects and near transfer in WM training are found to be significant,
although the near transfer effects are smaller than the training effects [25, 26, 27, 28, 29].
The effects are found across the whole lifespan, including children, younger adults and
older adults [28].The far transfer effects also show mixed results. WM is generally con-
sidered to be strongly correlated with fluid intelligence, executive functions and academic
achievements [30, 31, 32], and the results in these aspects are mixed. For example, the
study run by Clark et al. of 76 young adults in a 6-week online training session showed
support for null hypothesis across all cognitive tests evaluating fluid intelligence such as
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale and aven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices before and
after training [33], whereas small improvements of fluid intelligence are found in Au et al.
and Schwaighofer et al.’s research [34, 35, 25, 29]. Conclusions in far transfer to EFs
resemble these findings: Some showed small significance, such as meta-analyses of
Melby-Lervåg and Hulme [26] and Soveri et al. [36], which respectively provide evidence
in inhibition (stroop task) and EF (inhibition and fexibility); Some found no evidence from
WM training, such as in Sala et al.’s research [28]. Melby-Lervåg later claimed in 2016
[37] that Working memory training programs appear to produce short-term, specific train-
ing effects that do not generalize to measures of ‘real-world’cognitive skills. . . . Attempts
to increase working memory capacity by repetitively practicing simple memory tasks on
a computer are unlikely to lead to generalized cognitive benefits, same as a latest ar-
guments by Gobet, that ”the overall effect of far transfer is null, and there is little to no
true variability between the types of cognitive training” [38]. Recommendations in terms
of these current findings are putting more effort into training design, as transfer effects
are intrinsically dependent on similarity between training and transfer tasks, and focusing
more to near-transfer training.
Another popular cognitive training theme is old drivers intervention. Aging brings many
physical risky factors – for example, individuals with high falls risk (as determined by
the Physiological Profile Assessment composite score that combines contrast sensitivity,
hand reaction time, proprioception, leg muscle strength, and postural sway performance)
demonstrate poorer driving simulator performance [39], and also cognitive decline as well.
Decline of processing speed, memory and reasoning ability will hamper the ability to drive
[40], and visual-perceptual abilities are indicative of driving safety risks [41]. ACTIVE, a
large-scale cognitive intervention project of the older adults, which is often considered a
paradigm in the related-field, has proved efficacy of useful field of view (UFOV) training
both immediately after the training and for the following up to 5 years. Another large-scale
research on vehicle collision showed Speed-of-processing and reasoning training could
lower rates of at-fault collision involvement over the subsequent approximately 6-year
period, but memory training led to no significant difference [42]. For young drivers, safety
intervention focuses more on the speed and hazard management. Speed control might
be improved through additional sessions during driving like receiving auditory feedback
and self-explaining causes and outcomes of exceeding the speed limit [43]. SAFE-T
program was designed for the latter purpose, and is proved to have positive effects in
three cognitive abilities: hazard anticipation, hazard mitigation and attention maintenance
[44].
Further than investigate what type of training has efficacy, another central topic in cogni-
6
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:15==
tive training study is of training methods, namely, how the training performance could be
optimized. New digital forms of training, such as computerized cognitive training (CCT),
mobiled-based training, are new topics of study, as well as design approaches of cogni-
tive training programs such as gamification. The extra convenience and fun gained from
the innovation fueled the popularity of the commercial products utilizing these methods. A
systematic review in 2012 found the effect sizes of 151 studies among older adults shift to-
wards higher interval values for neuropsychological software interventions (0.19 to 7.14),
compared to classic cognitive training interventions (0.06 to 6.32), and there is slight po-
tential for video game interventions to beat conventional interventions (0.09 to 1.70) [45].
Another meta-analysis review in 2014 on 51 CCT studies suggested small statistical sig-
nificance (Hedges’ g = 0.22) for CCT’s effect sizes versus control [46]. The analysis fur-
ther showed different effects between cognitive domains, with visuospatial skills showing
the maximum g = 0.30 and verbal memory showing the minimum g = 0.08. Commer-
cial computerized cognitive training products are examined as well, as in Tetlow et al.’s
meta-analysis review, significant small to medium training effects among older adults are
found for attention (d = 0.651, p < .001), processing speed (d = 0.294, p = .002), and
visuospatial memory (d = 0.252, p = 0.016); Self-reported everyday function measures
provided evidence of far transfer(d = 0.277, p < 0.001) as well [47]. Furthermore, there
are abundant meta-analysis reviews concentrating on clinical patient groups, such as with
older adults having mild cognitive impairment, dementia or Parkinson’s disease [48, 49],
mental disease patients having depression or schizophrenia [50, 51], and young cancer
survivors [52]. Small to medium significant training effects are validated from all of these
reviews, despite the effect sizes and effective cognitive domains vary. In general, ad-
vantages are suggested for computerized cognitive training over traditional training, as
home-based training without the need of help from clinicians may cater to larger groups
of users.
Similarly, mobile-based cognitive training is found to be effective among older adults by a
meta-analysis review, that with short-term memory, working memory, reasoning, and ex-
ecutive function [53], the standard mean differences range from 0.22 to 0.70. Compared
to CCT that is mostly designed for people who have weaker cognitive abilities, such as
patients and the older adults, mobile-based intervention is suitable to approach healthy
adults of different careers. For instance, there are training apps developed for pre-service
teachers [54], surgeons and medical students performing laparoscopic cholecystectomy,
[55], and to improve general verbal reasoning ability among adults[56]. The first study
found statistically improvement in attentional control and impulsivity for pre-service teach-
ers, and the last study found larger effects for the app than the passive control group, but
not than the active control group. The training efficacy of Touch Surgery app did not beat
the virtual reality training, but still received good comments on the usability of the app.
Integrating design-based approaches when developing cognitive training apps is a minor
focus in the related field, but has good potential and leads to brand new intervention
spaces. Concluded in Lumsden et al.’s review, the purposes of gamification are:
• To increase participant motivation;
• To increase usability/intuitiveness for the target age group
• To increase long-term engagement;
• To investigate the effects of gamelike tasks;
• To stimulate the brain;
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
7
==PAGE:16==
• To increase ecological validity
• To increase suitability for the target disorder;
The review included 33 peer-reviewed papers of cognitive testing and training gamifica-
tion research. Cognitive domains most frequently chosen for training are WM training,
EF training and inhibitory control training, and evidence of gamification being engaging to
users especially ADHD patients is found, and ADHD children in one study [57] completed
more trials in gamified version than in the non-game version. While some papers argue
for the mixed efficacy of gamification, as in the study of WMTrainer, It is possible that even
this minimal gamification was enough to ... add “distracting” game elements such as per-
sistent score display may have a negative impact on performance by inducing unneeded
stress or new cognitive demands [58]. It seems that gamification requires careful balance
between motivation and distraction for the training results actually to improve, but still, it is
clearly noted that engagement will be important as cognitive research moves out of labs
to personal computers and mobile devices, and gamification would play an important role
fueling this change.
Along with massive research on cognitive intervention, the controversy of the training
efficacy in the related field is brought to the table. No one involved in cognitive training,
no matter developing or actually using it, should ignore the open debate happened in
2014, when two groups of scientist posted two open letter advocating conflicting opinions
towards cognitive training. The first consensus letter was launched by the Stanford Center
on Longevity and the Max Planck Institute for Human Development, signed by more than
70 psychologists and neuroscientists, arguing that [objected] to the claim that brain games
offer consumers a scientifically grounded avenue to reduce or reverse cognitive decline
... There is no compelling scientific evidence to date that they do [consensus], while the
other groups of 133 scientists and therapists responded on the website Cognitive Training
Data (www.cognitivetrainingdata.org/) with different belief about cognitive training that a
substantial and growing body of evidence shows that certain cognitive-training regimens
can significantly improve cognitive function, including in ways that generalize to everyday
life. The debate was stimulated by the hyped-up commercial products developed by big
companies such as Lumosity, Posit Science (BrainHQ), CogniFit, etc. at that time, and
was therefore unavoidably related to stances of different affiliations. Nonetheless, some
points that the two sides agreed upon about cognitive training research are valuable in
regulating all the following research. The most notable agreement is the emphasis on
evaluation through peer-reviewed randomized, controlled trials (RCT). This point was later
expanded on by Simon et al.’s review in 2016, in which the authors stressed the gold-
standard design for evaluation of any psychological intervention studies is the double-
blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial. The existed studies do not all
conformed to this pattern, but often used other designs to suggest training efficacy. The
paper concluded the following substitutional designs and their limitations:
• Correlational designs and skilled-versus-novice comparisons
• Longitudinal designs
• Experimental designs
The main limitation the first type of study faces is the gap between correlational relation-
ships and causal relationships, and the noise from a third variable in reality. Thus, this
type of study lacks sufficient proof of the training efficacy, but provides just supporting ev-
idence for improvement from indefinite factors the participant is exposed to in the training
process. The second type efficacy is proved through large number of participants through
8
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:17==
years, but the same lack of causal relationships is included here, and even more factors
are mixed up with the variables encountered in the real world. In terms of the last design,
the authors underlined the importance of including strictly matched active control group,
and setting suitable active control conditions to guarantee the double-blindness.
Regardless of the studies cited as evidence by cognitive training companies and corpo-
rations, the efficacy of cognitive training faces doubt until now. The large-scale review of
cognitive training written by Simon et al.[24], Diamon et al [20] both mentioned the lim-
itation of current training intervention, and insignificant cognitive improvements of many
training studies. It is important that the later studies adopt designs close to the gold-
standard design to provide more sufficient proof of efficacy, but it’s still too early to reject
any further exploration now.
In the end, it’s still worth mentioning the cognitive training isn’t limited to the specified
training programs this thesis focused on. Video games, physical training, and mindfulness
training as intervention methods on cognitive abilities have all been studied and some
showed strong efficacy [24, 20].
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
9
==PAGE:18==
10
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:19==
3
Game Ideation
Although it is common for a game to tend to encourage innovation and ”the moment of
inspiration” during production, it is also valuable to incorporate fundamental principles of
human-computer interaction (HCI) into the game design process to enhance the product’s
usability. A user-centric, intuitive interface and mechanics remain essential aspects of
game design.
3.1
Personas
Personas help designers to design products and experiences that cater to the specific
needs of different user groups. They also provide a reference point throughout the design
process, facilitating teams to make user-centered decisions and ensuring that the end
product meets the requirements and expectations of actual target users.
Three characters are listed in Figure 3.1 as the examples of our target users. Our project
is designed for cognitively healthy people, but could also reach to people having mild
ADHD, so the personas were ranged in the order of their cognitive inability. A regular
FPS game player, a busy working person, and a young adult with mild ADHD was cho-
sen, and each of them has distinct expectations of the design. A game player wishing
to improve his cognitive skills for better game performance would expect good gameplay
experience, and concrete training benefits. A working person mainly looking for some
fun and relaxation after work would expect enjoyable user experiences and a quick ”land-
ing”. For a young ADHD patient, it is important that the design soothes his mood and
provide specific training. The first two as healthy people would have lower expectations
on the training effects, while ADHD people in general would require training beneficial for
improve their attention ability.
The training target differs greatly on an individual basis, so in the personas the expectation
on training effects are not explained in detail. The keys of the design would focus on
developing a user-friendly and enjoyable UX.
3.2
User Story Map
User story map assists Agile teams in determining what should be constructed and in
maintaining a clear understanding of how all the components interconnect. They facilitate
discussions centered around users, encourage collaboration, and aid in the prioritization
of features. This method ensuring cohesion and direction for the ongoing process of
iterative product development [59].
After reviewing numerous types of games, we found role-playing games (RPG) have an
intrinsic user story which is suitable to be incorporated into cognitive training. The user
story map is warped into a circle to indicate the circulation through the levels or stages, and
the circulation is where motivation is gained to keep using it. The typical user story has 4
activities: 1) Get daily quests, 2) Complete daily quests, 3) Gather collectables, 4) Unlock
new areas. In our game, ”cognitive training” is in the form of a series of daily quests, where
the users are motivated to complete them and then gain reward. The reward could be
collectables defined along with the storytelling, such as magical materials, gold medals or
credibility with the non-player roles (NPC), or achievements based on challenges, scores
and levels indicating player development. The key incentives of persistent usage in RPG
game would be the preset goal to ”unlock” things, including new rules, new scenes and
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Personas
the plot progress, that allowing adaptive training levels and training content to be added.
In fact, the circulation could be endless, so that the developers could also insert endless
new content for users to receive training.
Another key feature of the RPG games suitable for providing relaxation is that the player
is encouraged to wander around the game world and explore freely, with possibilities to
encounter special events or non-player characters (NPCs). This allows the player to be
diverted shortly from the main gameplay to discover new fun.
The story map also defined some regular functionality modules in the RPG games, such as
UI boards for checking quests, collectables and achievements. The modules correspond
to specific UI designs, and could offer the entry to game history of users as their cognitive
training journey to update self-awareness with the current progress.
3.3
Low-fidelity Prototype
Before getting down to the detailed game design, a low-fidelity prototype in sketches was
made to illustrate the fundamental ideas of WaatLand, as shown in Appendix D. The
prototype shows possible ways to visualize the activities defined in the user story map,
although the two challenges drawn in the prototype are just examples.
3.4
Workshop
A design workshop is a structured approach aimed at gathering the collective insights of
participants and fostering innovative solutions to address a particular design challenge.
Six participants with normal cognitive abilities took part in the workshop, which lasted for
two and a half hours. The group consisted of four females and two males. The primary
objectives of the workshop were twofold: to generate ideas for the game’s background
story and to explore potential game mechanisms.
12
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: User story map
The participants were first introduced to the concept of cognitive training, and some clas-
sical role-playing games (RPG), to have a basic understanding of the form of the game.
Then a digital board was created, so people could add stick-notes of ideas and vote for
the most appealing ones.
3.4.1
Brainstorming: Game Themes
Our game, WaatLand, can be seen as a collaborative hub of imaginative concepts. How-
ever, it is equally important for it to maintain a coherent structure in terms of logic. Conse-
quently, we are eager to hear from participants regarding the themes and elements they
would like to see integrated into the game.
The session concluded with a total of 19 creative themes. Once the ideas were gathered,
we initiated a voting session where each participant was tasked with selecting their five
favorite concepts. The highest-ranking outcomes move forward for further discussion
during the subsequent segment of the workshop. The results are seen in Figure 3.3.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: Game theme brainstorm and ideation
Here are some top-picked themes:
• Mind world - Explore mental health diseases and cure them by training the cogni-
tion.
• Evolution - Evolve yourself through the expenditures to more advanced creature.
• Universe travel - Travel among different planets to meet all kinds of creatures.
• Alien habitation - An integrated-to-earth alien tries to understand the human cog-
nition.
• Neuron network - Play a neuron establishing a functional network.
• Magic school - A ”Hogwarts” training cognition, or ”Cogwarts”.
3.4.2
Brainstorming: Game Mechanisms
Participants were encouraged to expand on the subjects by contributing additional con-
cepts related to game mechanisms, to outline a basic yet comprehensive game structure.
The mechanisms could contribute to possible definition of core game play rules, the plots,
and the reward system. For instance, taking inspiration from the Universe travel theme,
attendees generated the following ideas:
• ”(Play) as an astronaut to travel through planets”
• ”Collect stars and moons (during the exploration)”
• ”Collect fuels to travel around”
• ”Collect new plants to grow”
• ”Level up by getting auto-routing ability”
14
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:23==
• ”Meet aliens and make friends; transform into their shape”
• ”Star wars” (inspired by the famous IP)
The complete results could be checked in Appendix E, and the storyline of WaatLand
was crafted using the outcomes derived from the collaborative idea generation among
the participants. In conclusion, all game themes and mechanisms significantly embodied
a ”process for change”, either along the path of integration or synthesis or the path of
break things down. It is also very important to show the player’s progress with the plots.
To fulfill these goals, the game is set to be a combination of Universe Travel and Alien
Habitation, where the player train himself/herself, so that the alien gains the human-
cognitive capability to understand the local dwellers.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
15
==PAGE:24==
16
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:25==
4
Interactive Design
This chapter discusses major interactive design to motivate users to keep training them-
selves with WaatLand from various perspectives. The improvements and modifications
made during iteration based on the feedback from usability test are introduced as well in
this chapter.
4.1
Overview
WaatLand is a single-player cognitive training game within the role-playing genre, de-
signed for individuals with normal cognitive functioning. Integrating gamified components
such as interactive controls and narrative storytelling, WaatLand presents an opportunity
to consolidate distinct individual mini-games commonly found in cognitive training prod-
ucts into a comprehensive mobile game. This approach aims to encourage and sustain
long-term engagement.
The primary mechanisms of the game are centered around achievements and exploration.
Players are motivated to attain higher scores in cognitive training exercises to advance the
storyline and to explore the game universe while making acquaintance with its inhabitants.
Additionally, WaatLand offers a casual, relaxing, and humorous vibe, providing players
a way to release tension during their mental journey within the game. This concept is
particularly appealing to players who fall within the ”Explorer” or ”Achiever” categories
outlined in [60].
To obtain knowledge of the average ability among our targeting users, a usability test
including an interview session was operated with 7 participants after implementing all
game elements, and the control variables of the mini-games were adjusted based on
the performance of these 7 participants. The detailed results will be provided in the last
section in this chapter.
We conducted a usability test involving seven participants, in order to obtain general us-
ability feedback on the game and fine-tune the level-controlling variables based on the
performance of target users. The test was operated after the implementation of all game
elements, whose results are present in the last section of this chapter.
4.2
Narrative
There is an ongoing debate, which is likely to persist in the foreseeable future, is that,
about the relation of gameplay and story-telling: which one is more important? Some play-
ers appreciate more the joy brought by gameplay, while the others prefer story-intensive,
or even story-driven games such as interactive movies. However the debate may end up,
it is a consensus that a game always has a story [61, 62].
We recognized the narrative as a driving force to motivate the long-term engagement
among users, offering the potential for players to reveal currently undiscovered secrets.
As a result, drawing upon the brainstorming sessions and feedback, we devised a storyline
for WaatLand using the ”The String of Pearls” approach outlined in [62] and demonstrated
in Figure 4.1. This technique represents a fully non-interactive narrative format, where the
story unfolds in a predetermined sequence. Players transition to the next non-interactive
’pearl’ as they achieve the goals of preceding stages, unlocking new objectives along the
way.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Pearl and String Method
We presented following story after the brainstorming of the workshop:
”The protagonist, portrayed as an extraterrestrial being (alien), finds their spaceship land-
ing from space to an unusual location called WaatLand. In this place, the inhabitants
communicate using the language known as ”HumanLang”, a language the protagonist
had learned a little long ago.”
”Chapter 0: You, playing as the protagonist, awaken within a village household, accompa-
nied by an elderly man and a child. Naturally, their conversations are mostly unintelligible
to you. However, surprisingly, you can fully comprehend the activities of a non-humanoid
creature.”
”The inhabitants of the village, who possess humanoid features, display great kindness.
This setting serves as a platform to reacquaint yourself with human cognition, enhance
your proficiency in ”HumanLang”, and integrate into the community.”
”Chapter One: Information is conveyed by a journalist that a ’city’ exists where your space-
craft can be repaired. One goal becomes clear: finding a way to return home.”
The current version of WaatLand consists only partial content of what has been designed
as Chapter 0.
4.3
Gameflow Design
This section describes our game design to realize the vision of WaatLand with the assis-
tance of the ”interest curve” theory.
4.3.1
Interest Curve
We applied the ”interest curve” theory discussed in [62] shown, plotting an ideal case of
the game time against the degree of interest. To the left of Figure. 4.2 is an ideal curve,
and an less successful one to the right.
Figure 4.2: Interest Curves
A successful curve often contains a point B as ”the hook” to quickly grab the attention
of the audience, soon after the starting point A. With finely crafted game experience, the
general level of interest keeps rising during the game, with temporal peaks such as point
C and E and valleys such as point D and F to leverage the intensity of fun of the game.
18
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:27==
In the end, the whole experience terminates at a high climax at point G to complete the
experience with a satisfying cleaning up.
On the contrary, curve (b) demonstrates one of the less fine-tuned interest curves. The
experience continuously drives the interests of player downhill. Though it does contain
peaks and valleys, they do not last long, and make user completely lose the interests
once around point c. The assuming climax, point e, shows an unsatisfying result which
can barely be called a ”climax” given its low interest level.
4.3.2
Gameflow
To match the ideal interest curve also fitting our game, we present our game-flow as shown
in Figure. 4.3. There are three main parts in our game-flow: Hook, Unlock daily quests
and Ongoing training.
The first part, Hook, corresponding to the ”the hook” point or point B in the ideal interest
curve, establishes the background and grab the attention of the players. We designed one
cutscene at the beginning demonstrating the accidental landing of the alien spaceship,
and the other one afterwards to animate the faint of main character and the waking up to
meet the family of an old man and a kid.
Two one-time cognitive games are inserted to familiarize the players with the gameplay:
one grid-route game to escape from the shuttle and an audio-visual one-back game to
teach the player basic knowledge of ”HumanLang”, the fictional language that WaatLand’s
residents speak.
Having been introduced to the game, now the player enters the next stage: Unlock daily
quests. In this part, the player is able to unlock several cognitive games as the routine
quests. This is done by free exploring to talk to various non-player characters(NPCs)
scattering around the map, and figure out the availability of NPCs.
The player can start the daily training in the third stage, Ongoing training. This part
reveals the core gameplay of WaatLand: taking quests from NPCs and completing the
quests by carrying out the cognitive training.
Daily quests are randomly selected from a quest pool. For example, in Figure. 4.3, game
#1, 3 and 4 are picked on day 1, and game #2, 5, 3 are drawn from the pool on day 4. The
player accumulates the score for each cognitive game throughout the training sessions.
The accumulated score then decides the current level of each cognitive mini-game to
differ the game experiences based on the performance.
More non-player characters are unlocked in this stage. We arranged two characters, a
cult believer and a journalist, who will appear and talk to players once the players have
reached the next level of ”HumanLang”, which is a motivation representing the amount
of human language that the player can understand. Some of the ”advanced” words are
hidden if the player’s HumanLang has not reached the requiring level.
Upon the completion of all quests, the player will receive a hint to guide them to the next
scene, to continue with the cognitive training on a new stage, a modern city where the
protagonist would find clearer clues on how to return home.
Because of project time constraints, we only partially incorporated the mentioned features.
The hook part has been streamlined to involve a conversation with the old man and the kid,
followed by the dog accompanying the main character. The first-time interaction with non-
player characters activates the daily quest, prompting players to engage with all four mini-
games on a daily basis. Regarding the progression rewards, only the journalist presents
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.3: WaatLand Gameflow
20
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:29==
a Flying Kitten quest upon meeting certain conditions.
4.4
Environment Design
Rooted in the core casual vibe of WaatLand, we picked a low-polygon style village scene
(Figure. 4.4) to present the environment of Chapter 0, in which the PC lands on the Waat-
Land and starts the long way back home. This choice was made for two primary reasons:
firstly, the low-polygon style, often utilized in casual games, offers a relaxed aesthetics
due to its simplified detail; secondly, low-poly style models are generally well-suited for
rendering on mobile platforms, as they feature fewer polygons, resulting in reduced hard-
ware workload.
Figure 4.4: Environment Design
4.5
Character Design
Characters serve as the tunnel through which a drama unfolds. By identifying with a
character and the outcomes of their objectives, the audience internalizes the events of
the story and empathizes with its progression towards resolution [63].
Due to the rather short everyday play time, it is crucial for the players to recognize char-
acters in the scene as quickly as possible. Von Restorff effect, described as ”uncom-
mon things are easier to recall than common things” [64], is one of our solutions. We
picked several non-everyday character models for both player character(PC) and non-
player characters(NPCs).
4.5.1
Player Character (PC)
A player character (PC), or playable character, is any character in game whose actions
are controlled by a player rather than the rules of the game.
In align with the narrative that the PC is an alien from space, we found a model of astronaut
from our asset pool (Figure. 4.5). The character is fully covered with a white spacesuit,
which to some extend removes the characteristics of the PC and adds credibility to the
narrative.
The PC has a special ability to comprehend the language of animals within WaatLand.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
21
==PAGE:30==
This perception is reinforced when a dog, named Barky, begins accompanying the PC
immediately after their initial conversation with the elderly man and the child.
Barky the dog, is intentionally portrayed as a character with behavior and communication
that might be deemed ’inappropriate’ since the PC is the only individual capable of un-
derstanding it. In various conversations, players will intermittently hear the dog making
sarcastic remarks about the other characters’ dialogue. Additionally, the dog assumes a
guiding role for the PC, especially provided the PC’s limited grasp of the ”HumanLang”
after the unexpected arrival from space.
The PC can be controlled via direct touch on the screen. A single tap can update the
position of the target, prompting the PC to autonomously navigate towards it. Users can
adjust the camera perspective by employing a two-finger gesture.
Figure 4.5: Player Character with Dog
4.5.2
Non-player Characters (NPC)
A non-player character (NPC), or non-playable character, is any character in a game that
is not controlled by a player.
We created six NPCs in WaatLand (Figure. 4.6), each of which has a one-to-one relation
with a specific cognitive training quest, except Ale the elderly and Lea the kid:
• Felux the Construction Guy (plus a seagull) →Catch-And-Throw
• Pitera the Cult Guy →Tarot
• Maroe the Cat Lady →Catnip Hunting
• Nejtale the Flower Girl →Flower-Stroop
• Bibagaite the Journalist →Flying Kitten
There is a one-to-one connection between the NPC and the quest they offer. For instance,
the flower girl’s color blindness prevents her from accurately discerning the hues of the
flowers - this is where the player’s involvement becomes crucial. The player will engage
in the Flower-Stroop game to assist the flower girl in correctly identifying the colors of the
flowers.
22
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: Non-player Character Overview
4.5.3
Non-player Character Map
The NPCs are distributed throughout the village, positioned around the central well as de-
picted in Figure. 4.7. This guarantees minimal travel distance and simplifies the process
of the player remembering locations to claim daily quests.
The journalist is situated at a comparatively greater distance from the central point than
the other characters because, firstly, she presents a quest that becomes available after
the initial quests; secondly, she comes from the city beyond the village. She is to guide
the PC to the subsequent scene and stage of the game.
4.5.4
Quest State Marks
The one-to-one relation between a cognitive training quest and an NPC enables player
to obtain daily quest information directly from the NPCs. Each quest comes with at least
five states:
• HasNotMet - First time talk to the NPC and thus first time accept the quest. The PC
will start the cognitive game right after the conversation.
• Offer-able - The NPC is offering the quest, and the PC and start a dialogue and add
the quest to the to-do-quest list.
• Active - The PC can start the cognitive training by talking to the quest-related NPC.
• Complete - The PC has finished the quest for this day.
• Pending - The quest cannot be taken this day, because it is not part of today’s
training.
Plus, an extra status called Not Offer-able exists, indicating that certain prerequisites
must be fulfilled before the quest can be unlocked. References for all states can be found
in Figure. 4.8.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: Character Map
Figure 4.8: Quest States
24
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:33==
4.6
Dialogue
We turned to ChatGPT for assistance on the fast generation of dialogue scripts. Please
refer to next chapter for details on implementation.
Figure. 4.9 illustrates the user interface panel used for dialogue interactions involving both
NPCs and the PC. In the case of NPC dialogue, the conversation proceeds automatically
after a set period of time, while for the PC, advancement of the dialogue relies on the
player clicking one of the available options, even if only one available option is presented.
During the iterative process, we introduced a ”continue” button for the NPC’s dialogue
panel. This enables players to manually move the conversation forward. The inclusion
of the ”continue” button ensures consistency in the design of both NPC and PC dialogue
panels, allowing players to interact and advance the game in a consistent manner. Fur-
thermore, text animations have been specifically applied to capture the player’s interests
and focus.
Figure 4.9: Dialogue Panel
4.7
Sound Design
4.7.1
Feedback Sound
In line with the relaxing atmosphere of WaatLand, a variety of casual sound effects has
been selected to provide instant and effective feedback. For instance, in cognitive games,
a sound effect triggers immediately after the player interacts with a clickable object such
as s button on the screen. This indicates whether the selection was accurate or incorrect.
Furthermore, in response to feedback from usability testing, a lengthier sound track now
follows the click of the ”Start New Day” button. This auditory cue signals to players that
the quests are once again available for selection.
4.7.2
Dialogue Sound
Every individual actor or character is allocated a unique sound effect that plays at the
onset of a dialogue. This aids the player in identifying the speaker of the conversation.
These sound effects encapsulate key attributes of the actor – for instance, in the case of
Maroe the cat lady, her dialogue begins with the sound of a cat meowing, reflecting one
of her prominent traits.
4.7.3
Music
We further selected two casual music tracks to serve as the background music for Waat-
Land, one tailored for daytime and the other for nighttime. These musical selections, in
conjunction with the lighting adjustments managed by the weather system, collaborate to
enhance the nuanced gaming experience during various times of the day.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
25
==PAGE:34==
4.8
Cognitive Game Design
The cognitive games, or mini-games in WaatLand, are the core of the entire game flow
which serve the cognition-training purpose to the player. Based on the related works,
we incorporated 4 mini-games, adapted from classical cognitive training paradigm such
as stroop task and 1-back task. The 4 mini-games were designed to cover the cognitive
abilities overlapping with the definition of executive functions: inhibitory control, working
memory and cognitive flexibility, which have all been extensively studied and potentially
be most useful for our target user group.
Table 4.1 provides an overview of the intended cognitive abilities trained in each cognitive
mini-game. Note that the trained cognitive ability could extend beyond those listed in the
table, as fundamental attention and perception abilities are indispensable to perform any
task.
Mini-game
Ability
Catch-And-Throw
Inhibitory control
Catnip Hunting
working memory
Flower-Stroop
cognitive flexibility
Tarot
working memory
Table 4.1: Mini-games and targeting cognitive abilities
4.8.1
Level Design and Flow Theory
Csikszentmihalyi proposed the flow theory as an important part of positive psychology. In
Csikszentmihalyi own words, flow is “a state in which people are so involved in an activity
that nothing else seems to matter; the experience is so enjoyable that people will continue
to do it even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it” [65].
Subplot (a) in Figure. 4.10 illustrates several possible flow states, noted as A1, A2, A3
and A4 on the plot of skills against challenges. State A1 is where the player has limited
skills or even no skills at all. The player will feel bored and transit to state A2, or feel
challenged and anxious and transit to state A3 after practicing over time.
Neither anxiety nor boredom can be categorized as positive feedback. In both cases, if we
reset the challenges to match the skills of the player, or increase the player’s skills to match
the challenges, the flow state will be back onto the right track, A4, which the player feels
comfortable with and enjoys the experience again, thus overcoming the negative feelings.
This leaves a marginal region in the middle of anxiety region and boredom region on the
plot, where lies the optimal flow states. This region is called ”flow channel” shown in both
subplots in Figure. 4.10. The players can maximize the joy gained from the game, without
feeling neither too much anxiety or boredom.
Flow theory is also relevant to the experiences in gaming. Raph Koster, the game de-
signer and author of [66], illustrates this phenomenon through personal examples in the
book. He states that when playing a first-person shooter game, he quits due to feelings
of inadequacy, which places him in the ”anxiety” region. On the other hand, while playing
a puzzle game, he manages to progress far and perform well, but eventually becomes
bored, falling into the ”boredom” region.
[62] introduces an interesting path of flow states for players to experience along in subplot
(b) in Figure. 4.10. The author describes the path as a cycle of ”tense and release”, which
could be found in many entertaining designs. First the challenge increases, after which
26
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.10: Flow Theory
the rewards comes to grant the player with more power, thus a easier period for players
of fewer challenges. Soon the challenges increase again and a new cycle starts.
Grounded on the theory, we designed an level system adapting itself to the current per-
formance of the player. The player would accumulate score for each mini-game, which
would lead the player into the next level of the game once it exceeds certain threshold.
Each cognitive game has three levels for player to challenge in the current version. The
threshold values were later calibrated using the data obtained form usability test.
4.8.2
Flower-Stroop
Flower-Stroop is a variant of classic cognition test Stroop, in which participants are tasked
with associating the color of text displayed on the flower pot, with the semantic meaning
of the text displayed on a button, rather than matching it to the background color of the
button.
Figure 4.11: Flower-Stroop
Apart from the cognitive training from traditional Stroop exercise, we introduced random-
ized arrangement of buttons and background colors which could lead the player to confu-
sion thus entailing a raised difficulty to the training. The button layouts depicted in figures
4.11 and 4.12 vary attributing to the implementation of a randomized button layout. Fur-
thermore, in Figure. 4.12, the text displayed on the buttons may not match the background
color, owing to the utilization of randomized button colors.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.12: Random Button Layout and Color in Flower-Stroop
Through the usability test, we discovered that a portion of the users encountered difficulty
in identifying the color of the flowers and the text displayed on the pot. In fact, one user
even questioned the possibility of having color blindness! During the iterative process,
we introduced a specialized lighting source for the flowers and added a white-colored
background under the text as our solution.
In terms of the challenge level, feedback pointed out that the randomized arrangement of
buttons didn’t significantly impact the performance, as long as the text and background
colors remained consistent. On the other hand, introducing randomized colors posed
a more substantial challenge that could effectively confused players. Consequently, we
made the choice to switch on randomized colors in the second level, while also extending
the response time for players to acquaint themselves with this new mechanism.
Flower-Stroop mini-game adapts itself to the player’s performance via controlling three
variables: answering time for each round, Use Random Button Layout to switch on and
off the random button layout in terms of their positions, and Use Random Button Color
to switch on and off the random background color for buttons. Tab. 4.2 demonstrates the
details.
Level
Answering Time
Use Random Button Layout ?
Use Random Button Color ?
1
2 seconds
false
false
2
5 seconds
true
true
3
3 seconds
true
true
Table 4.2: Level Table of Flower-Stroop
4.8.3
Tarot
Tarot is a variant of the classic cognition test 1-Back, in which participants are required
to determine whether the currently displayed card shares the same position, audio, or
pattern as the previously shown card. (Figure. 4.13)
Figure 4.13: Tarot
We have received a substantial amount of feedback regarding the peculiar approach to
encouraging passive control in the Tarot mini-game: surprisingly, holding back from active
participation could result in the player achieving a higher score. This phenomenon is
attributed to the counter-intuitive level design at the game’s outset. Originally, we held
28
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:37==
the belief that incorporating more cards or clips into the pool would elevate the game’s
difficulty, as it would require players to memorize a greater number of elements. However,
our design approach took an unexpected turn, as we neglected to the factor that a larger
pool of cards would reduce the repetition of individual cards, thus reducing the player’s
required actions. Consequently, instead of continuing to increase the number of cards in
the pool, we have decided to decrease this number based on insights from the usability
test. This adjustment aims to prompt players to engage more actively by clicking on a
reduced number of cards.
Tarot mini-game adapts itself to the player’s performance via controlling four variables:
answering time for each round, card-shown interval for the time a card is shown in
each round, size of card pool for the number of cards, and size of audio pool for the
number of audio clips. Tab. 4.3 demonstrates the details.
Level
Answering Time
Card-shown Interval
Size of Card Pool
Size of Audio Pool
1
4 seconds
1.25 seconds
4 cards
4 clips
2
4 seconds
1 second
3 cards
4 clips
3
4 seconds
0.85 second
2 cards
4 clips
Table 4.3: Level Table of Tarot
4.8.4
Catch-And-Throw
Catch-And-Throw is a variant of the classic cognition test SART used in the standard.
participants needs to determining whether the descending object should be attributed to
Felux the construction guy, the seagull, or neither. As the objects keep falling, the quick
switch to inhibition (the activity of not clicking) to the items not required from both lists is
the challenge. (Figure. 4.14)
Figure 4.14: Catch-And-Throw
We made adjustments to the positions of certain items on the required list for both the
construction guy and the seagull. This was in response to feedback mentioning that the
models displayed on the list did not closely match the actual materials that were falling
from the game camera’s view. Additionally, some of the feedback highlighted the issue of
slow falling speed, which resulted in the game being too easy across all three levels. We
increased the falling speed during the iterative process.
Catch-And-Throw mini-game adapts itself to the player’s performance via controlling three
variables: material falling speed for the falling speed of the newly spawned material,
number of required item, Felux for the number of required items of Felux the construc-
tion guy, and number of required item, Seagull or the number of required items of the
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
29
==PAGE:38==
talking seagull. Table. 4.4 demonstrates the details. Note that the falling speed does not
have an absolute unit reflecting the actual speed in the real world but is expressed in the
Unity modeling unit. The response time allowed for each item as falling down was roughly
1 second in level 1.
Level
Material Falling Speed
Number of Required Item,
Felux
Number of Required Item,
Seagull
1
4
3
1
2
6
3
2
3
8
3
3
Table 4.4: Level Table of Catch-And-Throw
4.8.5
Catnip Hunting & Flying Kitten
Catnip Hunting and Flying Kitten are variants of the classic cognition test Corsi used in
standard test. Participants are required to click on all targets where the tracking object
has been staying, following the exact sequence in which they appeared. (Figure. 4.15)
Figure 4.15: Level Table of Catnip Hunting and Flying Kitten
An important observation derived from the usability test was that the targets, especially
those at a greater distance, proved to be too small for valid clicking. Consequently, during
the iterative process, we adjusted the target size based on its actual distance from the
mini-game camera. There was also feedback regarding the tracking object occasionally
got obscured by trees during transitions between targets. Nonetheless, we made the
deliberate choice to retain this aspect as a feature, considering it a useful element for
memory training.
Catnip Hunting and Flying Kitten mini-games adapt themselves to the player’s perfor-
mance via controlling three variables: answering time for each round, target moving
speed for the translating speed of the tracking object (a butterfly or an orange cat), and
length of sequence for the number of number of stays of the tracking object, or the num-
ber of target that the player needs to answer correctly. Tab. 4.5 demonstrates the details.
Note that the moving speed does not have an absolute unit reflecting the actual moving
speed in the real world.
30
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:39==
Level
Answering Time
Target Moving Speed
Length of Sequence
1
4 seconds
5
3
2
6 seconds
5
5
3
8 seconds
5
7
Table 4.5: Level Table of Catnip Hunting and Flying Kitten
4.9
Usability Test
Apart from the aforementioned purpose of designing level system, the usability test was
conducted to enhance the product’s quality through improvements towards user-friendliness
before the commencement of long-term use study.
The test lasted for approximately 45 minutes per participant and was organized in a con-
trolled ”in-the-lab” manner for us to closely observe behaviors of users. Each participant
was assigned the task of playing the pre-installed game on a Samsung S8 Android phone.
This involved playing through three levels for each of the four cognitive games to gather
scores and receive feedback on the game’s performance. After the play test, the partici-
pants were requested to provide their feedback on the game and fill in a System Usability
Scale (SUS) questionnaire.
The participants in this test consisted of 7 students from DTU, with ages ranging from 22
to 30.
The participants were found to adopt various postures during gameplay as shown in Fig-
ure 4.16. some played with both hands, while others preferred using only single finger to
tap on the screen. The posture appeared to affect the difficulty of clicking on the small but-
tons in the Catnip Hunting mini-game. Invalid clicks happened more common on players
playing with both hands, probably due to the different center deviation the screen sensed
from each finger. This issue was largely resolved by enlarging the buttons afterwards.
We also noticed some issues related to the unwanted operations with dialogue system.
Originally, the NPC dialogue was designed to move forward automatically, while the player
has to manually click to proceed. This inconsistency led to confusion and an uncomfort-
able sense of control. Therefore, in the final version, we added a ”continue” button for the
NPC dialogue to restore the consistency, which is positioned almost symmetrically with
the player’s response buttons.
Other frequent complaints pertained to the difficulty with controlling movement and cam-
era rotating. Unfortunately, these issues remained unsolved, because optimizing them
would require a significant amount of effort due to the high dependency to the asset used
in the game.
Many participants mentioned that overall the game was playful and enjoyable and the
visual design was quite attractive. However, it seems that additional motivational feedback
is required as the game’s difficulty increases. The overall average System Usability Scale
(SUS) score reaches 70.71, which is a strong evidence for its usability.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.16: Play test
32
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:41==
5
Technical Implementation
This chapter covers the technical approaches used to implement the interactive design
motivating individuals with normally functional cognitive ability to engage in cognitive train-
ing in a mobile cognitive training game made by the widely-used game engine, Unity.
5.1
Overview
WaatLand takes of plenty of advantages from intuitive and effective workflow of Unity,
and fast generation of textual content of ChatGPT.
The game has been exclusively designed to run on Android and Android-like systems
within the project’s scope, and this decision is built on following considerations:
• The distribution of the game is simpler on the Android platform compared to the
IOS platform, owing to the .apk package format which can be transferred in various
tunnels. This format does not require any approval hence We can reach to a wider
audience of Android device users.
• We as developers do not possess any of the experience in developing neither a
Unity-made game, nor any other type of application on the Apple platform. Therefore
the decision was made to focus solely on Android to maintain a high quality game
experience.
5.2
Software Architecture
The nature of Unity’s GameObject-component structure inspires a modular design facili-
tated by an event-driven mechanism. The entire structure can be perceived as the combi-
nation of eight distinct and individually functional modules, in result organically supporting
the foundation of our interactive system. Figure 5.1 demonstrates the overall structure of
the project.
5.2.1
Director: GameManager
GameManager, as the name suggests, takes the managing role to direct the behaviours
of many GameObjects in the scene, especially coordinating these GameObjects in re-
sponse to triggered events. The partially implemented Mediator pattern in [67] helps in
achieving component decoupling within the distributed structure. This is especially use-
ful considering Unity’s GameObject-component structure, which could quickly become
unwieldy when dealing with an inflation in the number of GameObjects present within
scenes.
GameManager implements the Singleton pattern, ensuring that one and only one in-
stance of the class exists throughout the structure. This approach relieves us from the
need to manually filling in every slot requiring the participation of the GameManager in
Unity Editor. Instead, we can simply call the singular instance whenever events are trig-
gered.
The transitions from main game to cognitive games effectively showcase the capabili-
ties of the GameManager. Within the CognitiveGameManager, the OnGameStart() and
OnGameClear() methods are implemented through the ICognitiveGame interface. This
interface defines the standardized procedure for a cognitive mini-game to take over and
hand in the control of the game, as depicted in Listing 5.1. These two methods, limited
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.1: Software Architecture of WaatLand
in knowledge outside of their attached GameObject, communicates with virtually all other
GameObjects in the scene via the exclusive instance of the GameManager.
1
public void OnGameStart()
2
{
3
// GameMananger changing state
4
GameManager.Instance.OnGameModeSwitchToMiniGame(true);
5
6
SetDataLogFileName();
7
LoadData();
8
CreateDataLog();
9
10
ResetRound();
11
ResetTimeBar();
12
ResetFeedback();
13
14
SetMiniGameLevel();
15
16
SwitchToMiniGameControlMap(); // Calling the GameManager instance within
17
SwitchToMiniGameCamera();
18
SetActiveGameUI(false); // Calling the GameManager instance within
19
SetActiveMiniGameUI(true); // Calling the GameManager instance within
20
SetActiveActorsMiniGameObject(true);
21
ResetScore();
22
StartTimer();
23
}
24
25
public void OnGameClear()
26
{
27
CancelTimer();
34
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:43==
28
CancelAnsweringTimer();
29
CalcMiniGameScore();
30
SetActiveActorsMiniGameObject(false);
31
SetActiveMiniGameUI(false);
32
SetActiveGameUI(true); // Calling the GameManager instance within
33
SwitchToGameCamera(); // Calling the GameManager instance within
34
SwitchToGameControlMap(); // Calling the GameManager instance within
35
36
AddToTotalScore();
37
SaveDatalog();
38
39
// GameMananger changing state
40
GameManager.Instance.OnGameModeSwitchToMiniGame(false);
41
}
Listing 5.1: OnGameStart() method and OnGameClear() method
5.2.2
Director: CognitiveGameManager
CognitiveGameManager class is the base class for all cognitive game managers running
the actual gameplay of each mini-game, and the only practice of the PseudoMonoBe-
haviour class introduced in the Appendix. It only takes over the control of the game when
requested by GameManager and PseudoMonoBehaviour provides such a way to manu-
ally control the execution order of the MonoBehaviour’s life cycle functions based on the
need.
CognitiveGameManager is attached to an empty GameObject, with a series of child GameOb-
jects consisting of a scene-like environment, such as camera and UI canvas. There-
fore, each CognitiveGameManager-attached GameObject has a mini-scene setup, which
guarantees a fast transition through ICognitiveGame interface without waiting for the ex-
ecution of Unity’s scene-switching API.
Figure 5.2 shows a common structure in hierarchy and corresponding mini-game view.
Figure 5.2: CognitiveGameManger hierarchy and demo view
5.2.3
Dialogue System and Quest Machine
Both the dialogue system and quest machine have been developed by the Unity asset cre-
ator Pixel Crushers. The dialogue system streamlines the process of creating and editing
dialogues through a dedicated editor window, with high-quality scripts that accelerate the
implementation of dialogues in our game. The quest machine ensures the seamless and
robust implementation of our fundamental quest-pick-and-go mechanism by providing a
mature solution for quest management.
These two systems can be effectively integrated and managed through the dialogue sys-
tem alone. This enables us to delegate certain maintenance tasks to the dialogue system
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
35
==PAGE:44==
via its integrated scripting API. Additionally, we have incorporated the Text Animator into
the dialogue system to enhance user engagement and focus during gameplay.
5.2.4
Actor
Actor stands as a rather frequently appearing, independent module without much needs to
communicate with other modules. Typically, each actor, contains an ActorController com-
ponent for coordinating animation states and interactions with other actors. Additionally,
an ActorNavigator component is present, responsible for repositioning the actor to match
the target’s location, following a path determined by an external pathfinding component.
Upon the player entering an NPC’s trigger zone, the user gains the opportunity to start
interaction by tapping the white-blue button located on the side. Triggering this button-click
event activates the dialogue system and initiates a specific conversation and, if prompted,
updating quest states.
5.2.5
Control
This module comprises of two main candidates: the InputManager, responsible for re-
trieving data from the input device, and the ControlManager interpreting the input data
and converts it into the data to feed the need of other modules.
In the context of WaatLand, the ControlManager transforms the touch location on the
screen into an accurate position within the game world. Subsequently, the corresponding
target position is adjusted. The associated actor will subsequently move itself towards the
position align with the target and engage in the appropriate locomotion animation. The
procedure is shown in Figure. 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Control with touch
5.3
Artificial-Intelligence Generated Non-player Character and
Dialogue
We utilized ChatGPT to accelerate the process of generating non-player characters (NPCs)
and their dialogues based on the detailed descriptions of their unique personalities. By
applying this AI-powered tool, we were able to efficiently bring these characters to Waat-
Land, elaborating the design richness and depth of our virtual world.
The general procedure of obtaining desired results using ChatGPT starts with finding the
right question. At the beginning we tried the question ”Can you give me some typical NPCs
in a modern village”, which did not provide us with unsatisfying results without sufficient
WaatLand vibe within.
The first step to achieve the desired results using ChatGPT was identifying the most ap-
propriate question to type into dialogue box. At the beginning we attempted the question:
36
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:45==
• ”Can you provide examples of typical NPCs in a modern village?”
Unfortunately, this question yielded unsatisfactory answers without sufficient essence of
the WaatLand that we were looking for. This early trial marked the importance of improving
our questions to obtain the desired results.
In our pursuit to create an NPCs that fit into the unique atmosphere of WaatLand, we
fine-tuned our approach by typing the following question:
• ”Can you write some NPC descriptions in a modern village, that are kind of weird,
quirky?”
And repeated the question:
• ”Write me another 10 quirky NPCs?”
until we collected a total of 50 distinctive character descriptions. This revised approach
yielded more satisfying answers in line with our expectations. Through this iterative pro-
cess, we ensured that our NPCs having characteristics resonated with the vibe of Waat-
Land.
From the pool of created characters, we carefully picked nine that stood out as our top
favored choices. Our next step was refining the details of these selected characters to
ensure that they integrate into the game world. We carefully extracted the essential fea-
tures from each character, and drew from our asset library to create a consistent and
visually appealing presentation of these characters. This process allowed us to tailor the
selected characters, making them suited for the interactive experience. As an example
of this pruning process:
• ”Winston ”Whiskers” MacTavish:
Occupation: Professional Cat Whisperer
Winston, a portly man in his 60s, resembles a friendly teddy bear with his round
physique and perpetual smile. He is never seen without a trail of cats following him,
each sporting an assortment of collars, bows, and even tiny hats. Whiskers, as he is
affectionately known, has the uncanny ability to understand feline behavior and has
built a reputation for helping villagers solve their feline-related mysteries. Whether
it’s calming down a grumpy tabby or deciphering the enigmatic ”meows” of a stray,
Winston is the go-to person for all things feline.”
This description sparked our inspiration, especially the character of being a ”cat lover.”
However, some details about the character and his cats were beyond our scope for imple-
mentation. Therefore, we decided to extract the fascinating ”cat-lover” trait and port this
charming quality into a lady model character that we found in our asset pool, who adores
typical household cats. This adaptation enabled us to retain the essence of the concept
while fitting it into our project.
We carried out the question-select-modifying procedure for the script generation aspect
with the same effective approach. We input the following question to guide the generation
process:
• ”Write scrips between an old man and an alien who doesn’t speak same languages.
The alien is injured and the old man has taken him home and asks him if he’s alright
after he wakes up.” →dialogue script for Ale the elderly and Lea the kid
• ”Write scripts after the alien saved human’s dog, and asked if he can take the dog
with him to explore the village with mostly sign language” →dialogue script for Barky
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
37
==PAGE:46==
the dog
• ”Write scripts starting with the player almost got hit by the materials a construction
guy throw off the roof, and he asks the player to help him catch the correct materials
script.” →dialogue script for Felux the construction guy
• ”Write game scripts for a cat lady who wishes for some special catnip, that can be
found in the woods nearby. The butterflies always stop on it.” →dialogue script for
Maroe the cat lady
• ”Write game scripts for a color blind flower girl seek help to label the flowers by
color.” →dialogue script for Nejtaler the flower girl
• ”Write a hysterical cult character practicing card and spell, and player meet him and
help him for the ritual.” →dialogue script for Pitera the cult guy
• ”Generate nonsense sentences of a journalist.” →dialogue script for Bibagaite the
Journalist
After modifying these dialogues, the final step was integrating dialogues into the game.
This was accomplished through the dialogue system, which allowed for easy integration
to make sure the dialogues are harmoniously blended with the game’s narrative.
5.4
Data Collection
We incorporated the cloud save function empowered by Unity Gaming Service as shown
in Figure. 5.4, to gather user progress with their consent. This eliminates the need for
users to manually export data from their mobile devices. Furthermore, a local backup
is saved as a precautionary measure in case the cloud service encounters connectivity
issues.
Figure 5.4: Unity Cloud Save
A corresponding mini-game data log .json file is created every time the play of the mini-
game terminates as illustrated in 5.2. Each data log contains basic information such as
game title, timestamp and game score. Moreover, each wrong click is recorded with a
label indicating whether it is from mistake or missing.
1
{
2
"buttonNameList": ["Blue", "Green", "Pink", "Purple", "Yellow", "Red"],
38
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:47==
3
"colorNameList": ["RGBA(0.200, 0.604, 0.941, 1.000)", "RGBA(0.318, 0.812,
0.400, 1.000)", "RGBA(0.962, 0.422, 0.788, 1.000)", "RGBA(0.729,
0.000, 0.765, 1.000)", "RGBA(0.945, 0.710, 0.173, 1.000)", "RGBA
(1.000, 0.306, 0.235, 1.000)"],
4
"correctRoundNum": 55,
5
"gameTime": 60,
6
"gameTitle": "Stroop",
7
"level": 0,
8
"score": 5500,
9
"timeStamp": "2023-07-27T21:49:38.384756+08:00",
10
"totalRoundNum": 56,
11
"wrongResponseLogs": [{
12
"buttonIdx": -1,
13
"flowerIdx": 0,
14
"isMissed": true,
15
"labelIdx": 4
16
}, {
17
"buttonIdx": 0,
18
"flowerIdx": 4,
19
"isMissed": false,
20
"labelIdx": 0
21
}],
22
"wrongRoundNum": 1
23
}
Listing 5.2: Example of cognitive game data log of Flower-Stroop
After gathering all data from the study, we merged all the individual data log file into several
larger data log on per-game basis, which were used for the final data analysis. The results
are presented in chapter 7.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
39
==PAGE:48==
40
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:49==
6
Study
A ”in-the-wild” study was implemented to further evaluate the usability and efficacy of long-
term use. 21 participants were recruited and divided to an experimental group (N = 11)
who used WaatLand for 12 days continuously and a passive control group (N = 10) who
received no training during the period. Each group had one participant dropping out due
to personal reasons, and thus the size of experimental group and control group with full
records was respectively 10 and 9.
The criteria for recruitment are:
• Between age 15 to 55
• Has normal cognitive functions
• Owns a mobile platform running Android or Android-like system
• Has a basic knowledge to the English language
• Has a basic knowledge of using modern computer and internet browser
All participants walked through three stages for the study: Pretests-Training-Posttests,
and as described, in the Training session they received different interventions. The pretests
and posttests are composed of same cognition standard tests so that training efficacy
could be evaluated by changes through time and difference between groups. After the
posttests, participants were surveyed to collect their personal information, lifestyle factors,
and game-play habits. For the experimental group, extra interviews about WaatLand was
performed, to collect their opinions about its usability game experience.
6.1
Standard Test Batteries
The standard test used in this study consists 9 test batteries, each targeting at one of
multiple domains. The tests were distributed online via the open-sourced browser-based
psychology experiment and survey platform PsyToolkit, after being fetched from its ex-
periment library. Participants were asked to take the tests in the same order at quiet
places using mouse and keyboard. The test results were exported as csv files for later
analysis, including the detailed information of each single trial and response taken.
The 9 test batteries are: Deary-Liewald, Stroop, Task Switching, Wiscosin Card Sorting,
Digit Span, SART, 2-Back, Corsi Backward and Corsi, and the cognitive ability evaluated
by each test is seen in Table 6.1. Still, the cognitive ability being assessed are indefinite,
the table only lists the main purpose the task was initially designed for. while many studies
have proved their correlations to more cognitive abilities.
All experiments were set in default to have screen size of 800 by 600 pixels, with an option
to go full-screen. Each task lasted for about 1-5 minutes. The content and technical details
of each experiment is introduced in the following, in the order of being taken in pretests
and posttests, and screenshots of the tasks can be found in the appendix I.
6.1.1
Deary-Liewald
The Deary Liewald experiment [68] used in the study consists of a reaction time test with
two distinct tasks. The first task is the simple task where the participant is required to
press the space bar as soon as a black cross appears on the screen. The second task is
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
41
==PAGE:50==
task
measures
2-Back task
working memory
Backward Corsi task
working memory
Corsi task
working memory
Deary-Liewald task
response time
Digit Span task
short term memory
SART task
sustained attention
Stroop
selective attention, cognitive flexibility
Task Switching task
flexibility, processing speed
Wiscosin Card Sorting task
executive control function
Table 6.1: Test batteries and the measured cognitive abilities
the choice task, where the participant must press a specific button (key ’Z’,key ’X’,key ’,’,
key ’.’) corresponding to the position of the black cross when it appears on the screen.
The stimulus randomly appears at a random interval between 1 second to 3 second, and
lasts for at most 1 second. Each type of task has a training block and a true test block.
The simple task has 8 training trials and 20 test trials, and the choice task has 8 training
trials and 40 test trials. A 1-second interval is generated between blocks.
6.1.2
Stroop
The Stroop Task, named after John Ridley Stroop, stands among the most renowned
psychological experiments. It reveals the difficulty in identifying the ink color of a color
word when there is a discrepancy between the ink color and the word itself. An instance
of this phenomenon would be attempting to name the color of the word ”RED” when it is
printed in blue ink [69].
In the experiment, 4 colors and 4 corresponding texts are used as stimuli: yellow, green,
blue and red, generating 16 different combinations. Participants are required to respond
by pressing the capital letter key (’R’, ’G’, ’B’, ’Y’) same as the text color while ignoring the
text’s meaning. Each time the text appears for maximum 2 seconds, and a 0.5-second
interval is inserted before next text spawns. The task contains 40 trials in total.
6.1.3
Task Switching
The participants are required to respond to combinations of numbers and letters, following
the detailed on-screen instructions. At the end of the tasks, participants receive feedback
on their performance in two scenarios: when they perform the tasks individually (in ”pure
blocks”) and when they perform both tasks in a mixed setting. Within the mixed block,
there are ”task-repeat trials,” where the same task is repeated as the previous trial, and
”task-switch trials,” where participants switch from one task to another. The difficulty in
switching between tasks is evident in the slowdown observed immediately after a task
switch [70].
In each trial, a random letter followed by a random digit is spawned. The letter pool
includes G, K, M, R, A, E, I, U, and the digit pool includes integers 1 to 9. When the
stimulus appears at the top two quadrants, the participant needs to respond to the letter,
while in the bottom two quadrants to the digit. The participant should press key ’B’ for
consonant letters and odd numbers, and key ’N’ for vowel letters and even numbers.
The task consists one letter block, one number block and one mixed block. Each block has
40 trials, and new stimuli are spawned right after receiving the key input, or no response
is received in 5 seconds.
42
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:51==
6.1.4
Wiscosin Card Sorting (WCS)
This is an adapted computer-based Wiscosin Card Sorting task that draws inspiration
from the original copyrighted work by Berg[71] while incorporating several significant dif-
ferences. The test is presented with four cards as options and one card as the cue on the
screen. The objective is to first determine the classification rule by clicking one of the four
option cards to sort the cue card and then adhere to this rule until a new rule is applied.
The rule can be sort-by-shape, sort-by-color, or sort-by-number, and users need to learn
the rule being used by trail and error, and induction techniques.
WCS is originally designed for patients with brain damage, as they might have more trou-
ble to figure out and switch to new rules; WCS on healthy people might not be siginificant
[71].
The task contains 60 trials, and each card allows 10 seconds to decide which to click.
The audio feedback is then spawned and a 1-second transition interval is given.
6.1.5
Digit Span
The Digit Span task is a classical task for short-term memory study. It tests a person’s
capability to remember digit sequence at a time. The task starts with 2 digits, and if the
participant is able to remember correctly twice in a row, the sequence length will increase
by 1. The trial stops when the user makes mistakes twice in a row, and the correctly
remembered length is considered the his personal Digit Span. Number of trials of each
length is no more than 3.
Each digit is shown for 0.8 seconds, and there is no time limit for user to click on the digit
panel to repeat the required sequence.
6.1.6
Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART)
The Sustained Attention to Response Task, SART, has been employed as a tool to assess
sustained attention in research investigating relationships between various factors, such
as attention and media multi-tasking [72], and working memory and engagement on social
networking sites [73].
In the task, a digit randomly spawned in 1-9 is displayed for 250 ms, and the mask appears
for 900 ms. The participant need to press space bar for all digits except 3 in the display
period. The size of the stimulus is also random, either 48 point, 72 point, 94 point, 100
point, or 120 point. First a training block is performed, with 18 trials. Then the real test
block is performed for 225 trails (25 times for each digit).
6.1.7
2-Back
In essence, the N-Back task involves presenting participants with a sequential stream of
stimuli. Their task is to determine whether the current stimulus matches the one presented
N trials ago. The value of N can be 1 trial, 2 trials, 3 trials, and so on, with higher values
making the task more challenging. In this task, participants are required to recall in a
stream of letters whether the current one is the same as the letter 2 trials before.
The letter pool is composed of 15 letters: A, B, C, D, E, H, I, K, L, M, O, P, R, S, T. Each
letter is shown for 2 seconds while waiting for mouse input. The task contains 1 training
block of 25 trials and 2 test trials of also 25 trials.
6.1.8
Corsi Backward & Corsi
The Corsi (Backward) task is similar to Digit Span, but the stimuli are visuospatial. The
participant is first presented a sequence among 9 randomly placed squares by lightening
up one by one, and then he needs to click the blocks in the sequence by the correct order
(same order in Corsi, and reverse order in Corsi Backward). The sequence length starts
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
43
==PAGE:52==
at 2, and gradually increases. Each length is trialed twice. If at least one trial is correct,
the length increases by 1, but if two errors are made in a row, or the trials of length 9 are
finished, the task ends.
Each square is lightened for 0.3 seconds, and then hide for 0.3 seconds before next
square being lightened up. There is no time limit for users to click on the squares, but
once a click is made it’s not revertible.
6.2
Data Collection
The game WaatLand was distributed to the experimental group via a Google Drive link,
containing .apk installation package file for them to download and install the game.
Throughout the 12-day training session, every participant in the experimental group was
required to engage in all four cognitive games on a daily basis, and they can refresh the
game progress by clicking the ”start a new day” button. However, there were no technical
regulations to avoid users from refreshing the game for multiple times and playing more
than required, either from giving up or skip for a day.
The data logs were transmitted using Unity’s Cloud Save service, and they were also
stored locally as a backup. Prior to using the service, users must consent to the data
protocol, and they were provided with an instructional manual to guide them through the
process as shown in Figure. 6.1. This data was used to analyse their behaviors within
the game in the next chapter.
Participants in the control group were exempted from this session, but they were asked
to live as usual during the period, and if possible, to avoid caffeine overtake and staying
up late.
The post-survey questions are seen in Appendix M.
Figure 6.1: User Manual and Data Protocol
44
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:53==
7
Results
This chapter illustrates the results of the study with a purpose to look for evidence for
the efficacy of the designed cognitive training game. Possible factors (including the de-
mographic and lifestyle factors) correlated with the tested cognitive abilities were also
analyzed. Finally, a side analysis of the collected game data log is provided, displaying
more information about user behaviors within the game.
7.1
Pre-Post Changes
Statistical methods used for efficacy tests of medical intervention usually require rigor-
ous control conditions and clear numeric criteria (one dependent variable, or multiple
uncorrelated dependent variables) for the outcome. Some methods put restrictions on
the distribution of data collected, so that the statistical difference has high credibility. For
example, ANOVA is used with the assumption that the dependent variables are continu-
ous, normally distributed and independent with each other, and has comparable variance
across groups. Unfortunately, the enforced control conditions were not identical, which
were also a characteristic of ”in-the-wild” study, and the standard tests we incorporated
were mostly not eligible for such statistical analysis. As a substitution, pre-post results be-
tween groups were manually visualized and compared to discover insights of the training
effects.
Figure 7.1 shows the pre-post changes of average number of trials the participants an-
swered correctly (could be interpreted as mean scores) of the two groups, and each
marker’s size indicates the standard variance of the scores. Except for the Digit Span
task which stayed almost unchanged, most tasks saw a increase in score from pretests
to posttests within both groups. This might be caused by the effect of repetition, that
task performance is increased as the operator becomes more familiarized with the task.
In posttests, participants were more familiar with the rules than in the pretests when the
tasks were first presented. Based on the same reason, the participants were in general
able to finish the posttests faster than pretests, and this possibly relieved the the atten-
tional resources consumed through the process, resulting in better performance as well.
Compared to the control group, the experimental group received significantly more pre-
post improvement, judging from the larger slopes than the control group in task Deary-
Liewald, SART and Task Switching. Similar improvements, i.e. similar slopes, across
the two groups were seen in task 2-Back, Stroop and CorsiBackward. The increase of
experimental group’s scores was less than the increase of the control group in task Corsi
and Wisconsin Card Sorting.
However, the student t-test’s results (seen in Table.7.1) did not show any statistically sig-
nificant difference between pre-post tests for each task. This meant that no p-values were
below 0.05, although for experimental group the p-values were close to 0.1 in task Deary-
Liewald (t = −1.79, p = 0.09), SART (t = −1.73, p = 0.10) and Stroop (t = −1.78, p =
0.09) while the control group did not exhibit p-values at the similar level.
Another criterion often used to measure cognitive abilities is the response time (RT). In
the selected test batteries, response time is a less relevant measure for the two Corsi
tasks and Digit Span task. The average response time of the correct trials in other six
tasks are illustrated in Figure. 7.2. The decreases in response time also implied a better
performance from pretests to posttests. The response time of experimental group seemed
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 7.1: Pre-post changes in the test scores between groups
to decrease more only in the task 2-Back and Deary-Liewald, while the Task Switching
task shows an opposite result. The response time in task SART, Stroop and WCS did not
show a big difference.
Similar to the test scores, no statistically significant difference (p < 0.5) of response time
could be observed in the experimental group 7.2, while in the control group, the Task
Switching task (t = 3.43, p = 0.0035) showed a significant different pre-post RT results.
From the plotting of the individual changes of the scores and average response time in
Figure ??, the patterns of pre-post changes varied on an individual basis. In the plotting,
the experimental group (ID #1 to #11) is to the left of the red dotted line, and the control
group (ID #12 to #21) is to the right. The scores were comparatively stable between
pretests and posttests among all tasks, except the two Corsi tasks. Participant #2 and
Experimental group
Control group
t-value
p-value
t-value
p-value
2back
-1.06701728
0.300066888
-0.669469
0.5127419
DearyLiewald
-1.791308164
0.090073823
-0.296319
0.7707982
SART
-1.725633685
0.101539007
-0.278431
0.7842481
Stroop
-1.775749045
0.092683022
-1.571335
0.1356682
TaskSWitching
-1.097706098
0.286800562
1.5062839
0.1514816
WiscosinCardSorting
0.683165073
0.50320185
-1.482499
0.1576357
Corsi
-0.239426065
0.813480325
-0.781133
0.4461287
CorsiBack
-0.130930734
0.897282353
-0.474713
0.6414065
DigitSpan
nan
nan
0
1
Table 7.1: Student’s t-test results on pre-post scores
46
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:55==
Figure 7.2: Pre-post changes in the mean RT between groups
Experimental group
Control group
t-value
p-value
t-value
p-value
2back
0.511153411
0.615456345
-0.321598
0.7519205
DearyLiewald
0.70078901
0.492395166
1.1060987
0.2850381
SART
-0.67047976
0.511063721
-0.45649
0.6541733
Stroop
1.420416167
0.172577088
1.7614628
0.0972539
TaskSWitching
1.162197844
0.260333662
3.4269722
0.0034576
WiscosinCardSorting
0.628335181
0.53767622
0.7384785
0.4709182
Table 7.2: Student’s t-test results on pre-post response time
#3 had observable longer response time, and these two participants were featured to be
middle-aged adults with fewer game experiences. Even after training and familiarizing
with the tests, their response time was still often outliers among the group, as in the task
Deary-Liewald, SART and Task Switching. A raised score with shorter pre-post response
time is likely to indicate a better performance over time, which was commonly discovered
within the experimental group (participant #1, #4 to #8 and #12) in the Stroop task. In the
meanwhile, this phenomenon did not happen in the control group, indicating a possible
efficacy from cognitive training.
In cases where the scores and response time increased or decreased together, trade-
off between accuracy and speed resulting in changes of personal strategy might be the
cause, meanwhile whether the cognitive abilities were changed is uncertain. Very few
cases showed decreased scores and increased response time, which indicates worsening
performance, were probably resulted from unknown factors other than the between-group
conditions. In the last three tasks where response time is less relevant, pre-post changes
in the memory span were not significantly different between groups, and the calculation
showed that mean pre-post changes in the three tasks were all zero for both groups.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
47
==PAGE:56==
7.1.1
Task-specific Measures
Some of the test batteries use a complex construct to measure more detailed cognitive
abilities, rather than just scores and response time, except for the memory tasks (2-Back,
Corsi (backward and forward) and Digit Span). This section will go through the task-
specific measurements, to check if individual pre-post changes differ between groups.
In the Deary-Liewald task, how much response time (RT) increases from the simple
(choice-1) task to the choice (choice-4) task indicates the mental flexibility, and Figure.
7.3 plots the mean ”1 to 4” RT increase in seconds and in percentage of each partici-
pant. The majority of the experimental group appeared to have fewer ”1 to 4” RT increase
in the pretests, as the group’s posttests line lied mostly below the prestests line, imply-
ing better mental flexibility obtained after training for the experimental group, because
meanwhile the control group’s posttests line revealed fluctuating changes from pretests.
The means of the ”1 to 4” RT increase difference from pretests to posttests for the ex-
perimental group and the control group were respectively 15.05 (std = 31.18) and -0.45
(std = 72.32), meaning the experimental group showed on average 15.05 milliseconds
decrease in posttests, while the control group’s performance was slightly worsened dur-
ing the study period. However, the pre-post differences between two groups were not
significant by t-test, as its t-value was 0.58, and p-value 0.57. The ”1 to 4” RT increase
percentage difference did not show better improvements for the experimental group, as
the mean differences were both positive, 1.371% for the experimental group, and 3.097%
for the control group, although the experimental group’s pre-post diference of ”1 to 4” in-
crease percentage was smaller. More crossovers between pretests and postests lines in
the percentage plotting were also seen for the experimental group, but still it showed a
more steady pattern than the control group. This might be rooted in the general improve-
ments of response speed from training, and thus the flexibility improvements were less
prominent on a higher base.
Figure 7.3: Deary-Lieward: Response time increase from simple tasks to choice tasks
For the Task Switching task, it is obviously important to examine the number of errors
made in real ”switch” trials, and in our setting, that was when the stimuli showed up from
top quadrants to the bottom ones, or the other way around. The pre-post total switch
errors were counted individually and illustrated in Figure 7.4. 6 participants (#1, #2, #7,#8,
#10) in the experimental group made fewer task-switching mistakes in posttests, 3 (#4,
#9, #11) made the same number of mistakes and the other 2 made more mistakes. The
switch error pre-post changes for the control group, nonetheless, were quite opposite,
that 7 out of 9 made more mistakes in the posttests. Mean pre-post difference of the
switch error was -0.6 (std = 2.0) for the experimental group, and 1.56(std = 1.42) for
the control group, which also proved that the experimental group made on average fewer
switch task mistakes. According to this phenomenon, the training may have improved
48
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:57==
the experimental group’s attention and flexibility, but the common increase of errors in the
posttests for the control group might be the consequence of unknown factors.
Figure 7.4: Task Switching: Switch task error number
In Stroop tasks, there are congruent stimuli in which the text have the same color as its
meaning, and incongruent stimuli in which the meaning and the font color don’t match. It
is found that the response time is in general longer for incongruent stimuli than congruent
stimuli, and the difference between the two is called the stroop effect, which measures the
processing speed and flexibility: The smaller the difference, the higher processing speed
an individual may be capable of. Figure 7.5 plots the individual stroop effect in pretests
and posttests. However, no specific pattern can be concluded from the plotting, as each
individual showed clearly different stroop effect changes, and some even had negative
stroop effects meaning they performed better in the incongruent tasks than congruent
ones.
Figure 7.5: Stroop effects
The Wisconsin Card Sorting task is often used on younger kids or patients, to evaluate
if they have abnormal cognitive functionalities, and there is a key measurement called
the perseveration error, meaning the operator keeps applying the old rule. Figure 7.6
illustrates the number of perseveration error across all individuals, and for most partici-
pants the perseveration errors lied on a similar level, both across individuals, and between
prettests and posttests. There is only one participant (#11) showed abnormally high per-
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
49
==PAGE:58==
severation errors. The reason might be rooted in the testing process, when this participant
had been confused about the rules of the task, and only came to understand in much later
trials.
Figure 7.6: Stroop effects
In the end, in the SART task, there are two types of trials: Go and No-Go, each cor-
responding to pressing the space bar or withholding the action. The No-Go error is a
measurement not only of the inhibition ability, but also the sustained attention, because
the task lasts fairly long and it would become harder and harder to not press the space bar
in a streamline of Go trials. Figure. 7.7 illustrates the No-Go error rates across individuals
in pretests and posttests. The No-Go error largely fell to very low level for all individuals
in postests compared to pretests, which was a reasonable change not only because the
effects of familiarization on rules, but also better attention strategy when the participants
had better ad hoc anticipation of how long the task would last. The No-Go error rates
fell from pretests to postests each by 21.1%(std = 0.175) and 28.4% (std = 0.195) on
average for the experimental group and the control group, indicating no improvements on
the sustained attention from intervention for the experimental group.
Figure 7.7: SART: No-Go error rate
7.1.2
summary
Based on all that has been analysed, training through WaatLand is most likely to im-
prove the results in the Deary-Liewald, SART and Stroop tasks, that heavily relies on
50
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:59==
mental flexibility and speed. Pre-post score differences were found to be comparatively
more significant in these tasks for the experimental groups: Deary-Liewald (t = −1.79,
p = 0.09), SART (t = −1.73, p = 0.10) and Stroop (t = −1.78, p = 0.09). The response
time decreased more for the experimental group than the control group in posttests in the
Deary-Liewald task, and in the Stroop task, more individual performance improvement in
the experimental group was discovered. Evidence for improved cognitive flexibility was
also discovered, since there were more significant pre-post differences of ”1-to-4” RT in-
crease in the Deary-Liewald, and fewer switch errors in the Task Switching.
In terms of working memory, no significant differences through training was observed, as
the mean span values for the three tasks remained mostly unchanged for all participants.
No inhibitory control differences were found in the SART task as well, based on the sharp
drop of No-Go errors discovered in both groups.
7.2
Correlation Analysis
The cognitive ability being assessed in this study may not only be a result of the training
program we designed, but also might be under the influence of the external ”third factors”
in the real world. Often, demographic and behavioral factors are contributing factors to
health-related subjects, and this part will therefore display the correlation between some
possible factors related to the test results, supplementing side explanations regarding
human factors in the study, some of which could potentially contribute to the ”unknown
factors” mentioned in the previous section.
The factors being included for correlation analysis are: age, gender, self-evaluated phys-
ical health score, average daily hour of sleep in the past two weeks, average quality of
sleep in the past two weeks, average minutes of exercise per day, self-evaluated emotion
level in the past two weeks, caffeine intake intensity, alcohol intake intensity, and if is a
game player. Complete questions are listed in the Appendix M.
The pretests results could be considered as the baseline prior to any cognitive intervention
and thus revealed their inherent ability level under that exact circumstance. Appendix K
shows the correlation heatmap between all the extended factors except those questions
asking specifically about the training period. The Digit Span task was excluded because
the scores were not distinguishable. The two Corsi tests were included directly using the
longest memory span.
Age was significantly positively correlated with all RT results, especially for the Deary-
Liewald task mentioned in the previous findings, in which two older participants had in
particular higher response time. This task’s RT showed a correlation with age as high
as 0.87. In terms of scores, age also has significantly negative correlation with scores
of the Deary-Liewald (-0.81), and the Corsi forward span (-0.41), indicating participants
of higher ages scored lower in these tests. On the other hand, the scores for the SART,
Stroop, Task Switching and WCS tasks seemed to be not significantly related to age.
The factor ’isGamePlayer’ could be a main contributing factor of the test results. The
correlations between ’isGamePlayer’ and all RT results were significantly negative, among
which the correlation with the Task Switching, WCS and Deary-Liewald and Stroop tasks
were below -0.5; Whereas, the test scores showed different correlations with this factor,
as only Stroop and Task Switching showed negative correlation with ’isGamePlayer’ while
the rest were positive. This finding resonates with a lot of other studies on game-play and
reaction time, where in general game players are found to have better reaction speed.
Gender was assigned a value of 0 to represent females and 1 to represent males. It
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
51
==PAGE:60==
exhibited a positive correlation of 0.47 with the variable ’isGamePlayer,’ indicating that,
among the participants under study, males were more inclined to be game players. Gen-
der was negatively correlated the most with Stroop’s score, the reason for which could
partly be related to the less experience of using keyboards for game play (in this task, it
was required to press four keys respectively with four fingers) among the tested females.
The participants’ self-reported physical health displayed a negative correlation of -0.6 with
’isGamePlayer,’ revealing that non-gamers perceived themselves to have a higher level
of physical health. This could potentially be attributed to gamers spending longer time
sitting and playing games, and meanwhile fewer time on physical exercise. Addition-
ally, all reaction time (RT) results revealed a positive correlation with the perceived health
level, which may also be caused by the similar reason that game players with lower self-
evaluated health score, had faster reaction speed on average than the non-players.
In terms of the correlation between test batteries, the response time results showed clear
positive correlation with one another, as shown the red square region seen in the bottom
right; The test scores, sit on the top left red square region, were positively correlated as
well, but in less significance.
The Appendix L illustrates the correlation between all possible factors and the pre-post
differences. The differential values were calculated by subtracting pretests results from
posttests results, and then the signs of response time difference were inversed to keep
the positive correlation align with larger improvement, since pre-post response time de-
creases as improvement is made. The lower triangle displays the correlation of experi-
mental group, and the upper triangle displays the correlation of the control group. The
ones on the diagonal is set to blank for better visualization. The age factor negatively
contributed to the score improvements in the 2-Back (-0.47), SART task (-0.4), but signif-
icantly positive with that of the Stroop task (0.87) for the experimental group; While in the
control group, the correlation between age with the first two tasks’ score improvements
were positive and much smaller, and in the Stroop Task the correlation was greatly neg-
ative to be -0.74. The converse correlation in the Stroop task between the two groups
might indicate effective training, especially for older participants.
The ’isGamePlayer’ variable had significantly negative correlation with the all task score
improvements within the experimental group, except for the Stroop (0.42). In contrast, in
the control group the correlations were much less significant to be around -0.2 to 0.25,
except for the strong negative correlation with the Deary-Liewald task (-0.94) and positive
correlation with the Stroop task (0.70). The stronger negative correlation in the experi-
mental group for the Deary-Liewald task compared to the control group implies greater
training benefits for non gamers, while for the Stroop task, gamers in general showed
more improvements (both group had positive correlation), but the training received by
the experimental group seemed not to prompt greater improvements among gamers, as
the correlation is smaller than control group. Regarding RT differences, the gamers made
overall smaller improvements in task RTs in the control group than the experimental group,
as many RT improvements were negatively correlated with ’isGamerPlayer’, indicating
less effects the familiarization process were made on RT for game players. The possible
reason for this could be higher proficiency among gamers to quickly respond to stimuli.
Training on the experimental group, on the other hand, might have countered this intrinsic
discrepancy by making game players even improve more, although this increase is mostly
very modest in scale (correlation between 0.02-0.12), and the greatest intervention effect
was observed in the SART task, where game players displayed a strong positive correla-
tion (0.63) with RT improvements, whereas gamers in the control group naturally exhibited
a negative correlation with greater improvements.
52
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:61==
In terms of the lifestyle factors, the self-evaluated health level, average sleep hours and
self-evaluated sleep quality all greatly contributed to the score improvements in the exper-
imental group, while the these correlations were much weaker in the control group; The
average exercise time per day unexpectedly exhibited negative correlation with score
improvements in the experimental group, while in the control group it revealed more posi-
tive correlation with score improvements. The correlation in the experimental group, once
again might be the consequence of those game players being less involved with physical
activity, and the small space of improvements of taking less exercises was actually the
negative effects of being game players. Another interesting fact was that the caffeine
and alcohol intake contributed conversely towards test score improvements between two
groups. The intake were mostly negatively correlated with the improvements within the
experimental group, while much positively correlated within the control group.
The key findings in the factorial analysis once more stressed the importance of considering
the game play habits of participants when designing and carrying out cognitive training.
For gamers who are usually more accustomed to fast response, the baseline performance
and the amount of training benefits are not the same as non-gamers.
7.2.1
Game Log Analysis
The experimental group were asked in addition to give scores on the game difficulty and
enjoyment. Figure 7.8 plots the mean enjoyment scores against mean difficulty scores,
including 4 mini-games and overall game experience. The distribution was roughly fitted
to a straight line, where higher difficulty arouses lower enjoyment. The Catnip Hunting
game was rated to be the most difficult one, with an average difficulty scoring to be 7.9,
and its enjoyment score received was the lowest, at 6.7 on average. The Tarot game had
a mean difficulty-enjoyment score (6.2,6.9), and the Flower-Stroop to be (5.5,8.3), and
the Catch&Throw to be (3.0,8.2). The overall difficulty-enjoyment score for the game is
(5.5,7.8). Although it is not our goal to design a game that provides maximum enjoyment
with lightest efforts, it is worth noticing that the difficulty and fun in the Flower-Stroop and
the Tarot game appeared to be more properly designed than the other two.
Figure 7.8: Enjoyment against difficulty
The total number of each game played during the training session wasn’t identical across
participants. Participant #3 and #7 played for the highest number of times, each 13 times,
while participant #9 played for the lowest number of times, only 7 times during the 12
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7.9: Number of times each level is played
Game
Level
0
1
2
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
Catch Throw
4.4
0.52
4.2
1.03
2.71
0.95
Catnip Hunting
1.9
0.31
2.0
0.94
6.6
1.78
Flower-Stroop
3.2
0.63
1.83
0.75
5.8
1.93
Tarot
3.8
0.92
3.2
0.63
4.25
1.28
Table 7.3
days. The leveling up threshold was originally designed for roughly 3 days in each level,
but the real data didn’t perfectly follow the expected pattern, as in Figure 7.9. The level
progress seemed to be more even in the Catch&Throw game and the Tarot game, while
in the other two games, the level 1 period was fleeting, and some even were able to enter
level 2 without actually experiencing level 1. Many participants spent more than half of the
training days playing the most difficult Catnip Hunting level 2, and they have expressed
frustration for getting 0 scores for this task everyday.
In the end, the mean correct rate of each level for all participants is concluded and illus-
trated in Figure 7.10. The results were aligned with the previous difficulty scores, that the
Catch&Throw game remains a correct rate over 90% through all levels, but the Catnip
Hunting game saw correct rate falling to only 20% for level 2. The difficulty of level 1 is
properly designed, so that 3 of the 4 games showed mean correct rate between 60% to
80%, and this could guarantee a sufficient sense of achievement, while providing proper
training. It is also interest that correct rate actually increased from level 1 to level 2 for
the Tarot game and the Flower Stroop game, implying possible ability improvements has
gained, so the player was able to adapt to a more difficult task fluently.
54
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:63==
Figure 7.10: Mean correct rate in each level
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
55
==PAGE:64==
56
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:65==
8
Discussion
Previous study results show the efficacy of the cognitive training game in improving the
mental flexibility and reaction speed related tasks, judging from the greater average pre-
post difference. The intervention effects were found to vary between gamers and non-
gamers, which might be more effective among gamers in the Stroop task. However, there
are still limitations in terms of the study results and the game implementation, which are
discussed in this chapter as well as the potential prospects for the future work.
8.1
Study Limitations
In spite of the effectiveness indicated by the study data, the analytical methods used were
not the typical statistical techniques found in rigorous medical research, and the study’s
design fell short of the well-recognized ”gold-standard” of a double-blinded randomized
controlled trial (RCT) [24]. As a result, the calculated efficacy based on the findings is
facing a degree of uncertainty.
The statistical limitations extend to the bias introduced by the participants’ recruitment.
The total sample size used for analysis is rather small (10 in the experimental group and
9 in the control group), and a biased distribution of ages exists among the participants,
with two of them significantly deviated from the rest. This age deviation also brought a
behavioral bias while using the game and taking cognitive tests, leading to greater difficulty
in harnessing game controls and understanding the rules of cognitive test. A similar bias
may also exist between gamers and non-gamers, as game controls could seem more
unfamiliar to those with fewer gaming experience. Additionally, the study was constrained
in user profiles, as the game could only run on Android or Android-like systems. This
limitation excluded IOS users and resulted in a reduced number of participants for both
usability tests and the study, and the absence of feedback from iOS users accustomed to
different usability features.
Due to practical limitations, the duration of intervention in the study was restricted, which
therefore weakened the strength of the evidence of efficacy. Studies regarding the ”long-
term” efficacy of cognitive training typically span multiple years and involve significantly
larger amount of user. Moreover, the cognitive tests used in the study were compromised
in their reachable domains, in contrast to other commercially versions sold at higher price.
8.2
Technical Limitations
The game WaatLand is currently built for Android systems exclusively, and thus fail to
reach a broader range of user groups. The game itself was not optimized for non-functional
features, for example, the game was not able to enforce landscape mode, causing some
players felt lost during the first time launching the game. The game did not undergo op-
timization of battery management, and therefore the battery decrease was pretty fast,
especially for older phones. Reports of phone overheating after running the games for a
few minutes were also received from some participants, and whether it’s a device spe-
cific problem is still unknown. Additionally, some participants using Harmony OS, an
Android-like operating system deployed on Huawei-branded mobile phones, experienced
unexpected black screens and difficulty exiting the game during their first play-through.
However, we did not encounter such occurrence during software testing on Android sys-
tem. All of these problems would require further investigation.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
57
==PAGE:66==
8.3
Future Work
As only chapter 0 of WaatLand was completed and tested in the thesis, future work is
needed to incorporate additional features to offer a comprehensive interactive experience.
For example, the cutscenes in the hook part would offer players a more engaging and
intuitive game introduction, while the integration of HumanLang system could potentially
provide elevated motivation and support long-term training to the players.
Furthermore, the concerns highlighted in the long-term usage study could be addressed
by an improved gaming experience. An example is the control system, where some par-
ticipants noted its inadequacy in accurately responding to touch inputs. We also noticed
the feedback regarding troubles in locating NPCs, especially the flower girl. This may
require our revision of how the NPCs are distributed in the game.
Regarding cognitive training research for individuals with normal cognitive function, the
utilization of a form of role-playing game holds the potential to offer a more enjoyable user
experience, when compared to conventional training methods, thereby enhancing efficacy
and facilitating long-term engagement. However, this requires comprehensive investiga-
tion within a larger study group over longer period of experimental time, to conclude with
strong evidence of the efficacy.
When designing such studies or products, age and gaming habits should come into con-
sideration as major contributing factors, maing a clear distinction among groups due to
the considerable cognitive and behavioral variations between older adults and young in-
dividuals, or gamers and non-gamers. Moreover, it is essential to conduct comparative
studies that assess the benefits from these training games against other forms of training
–such as physical training and traditional action games – to elucidate the advantages and
disadvantages of the training game among other factors in real world that could potentially
cause the changes in cognitive ability.
58
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:67==
9
Conclusion
Cognitive ability performs a crucial in daily life of human. An interventions training could
be helpful for maintaining the cognition performance on a high level.
The thesis project tries to discover an effective method to organically combine the inde-
pendent cognitive training items and gamified elements into one holistic mobile applica-
tion, which provides the users with a complete game structure.
We began the game ideation with classic user experience (UX) design methods such as
depicting users’ personas and user-story map, and organizing a workshop whose results
greatly inspired us during the later interactive design phase.
A large scope was portrayed to support our vision of the cognition-training game, Waat-
Land, with a full set of gamified elements potentially attracting the players in favor of
exploring and achieving. To catch up with the trend, ChatGPT was involved in the fast
generation of non-player character and dialogue.
We implemented the core game mechanisms within the reach of the thesis, with the uti-
lization of the popular game engine Unity and some powerful game development assets
available on the market. A usability test was carried out to improve the UX of the product
by hearing from target users, and we went through a subsequent iteration process based
on the valuable feedback.
The long-term efficacy of the gamified product was pending to be validated in this phase,
due to which we held a study comparing the experimental group who used the product
for 12 days with the passive control group who received no cognitive training during the
period. The study included nine selected cognitive test batteries for both pretests and
posttest. A significant distinction between two groups was found in tasks involving cog-
nitive flexibility and response time, such as Deary-Liewald task, SART task and Stroop
task. It is worth noting that age and gaming habits might influence the benefits received
from the training, and therefore requiring further examination and discussion.
In conclusion, this research project resulted in the realization of a gamified cognition-
training product through a closed product development loop including UX design, game
design, technical implementation, study conduct and result analysis. We hope the re-
search successfully demonstrates one of many possibilities to motivate people caring
about their own cognition performance in the long run.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
59
==PAGE:68==
60
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Robert J. Sternberg and Karin Sternberg. Cognitive Psychology, 6th Edition. 2012.
[2]
Yang Liu et al. “Antecedents of construction workers’ safety cognition: A systematic
review”. In: Safety Science 157 (2023), p. 105923. ISSN: 0925-7535. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2022.105923. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0925753522002624.
[3]
Kaarin J. Anstey et al. “Cognitive, sensory and physical factors enabling driving
safety in older adults”. In: Clinical Psychology Review 25.1 (2005), pp. 45–65. ISSN:
0272-7358. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2004.07.008. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272735804001345.
[4]
Michael Ford and Bryan Wiggins. “Occupational-Level Interactions Between Phys-
ical Hazards and Cognitive Ability and Skill Requirements in Predicting Injury Inci-
dence Rates”. In: Journal of occupational health psychology 17 (May 2012), pp. 268–
78. DOI: 10.1037/a0028143.
[5]
Teimour Allahyari et al. “Occupational Cognitive Failures and Safety Performance
in the Workplace”. In: International Journal of Occupational Safety and Ergonomics
20.1 (2014). PMID: 24629879, pp. 175–180. DOI: 10.1080/10803548.2014.11077037.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/10803548.2014.11077037. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1080/10803548.2014.11077037.
[6]
David Kaber et al. “The effect of driver cognitive abilities and distractions on sit-
uation awareness and performance under hazard conditions”. In: Transportation
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 42 (2016), pp. 177–194. ISSN:
1369-8478. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2016.07.014. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369847816302017.
[7]
Louise Kerruish et al. “Exploring the sustained and divided attention of novice versus
experienced drivers”. In: Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 16
(2022), p. 100702. ISSN: 2590-1982. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2022.
100702. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590198222001622.
[8]
C.M. Jantien Vrijmoet-Wiersma et al. “Health-related quality of life, cognitive func-
tioning and behaviour problems in children with Langerhans cell histiocytosis”. In:
Pediatric Blood & Cancer 52.1 (2009), pp. 116–122. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
pbc.21740. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/pbc.21740. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pbc.21740.
[9]
T. Kaller et al. “Cognitive abilities, behaviour and quality of life in children after liver
transplantation”. In: Pediatric Transplantation 14.4 (2010), pp. 496–503. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3046.2009.01257.x. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1399-3046.2009.01257.x. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1111/j.1399-3046.2009.01257.x.
[10]
Maira Rozenfeld Olchik et al. “The impact of cognitive performance on quality of life
in individuals with Parkinson’s disease”. In: Dementia Neuropsychologia 10 (Dec.
2016), pp. 303–309. DOI: 10.1590/s1980-5764-2016dn1004008.
[11]
Cognitive Training Data Response Letter. 2014. URL: https://www.cognitivetrainingdata.
org/the-controversy-does-brain-training-work/response-letter/.
[12]
Joaquin A Anguera and Adam Gazzaley. “Video games, cognitive exercises, and
the enhancement of cognitive abilities”. In: Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences
4 (2015). Cognitive enhancement, pp. 160–165. ISSN: 2352-1546. DOI: https://
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
61
==PAGE:70==
doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2015.06.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2352154615000807.
[13]
Sebastian Deterding et al. “From Game Design Elements to Gamefulness: Defin-
ing ”Gamification””. In: MindTrek ’11. Tampere, Finland: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2011, pp. 9–15. ISBN: 9781450308168. DOI: 10.1145/2181037.2181040.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2181037.2181040.
[14]
Juho Hamari, Jonna Koivisto, and Harri Sarsa. “Does Gamification Work? – A Liter-
ature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamification”. In: 2014 47th Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on System Sciences. 2014, pp. 3025–3034. DOI: 10.1109/HICSS.
2014.377.
[15]
Zeynep Turan et al. “Gamification and Education: Achievements, Cognitive Loads,
and Views of Students”. In: Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn. 11 (2016), pp. 64–69.
URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:30884708.
[16]
Executive Summary: Infographic on the Digital Brain Health Market 2012–2020.
URL: https://sharpbrains.com/executive-summary.
[17]
Nash Unsworth et al. “Is Playing Video Games Related to Cognitive Abilities?” In:
Psychological Science 26.6 (2015). PMID: 25896420, pp. 759–774. DOI: 10.1177/
0956797615570367. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797615570367. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0956797615570367.
[18]
URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/design-thinking#:~:text=
Design%20thinking%20is%20a%20non,solutions%20to%20prototype%20and%20test..
[19]
John B. Carroll. Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies.
Cambridge University Press, 1993. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511571312.
[20]
Adele Diamond and Daphne S. Ling. “Review of the Evidence on, and Fundamen-
tal Questions About, Efforts to Improve Executive Functions, Including Working
Memory”. In: Cognitive and Working Memory Training: Perspectives from Psychol-
ogy, Neuroscience, and Human Development. Oxford University Press, Dec. 2019.
ISBN: 9780199974467. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199974467.003.0008. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199974467.003.0008.
[21]
What are cognitive abilities and skills, and can we boost them? URL: https : / /
sharpbrains.com/what-are-cognitive-abilities.
[22]
Highly sensitive, precise objective measures of specific cognitive processes. URL:
https://cambridgecognition.com/cognitive-function/.
[23]
What Are The 8 Core Cognitive Skills? URL: https://www.practiceaptitudetests.com/
resources/what-are-the-8-core-cognitive-skills/.
[24]
Daniel J. Simons et al. “Do “Brain-Training” Programs Work?” In: Psychological
Science in the Public Interest 17.3 (2016). PMID: 27697851, pp. 103–186. DOI:
10.1177/1529100616661983. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100616661983.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100616661983.
[25]
Julia Karbach and Paul Verhaeghen. “Making working memory work: A meta-analysis
of executive-control and working memory training in older adults”. In: Psychological
science 25.11 (2014), pp. 2027–2037.
[26]
Monica Melby-Lervåg and Charles Hulme. “Is working memory training effective?
A meta-analytic review.” In: Developmental psychology 49.2 (2013), p. 270.
[27]
Lan Nguyen, Karen Murphy, and Glenda Andrews. “Immediate and long-term effi-
cacy of executive functions cognitive training in older adults: A systematic review
and meta-analysis.” In: Psychological Bulletin 145.7 (2019), p. 698.
[28]
Giovanni Sala et al. “Near and far transfer in cognitive training: A second-order
meta-analysis”. In: Collabra: Psychology 5.1 (2019), p. 18.
62
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:71==
[29]
Matthias Schwaighofer, Frank Fischer, and Markus Bühner. “Does working memory
training transfer? A meta-analysis including training conditions as moderators”. In:
Educational Psychologist 50.2 (2015), pp. 138–166.
[30]
Michael J Kane et al. “The generality of working memory capacity: a latent-variable
approach to verbal and visuospatial memory span and reasoning.” In: Journal of
experimental psychology: General 133.2 (2004), p. 189.
[31]
Peng Peng et al. “A meta-analysis of mathematics and working memory: Moder-
ating effects of working memory domain, type of mathematics skill, and sample
characteristics.” In: Journal of Educational Psychology 108.4 (2016), p. 455.
[32]
Peng Peng et al. “A meta-analysis on the relation between reading and working
memory.” In: Psychological bulletin 144.1 (2018), p. 48.
[33]
Cameron M Clark, Linette Lawlor-Savage, and Vina M Goghari. “Working memory
training in healthy young adults: Support for the null from a randomized comparison
to active and passive control groups”. In: PloS one 12.5 (2017), e0177707.
[34]
Jacky Au et al. “Improving fluid intelligence with training on working memory: a meta-
analysis”. In: Psychonomic bulletin & review 22 (2015), pp. 366–377.
[35]
Jacky Au et al. “There is no convincing evidence that working memory training is
NOT effective: A reply to Melby-Lervåg and Hulme (2015)”. In: Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review 23 (2016), pp. 331–337.
[36]
Anna Soveri et al. “Working memory training revisited: A multi-level meta-analysis
of n-back training studies”. In: Psychonomic bulletin & review 24 (2017), pp. 1077–
1096.
[37]
Monica Melby-Lervåg, Thomas S Redick, and Charles Hulme. “Working memory
training does not improve performance on measures of intelligence or other mea-
sures of “far transfer” evidence from a meta-analytic review”. In: Perspectives on
Psychological Science 11.4 (2016), pp. 512–534.
[38]
Fernand Gobet and Giovanni Sala. “Cognitive training: A field in search of a phe-
nomenon”. In: Perspectives on Psychological Science 18.1 (2023), pp. 125–141.
[39]
John G Gaspar, Mark B Neider, Arthur F Kramer, et al. “Falls risk and simulated
driving performance in older adults”. In: Journal of aging research 2013 (2013).
[40]
P Belchior. “Cognitive training with video games to improve driving skills and driving
safety among older adults”. In: University of Florida (2007), p. 209.
[41]
Bernadette A. Fausto et al. “A systematic review and meta-analysis of older driver
interventions”. In: Accident Analysis Prevention 149 (2021), p. 105852. ISSN: 0001-
4575. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . aap . 2020 . 105852. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0001457520316729.
[42]
Karlene Ball et al. “Cognitive Training Decreases Motor Vehicle Collision Involve-
ment of Older Drivers”. In: Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 58.11 (2010),
pp. 2107–2113. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.03138.x. eprint:
https://agsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1532- 5415.2010.
03138.x. URL: https://agsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2010.03138.x.
[43]
Oleksandra Molloy, Brett R.C. Molesworth, and Ann Williamson. “Which cognitive
training intervention can improve young drivers’ speed management on the road?”
In: Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 60 (2019),
pp. 68–80. ISSN: 1369-8478. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2018.09.025. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369847817303819.
[44]
Yusuke Yamani et al. “Evaluation of the effectiveness of a multi-skill program for
training younger drivers on higher cognitive skills”. In: Applied Ergonomics 52 (2016),
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
63
==PAGE:72==
pp. 135–141. ISSN: 0003-6870. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2015.07.005.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S000368701530034X.
[45]
Alexandra M. Kueider et al. “Computerized Cognitive Training with Older Adults: A
Systematic Review”. In: PLOS ONE 7.7 (July 2012), pp. 1–13. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0040588. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0040588.
[46]
Amit Lampit, Harry Hallock, and Michael Valenzuela. “Computerized Cognitive Train-
ing in Cognitively Healthy Older Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of
Effect Modifiers”. In: PLOS Medicine 11.11 (Nov. 2014), pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pmed.1001756. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001756.
[47]
Amber Tetlow and Jerri Edwards. “Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analysis
of Commercially Available Computerized Cognitive Training Among Older Adults”.
In: Journal of Cognitive Enhancement 1 (Dec. 2017). DOI: 10.1007/s41465-017-
0051-2.
[48]
Hanna M. Gavelin et al. “Computerized cognitive training in Parkinson’s disease:
A systematic review and meta-analysis”. In: Ageing Research Reviews 80 (2022),
p. 101671. ISSN: 1568-1637. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2022.101671. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568163722001131.
[49]
Nicole T.M. Hill et al. “Computerized Cognitive Training in Older Adults With Mild
Cognitive Impairment or Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis”. In:
American Journal of Psychiatry 174.4 (2017). PMID: 27838936, pp. 329–340. DOI:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16030360. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.
16030360. URL: https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16030360.
[50]
Jeffrey N. Motter et al. “Computerized cognitive training and functional recovery in
major depressive disorder: A meta-analysis”. In: Journal of Affective Disorders 189
(2016), pp. 184–191. ISSN: 0165-0327. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2015.09.
022. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165032715308454.
[51]
Karuna Subramaniam et al. “Computerized Cognitive Training Restores Neural Ac-
tivity within the Reality Monitoring Network in Schizophrenia”. In: Neuron 73.4 (2012),
pp. 842–853. ISSN: 0896-6273. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.12.024.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627312000499.
[52]
Kristina K. Hardy, Victoria W. Willard, and Melanie J. Bonner. “Computerized Cog-
nitive Training in Survivors of Childhood Cancer: A Pilot Study”. In: Journal of Pe-
diatric Oncology Nursing 28.1 (2011). PMID: 20966158, pp. 27–33. DOI: 10.1177/
1043454210377178. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/1043454210377178. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1177/1043454210377178.
[53]
Ju-Young Ha and Hyo-Jin Park. “Effects of mobile-based cognitive interventions
for the cognitive function in the community-dwelling older adults: A systematic re-
view and meta-analysis”. In: Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics 104 (2023),
p. 104829. ISSN: 0167-4943. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.archger.2022.104829.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167494322002163.
[54]
Mohamed El-Badramany et al. “The influence of cognitive training using mobile ap-
plications on attentional control and impulsivity among pre-service teachers”. In:
Contemporary Educational Technology 15 (July 2023), ep440. DOI: 10 . 30935 /
cedtech/13334.
[55]
Karl Friedrich Kowalewski et al. “Validation of the mobile serious game application
Touch Surgery™for cognitive training and assessment of laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy”. In: Surgical Endoscopy 31 (2017), pp. 4058–4066. URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10538805.
[56]
Robert A. Cortes, Adam B. Weinberger, and Adam E. Green. “The Mental Models
Training App: Enhancing verbal reasoning through a cognitive training mobile ap-
64
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:73==
plication”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 14 (2023). ISSN: 1664-1078. DOI: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2023.1150210. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.
1150210.
[57]
Pier Prins et al. “Does Computerized Working Memory Training with Game Ele-
ments Enhance Motivation and Training Efficacy in Children with ADHD?” In: Cy-
berpsychology, behavior and social networking 14 (Mar. 2011), pp. 115–22. DOI:
10.1089/cyber.2009.0206.
[58]
Benjamin Katz et al. “Differential effect of motivational features on training improve-
ments in school-based cognitive training”. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8
(2014). ISSN: 1662-5161. DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00242. URL: https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00242.
[59]
en. URL: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/user-story-mapping/.
[60]
Richard Bartle. “Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit MUDs”. In:
(June 1996).
[61]
Scott Rogers. Level Up! The Guide to Great Video Game Design. 2nd. Wiley Pub-
lishing, 2014. ISBN: 1118877160.
[62]
Jesse Schell. The Art of Game Design: A Book of Lenses. 2nd. USA: A. K. Peters,
Ltd., 2014. ISBN: 1466598646.
[63]
Tracy Fullerton. Game design workshop: A playcentric approach to creating inno-
vative games, fourth edition. 4th ed. London, England: CRC Press, 2018. ISBN:
9781138098800.
[64]
William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler. Universal principles of design: 125
Ways to enhance usability, influence perception, increase appeal, make better de-
sign decisions, and teach through design. en. 2nd ed. Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2010.
ISBN: 9781592535873.
[65]
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. Harper &
Row, 1990. ISBN: 0060162538. URL: https://www.amazon.com/Flow-Psychology-
Experience-Mihaly-Csikszentmihalyi/dp/0060162538?SubscriptionId=AKIAIOBINVZYXZQZ2U3A&
tag=chimbori05-20&linkCode=xm2&camp=2025&creative=165953&creativeASIN=
0060162538.
[66]
Raph Koster. Theory of Fun for Game Design. 2nd. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2013. ISBN:
1449363210.
[67]
Erich Gamma et al. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Soft-
ware. USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1995. ISBN: 0201633612.
[68]
Ian J. Deary, David Liewald, and Jack Nissan. “A free, easy-to-use, computer-based
simple and four-choice reaction time programme: The Deary-Liewald reaction time
task”. English. In: Behavior Research Methods 43.1 (Mar. 2011), pp. 258–268.
ISSN: 1554-3528. DOI: 10.3758/s13428-010-0024-1.
[69]
en. URL: https://www.psytoolkit.org/experiment-library/stroop.html.
[70]
en. URL: https://www.psytoolkit.org/experiment-library/taskswitching.html.
[71]
en. URL: https://www.psytoolkit.org/experiment-library/wcst.html.
[72]
Brandon Ralph et al. “Media multitasking and behavioral measures of sustained
attention”. In: Attention, perception psychophysics 77 (Oct. 2014). DOI: 10.3758/
s13414-014-0771-7.
[73]
Tracy Packiam Alloway and Ross Geoffrey Alloway. “The impact of engagement
with social networking sites (SNSs) on cognitive skills”. In: Computers in Human
Behavior 28.5 (2012), pp. 1748–1754. ISSN: 0747-5632. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.chb.2012.04.015. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0747563212001197.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
65
==PAGE:74==
66
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:75==
A
Distribution of Contributions
This chapter introduces the individual contribution of Sixian ZUO and Kewei DU. Please
refer to Table A.1 for detailed distribution of contributions. In general, Sixian focused more
on researching, designing study and data analysis, while Kewei focused more on game
design and development.
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
67
==PAGE:76==
Sixian ZUO
Kewei DU
Empirical Work
Game ideation and design
x
x
Game development in Unity
- Cognitive mini-game
x
x
- Architecture design and implementation
x
Usability test design and conduct
x
Study design and conduct
x
Data analysis
x
Thesis Writing
Chapter 1, Introduction
x
x
Chapter 2, Related Work
x
Chapter 3, Game Ideation
x
x
Chapter 4, Interactive Design
x
x
Chapter 5, Technical Implementation
x
Chapter 6, Study
x
x
Chapter 7, Results
x
x
Chapter 8, Discussion
x
x
Chapter 9, Conclusion
x
x
Appendices
x
x
Table A.1: Distribution of Contributions
68
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:77==
B
Acronyms
NPC, Non-player Character
PC, Player Character
RPG, Role-playing Game
FPD, First-person Shooting
Rt, Response Time
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
69
==PAGE:78==
C
Gameplay Demo Video
Here is a link to our game demo video: https://vimeo.com/manage/videos/853761712
70
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:79==
D
Low-fidelity Prototype
Figure D.1: Sketches of game - the first prototype
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
71
==PAGE:80==
E
Game Mechanisms Brainstorming Results
Figure E.1: Sketches of game - the first prototype
72
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:81==
F
Usability Test Comments
Figure F.1: The comments received from participants
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
73
==PAGE:82==
G
PseudoMonoBehavior Class
MonoBehaviour does provide a certain level of support to arrange execution order when
dependencies are present. An instance is that the Awake() method consistently executes
prior to the Start() method. Nonetheless, MonoBehaviour does not define the order of
execution for the same life cycle method across distinct scripts. Consider a scenario
where script A and script B both have an Update() method for execution. Unfortunately,
it is uncertain as to which of these two Update() methods will run first.
The absence of specification on execution order raises a concern regarding inter-dependencies
among scripts - what if one Update() method relies on another?
Employing [Execu-
tionOrder()] attribute could mitigate this issue by assigning a numeric value to each script,
to explicitly indicate the execution order. However, with the fast growing of the number
of scripts in a project, it becomes increasingly common to lose track of the order indices
midway through development. Consequently, debugging and maintenance during the
scaling-up phase become challenging and time-consuming.
Our approach involves creating a class named PseudoMonoBehaviour, a derivation of
MonoBehaviour, following the Composite pattern discussed in [67]. Behaving both as a
MonoBehaviour and a tree structure, PseudoMonoBehaviour collects references to Pseu-
doMonoBehaviour components from itself and child GameObjects within the Awake()
method using a recursive approach. These references are subsequently stored in an
array. Unity offers a method for sequentially searching the components in child GameOb-
jects based on their order in the hierarchy. This allows us to adjust the order of child
objects in the hierarchy to determine the sequence of PseudoMonoBehaviour elements
within the array.
Next, we replace the conventional life cycle methods in MonoBehaviour with correspond-
ing pseudo-life cycle methods. As an illustration, the Start() method is swapped for the
PseudoStart() method. The PseudoStart() method iteratively triggers the PseudoStart()
methods of PseudoMonoBehaviour components stored in the array in a predetermined
sequence. This approach enables us to manually control over the timing and sequence
of execution for each PseudoMonoBehaviour element.
This method can also be changed to allow user manually set the execution order by expos-
ing the array in the editor, instead of delegating the task to scripting API. Of course, more
human labor is expected, but it also provides a higher accuracy to control the execution
order.
74
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:83==
H
Assets in Project
Our most sincere courtesy to the authors of the following Unity assets:
• Dialogue System for Unity
• Quest Machine
• A* Pathfinding Project
• Text Animator
• Rewired
• UniStorm Weather System
• Easy Save 3
• Animancer
• RPG Cameras & Controllers
• POLYGON Adventure - Low Poly 3D Art by Synty
• POLYGON Icons Pack - Low Poly 3D Art by Synty
• Low Poly Animated People
• Low Poly Animated Animals
• Ultimate Clean GUI Pack
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
75
==PAGE:84==
I
Psytoolkit Test Screeshots
Figure I.1: 2-Back
Figure I.2: Corsi
76
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:85==
Figure I.3: Deary-Liewald
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure I.4: Digit Span
Figure I.5: SART
78
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:87==
Figure I.6: Stroop
Figure I.7: Task Switching
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure I.8: Wiscosin Card Sorting
80
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:89==
J
Individual Pre-Post Changes Plotting
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure J.1
82
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:91==
K
Correlation: Baseline
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
83
==PAGE:92==
L
Correlation: Pre-Post Differences
84
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:93==
M
Post-survey questions
• What is your age?
• What is your gender?
• Please give a self-evaluated score on your physical health from 1 to 10, where 10
indicates the most healthy state.
• What is the average hours of sleep per night you had for the past two weeks?
• What is the overall sleep quality (1 to 10) you had for the past two weeks?
• What is the average minutes of exercising you had per day for the past two weeks?
• What is the overall emotion level (1 to 10, where 10 is the happiest state) you had
for the past two weeks?
• Please self-evaluate your intensity of drinking coffee/tea from 0 to 5.
• Please self-evaluate your intensity of drinking alcohol from 0 to 5.
• Are you using using similar training products?
• Are a game player?If yes, what type of game do you usually play? If yes, what is
the average daily time you spend on playing games?
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
85
==PAGE:94==
N
SUS
User ID
SUS Score
Average SUS Score
1
50
70.71
2
80
3
82.5
4
67.5
5
80
6
55
7
80
86
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
==PAGE:95==
WaatLand: A Cognition Training Game For Healthy People
87
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/
