==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic 
simulation and experiments of vortex 
shedding in elliptical profiles
Xabier Uralde Guinea 
DTU Wind-M-0708
August 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0708 
August 2023
Project period:
March - August 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science 
Supervisor(s):
Martin O. L. Hansen
Robert Fl. Mikkelsen
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Marcos Lombardi
Vestas
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author(s):
Xabier Uralde Guinea
Title:
High Reynolds number unsteady 
aerodynamic simulation and experiments 
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
High Reynolds Number Unsteady Aerodynamic Simulation and Experiments
of Vortex Shedding in Elliptical Profiles
MSc Wind Energy
Master Thesis - Full-report
August, 2023
By
Xabier Uralde Guinea
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind Energy, Nils Koppels Alle, Building 403, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://wind.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Xabier Uralde Guinea - s210724
Signature
Date
ii
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
August 3rd, 2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The present study focuses on investigating the unsteady aerodynamic behaviour of vortex
shedding in 2-D elliptical profiles at high Reynolds numbers through a combination of
numerical simulations and wind tunnel experiments. The goal is to obtain a comprehensive
understanding of the change of the Strouhal number on ellipses through different Reynolds
numbers, angles of attack and aspect ratios.
The research begins with a comprehensive literature review, examining fundamental con-
cepts of unsteady aerodynamics, vortex shedding, turbulence modelling, and the applica-
tion of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and experimental techniques in wind tunnel
measurements.
For the numerical simulations, a structured mesh is used together with an implicit unsteady
k −ω SST turbulence model solver, which are complemented by wind tunnel experiments
with 3D-printed elliptical profiles. Detailed measurements of pressure distributions are
conducted to validate the numerical results.
The results chapter presents a thorough analysis of the flow behaviour around the elliptical
profiles. Visualizations of velocity fields, pressure distributions, vorticity patterns, and
turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) fields reveal the formation and shedding of vortices in
the wake region. Strouhal numbers are calculated from the Power Spectral Density (PSD)
analysis of lift coeﬀicient fluctuations, providing insights into the dominant vortex shedding
frequency.
Furthermore, the research explores the influence of aspect ratio and Reynolds number
on the vortex shedding characteristics. The Strouhal numbers show self-similarity across
various aspect ratios, with variations in shedding frequency attributed to the aspect ratio
and Reynolds number variations.
In the discussion section, the implications of the results on the aerodynamic performance of
the elliptical profiles and their potential applications in wind energy systems are discussed.
Research gaps and potential areas for future investigations are also addressed.
In conclusion, this master thesis provides valuable insights into the unsteady aerodynamics
of vortex shedding in 2-D elliptical profiles at high Reynolds numbers. The combination of
numerical simulations and wind tunnel experiments offers a comprehensive understanding
of the flow behaviour, turbulence characteristics, and vortex shedding phenomena. The
findings contribute to the advancement of knowledge in unsteady aerodynamics and hold
significant implications for practical engineering applications.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Xabier Uralde Guinea, MSc Wind Energy, DTU
I am profoundly grateful to all the people who have supported and encouraged me through-
out my journey in completing this master’s thesis. Their guidance, patience, and uncon-
ditional support have been essential in shaping this research and making it possible. I
would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to:
My first thesis supervisor, Martin Otto Laver Hansen, for his invaluable guidance,
expertise, and knowledge throughout the entire thesis process. His feedback and patience
have been crucial for the direction of this research.
My second thesis supervisor, Robert Flemming Mikkelsen, for all his help, support
and priceless time used to realize all the design and measurements on the wind tunnel and
his feedback which has played a vital role in refining the content and quality of this thesis.
My two close friends, Irene Elejoste Orcajada and Iker Martínez Montoya, for
their constant motivation, love, and joy during this challenging journey. And above all,
for being my family for the time being in Denmark.
I also extend my gratitude to all my colleagues in various courses throughout my mas-
ter’s program, especially to Ishwar Mukesh. Their camaraderie, shared knowledge, and
intellectual discussions have enriched my learning experience and provided a conducive
environment for academic growth.
I would like to express my appreciation to the faculty members and staff at DTU for their
dedication to education and for creating a nurturing academic environment that fosters
learning and research.
Moreover, I would like to thank my former professor Unai Fernández Gámiz for en-
couraging me to take this step in my career, for all the help through this process and for
making me able to have the opportunity to discover Copenhagen.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family for their unconditional love, encour-
agement, and belief in my abilities. Their support and sacrifices have been the foundation
of my academic journey.
This work would not have been possible without the collective effort and encouragement
from everyone mentioned above, and I am truly indebted to each one of them for their
invaluable contributions.
Thank you all for being a part of my academic journey and for enriching my life in ways
beyond words.
iv
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Acronyms
AoA
Angle of Attack
AR
Aspect Ratio
CAD
Computer-Aided Design
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
CFL
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
DES
Detached Eddy Simulations
DOF
Degrees Of Freedom
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
PSD
Power Spectral Density
RANS Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes equations
RSM
Reynolds Stress Model
S-A
Spalart-Allmaras
SST
Shear Stress Transport
TI
Turbulence Intensity
URANS Unsteady Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes equations
VIV
Vortex-Induced Vibrations
Greek Symbol
α
Angle of Attack
ϵ
Turbulent Dissipation Rate
µ
Fluid dynamic viscosity
ν
Kinematic Viscosity
Ω
Frequency of vortex shedding or oscillation
ω
Specific Dissipation Rate
ρ
Fluid density
τw
Wall-Shear Stress
k
Turbulence Kinetic Energy
Symbol
−Cpb
Base Suction Coeﬀicient
∆t
Time-Step
Cd
Average Drag Coeﬀicient
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
v
==PAGE:8==
εD
Drag Coeﬀicient Error
εL
Lift Coeﬀicient Error
εSt
Strouhal Number Error
C
Courant Number
c
Chord
Cc
Cross-wind force coeﬀicient
Cd
Drag Coeﬀicient
Cf
Skin Friction Coeﬀicient
Cl
Lift Coeﬀicient
Cmax
Maximum Courant Number
D
Drag
F
Force
F1
Blending Function
L
Lift
l
Characteristic-length scale of the object
q
Dynamic Pressure
Rij
Reynolds Stress
Re
Reynolds number
St
Strouhal number
Tke
Turbulent Kinetic Energy
U
Free-stream velocity
ux
Flow velocity x direction
uy
Flow velocity y direction
uτ
Friction Velocity
V∞
Flow Velocity
y+
Wall Distance
vi
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Context of the High Reynolds Number Unsteady Aerody-
namic Simulation and Experiments of Vortex Shedding in Elliptical Profiles.
1
1.2
Problem Statement and Research Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Significance and Motivation for the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Overview of the Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Aerodynamic of Elliptical Section - A Review
5
2.1
Vortex Shedding from Cylinders and Elliptical Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Overview of Turbulence Modeling and Turbulence Models used in Vortex
Shedding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Review of Relevant Studies and Research on Vortex Shedding in Elliptical
Profiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Discussion of Previous Numerical and Experimental Investigations in the
Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Investigation of Wind Tunnel Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Identification of Research Gaps and the Rationale for the Study . . . . . . .
21
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Description of the Wind Tunnel Setup and Experimental Procedures . . . .
23
3.2
Explanation of the Numerical Simulation Techniques and Parameters Used
26
3.3
Discussion of the Chosen Elliptical Profile Geometry, Reynolds Number
Range and Angles of Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.4
Explanation of the Data Collection and Analysis Methods Employed . . . .
44
4
Experimental Results and Analysis
49
4.1
Presentation of the Experimental Data on Vortex Shedding in Elliptical
Profiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Analysis of the Ellipses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Numerical Simulation Results and Analysis
57
5.1
Presentation and interpretation of the simulation results for the flow around
elliptical profiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Analysis of the Vortex Shedding Characteristics in the Simulations . . . . .
57
6
Integration and Discussion of Experimental and Simulation Results
87
6.1
Comparison and integration of the experimental and simulation results . . .
87
6.2
Discussion of the Agreement or Discrepancies Between Wind Tunnel Mea-
surements and Numerical Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6.3
Examination of the Insights Gained from the Combined Analysis . . . . . .
93
6.4
Findings for the Understanding of Vortex Shedding in Elliptical Profiles . .
93
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
vii
==PAGE:10==
6.5
Comparison of Shedding-Frequencies with Wind Turbine Blade Data . . . .
94
7
Discussion and Interpretation of Results
95
7.1
Evaluation of the research objectives and how they have been addressed . .
95
7.2
Discussion of the implications and potential applications of the findings
. .
95
7.3
Identification of future research directions and recommendations
. . . . . .
96
8
Conclusion
97
8.1
Summary of the Key Findings and Contributions of the Thesis
. . . . . . .
97
8.2
Key Findings and Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
8.3
Limitations and Challenges Encountered During the Study
. . . . . . . . .
97
8.4
Suggestions for Further Research and Potential Practical Applications . . .
98
Bibliography
99
A Appendix
105
A.1 Overview of Turbulence Modeling and Turbulence Models used in Vortex
Shedding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.2 Investigation of Wind Tunnel Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
A.3 3D Printing Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.4 Pressure Distributions and Pressure Coeﬀicients Figures for the Different
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
viii
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Context of the High Reynolds
Number Unsteady Aerodynamic Simulation and
Experiments of Vortex Shedding in Elliptical Profiles.
With an increasing focus towards improving the performance and eﬀiciency of wind turbine
systems, the area of wind energy has made significant advances recently. Understanding
the intricate aerodynamic events that take place during operation, such as vortex shed-
ding, is an essential component of wind turbine design. When a fluid flow passes across
bluff bodies, such as the airfoils employed in wind turbine blades, vortex shedding, a
fundamental phenomenon, may take place. The performance and structural integrity of
wind turbines may be impacted by these shedding vortices’ introduction of unstable aero-
dynamic forces. Therefore, for the purpose of building more eﬀicient and reliable wind
energy systems, a full understanding of vortex shedding is essential. The current study is
a suggestion from VESTAS [1] for the PRESTIGE project [2], looking into the stability
of wind turbines in various aspects.
1.2
Problem Statement and Research Objectives
Vortex shedding has been deeply studied in the context of wind energy for a variety of air-
foil geometries, especially concentrating on symmetric and asymmetric profiles. The study
of vortex shedding in elliptical shapes, however, has received considerably less attention
in the literature. Due to its ability to resemble airfoils, the study on elliptical profiles
has grown in popularity in recent years. Because of this, researching the unstable aerody-
namics of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles at high Reynolds numbers might provide
light on how they function and suggest potential uses for them in wind turbine design,
and state more in-depth if the instabilities on wind turbines are caused by vortex-induced
vibrations. Therefore, the main focus of the present project is to map the value of the
Strouhal number through different ellipses with different aspect ratios, inflows with dif-
ferent Reynolds numbers and angles of attack. Furthermore, cross-checking the obtained
numerical results from the CFD simulations with experimental results is one of the goals of
the research objectives. Experimental results are made on the Red Wind Tunnel provided
by DTU for that purpose. All in all, the main research question that serves as the starting
point of this study is: ”How does the Strouhal number vary on ellipses through different
aspect ratios, Reynolds numbers and angles of attack?”. And the objectives can be split
into the following ones:
• Obtain numerical results for computational fluid dynamics simulations for the dif-
ferent case scenarios stated before.
• Obtain experimental measurements of ellipses in a wind tunnel.
• Cross-check the numerical results obtained with the experimental measurements to
ensure the reliability of the numerical results.
• Compared obtained data with data from previous studies.
• Conclude if the vortex-induced vibrations on ellipses can be a major problem for
instabilities on wind turbines.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
1
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Significance and Motivation for the Study
As stated before, the investigation on the high Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic
characteristics of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles, with a specific focus on under-
standing the frequency, plays a major role in implications for wind energy applications.
Moreover, the investigation on vortex shedding in elliptical profiles holds significant im-
portance and motivation due to its potential to improve, even slightly, the field of wind
energy and contribute to a sustainable and greener future for all populations worldwide.
The pressing global challenges of rising energy prices, climate change, and energy crises
necessitate advancements in wind turbine technology for increased eﬀiciency and larger-
scale deployment. The study of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles can play a pivotal
role in addressing these challenges and realizing the potential of wind energy as a key
renewable resource. A wide range of examples is key to understanding the motivation
behind the interest in increasing wind energy eﬀiciency:
• Increasing Eﬀiciency and Size of Wind Turbines: Understanding the unsteady aero-
dynamic behaviour of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles can offer valuable com-
prehension into optimizing wind turbine designs. By understanding vortex shedding
phenomena, more eﬀicient wind turbines capable of generating higher energy out-
puts with reduced energy losses can be designed. Larger and more powerful wind
turbines will contribute to increased energy production and a more cost-effective
renewable energy solution.
• Lowering Energy Costs for All: The cost of producing wind energy can be signifi-
cantly reduced with the use of larger, more effective wind turbines. Wind power will
open up prospects for affordable and sustainable energy solutions as it becomes more
competitive with conventional energy sources. This will be advantageous for people,
businesses, and economies all around the world. Consumer financial pressures will
be reduced by lower energy costs, which will also advance the economy as a whole.
• Addressing Global Warming and Climate Change: In order to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, slow down global warming, and battle climate change, wind energy
is essential. Wind turbine eﬀiciency can be improved by increasing our understand-
ing of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles, which would promote the adoption of
renewable energy sources and decrease dependency on fossil fuels. As a result, both
present and future generations will benefit from a cleaner and healthier environment.
• Tackling the Global Energy Crisis: The creation of eﬀicient and dependable renew-
able energy sources is essential while the entire world experiences an energy crisis
due to a shortage of fossil fuel supplies. Utilizing the vortex shedding capability in
elliptical profiles can help diversify the energy mix and lessen reliance on limited
fossil fuel supplies. This will improve global energy stability and security.
The study of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles, in summary, gives enormous significance
and inspiration for developing wind energy technologies. The potential to increase the size
and eﬀiciency of wind turbines has significant implications for managing energy issues,
promoting sustainability, and preventing climate change.
Although the results of this
study may not be conclusive, the way for a greener and more sustainable future in which
wind energy becomes a key component of the world’s energy system is closely related to
the investigation, providing advantages to all people and fostering a world that is cleaner
and more resilient.
2
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:13==
1.4
Overview of the Thesis Structure
The remainder of this thesis is structured as follows:
Chapter 2 provides a comprehensive review of the relevant literature on unsteady aero-
dynamics, vortex shedding, and studies related to elliptical profiles. Also, a review of
turbulence modeling and turbulence models is given together with the identification of
research gaps and the rationale for the study.
Chapter 3 presents the methodology employed in this research, including a description
of the wind tunnel setup, an explanation of the numerical simulation techniques and
parameters used, a discussion of the chosen elliptical profile geometry, Reynolds number
range and angles of attack and an explanation of the data collection and analysis methods
employed.
Chapter 4 gives the experimental results and analysis of the observed vortex shedding
characteristics.
Chapter 5 presents the numerical simulation results and their analysis.
Chapter 6 integrates and discusses the findings from both experimental and numerical
approaches.
Chapter 7 offers a broader discussion and interpretation of the results, emphasizing their
implications for wind energy applications.
Chapter 8 lastly concludes the thesis by summarizing the key findings, highlighting the
contributions of the study, and suggesting avenues for future research.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
3
==PAGE:14==
4
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:15==
2
Aerodynamic of Elliptical Section - A
Review
To have a comprehensive overview of the existing understanding and research that is
relevant to high Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments of
vortex shedding in elliptical profiles, the following section aims to explore and summarize
the main findings, methodologies, and theoretical backgrounds needed before the present
study.
2.1
Vortex Shedding from Cylinders and Elliptical Shapes
To improve the design and performance of wind turbines, a deep understanding of the
complex aerodynamic phenomena is mandatory. Vortex shedding, in particular, is a phe-
nomenon that arises when a fluid flow passes around an object, such as a bluff body,
resulting in the formation of alternating vortices in the wake of the object. This alter-
nating vortices are shed from each side of the object at a specific frequency. The vortices
induce unsteady aerodynamic forces, leading to vortex-induced vibrations (VIV) that in-
fluence the structure and performance of wind turbines. From this point forward, the
term VIV will be used interchangeably with ”Vortex-Induced Vibrations” for brevity and
clarity.
The most important parameter influencing the characteristics of the vortex shedding and
the VIV is the so-called Reynolds number (Re). The Reynolds number is the most common
dimensionless number in fluid mechanics [3]. It is defined as the ratio between the inertia
forces and the viscous forces in a flow and is defined as follows:
Re = Reynolds number ≡inertia force
viscous force = ρUl
µ
(2.1)
Where ρ, U, l and µ are the fluid density, free-stream velocity, characteristic length scale
of the object and dynamic viscosity of the fluid respectively. Depending on the Reynolds
number, the flow is going to be defined by different regimes. Starting from a laminar flow
at low Reynolds number (parallel flow layers), the higher the Reynolds number the more
turbulent the flow becomes, and the laminar flow starts to break into small vortices.
The second most important parameter related to VIV is the Strouhal number (St). The
Strouhal number is also a dimensionless coeﬀicient that expresses the importance of un-
steady fluid acceleration in flows with oscillations, describing the frequency of vortex
shedding to the velocity and characteristic length scale of the flow. It is defined as follows:
St = Strouhal number ≡unsteady acceleration
advective acceleration = Ωl
U
(2.2)
Where Ω, l and U are the frequency of vortex shedding or oscillation, the characteristic
length scale of the object and the free-stream velocity.
The different flow regimes at a circular cylinder for an incompressible flow can be seen in
Figure 2.1. There is a correlation between the Reynolds number and the Strouhal number;
as the Reynolds number increases, as mentioned earlier, the flow becomes more turbulent,
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
5
==PAGE:16==
and following this increase it is observed that the Strouhal number follows a predictable
trend.
Figure 2.1: Flow regimes at a circular cylinder (incompressible flow) [4]
Although the first measurements that allowed the definition of flow regimes based on
velocity fluctuation, spectra, and frequency were studied by Roshko (1954) [5]; a more
precise definition of the flow regimes was given by Williamson (1996) [6].
Williamson
defined the following regimes that are represented in the Figure 2.2:
• Regime up to A: Laminar Steady Regime (Re < 49) For Re below around
49, the wake is based on two symmetrically placed vortices on each side. The length
of both vortices grows as the Reynolds number increases.
• Regime A-B: Laminar Vortex Shedding Regime (Re = 49 to 140-194)
Instabilities are developed in the recirculation region, that increase the strength and
amplitude with Re.
• Regime B-C: 3-D Wake-Transition Regime (Re ≃190 to 260) The Strouhal
number varies as the Reynolds number is increased by the influence of two discon-
tinuities. These discontinuities will not be discussed as they are irrelevant to the
present study.
• Regime C-D: Increasing Disorder in the Fine-Scale Three Dimensional-
ities Regime (Re ≃260 to 1,000) At Re = 260, a peak in Reynolds stresses
emerge. As Re is increased towards point D, a reduction in the two-dimensional
Reynolds stresses appears.
• Regime D-E: Shear-Layer Transition Regime (Re = 1,000 to 200,000) This
regime is characterized by the 2-D Reynolds stress level increase, the gradual de-
crease of the Strouhal number and the decrease of the formation length of the mean
recirculation region.
6
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:17==
• Regime E-G: Asymmetric Reattachment Regime (or Critical Transition)
Decrease of the base suction and drag.
• Regime G-H: Symmetric Reattachment Regime (or Supercritical Regime)
The flow becomes symmetric with two separation-reattachment bubbles, one on each
side of the body.
• Regime H-J: Boundary-Layer Transition Regime (or Post-Critical Regime)
The turbulent transition is moved further upstream, until at a high enough Re, where
the boundary layer on the surface of the cylinder becomes itself turbulent.
Figure 2.2: Base suction coeﬀicients (−Cpb) over a large range of Reynolds numbers.
Data: ◦, Williamson & Roshko (1990) [7]; △, Norberg (1987) [8]; +, Bearman (1969) [9];
∗, Flaschbart (1932) [10]; ▽, Shih et al (1992) [11]. Curve for steady flow regime (Re < 49
is from steady computations of Henderson (1995) [12]. −Cpb ≡−2(pb −p∞)/ρU 2.
Nonetheless, while vortex shedding in circular cylinders is a very highly researched and
well-known topic, vortex shedding in elliptical cylinders is not such a popular topic. An
approach to vortex shedding in elliptical cylinders can be made as it is the geometry in
between the circular cylinder and the normal flat plate, by defining its aspect ratio (AR).
The aspect ratio is defined as the ratio of the width to the height, or better related to
ellipses, the ratio of the semi-minor to semi-major axis length.
AR = Aspect Ratio ≡Width
Height = Semi-minor axis
Semi-major axis
(2.3)
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: (a) Problem definition. (b) Change of the shape of the ellipse through different
AR as stated in [13].
Therefore, a normal flat plate will be represented with an elliptic cylinder with zero aspect
ratio and the circular cylinder will be represented as a 1 AR elliptic cylinder, as can be seen
in Figure 2.3. A study of the critical Reynolds number and the number variation of the
Strouhal-Reynolds relationship was done by Thompson et al. (2014)[9]. They showed how
the critical Reynolds number is dependent on the AR of the ellipse cylinder; the higher
the AR, the higher the critical Reynolds; and at increasingly smaller Reynolds numbers
and lower the AR, the lower the Strouhal number was. This can be seen in the Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.4: Strouhal number and drag coeﬀicient of various shapes in essentially two-
dimensional flow, at Reynolds numbers > 103 [14].
Moreover, in the book written by S. F. Hoerner (1965) [14] available experimental results of
essentially two-dimensional bodies (cylinders of various shapes) were plotted in Figure 2.4.
Strouhal number and drag coeﬀicient seemed to be coupled with each other in a consistent
manner for the Reynolds numbers under consideration (103 to 106).
As the elliptical
cylinder can be approximated as the middle point between a circular cylinder and a flat
plate, very relevant are the cases of the circular cylinder where the Strouhal number is in
order of 0.19, and of the two-dimensional plate where the Strouhal number is in order of
0.13.
8
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5: Strouhal number variation with Reynolds number from two-dimensional sim-
ulations. Each aspect ratio is corresponded by each curve [13].
In the study done by Thompson, they concluded that the decrease in the aspect ratio
resulted in a substantial increase in the circulation feeding into the wake, leading to the
formation of stronger and larger wakes, at least for small Reynolds numbers.
Regarding the effect of the VIVs on wind turbines, Grinderslev et al. (2022) [15] studied
the effect of vortex-induced vibrations on the IEA 10MW blades. Although the vibrations
of the blades caused by the VIVs did not necessarily relate to structural vibrations, there
were some specific cases where the so-called lock-in phenomenon could take place; where
the frequency of the vortex shedding vibrated at the same frequency as the structural
frequency at which the blade vibrated. This was thought to be a very important topic, as
the structural integrity of the blades; and therefore, the wind turbine, could be threatened
and put at risk. In previous studies conducted by Horcas et al. (2019,2020) [16], [17]
and Heinz et al. (2016) [18] it was found that the risk of VIVs was very dependent on
the pitch and inclination angles of the blades. Moreover, they found that the change of
geometry does affect highly the VIVs, but the alteration of geometries does only move the
risk zones, not reduce them. All in all, the most affected mode shape from the VIVs was
the first edgewise vibration mode. Grinderslev et al. concluded that the VIVs for wind
turbines were still an understudied field and that a broader study of VIVs looking at the
range of inflow angles and velocities, inflow turbulence, and much more was needed.
Finishing the overview of the fundamental concepts of unsteady aerodynamics and vortex
shedding, vortex shedding at high Reynolds numbers is going to be discussed.
As a
preliminary overview of high Reynolds number vortex shedding, the more discussed VIV
on circular cylinders is going to be reviewed. Vortex-induced vibrations at high Reynolds
numbers that range between 104−106 is far more challenging than lower Reynolds numbers
as flow transitions to turbulent or fully turbulent. In the study made by Nguyen et al.
(2016) [19], a comparison between URANS (Unsteady RANS) and DES (Detached Eddy
Simulations) simulations of flow-induced vibrations of circular cylinders at high Reynolds
numbers was done. Regarding the comparison between URANS and DES, they concluded
that the performance of DES compared to the one from URANS was far superior, as it
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
9
==PAGE:20==
predicted more accurate measures of forces, responses, as well as phase differences. This
was caused by the fact that URANS is capable of effectively predicting low-frequency
unsteadiness, but it gave out wrong results when predicting high frequencies.
This is
especially relevant in VIV on circular cylinders due to their intrinsic properties of isotropic
eddy viscosities, homogeneous Reynolds stresses and lack of success to model all eddy
scales. The numerical simulations showed that the increase of Re in the range between
104 −106 led to a change in the formation of wake patterns in VIV responses, and that
higher Re led to more turbulent wakes as expected.
2.1.1
Aerodynamic Forces from Elliptic Sections
For the different profiles used in the wide range of aerodynamic studies, essential aerody-
namic forces associated with the profiles are used. The aerodynamic profiles are usually
long and slender where the spanwise velocity component is much lower than the stream-
wise component. If the flow on a profile is reduced to a two-dimensional plane with a
coordinate system where x-direction is parallel to the flow direction, y-direction is per-
pendicular to the x-direction (pointed upwards), then the z-direction velocity component
is simplified to zero.
The flow impacting the aerodynamic profile generates a reacting force F which can be
decomposed into a direction perpendicular to the velocity at infinity V∞and to a direction
parallel to V∞.
The perpendicular component is denoted the lift, L, and the parallel
component is called the drag, D, as seen in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Definition of lift and drag [20].
Where c is the aerodynamic profile’s chord, M is the momentum generated on the aero-
dynamic profile by the F force and α is the angle between V∞and the chord. Most of the
aerodynamic industries benefit from a high L/D ratio, maximizing the lift to drag allows
to obtain the best ratio between the upwards force against the pull force [20]. Another
qualitative way of describing the lift and drag forces is the lift and drag coeﬀicients, defined
as:
Cl =
l
1
2ρV 2
∞c
(2.4)
10
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:21==
Cd =
d
1
2ρV 2
∞c
(2.5)
Where ρ is the density of the fluid. The unit for the lift and drag is force per length
(N/m), and the coeﬀicients (Cl&Cd) are adimensional. For wind turbines, the lift and
drag are only functions of α and Re. Lastly, it is common practice to compute the lift to
drag coeﬀicient ratio, defined as the division of both coeﬀicients (Cl/Cd).
Particularly, for the case of elliptic airfoils, the chord is related to the semi-major axis
of the ellipse. On the work carried on by Choi and Kwon (2008) [21], the aerodynamic
coeﬀicients of ellipses with diverse thicknesses were computed and compared to those of a
NACA 0012 airfoil, as seen in Figure 2.7.
They showed that the elliptic airfoil had lower lift and comparable drag compared with the
NACA 0012 airfoil below the stall angle of attack. Moreover, the elliptic airfoil suffered a
sudden drag increase at a lower angle of attack than the NACA 0012 airfoil, due to early
stall, resulting in the elliptic airfoil showing inferior lift-to-drag ratio distribution for all
angles of attack considered in the study. All in all, the elliptic airfoil showed a poorer
aerodynamic eﬀiciency.
On the other hand, the effect of airfoil thickness on the aerodynamic force and moment
coeﬀicients showed that as the airfoil thickness increased, the lift coeﬀicient and its slope
were reduced slightly, whereas the drag increased. Furthermore, the stall was delayed up
to a higher angle of attack. This summed up with the lift-to-drag ratio of the elliptic
airfoil becoming worse as the thickness increased, but its maximum value was obtained at
a higher angle of attack.
Another study conducted by Zahm et al.(1928) [22] studied the results of wind tunnel tests
on four elliptic cylinders with various fineness ratios of 2.5, 3.0, 3.5 and 4.0. The results
for the cross-wind coeﬀicient and drag coeﬀicient can be seen in Figure 2.8. The cross-
wind coeﬀicient is related to the lift coeﬀicient by multiplying the cross-wind coeﬀicient
by the frontal area/chord-plane area. The results showed that the cross-wind coeﬀicient
increased positively at negative yaw angles and negatively at positive yaw, as the fineness
ratio was increased from 2.5 to 4.0. For the drag coeﬀicient, they showed that the drag
coeﬀicient was decreased by increasing the fineness ratio at zero yaw, but the difference
was smaller as the yaw increased. Furthermore, after 13o yaw, the greater the fineness
ratio the greater the drag coeﬀicient was.
Lastly, S.F. Hoerner, studied in both his studies in ”Fluid-dynamic lift: Practical in-
formation on aerodynamic and hydrodynamic lift” (1975) [23] and the aforementioned
”Fluid-Dynamic Drag: Theoretical, experimental and statistical information” (1965) [14]
books studied the lift and drag coeﬀicients of elliptical sections. The results can be seen in
Figure 2.9. For the lift coeﬀicient, it was shown that the lift-curve slope increased slightly
as the Reynolds number increased. As Re was reduced below 106, the slope increased; and
it reached values considerably above those of airfoil sections, probably as a consequence
of early laminar separation from the lower side in combination with attached flow around
nose and suction side. For the drag coeﬀicient, it was shown that as the AR of the ellipse
is reduced, the drag coeﬀicient was reduced significantly. However, after the aspect ratio
of 0.33 the drag coeﬀicient for a supercritical Reynolds number approximated a constant
value of ≈0.1. For the subcritical Reynolds number this value approximated ≈0.3.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
11
==PAGE:22==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: (a) Comparison of aerodynamic force and moment coeﬀicients between a
12%-thick elliptic airfoil and a NACA 0012 airfoil at M∞= 0.3 and Re = 3.91 × 106.
(b) Effect of thickness on aerodynamic force and moment coeﬀicients at M∞= 0.3 and
Re = 3.91 × 106 [21].
12
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8: Force coeﬀicients on elliptic cylinders of various fineness ratios. (a) Cross-wind
force coeﬀicient Cc (Absolute). (b) Drag coeﬀicient CD (Absolute) [22].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.9: (a) Lift of elliptical sections at Reynolds numbers as indicated, as a function
of their thickness or rounding ratio [23]. (b) Drag coeﬀicients of elliptical section, a) at
subcritical Re numbers, b) above the critical Re numbers [14].
2.2
Overview of Turbulence Modeling and Turbulence
Models used in Vortex Shedding
The study of fluid dynamics is highly affected by the presence of turbulence, which is a
very complex phenomenon that arises in an almost infinite number of cases and examples
across many disciplines. Turbulence is characterized by its appearance over a large range
of lengths and time scales, its dependency on time, its three-dimensionality and its need
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
13
==PAGE:24==
for high Reynolds numbers to occur [24].
The equations that describe the motion of viscous fluid flows are the well-known Navier-
Stokes equations. Taking into consideration the three-dimensionality and time-dependency
of the Navier-Stokes equations, Reynolds time-averaging is used to decompose the equa-
tions into the sum of mean and fluctuating parts. This averaging of the equations leads
up to the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations. The nonlinear terms that
arise from RANS equations are the Reynolds Stress (Rij = −ρv
′
iv
′
j), which in the fluctu-
ating components of the velocity field. The Reynolds Stress leads to the so-called closure
problem, from where turbulence modelling arises.
The closure problem appears because the different terms of the Reynolds Stress are not
explicitly known and can not be numerically solved from the governing equations as there
are more unknowns than equations. Therefore, by using certain assumptions and simplifi-
cations, closure models are introduced in an attempt to close the system of equations. The
different main closure models that exist are explained on section A.1, and the turbulence
model used in the present study is going to be quickly introduced.
2.2.1
k −ω SST
k −ω turbulence model is based on the two transport equations of the turbulence kinetic
energy (k) and the specific dissipation rate (ω). It is best for boundary layer flows and
flows with separation regions. Variations and extensions of the model have been made,
where special attention is going to be given to the k −ω shear stress transport (SST)
model, which combines both the k −ϵ and the k −ω models. As a baseline, the k −ω
model developed by Wilcox was used, but only for the inner region of the boundary layer.
The model gradually changes from k −ω to k −ϵ in the outer wake region. A blending
function (F1) is used that gradually changes from zero to one k −ω for the desired region.
It is known to have good behaviour in adverse pressure gradients and separating flows,
although it could over-predict turbulence in stagnation regions and regions with strong
acceleration.
Moreover, the model under-predicts the amount of separation for severe
adverse pressure gradient flows [25].
2.3
Review of Relevant Studies and Research on Vortex
Shedding in Elliptical Profiles
Building from the extensive groundwork that has been made on vortex shedding in circu-
lar cylinders, studies have been made to understand the unique characteristics of vortex
shedding in elliptical cylinders. As stated before, these studies are determined by the
consideration of aspect ratio, angles of attack, Reynolds numbers, and other properties.
One significant study by Hasheminejad and Jarrahi (2015) [26] focused on the coupled un-
steady fluid/structure interaction of an elastically suspended 2DOF (Degrees Of Freedom)
elliptical cylinder in laminar cross-flow at low Reynolds numbers. The key observations of
the study were that as the aspect ratio of the elliptical cylinder increased, the jump in the
transverse oscillation amplitudes was progressively transferred to higher Reynolds num-
bers. Moreover, for the circular and smaller elliptical cylinders, the Strouhal frequency
practically joined the structural frequency, as can be seen in Figure 2.10. Another re-
markable conclusion was that while the circular cylinder showed the classical hysteretic
jump at both ends of the lock-in region, there was no hysteretic jump observed in the
small elliptical cylinders for zero angles of inclination.
14
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.10: Variations of the maximum aerodynamic coeﬀicient amplitudes, and the non-
dimensional vortex shedding frequency, with Reynolds number, for zero inclination angle
(α = 0o) [26].
Another important study conducted by Leontini et al. (2018) [27] used numerical simula-
tions to study the flow-induced vibrations of an elliptical cross-section with varying angles
of attack. A very wide range of different flow regimes appeared, where for small angles of
attack the flow seemed to behave similar to the one on a circular cylinder. Nonetheless,
increasing the angle of attack led to different, more asymmetric vortex shedding modes.
Furthermore, the study by Zhao et al. (2019) analysed the dynamic response of elastically-
mounted elliptical cylinders with various cross-sectional aspect ratios in a free stream. The
results from the study showed that as the aspect ratio was modified, different response
regimes were shown by the elliptic cylinder and that there was a strong correlation between
the elliptical ratio and the flow-induced vibration response. Additionally, as the aspect
ratio increased, so did the peak response amplitude, leading to the conclusion that the
body vibration increased as the after-body reduced.
Another relevant study by Wang et al. (2022) [28] investigated the vortex-induced vibra-
tion of an elliptic cylinder with different aspect ratios. On the whole, the conclusion was
that the response amplitude and the forces acting on the cylinder were amplified as the
aspect ratio increased, as seen in Figure 2.11. Besides, an elliptical cylinder with a small
aspect ratio and the major axis aligned with the incoming flow results in the delay of the
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
15
==PAGE:26==
vortex shedding and the reduction of the strength of the vorticity magnitude.
Figure 2.11: The dimensionless transverse amplitude varies with reduced velocity for dif-
ferent ARs [28].
In the study conducted by Smith et al. (2018) [13], the aim was to investigate the wake
characteristics of elliptical cylinders in low Reynolds numbers. For that purpose, they
performed a combination of experimental measurements and numerical simulations, fo-
cusing on comparing the wake flow structures, shedding frequencies, and wake oscillation
amplitudes between elliptical cylinders, circular cylinders, and normal flat plates. It was
observed that elliptical cylinders showed distinct wake behaviour compared to circular
cylinders and flat plates. The wake behind an elliptical cylinder displayed a more com-
plex pattern characterized by asymmetry and the presence of additional vortex structures.
These additional vortices were found to be caused by the uneven distribution of pressure
and the separation of flow around the elliptical geometry. Moreover, the aspect ratio of
the elliptical cylinder influenced the shedding frequencies of the vortices, and it was found
that the shedding frequency increased with increasing aspect ratio. The understanding
gained from the discussed study can be useful for the design and optimization of airfoil
shapes.
2.4
Discussion of Previous Numerical and Experimental
Investigations in the Field
Although research on elliptical profiles and vortex-induced vibrations at high Reynolds
numbers has not been a widely studied topic and has not gotten as much attention as other
bluff bodies like circular cylinders, there are some numerical and experimental studies that
have been conducted that enable further understanding in the investigation of the topic.
Modi and Wiland (1970) [29] made an experimental study regarding two-dimensional
elliptic cylinders at subcritical Reynolds numbers between 3 × 103 and 1 × 105 with an
eccentricity of 0.8 and 0.6. They measured the Strouhal number, unsteady pressures and
wake geometry as a function of different angles of attack during static conditions. The main
conclusions were that the Strouhal frequency increased linearly with the incoming wind
speed and that the variation of Strouhal number with the angle of attack was considerably
less when based on projected height (Figure 2.12). Moreover, the fluctuating pressure
coeﬀicients had a trend to increase with angles of attack, and the lift coeﬀicient was also
affected by the different angles of attack.
16
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.12: Variation of Strouhal number with angle of attack [29].
Choi and Kwon (2008) [21] numerically investigated the aerodynamic characteristics of
elliptic airfoils at relatively high Reynolds numbers, ranging between 2.48 × 105 and
3.91 × 106.
They had a major interest in the flow separation characteristics, such as
the laminar separation bubble on the leading-edge and the trailing-edge flow separation
aºnd comparing the results with NACA series airfoils. They did the investigation taking
into account the effect of airfoil thickness on the aerodynamic characteristics. The main
finding was that as the angle of attack increased, the separation and reattachment points
both moved upstream; moreover, the laminar separation bubble size decreased. Regard-
ing the different aspect ratios, when the thickness of the elliptic airfoil increased over 20%
shedding of the trailing-edge vortices were observed that led to periodic variations of aero-
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
17
==PAGE:28==
dynamic loads. Increasing the thickness of the airfoil caused a decrease in the Strouhal
frequency, whereas the amplitude of oscillation increased.
Additionally, in the study conducted by Ota et al.(1987) [30] the flow around an elliptic
cylinder was investigated in the critical Reynolds number by means of an experiment. The
elliptic cylinder used was of AR = 1/3 and hot-wire measurements were used in the near
wake. The measurements were made in the range of Reynolds numbers from 35,000 up to
125,000. They concluded that depending on the angle of attack (α) the critical Reynolds
number varied; where the minimum Reynolds number was obtained at angles between
α = 5 −10 deg and for both increasing and decreasing angles of attack the Reynolds
numbers increased. Moreover, as the wake was studied by using the hot-wire method,
they remarked how the characteristics of the wake changed greatly with the variation of
Reynolds number.
Regarding the comprehension of the phenomena of vortex shedding in elliptic airfoils,
relevant research was done on flow over an elliptic airfoil near stall by Benazza and Blanco
(2011) [31]. They used numerical methods with Detached-Eddy Simulations to investigate
the flow around an elliptic profile for angles of attack that varied from zero to angles above
stall. They compared the data with experimental data and numerical studies done with
RANS S-A model.
The main idea obtained from the research was that DES was not
capable to predict reasonably well the flow behaviour at stall angles, as the calculation
of smooth-surface separation at stall is still a big problem for DES modelling. However,
DES model exceeded RANS S-A predictions and the obtained results for both Cl and Cd
were in good agreement with the experimental results that were not close to stall angles
of attack, seen in Figure 2.13.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13: (a) Lift coeﬀicient versus the angle of attack. (b) Drag coeﬀicient versus the
angle of attack [31].
Another study was done by Benazza et al. (2005) [32] in which the lift and drag coeﬀicients
were computed for different angles of attack and for four different turbulence models (S-A,
k −ω, k −ϵ, RSM) to calculate the flow around an elliptic profile. k −ω and RSM models
predicted better the tendency to stall and the results for maximum lift angles of attack.
Lastly, one more study was conducted by Benazza et al. (2007) [33]. This study was
intended to understand the 2D DES simulations around an elliptic airfoil for high Reynolds
numbers of 7.21 × 106. A hybrid mesh was used where the turbulence models used were
18
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:29==
DES approach and the Spalart-Allmaras, and the angles of attacks were varied from zero
lift up to angles above stall. The reached conclusion was that Spalart-Allmaras numerical
calculations were far inferior to the ones obtained from DES. And for angles of attack
close to stall, both models failed to predict the Cl and Cd values.
2.5
Investigation of Wind Tunnel Measurement
Aerodynamic research depends significantly on experimental measurements, specially when
dealing with CFD calculations, as the models used rely heavily on comparison with ex-
perimental data, in need of validation.
In the present case, the used methodology to
obtain experimental data to compare with has been wind tunnel measurements, due to its
availability on the project and since it enables controlled testing and evaluation of airflow
around diverse objects and structures. In order to draw attention to the methodology,
instrumentation, and diﬀiculties in this subject, attention is going to be drawn to signifi-
cant works and developments in wind tunnel measurements. A more detailed explanation
of wind tunnel measurements can be found in section A.2.
2.5.1
Open-Circuit Wind Tunnel
Several different types of wind tunnels exist that are used for aerodynamic research and
testing, depending on the specific applications and requirements that are needed, wind
tunnels are designed differently to adapt to the needed requirements [34]. The used wind
tunnel in the present work has been an open-circuit wind tunnel.
Open-circuit wind
tunnels are characterized by airflow entering the wind tunnel, by taking it in from the
outside environment and released after passing through the test portion. They usually
have a straight path from the inlet through a contraction and afterwards, into the test
section. After the test section the diffuser, a fan section, and an exhaust of the air are
usually placed. They are characterized by large size and high airspeeds and compared to
closed-circuit wind tunnels, which are going to be explained afterwards, they are more
cost-effective and more adaptable to large-scale objects. Moreover, if flow visualization
via smoke is needed, there is no need for purging. Nonetheless, they do not offer the
same level of repeatability and control as closed-circuit wind tunnels. For aerodynamic
testing where the flow parameters closely mirror actual air conditions, open-circuit wind
tunnels are especially well suited. A scheme of an open-circuit wind tunnel can be seen in
Figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14: Open-circuit wind tunnel [35].
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
19
==PAGE:30==
2.5.2
Wind Tunnel Instrumentation and Measurement Techniques
Understanding aerodynamic phenomena and verifying numerical models depend on precise
measurement of flow parameters and forces acting on the model to obtain the necessary
data. To obtain a deep understanding of the complex flow characteristics, accurate and
reliable measurements need to be gathered. For that purpose, different measurements can
be done in wind tunnels to gather different data such as pressure measurements, velocity
measurements, force and moment measurements or flow visualization techniques.
The
aforementioned measurement techniques are going to be quickly discussed.
Pressure Measurements
Pressure measurements make possible the understanding of pressure distributions, thus,
being able to determine the calculation of aerodynamic forces and pressures on the model.
Static and dynamic pressures are measured in wind tunnels for those reasons, with the
use of different techniques and instruments [36].
• Pressure taps: Pressure taps are small holes or tubes strategically placed on the wind
tunnel or on the model to be studied to capture the local static pressure. Pressure
transducers are then connected to the pressure taps to convert the pressure into an
electrical signal. A figure describing the pressure taps on a model can be seen in
Figure 2.15.
• Pressure transducers: Pressure is directly measured and provides instantaneous data.
Typically small, they can be positioned in critical locations and give high-frequency
responses and compatibility with digital systems.
Figure 2.15: Set-up of tubes for the pressure taps [37].
Force and Moment Measurements
To quantify the force and moment acting on the model that is studied in a wind tun-
nel, several techniques do exist, which give reliable information about the performance,
stability, and control characteristics of the model. The most common techniques are the
following:
• Force Balance: In force balance, load cells or strain gauges are used to directly mea-
sure the forces and moments acting on the model under study. All three components
20
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:31==
are normally measured (lift, drag, and side force), together with the moments acting
on each axis [38].
• Strain Gauges: Strain gauges are sensors used to measure strain or deformation,
consisting of a length of fine wire lying along the main direction of the wanted
measure. When the strain gauge is subjected to deformation, the length of the wire
changes in proportion to the structural strain, leading to a change in the wire’s
electrical resistance that makes the strain or deformation possible to measure [39].
• Pressure Integration: Pressure integration relies on the integration of the pressure
distribution along the surface of the model to calculate the resulting forces and
moments on the model.
Therefore, accurate pressure measurements need to be
applied and are a very suitable technique when direct force measurements are not
achievable.
2.6
Identification of Research Gaps and the Rationale for
the Study
To establish the rationale and significance of the present study, a comprehensive under-
standing of the existing research landscape and the identification of research gaps are
fundamental. This section highlights the identified research gaps and provides a reason-
able rationale for undertaking the current research.
2.6.1
Research Gap 1: Limited Investigation of High Reynolds
Number Unsteady Aerodynamics in Elliptical Profiles
Although there have been numerous studies on unsteady aerodynamics and vortex shed-
ding in various geometries, there is a noticeable research gap regarding high Reynolds
number unsteady aerodynamics in elliptical profiles. Most of the existing literature has
mainly focused on circular or bluff bodies, and limited attention has been given to elliptical
profiles. Given the widespread presence of elliptical shapes in various engineering appli-
cations, such as aircraft wings and wind turbine blades, there is a need to investigate the
unsteady aerodynamic behaviour of these profiles under high Reynolds number conditions.
This research gap emphasises the significance and originality of the current study, as it
aims to lower this knowledge gap and contribute to the understanding of vortex shedding
in elliptical profiles.
2.6.2
Research Gap 2: Limited Integration of Computational
Simulations and Experimental Measurements
The second research gap that has been identified in the literature is the limited integra-
tion of computational simulations and experimental measurements in the context of high
Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamics. Despite the fact that numerical simulations
and wind tunnel measurements have been extensively utilized in aerodynamic research,
the combination of these remains relatively small. The current study aims to increase the
understanding of unsteady aerodynamics in vortex shedding. This integration presents
an opportunity to validate simulation models using experimental data, leading to more
accurate predictions and improved design guidelines.
2.6.3
Research Gap 3: Limited Understanding of 3D Printing for Wind
Tunnel Measurements
The last research gap related to the limited understanding of the use of 3D printing in
wind tunnel measurements. Despite the growing popularity of 3D printing, there remains
a research gap regarding the specific application in wind tunnel measurements. There is
a lack of studies exploring the suitability of 3D printing and its effectiveness for accurate
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
21
==PAGE:32==
wind tunnel measurements. The current literature mainly focuses on the aspects of design-
ing and fabrication of 3D printed models, with small attention given to their performance
in wind tunnel measurements.
This research gap highlights the need for a deep investigation into the challenges and
benefits of using 3D printed models for wind tunnel measurements, including the impact of
3D printing techniques and materials for aerodynamic performances, the compatibility of
3D printed models with measurement techniques such as pressure taps or velocity sensors,
and the influence of surface roughness or imperfections due to the process of 3D printing
on the measurement accuracy. Having a more deep understanding of this topic will allow
more reliability and applicability of 3D printing for wind tunnel measurements.
2.6.4
Rationale for the Current Study
The aforementioned research gaps provide a suitable basis for the current study.
By
addressing the gaps in the literature and conducting an investigation of high Reynolds
number unsteady aerodynamics in elliptical profiles, this study aims to make significant
contributions to the field. It is hoped that the outcome of this study will deepen the
understanding of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles as well as the correlation between
Reynolds number and vortex shedding behaviour, and the use of 3D printing technologies
for wind tunnel measurement.
22
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:33==
3
Methodology
In the methodology section, the techniques and procedures that were used to investigate
the present study are going to be explained. All in all, the wind tunnel setup and exper-
imental procedures used in the wind tunnel are going to be explained, together with the
numerical simulation techniques and parameters used, a discussion of the chosen elliptical
profile geometry, Reynolds number range, used angles of attack and an explanation of the
data collection and analysis methods employed.
3.1
Description of the Wind Tunnel Setup and
Experimental Procedures
In the present study the wind tunnel setup that was used was the DTU red wind tunnel
located at the DTU building 414. The test section dimensions of the used wind tunnel
were 75 cm in width, 50 cm in height, and 200 cm in length, providing ample space for
conducting experiments on various aerodynamic profiles and models. The wind tunnel was
capable of achieving a maximum wind velocity of 40 m/s, allowing for high-speed testing
of aerodynamic components.
To ensure accurate and reliable measurements, the wind tunnel maintained a turbulence
intensity (TI) of less than 0.1%.
The low turbulence level minimized disturbances in
the flow and enabled accurate data collection during the experiments. The wind tunnel
featured a contraction ratio of 8.5, which made the flow well-concentrated and remained
uniform across the test section. This design helps to reduce flow divergence and enhances
the precision of the aerodynamic measurements. The red wind tunnel and test section can
be seen in Figure 3.1.
The instrumentation used in the wind tunnel included pressure scanners from ”Pressure
Systems” [40], equipped with two scanners. The first scanner comprised 32 taps with a
range of +/−1 PSI (Pounds per Square Inch), providing accurate pressure measurements
for high-pressure regions. The second scanner also consisted of 32 taps but had a range
of 10 inches of water column (10”H2O), ideal for capturing low-pressure areas with high
sensitivity.
The pressure scanners had exceptional accuracy, capable of measuring pressures with a
precision of 0.05% of the full-scale range. This high level of accuracy ensured reliable data
collection and reduced uncertainties in the experimental results.
To record data at high frequencies, the wind tunnel employed a sampling frequency of 333
Hz. This rapid data acquisition enabled the capture of dynamic aerodynamic phenomena
and ensured detailed analysis of time-dependent flow features.
Furthermore, the wind tunnel was equipped with a servomotor-controlled turntable, al-
lowing for controlled angle of attack adjustment with a resolution of 0.05 degrees. The
turntable offered precise control over the model’s orientation, facilitating investigations of
lift and drag coeﬀicients at different angles of attack conditions.
Overall, the wind tunnel’s capabilities and instrumentation made it ideal for conducting
aerodynamic experiments. The facility’s controlled and stable flow conditions, together
with accurate and high-frequency data acquisition, provided a platform for exploring the
characteristics of the ellipses.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
23
==PAGE:34==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a) Figure of the red wind tunnel used. (b) Test section in the red wind tunnel.
3.1.1
Design of the Used Ellipse Models
To realize the measurements on the wind tunnel, the design and production of 3D mod-
els was mandatory, as it aimed to accurately represent the geometric characteristics of
elliptical profiles. Although the whole design process of the ellipse is not directly related
to the present study, a quick review of the 3-D printing of the ellipses including pressure
taps, the limitations in surface smoothness and distribution of pressure holes is going to
be given.
As a quick review of the design process, a CAD software was used to create the 3D models
of the ellipses, then the 3D models were imported into a 3D software to create the G-code
used to 3D print the models, and lastly, the G-code was transferred into a 3D printer to
create the models.
Design of the Pressure Taps and Pressure Holes
To determine the optimal location for pressure taps on the elliptical models, some calcu-
lations were realized, that are going to be briefly explained. The main objective was to
calculate the coordinates of the pressure taps in a manner that provided accurate pres-
sure measurements and captured the complex flow behaviour around the ellipse. For that
reason, a non-linear division of the perimeter was implemented, ensuring suﬀicient data
points and adequate resolution for accurate pressure measurements. The pressure scanner
on the wind tunnel had 32 pressure taps, therefore, 32 points were selected to measure the
pressure on the ellipse. The algorithm for the pressure tap placement was the following
one:
1. Ellipse Geometry Initialization: The major axis (a) and minor axis (b) of the ellip-
tical profile were known from the physical dimensions of the model.
2. Division of the perimeter: The aim was to achieve a non-linear division on the el-
24
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:35==
lipse’s perimeter, concentrating pressure taps in regions of interest with high curva-
ture and vortex shedding. Therefore, the ellipse’s perimeter was divided into discrete
segments, with a higher density of pressure taps around the leading edge and trailing
edges of the ellipses, and reduced density towards the top and bottom.
3. Distribution of Pressure Tap Coordinates: The non-linear division of the perimeter
allowed for increased resolution in areas where high aerodynamic forces and vortices
were expected, enabling accurate capture of transient flow phenomena.
4. Equidistribution of Pressure Taps: In addition to the non-linear division, the algo-
rithm aimed to achieve equidistribution of pressure taps along the ellipse, ensuring
that the density of pressure taps was relatively uniform, allowing for an accurate
representation of the overall aerodynamic behaviour of the ellipse.
The non-linear division of the perimeter, combined with equidistribution, allowed for bet-
ter resolution in regions of interest while maintaining uniformity in the pressure tap den-
sity.
The resulting pressure tap configuration facilitated precise measurements of the
complex flow behaviour around the ellipse in the wind tunnel experiments. The source
code can be found in subsection A.3.1 and an example of the obtained plot from the al-
gorithm can be seen in Figure 3.2. As it can be seen, there is a higher concentration of
points in both the leading and trailing edges, while there are fewer points in the Y axis
edges of the ellipse.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Figure 3.2: Example of a plot from the design of the pressure taps for the ellipse with AR
of 0.75.
It is important to remark that when the coordinates of the pressure taps were placed on
the 3D models, and the holes made to make the measurements had a diameter of 0.7 mm.
Although the holes had to be as small as possible, there were some limitations on the
precision of the 3D printers, which limited the minimum diameter. However, through an
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
25
==PAGE:36==
iterative method, it was seen that 0.7 mm was the smallest diameter that actually had
proper results.
Discussion on Surface Smoothness
The surface roughness of 3D printed models played a critical role in the accuracy and
reliability of the wind tunnel measurements. The 3D printing precision was 0.1 mm, due
to the maximum precision that the 3D printers had available. This had an impact on the
final surface roughness of the printed models and had potential effects on the wind tunnel
measurements.
The 3D printing process involves layer-by-layer deposition of material to create the desired
geometry and the printing precision (0.1 mm), determined the minimum layer thickness
that could be achieved during printing. As a result, the surface of the printed models had
a certain level of roughness. It was known that the presence of surface roughness in the 3D
printed models could introduce deviations from the intended geometry. The layer lines led
to small variations in the model’s cross-section and affected the aerodynamic behaviour
of the profiles. While the aim was to achieve high printing precision, it must be recog-
nized that some level of surface roughness was inevitable. During wind tunnel testing, the
roughness of the models could introduce additional turbulence and flow disturbances. The
surface irregularities may have altered the local airflow around the models, influencing lift
and drag coeﬀicients, pressure distributions, and vortex shedding characteristics. There-
fore, the effect of surface roughness when interpreting wind tunnel measurements had to
be considered.
However, to minimize the impact of surface roughness on the wind tunnel measurements,
several strategies were employed. First, post-processing was carried out to smoothen the
surface of the printed models, especially close to the pressure taps. Polishing techniques
were applied to reduce the prominence of the layer lines and improve surface continuity.
Secondly, careful calibration of the wind tunnel was performed to account for any potential
disturbances caused by surface roughness.
All in all, the 3D printed models utilized in this study possessed surface roughness due to
the 3D printing process, with a precision of 0.1 mm. While this roughness introduced chal-
lenges in achieving perfect geometrical accuracy, it was addressed through post-processing
methods and calibration efforts during wind tunnel testing. By recognizing and mitigating
the effects of surface roughness, it was ensured that the measured aerodynamic characteris-
tics of the 3D printed ellipse models remained reliable and informative for the investigation
of vortex shedding and other aerodynamic phenomena in the wind tunnel experiments.
3.2
Explanation of the Numerical Simulation Techniques
and Parameters Used
A detailed explanation of the computational methods and parameters that were used in the
numerical simulations is going to be presented in this next section. All the mathematical
models; fluid solver and turbulence model applied; grid size, time-step and inner-iterations
chosen; the process of the grid generation; boundary conditions; numerical parameters and
the used software and hardware are going to be explained in detail.
3.2.1
Grid Size, Time-Step and Inner-Iterations Refinement Study
To obtain accurate flow-field predictions it is mandatory to choose the right grid size, as
well as the right time-step. For that purpose, a grid size and time-step refinement study
was conducted. The objective of this investigation was to comprehend the mesh indepen-
dence and the time-step sensitivity of the used computational model. For that reason, a
first coarse grid size and relatively high time-step values were chosen, and systematically
26
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:37==
they were refined in the case of the grid size and reduced in the case of the time-step study.
The aim of the study was to determine the optimal grid size resolution where the vortex
shedding phenomena was captured accurately enough and the computational resources
needed to do so were small enough. The same objective was used for the time steps and
the inner iterations of the implicit unsteady solver. The way to do so, was to examine
the effect of the variation on all three categories on the numerically calculated mean drag,
the converged lift coeﬀicients and the Strouhal number of each simulation of a stationary
ellipse with AR of 0.5, with zero inclination angles at Re = 50, 000 (AR = 0.5; α = 0o;
Re = 50, 000). For each refinement, the relative error measure of the lift coeﬀicient, drag
coeﬀicient and Strouhal number can be used to analyze the convergence. The different
relative error measures can be calculated with the following formulas:
Lift coeff. error ≡εL =

CLmax-coarse −CLmax-fine
CLmax-fine

(3.1)
Drag coeff. error ≡εD =

CD−coarse −CD−fine
CD−fine

(3.2)
Strouhal number error ≡εSt =

Stcoarse −Stfine
Stfine

(3.3)
Where, CLmax is defined as the maximum obtained CL after the convergence of the simu-
lation; CD relates to the average CD and St is the Strouhal number.
Grid Size Independence Study
To perform the grid size independence study, a number of grids with different numbers of
cells were studied, starting with a coarse mesh with 5,000 cells and up to a fine mesh with
250,000 cells. The numerical results for each of the studied grids can be seen in Table 3.1.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
27
==PAGE:38==
Table 3.1: Numerical results of the grid independence study for different AR, zero angle
of attack and Re = 50, 000.
AR
Total Cells
CLmax
CD
St
εL
εD
εSt
Time (h)
0.25
5,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
75,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
150,000
0
0.0736
0.0072
0.014
0
98.33
7.8317
250,000
0
0.0736
0.4309
-
-
-
12.2319
0.5
5,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25,000
0.4145
0.2967
0.6751
2.2367
3.1397
1.0552
2.1281
50,000
0.4017
0.2834
0.6607
0.9018
7.4679
3.1658
3.5736
75,000
0.4031
0.2919
0.6679
0.5649
4.6749
2.1105
4.8136
150,000
0.4048
0.3054
0.6823
0.1358
0.1499
0
11.4717
250,000
0.4054
0.3063
0.6823
-
-
-
18.5883
0.75
5,000
0.7990
0.7212
0.3304
9.7690
1.9006
13.1897
0.9800
25,000
0.7481
0.6840
0.3663
2.7774
3.3646
3.7572
2.1094
50,000
0.7384
0.6815
0.3663
1.4480
3.7172
3.7572
3.5225
75,000
0.7381
0.6885
0.3735
1.4004
2.7187
1.8655
5.0750
150,000
0.7320
0.7161
0.3878
0.5725
1.1735
1.8917
11.7250
250,000
0.7279
0.7078
0.3806
-
-
-
18.8411
However, the simulation for the ellipse with AR = 0.25 did not converge for the first 4
simulations as the skewness of the mesh close to the ellipse was too high. Moreover, the
converged simulations (150k & 250k) did not converge into a vortex shedding regime, in-
stead, a steady-state simulation was obtained. Therefore, for the AR = 0.25, the Reynolds
number was lowered to Re = 10, 000 and for all the simulations 3 more simulations were
done with meshes with a total number of cells of 100k, 125k, 200k; together with the 150k
and 250k ones, as can be seen in Table 3.2
28
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.2: Numerical results of the grid independence with added total cell numbers.
AR
Total Cells
CLmax
CD
St
εL
εD
εSt
Time (h)
0.25
5,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
75,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
125,000
1.5900
0.2215
0.1169
4.6879
9.5721
22.4801
3.5147
150,000
1.5011
0.2004
0.1508
1.1654
0.0136
0
5.1847
200,000
1.5112
0.2015
0.1508
0.5004
0.0136
0
6.9522
250,000
1.5188
0.2021
0.1508
-
-
-
8.9342
0.5
5,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25,000
0.4145
0.2967
0.6751
2.2367
3.1397
1.0552
2.1281
50,000
0.4017
0.2834
0.6607
0.9018
7.4679
3.1658
3.5736
75,000
0.4031
0.2919
0.6679
0.5649
4.6749
2.1105
4.8136
100,000
0.4051
0.3030
0.6751
0.0762
1.0550
1.0552
6.7617
125,000
0.4055
0.3054
0.6823
0.0326
0.2987
0
7.6817
150,000
0.4048
0.3054
0.6823
0.1358
0.1499
0
11.4717
200,000
0.4052
0.3062
0.6823
0.0541
0.0277
0
15.2703
250,000
0.4054
0.3063
0.6823
-
-
-
18.5883
0.75
5,000
0.7990
0.7212
0.3304
9.7690
1.9006
13.1897
0.9800
25,000
0.7481
0.6840
0.3663
2.7774
3.3646
3.7572
2.1094
50,000
0.7384
0.6815
0.3663
1.4480
3.7172
3.7572
3.5225
75,000
0.7381
0.6885
0.3735
1.4004
2.7187
1.8655
5.0750
100,000
0.7350
0.7030
0.3806
0.9770
0.6690
0
6.8333
125,000
0.7340
0.7185
0.3878
0.8448
1.5215
1.8917
7.7531
150,000
0.7320
0.7161
0.3878
0.5725
1.1735
1.8917
11.7250
200,000
0.7305
0.7111
0.3878
0.3665
0.4620
1.8917
14.4811
250,000
0.7279
0.7078
0.3806
-
-
-
18.8411
To have a better representation of the mesh independence error through the different
number of cells, the plots that can be seen in Figure 3.3, Figure 3.5, Figure 3.6 were made.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
29
==PAGE:40==
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Figure 3.3: Mesh Error for the ellipse with AR = 0.25 at Re = 50, 000.
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 3.4: Mesh Error for the ellipse with AR = 0.25 at Re = 10, 000.
30
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:41==
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Figure 3.5: Mesh Error for the ellipse with AR = 0.5 at Re = 50, 000.
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Figure 3.6: Mesh Error for the ellipse with AR = 0.75 at Re = 50, 000.
All in all, the errors for 125,000 cells onwards were small enough, but the time needed
for each simulation increased rapidly. Moreover, taking into account that the mesh with
125,000 cells for the simulation with AR = 0.25 and Re = 10, 000 could not converge
totally, the next grid size was chosen, which was 150,000 cells. Therefore, for the rest of
the simulations that were performed in this study, a grid size of 150,000 cells was used.
Time Step Independence Study
Continuing with the mesh independence study, and as the necessary solver for the sim-
ulations was unsteady, a time step had to be chosen. The time step size is a relevant
parameter to have into account when performing CFD because to obtain a good accuracy
of the vortex shedding phenomena it must be properly defined, and it is known to have a
main role in the proper calculus of the Strouhal number in unsteady simulations. Thus,
different time step sizes were used in different computations for the same case-scenario as
the study of the grid size independence: AR = 0.5; α = 0o; Re = 50, 000 and the 150,000
cells. A relevant parameter for this study was the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condi-
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
31
==PAGE:42==
tion, defined by Courant et al. [41] in 1928, stated as a necessary condition for convergence
criteria when solving partial differential equations. In a numerical analysis of explicit time
integration schemes, the used time step has to be smaller than a concrete time in explicit
time-marching computer simulations. For a two-dimensional case as the one that has been
studied in the present work, for a two-dimensional case, the CFL condition is stated as:
C = ux∆t
∆x + uy∆t
∆y
≤Cmax
(3.4)
Where C is the so-called Courant number; ux is the flow velocity in the x axis direction;
uy is the flow velocity in the y direction; ∆t is the chosen time step; ∆x is the smallest
grid cell size in the x direction; ∆y is the smallest grid cell size in the y direction and Cmax
is the maximum obtained Courant number. As the flow that is studied in the present case
is mainly one-directional (inflow direction), the CFL condition can be simplified into:
C = ux∆t
∆x
≤Cmax
(3.5)
Following the work done by Eça et al.
[42], a non-dimensional time step was chosen,
∆tUxmax/∆x, that had to fulfil the CFL condition. Establishing Cmax as 1 to ensure
accuracy, Uxmax the maximum velocity in x direction and ∆x as the smallest grid cell in the
inflow direction. Moreover, Uxmax was defined as U∞·i, where U∞was the inflow velocity
and i as the parameter used to scale the inflow velocity to determine the maximum velocity.
Therefore the CFL condition used for the time step independence study is summarized as:
U∞· i · ∆t
∆x
≤Cmax = 1
(3.6)
∆t ≤Cmax∆x
U∞· i
= 1 · 0.001
10.444 · i ≃9.5E −05
i
(3.7)
Taking into account the condition stated in Equation 3.7, six different time steps were
chosen and used for the same case-scenario simulations. As it has already been stated, i
was a chosen parameter to scale the time step accordingly. The different time steps and
results can be seen in Table 3.3, and a plot to have a better visualization of the variation
of the errors through the different time steps can be seen in Figure 3.7.
Table 3.3: Numerical results of the time step independence.
Time Steps
∆t
CLmax
CD
St
εL
εD
εSt
Time (h)
i/4
3.8 · 10−4
0.2293
0.3783
0.6908
28.5759
11.0824
5.2086
2.9028
i/2
1.9 · 10−4
0.2877
0.3968
0.6679
10.3850
6.72223
1.7210
5.6370
i
9.5 · 10−5
0.3036
0.4055
0.6823
5.4323
4.6774
3.9141
11.4631
2i
4.75 · 10−5
0.3078
0.4081
0.6569
4.1241
4.0663
0.0457
18.5453
3i
3.2 · 10−5
0.3093
0.4123
0.6568
3.6569
3.0908
0.0305
25.9717
4i
2.375 · 10−5
0.3214
0.4254
0.6566
-
-
-
30.8575
32
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:43==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Figure 3.7: Mesh Error for the different time-steps.
Inner-Iterations Independence Study
The last study that was done for the mesh independence study was the inner-iterations
independence study.
As the solver that was used for the different simulations was an
”Implicit Unsteady” solver, in each of the time steps taken in the simulations, inner-
iterations were performed, so that the residuals of the simulations were decreased before
moving on to a new time step.
Therefore, it was relevant to know how many inner-
iterations were the optimum ones for the simulations. It is relevant to mention that too few
inner-iterations led to bad converged simulations, and too many inner-iterations led to the
possibility of reaching a steady-state solution. Therefore, 6 different inner-iterations were
chosen, and the different errors were measured between them as can be seen in Table 3.4.
For a more visual understanding of the errors through the different inner-iterations, the
plot in Figure 3.8 can be seen.
Table 3.4: Numerical results of the inner-iterations independence.
Inner-Iterations
CLmax
CD
St
εL
εD
εSt
Time (h)
5
0.2987
0.3899
0.6566
3.4271
5.0414
0
0.8811
7
0.3035
0.3919
0.6566
1.8752
4.5543
0
1.2311
10
0.3059
0.3979
0.6566
1.0993
3.0930
0
1.7317
12
0.3055
0.3991
0.6361
1.2286
2.8130
3.1221
2.3553
15
0.3064
0.4056
0.6823
0.9376
1.2177
3.9141
2.7439
20
0.3093
0.4106
0.6566
-
-
-
3.5444
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
33
==PAGE:44==
5
10
15
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Figure 3.8: Inner-iterations errors.
As it can be seen in Figure 3.8, the errors of the different parameters were already relatively
low after the value of 7 inner-iterations. However, taking into account that the time was
a very important factor, and the different errors, the inner-iterations chosen were 10, as
the time was quite low and the errors were not that different compared to higher inner-
iterations.
3.2.2
Grid Generation
Having stated the grid size in subsection 3.2.1, the generation of the chosen mesh is going
to be explained briefly. The mesh generator used for the present study was a structured
mesh, as structured mesh are better at representing complex geometries with a lower grid
density, which makes the needed computational power to be faster and more precise [43].
Moreover, structured meshes allow a better study of mesh independence as the change of
the different parameters involved in the mesh generation can be more easily manipulated.
Therefore, the grid was generated using a structured mesh generator, ensuring uniform
cell size and connectivity throughout the whole computational domain.
The first step taken in the generation of the mesh was to import the mesh base geometry.
The mesh base geometry was done by using the CAD (Computer-Aided Design) software
”SOLIDWORKS 2022” [44]. Following the chosen ellipse geometry in section 3.1, the main
ellipse axis had a length of 0.075 m, and taking the example of the ellipse with AR of 0.5,
the minor axis had a length of 0.0375 m. The chosen mesh type was a curvilinear O-type
mesh [45], which are thought to improve accuracy and reduce the needed computational
time. Following other numerical studies of vortex shedding in circular or ellipse cylinders
such as the study done by Catalano et al. (2003) [46] and Ong et al. (2009) [47], the
computational domain was extended to a value of R = 25D. The resulting geometry can
be seen in Figure 3.9.
34
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.9: Computational domain created in SOLIDWORKS.
After generating the geometry a structured mesh was generated from it. First, the ”patch
topology” needed to be created. Patch topology is a tool used to create the reference
nodes that are going to be defined to structure the grid. The patch topology chosen for
the grid can be seen in Figure 3.10.
Subsequently, the division of the patch topology needed to be determined. In the case of
the mesh with 150, 000 cells, each quarter of the domain was divided 150 times equally
in the azimuth direction, and the domain was divided 250 times in the radial direction.
However, a non-linear division was used for the radial direction, because closer to the
wall the cells need to be smaller to satisfy the y+ condition. The wall distance y+ is a
dimensionless parameter that is used to determine the height of the viscous sublayer of
the flow. By relying on the universal law of the wall [48], which states that the velocity
distribution of a flow very near to a wall is similar for most of the turbulent flows, it can
be calculated how close the centre of the closest cell to the wall needs to be. The chosen
turbulence model (k−ω SST) does not perform well in the area close to the wall, therefore,
to solve the near-wall region, the first cell centre must be placed in the viscous sublayer
(y+ ≤1). The different relationships to calculate y+ are explained briefly:
y+ = yuτ
ν
(3.8)
Where, y is the absolute distance from the wall, uτ is the so-called friction velocity and ν
is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid. Moreover, the friction velocity uτ can be calculated
as:
uτ =
rτw
ρ
(3.9)
Where, τw is the wall-shear stress, and ρ is the fluid density. Lastly, the wall-shear stress
can be calculated as follows:
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
35
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: (a) Created patch nodes in the ellipse.
(b) Created patch nodes in the
computational domain.
τw = CfρU 2
∞
2
(3.10)
Being, Cf the skin friction coeﬀicient, and U∞the inflow velocity of the fluid. And lastly,
the skin friction coeﬀicient can be determined as:
Cf = 0.0576Re
−1
5
d
(3.11)
Where Red is the Reynolds number. Therefore, the value of the y+ is going to vary through
the different simulations together with the Reynolds number. Taking as an example, a case
with a Reynolds number of 50, 000, the values for the different parameters are summarized
in Table 3.5.
36
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:47==
Table 3.5: Value of the different parameters used to calculate y+.
y+ (Re = 50, 000)
Re
50000
Cf
0.0066
ρ
1.18415
U∞
10.444
τw
0.4273
uτ
0.6007
ν
1.48 · 10−5
y+
≤1
y
2.4637 · 10−5
Therefore, the smallest cells centre must be placed at a height of 2.4637 · 10−5m, meaning
that the smallest cell height must be the maximum height of y ≃5 · 10−5m. All in all,
and coming back to the mesh grid design, the radial direction of the mesh was divided
250 times, having the smallest cell height equal to its correspondent y+ value, and using
a non-linear distribution of the cells. Taking into account all the previous explanations of
the mesh distribution, the obtained final mesh was the one seen in Figure 3.11.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
37
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: (a) Generated mesh. (b) Close look-up of the generated mesh.
3.2.3
Boundary Conditions
Defining the boundary conditions in the simulation is a key-point feature to have the
appropriate flow behaviour in the computational domain. To apply the required boundary
conditions, the first step was to divide the imported geometry into regions. To do so, the
geometry was divided into its different surfaces, being them 4 different ones: The wall
in the back, the wall in the front, the ellipse surface and the surface surrounding the
computational domain. To each of the different surfaces, a boundary type was applied.
For both of the back and front walls, a symmetry plane boundary type was applied, for the
ellipse surface a wall type with no-slip condition was applied, and lastly, for the surface
surrounding the computational domain, a free stream type was applied.
Symmetry plane boundary conditions state symmetry in flow properties, velocity and
pressure for example, across the symmetry plane so that the computational resources are
conserved while accurately capturing flow behaviour. The wall boundary condition implies
that the surface is considered a solid, where the no-slip condition is applied, meaning that
the velocity at the wall is equal to 0. In this way, the effect of the boundary layer is
represented in the simulation.
Finally, the free stream boundary type states that the
whole surface acts as an inflow surface.
38
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:49==
Furthermore, in the free stream boundary, the flow direction is stated with a coordinate
system, together with a Mach number, and a turbulence intensity of 1% and a turbulent
viscosity ratio of 10%.
3.2.4
Numerical Parameters
The different numerical parameters that were chosen for the numerical calculations were
determined to ensure the best accuracy possible taking into account the limitations that
the present study faced.
The different numerical parameters can be divided into the
physics that were chosen, the turbulence model parameters, the solver parameters and
grid size, and computational resources.
Physics
The physics chosen for the numerical calculations determines which are the flow charac-
teristics, and its input values. The chosen models for the flow were: the flow was three
dimensional; the fluid chosen was an ideal gas; turbulent flow; the flow was determined as a
segregated flow (segregated fluid temperature), which means that the governing equations
for the different flow variables (velocity, pressure, temperature...) are solved separately,
leading to more computationally eﬀicient and straightforward to implement simulations;
the used time-scheme was implicit unsteady; and the chosen turbulence model k −ω SST.
The chosen conditions for the simulations were the ISO standard reference conditions
for gas [49] with a reference temperature of 15oC and a reference pressure of 101, 325Pa.
The used gas was air, with a constant dynamic viscosity of µ = 1.85508 · 10−5Pa · s.
Moreover, the initial conditions were defined with the inflow velocity characteristic of
each simulation and an initial pressure equal to the dynamic pressure expected in the
wind tunnel, calculated as seen in Equation 3.12.
q = 1
2ρU 2
(3.12)
Where, q is the dynamic pressure, ρ is the air density and U is the inflow velocity in the
wind tunnel.
Turbulence Model Parameters
The chosen k −ω SST parameters used in the different numerical calculations were the
default ones that the CFD program determined.
A more detailed explanation of the
parameters can be found in subsection A.3.2 The reason behind this choice was based
on the premise that turbulence models are very complex and a very exhaustive study is
required to understand the influence of changes of each parameter. Therefore, the default
parameters are presented in Table 3.6, similar to the ones presented in Table A.2.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
39
==PAGE:50==
Table 3.6: Default properties for the k −ω SST Turbulence model
SST (Menter) k −ω - Properties
Properties
Curvature Correction Option
Off
Realizability Option
Durbin Scale Limiter
Compressibility Correction
Enabled
Low Re Dampling Modification
Disabled
Convection
2nd Order
Constitutive Option
Linear
Expert Properties
Normal Stress Term
Disabled
Tke Minimum
1.0E-10
Sdr Minimum
1.0E-10
Secondary Gradients
On
κ
0.41
β∗
0.09
β1
0.075
σk1
0.85
σω1
0.5
β2
0.0828
σk2
1.0
σω2
0.856
a1
0.31
Compressibility Parameter: z∗
1.5
Realizability Coeﬀicient
0.6
Solver Parameters & Grid Size
The different parameters that embrace the solver parameters are the used time-step, the
temporal discretization accuracy and the maximum inner iterations. Together with grid
size, most of the parameters have already been discussed in section 3.2; for that reason,
the temporal discretization scheme is going to be briefly explained, and all the parameters
are going to be summarized in Table 3.7.
As stated in the manual of the used CFD Program: ”Temporal discretization scheme is a
numerical procedure requiring the temporal coordinate to be discretized in addition to a
spatial discretization for unsteady simulations. The solution of the governing equations is
obtained at different time-levels whereby the solution at time t requires the solutions from
previous time-levels. Time integration schemes are distinguished between the number of
time-levels they use for integration and on which time-level the fluxes and sources are
integrated.
The Euler implicit scheme, a first-order temporal scheme, approximates the transient term
in... using the solution at the current time level, n + 1 and the one from the previous time
level, n.
A basic second-order temporal discretization of the unsteady term uses the solution at the
current time level, n + 1, as well as the solutions from the previous two time levels, n and
n −1, in a Backward Differentiation Formula.” [50].
The second-order temporal discretization of the unsteady term is thought to be more
accurate, although the time needed to calculate is higher than the first-order temporal
40
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:51==
scheme.
All in all, taking into account the choices made for the grid size and solver
parameters, the second-order temporal discretization scheme was chosen as a way to obtain
more accurate results. Therefore, all the parameters chosen for the solver can be seen in
the table below (Table 3.7).
Table 3.7: Grid Size & Solver Parameters
Grid Size & Solver Parameters
Grid Size
Time-Step
Inner Iterations
Temporal Discr.
Max. Time
150.000
0.001/(2U∞)
10
2nd order
2.0 s
Computational Resources
The different simulations performed in the present study were calculated using a combina-
tion of both personal computing resources and online servers provided by the university.
The computational resources available for this research allowed for eﬀicient and reliable
simulations.
• Personal Laptop: A small portion of the simulations were carried out on a personal
laptop with an AMD Ryzen 7 4800H with Radeon Graphics 2.90 GHz as a processor,
16,0 GB of installed RAM and 8 cores. Although the computational power of the
personal laptop was limited compared to the dedicated high-performance computing
(HPC) clusters, it provided a convenient platform for preliminary investigations,
parameter studies, and small-scale simulations.
• University-Provided Online Servers: For the large-scale simulations and extensive
parametric studies, additional computational resources were used through online
servers made available by the university. These servers were part of the university’s
computing cluster, designed to support research projects from various disciplines.
The cluster employed parallel computing techniques to distribute the computational
load eﬀiciently among multiple processing nodes. Due to the queuing system em-
ployed by the university’s computing cluster, exact details of the maximum computa-
tional resources, such as the total number of cores, memory per node, and processing
speed, were not readily accessible. Simulations were submitted to the cluster’s queue
and processed in sequence based on the availability of resources. While this approach
allowed for the cost-effective use of computational resources, it also introduced vari-
ability in the simulation turnaround time. Normally 12 ”workers” were used with a
total RAM usage of 4 GB. However, occasionally and for the most computationally
expensive simulations, up to 24 workers were used.
The use of the personal laptop and university-provided online servers in combination
provided a balanced approach to meet the computational requirements of this study. The
laptop allowed for quick prototyping and preliminary investigations, while the university’s
computing cluster enabled more extensive and computationally demanding simulations.
3.2.5
Software and Hardware
As the hardware resources used for the numerical calculations have already been described
in the previous section (subsubsection 3.2.4), only the hardware used for the 3D printing
is going to be described. Two different 3D printers were used in the fabrication of the
different ellipses used for the measurements in the wind tunnel:
• Ultimaker 3 Extended: It is a 3D printer that uses the Fused Filament Fabrication
technology to produce thermoplastic parts using filament feedstock. It offers a build
volume of 215 × 215 × 300 mm [51].
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
41
==PAGE:52==
• Prusa i3 MK3S: It is a 3D printer that also uses the Fused Filament Fabrication
technology to produce thermoplastic parts using filament feedstock. It offers a build
volume of 250 × 210 × 210 mm [52].
On the other hand, the different software used are going to be briefly described:
• CFD Software: For the CFD Software, Simcenter STAR4-CCM+ was used, with the
version: 3202.001 Build 18.02.010.
• Programming Software: For the generation of programming and numeric computing
MATLAB was used with the version R2021a.
• CAD Software: For the CAD software used in the design of the ellipses that were
3D-printed, SOLIDWORKS 2022 was used, using the Student Edition.
• 3D Printing Software: For the processing of the ellipse CAD design and the subse-
quent slicing of it for the 3D-printing, the software UltiMaker Cura was used, version
5.4.
3.3
Discussion of the Chosen Elliptical Profile Geometry,
Reynolds Number Range and Angles of Attack
A critical aspect of this study was the selection of the geometric profiles and Reynolds
number range as both of them influence the different flow characteristics and the applica-
bility of the turbulence model. In this section, the reasoning behind choosing the different
aspect ratios for the elliptical profiles and the range of Reynolds numbers are discussed.
3.3.1
Aspect Ratio of Elliptical Profiles
For the different aspect ratios used for the elliptical profiles, three were the chosen ones:
0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 as can be seen in Figure 3.12. These aspect ratios were chosen to
investigate the influence of aspect ratios on the flow behaviour, ranging from the well-
known flat plate to the also well-known circular cylinder. The three different values covered
a range allowing the understanding of the transition from circular to streamlined profiles.
There were some inner limitations that constrained the range of aspect ratios. First of
all, as the chosen turbulence model was k −ω SST and the elliptical profiles had to be
subjected to stall conditions (α = 90o), an elliptical profile with a very low aspect ratio
(AR ≈0.1 −0.2) led to non-converged simulations. On the other hand, very high aspect
ratios (AR ≈0.8−0.9) were very similar to circular cylinders, reducing the interest of those
studies. Lastly, due to the limited time, not many aspect ratios could be investigated,
leading to the final decision of choosing 3, trying to cover the widest range possible.
Furthermore, as seen in chapter 2 in the study by Thompson et al. (2014) [13] they chose
the aspect ratios 0, 0.10, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1, and following the different investigations read,
those seemed to be the most suitable aspect ratios.
42
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:53==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.12: (a) CAD design of the AR 0.25 ellipse, (b) CAD design of the AR 0.5 ellipse,
(c) CAD design of the AR 0.75 ellipse, (d) 3D print of the AR 0.25 ellipse, (e) 3D print
of the AR 0.5 ellipse, (f) 3D print of the AR 0.75 ellipse.
3.3.2
Reynolds Number Range
Several considerations were taken to select the range of Reynolds number range. The
lowest chosen Reynolds number was Re = 10.000 which corresponds to flows with moderate
turbulence and provides insights into the behaviour of vortex shedding at relatively low
Reynolds numbers. On the other hand, the highest chosen Reynolds number was Re =
250.000, which was chosen as it represents a practical upper threshold for the time available
per simulation, computational resources and the k-w SST turbulence model used in this
study. Beyond this range, the turbulence model’s predictions may become less accurate
due to limitations in its applicability to very high turbulence levels, especially for high
angles of attack.
The range of Reynolds numbers covers a broad spectrum of flow regimes, including laminar,
transitional, and turbulent flows. This allowed to explore the characteristics of vortex
shedding across different flow regimes and assess the influence of the Reynolds number
on the shedding frequency, shedding patterns, and aerodynamic forces on the elliptical
profiles.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
43
==PAGE:54==
3.3.3
Angles of Attack
The angles of attack used in the present study were planned to cover the whole range
of angles of attack available; therefore, as the geometries were symmetrical in both axes
(x&y), at a first approach 3 angles of attack were chosen: α = 0o, 45o&90o. Moreover,
there was some more time available than expected and the angles α = 22.5o&67.5o were
also used for Reynolds numbers of 10.000, 25.000 & 50.000.
3.4
Explanation of the Data Collection and Analysis
Methods Employed
The procedures used to gather and analyze the data for this study are fully described in
the next section. The methodologies used for data processing and analysis are outlined, as
well as the devices and techniques used for data gathering. Both the data collection and
analysis are explained for both the experimental measurements and numerical simulations.
3.4.1
Data Collection and Analysis for the Experimental Measurements
For the data collection in the experimental measurements, pressure taps were used as
described in chapter 2. First of all, the use of pressure taps was already planned before
the design of the 3D geometries; therefore, some inner tubes inside the geometries were
designed as seen in Figure 3.13. The inner tubes allowed the measurement of pressure
around the ellipses which were connected to the pressure taps in one of the 3D geometries
ends, which can also be appreciated in Figure 3.14. Lastly, the pressure taps were con-
nected to a pressure transducer to convert the pressure into an electrical signal, connected
to a computer, saving the measurement data. The setup can be seen in Figure 3.15. All
the data was saved into a .txt file and processed with a code already developed by the
university to read and plot the measurement data from the wind tunnel.
3.4.2
Data Collection and Analysis for the Numerical Simulations
To obtain the data in the numerical simulations, reports were created in the software to
calculate the drag coeﬀicient, lift coeﬀicient and pressure coeﬀicient all along the ellipses.
These reports calculated the different parameters and stored the results.
From these
reports, plots were created to measure the lift and drag coeﬀicient distribution through
time. Subsequently, when the simulations were finished, the plots were exported into a
CSV file and imported into the programming software to analyze the data. From the
collected data, a power spectral density (PSD) analysis was used to calculate the peak
frequency of the lift coeﬀicients, and obtain the Strouhal number from there. An example
of the PSD can be seen in Figure 3.16.
44
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:55==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: (a) Inner Tubes in the CAD. (b) CAD view for reference.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
45
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.14: Pressure taps end in CAD (a) and 3D printed (b).
Figure 3.15: Used pressure taps and pressure transducer.
46
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:57==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
10-14
10-12
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
  Peak Frequency: 97.0006Hz
Figure 3.16: Power Spectral Density.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
47
==PAGE:58==
48
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:59==
4
Experimental Results and Analysis
4.1
Presentation of the Experimental Data on Vortex
Shedding in Elliptical Profiles
For the experimental results and analysis section, the obtained results of the measurements
on the wind tunnel of the flow around elliptical profiles are going to be given. Two different
ellipses were measured in the wind tunnel, both with a major axis of 0.075 mm, one with
an aspect ratio of 0.5 and the second one with an aspect ratio of 0.75. Furthermore, both
ellipses were measured for Reynolds numbers of 50k, 100k and 150k and for angles of attack
of 0o, 45o, 90o, −45o, and −90o. Therefore, first, on both ellipses, the different figures and
plots are going to be presented to understand the flow behaviour for the different case
scenarios, starting from a general overview of the lift and drag coeﬀicients, followed by the
Cp measurements on the ellipse, and lastly, St and shedding-frequency measurements are
going to be shown.
4.2
Analysis of the Ellipses
To understand the aerodynamic phenomena behind the different elliptical profiles, Reynolds
numbers and angles of attack, the observed vortex shedding characteristics are going to
be analyzed in the present section.
4.2.1
Cl and Cd Measurements
With the use of the pressure tabs along the ellipses, the Cp curve was obtained in the
measurements, and by integrating the pressure coeﬀicient over the ellipse, the Cl and Cd
coeﬀicients were obtained. The obtained results can be seen in Figure 4.1. It can be
seen that the four different case scenarios had the same trend, where Cl had a kind of
sinusoidal shape, where at high angles of attack −90o and 90o, the lift coeﬀicient is close
to 0, reducing the angle of attack to −45o and 45o led to an increase in the lift coeﬀicient,
as expected, an lastly, for 0o the lift coeﬀicient went back to close to zero. The Cd for
the angles of attack of −90o and 90o is above 1, and reducing the angle of attack led to
a decrease in the Cl in all cases. The smallest Cd was obtained at an angle of attack of
0o as could have been expected, except for the ellipse of AR 0.75, where it seems that the
smallest drag coeﬀicient is related to an angle of attack of 45o, which can be regarded as
an error in the measurements because the smallest drag coeﬀicient should be at 0o.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
49
==PAGE:60==
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
(a)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
(b)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
(c)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
(d)
Figure 4.1: Cl and Cd coeﬀicients of the measurements done in the wind tunnel for the
ellipse with AR of 0.5. (a) AR 0.5 and Re 50k. (b) AR 0.5 and Re 100k. (c) AR 0.75 and
Re 50k. (d) AR 0.75 and Re 100k.
4.2.2
Cp Along the Ellipse
For the pressure coeﬀicient measurements, the following plots were obtained: Figure 4.2,
Figure 4.3, Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5.
And all the plots, the pressure coeﬀicient for
instantaneous measurements of 0.1 seconds, 1 second, and the average pressure coeﬀicient
are plotted. All in all, the different angles of attack cases had the same shape for the
different aspect ratios and Reynolds numbers.
50
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:61==
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 4.2: Pressure coeﬀicient on the wind tunnel measurements for the ellipse with AR
0.5, Re = 50k and different angles of attack (0o, 45o, 90o).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
51
==PAGE:62==
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 4.3: Pressure coeﬀicient on the wind tunnel measurements for the ellipse with AR
0.5, Re = 100k and different angles of attack (0o, 45o, 90o).
52
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:63==
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 4.4: Pressure coeﬀicient on the wind tunnel measurements for the ellipse with AR
0.75, Re = 50k and different angles of attack (0o, 45o, 90o).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
53
==PAGE:64==
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 4.5: Pressure coeﬀicient on the wind tunnel measurements for the ellipse with AR
0.75, Re = 100k and different angles of attack (0o, 45o, 90o).
54
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:65==
4.2.3
St and Shedding Frequency
For the Strouhal number and shedding frequency calculus, a PSD was done to the lift
coeﬀicient data over time.
From the realized PSDs, the data seen in Figure 4.6 was
obtained. Moreover, the different values for the Strouhal number and shedding-frequencies
can be seen summarized in Table 4.1 and Table 4.2.
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
(a)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
(b)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
(c)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
(d)
Figure 4.6: Cl and Cd coeﬀicients of the measurements done in the wind tunnel for the
ellipse with AR of 0.5. (a) Re 50k. (b) Re 100k.
Table 4.1: St and f [Hz] for the AR 0.5 ellipse.
WT Measurements - AR 05
0o
45o
90o
−45o
−90o
Re 50k
St
0.502
0.2535
0.1812
0.1796
0.1778
f [Hz]
66.4666
33.3444
23.6746
25.5634
23.23
Re 100k
St
0.5255
0.2429
0.1725
0.2489
0.1771
f [Hz]
140.9359
64.6882
45.5707
66.022
46.7934
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
55
==PAGE:66==
Table 4.2: St and f [Hz] for the AR 0.75 ellipse.
WT Measurements - AR 075
0o
45o
90o
−45o
−90o
Re 50k
St
0.2959
0.2375
0.2029
0.2307
0.2004
f [Hz]
40.9025
32.6776
27.787
31.6772
27.4536
Re 100k
St
0.2892
0.2112
0.1946
0.2126
0.1957
f [Hz]
81.027
58.7974
53.7957
59.0197
54.1292
From the experimental data obtained regarding the Strouhal number and shedding fre-
quency, several conclusions can be drawn. First of all, it can be seen that both ellipses
when getting closer to 90o, approach the Strouhal number expected for an ellipse, this is
between the flat plate (St = 0.1) and a circular cylinder (St = 0.2). Moreover, the ellipse
with a higher aspect ratio, AR of 0.75, is even closer to the Strouhal number of a circular
cylinder, as its geometry is closer to it. Furthermore, the shedding frequency of the ellipses
at an angle of attack of 0o is pretty high compared to the rest of the angles of attack,
being almost two times higher. It is important to notice, that the values obtained for the
angle of attack of 45o, are in a middle point between the 0o and 90o, slightly closer to the
ones obtained for an angle of attack of 90o. Lastly, comparing both Reynolds numbers, it
is seen that the shedding frequency is proportional to the Reynolds numbers. The cases
with a Reynolds number of 100k had a shedding frequency value double the ones with a
Reynolds number of 50k. This can be explained with ease looking at the equation used
for the calculation of the Strouhal number:
St = Freqpeakc
U
(4.1)
Where, Freqpeak is the obtained frequency from the PSD, c is the chord of the ellipse and
U is the flow velocity. Therefore, as the Strouhal number is characteristic of the geometry,
for a Reynolds number two times bigger (two times higher the flow velocity for the same
geometry), the shedding frequency must double, to keep the Strouhal number constant.
56
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:67==
5
Numerical Simulation Results and
Analysis
5.1
Presentation and interpretation of the simulation
results for the flow around elliptical profiles
In the present section, the obtained results for the simulations of the flow around elliptical
profiles are going to be given.
First of all, different figures and plots are going to be
presented to understand the flow behaviour for the different case scenarios, starting from
figures to visualize the flow around the airfoils and the patterns behind them, afterwards
the pressure distributions and pressure coeﬀicients are going to be presented, continuing
with the change of vortex shedding frequencies and Strouhal number through the different
simulations, also the aerodynamic forces and coeﬀicients are going to be presented, and
lastly, the vorticity and turbulent structures are going to be presented.
5.2
Analysis of the Vortex Shedding Characteristics in the
Simulations
To understand the aerodynamic phenomena behind the different elliptical profiles, Reynolds
numbers and angles of attack, the observed vortex shedding characteristics in the numer-
ical simulations are going to be analyzed in the present section. The different flow visu-
alizations and patterns, pressure distributions and pressure coeﬀicients, vortex shedding
frequencies and Strouhal numbers, aerodynamic forces and coeﬀicients and vorticity and
turbulent structures are going to be analyzed.
5.2.1
Flow Visualization and Patterns
The first results that are presented are the flow visualization and the patterns behind
the ellipses. To give a comprehensive view of the flow around the ellipses, the velocity
field was chosen to be displayed. In this way, the domain’s flow patterns and overall flow
direction are easily understood. Moreover, it helps to identify relevant flow features, such
as boundary layer separation, flow recirculation, stagnation points and the formation of
the wake behind the body.
For the patterns behind the ellipses, the turbulent kinetic energy field was chosen as
the relevant field to be displayed as it highlights the regions with high turbulence (wake
region and areas of flow separation) and together with the velocity field given before, a
more relevant overview of the flow behaviour is given. The different figures for the velocity
and turbulent kinetic energy field can be seen below:
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.1: Velocity field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 0 deg. From left to right
the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the
different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
Figure 5.2: Velocity field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 22.5 deg. From left to
right the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom
the different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Velocity fields for Re
= 100k and 250k are missing as they were not performed for 22.5 deg.
58
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.3: Velocity field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 45 deg. From left to
right the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom
the different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k). Velocity
field for AR = 0.25 and Re = 250k is missing as the simulation did not converge.
Figure 5.4: Velocity field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 67.5 deg. From left to
right the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom
the different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k). Velocity
fields for Re = 100k and 250k are missing as they were not performed for 67.5 deg.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.5: Velocity field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 90 deg. From left to right
the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the
different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k). Velocity fields
for Re = 100k and 250k and AR = 0.25 are missing as the simulations did not converge.
As can be seen in Figure 5.1, Figure 5.2, Figure 5.3, Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5 the velocity
field varied greatly between different angles of attack. For angles of attack of 0 deg, it can
be seen that for a small AR of 0.25, the velocity field behind the ellipse after the Reynolds
number increased to 50,000 did not create vortex shedding, instead, it reached a steady-
state of a detached wake. For the aspect ratios of 0.5 and 0.75 there was a permanent
generation of Von-Kármán vortices, as the vortices behind the ellipses were symmetrical
and followed the flow direction. Moreover, as the Reynolds number increased the detached
zone increased, and the higher the aspect ratio the separation between vortices increased.
For angles of attack of 22.5 deg, it can be seen that the simulations with AR of 0.25 had
a more unstable wake compared to the ones with AR of 0.5 and 0.75. Moreover, higher
AR led to a better formation of the vortex behind the ellipse. The increase in the angle
of attack also led to a movement of the detachment point in the ellipses, where for AR of
0.25 was a little bit more complex to define.
For angles of attack of 45 deg, the same trend was obtained where the smallest AR had
a more turbulent wake and a hardly defined detachment point, whereas by increased AR
the wake was more clear and the detachment point more easily located.
60
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:71==
In the simulations performed for an angle of attack of 67.5 deg, the wake behind the
ellipse of AR of 0.25 had a completely unstructured wake, whereas, for the other two
aspect ratios, there was still a lightly structured wake.
Lastly, for the simulations with angles of attack of 90 deg, the wake seemed similar between
the different ellipses and more structured.
Figure 5.6: TKE field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 0 deg. From left to right
the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the
different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
Figure 5.7: TKE field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 22.5 deg. From left to right
the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the
different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k). TKE fields
for Re = 100k and 250k are missing as the simulations were not performed.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure 5.8: TKE field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 45 deg. From left to right
the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the
different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k). TKE field for
Re = 250k and AR = 0.25 is missing as the simulation did not converge.
Figure 5.9: TKE field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 67.5 deg. From left to right
the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the
different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k). TKE fields
for Re = 100k and 250k are missing as the simulations were not performed.
62
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:73==
Figure 5.10: TKE field around the airfoil for angle of attack of 90 deg. From left to right
the three ARs are displayed (AR 0.25, AR 0.5, AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the
different Reynolds numbers are displayed (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k). TKE fields
for Re = 100k and 250k and AR = 0.25 are missing as the simulations did not converge.
As can be seen in Figure 5.6, Figure 5.7, Figure 5.8, Figure 5.9 and Figure 5.10 the
turbulent kinetic field varied greatly between different angles of attack. For angles of attack
of 0 deg, it can be seen that for a small AR of 0.25, the wake behind the ellipse after the
Reynolds number increased to 50,000 did not create vortex shedding, as also seen in the
velocity field figures, instead, it reached a steady-state of a detached wake. For the aspect
ratios of 0.5 and 0.75 there was a permanent generation of Von-Kármán vortices, as the
vortices behind the ellipses were symmetrical and followed the flow direction. Furthermore,
smaller aspect ratios seemed to create higher vortex-shedding frequencies, while bigger
aspect ratios seemed to create more energetic vortices.
For angles of attack of 22.5 deg, it can be seen that the simulations with AR of 0.25 had
a more unstable wake compared to the ones with AR of 0.5 and 0.75. Moreover, higher
AR led to a better formation of the vortex behind the ellipse, with a not so periodic
vortex shedding. The increase in the angle of attack also led to an increase in the distance
between different vortices. Lastly, the vortices in the ellipse of AR of 0.5 seemed periodic
and with a higher shedding frequency than the ones with AR of 0.75.
For angles of attack of 45 deg, the same trend was obtained where the smallest AR had
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
63
==PAGE:74==
a more turbulent wake and higher AR led to more periodic vortex shedding and a more
clear vortex formation. Moreover, the vortices in the simulations with an aspect ratio of
0.25 seemed to have a higher turbulent kinetic energy than the ones with higher aspect
ratios.
In the simulations performed for an angle of attack of 67.5 deg, the wake behind the ellipse
of AR of 0.25 had a completely unstructured wake, with highly energetic vortices whereas,
for the other two aspect ratios, there was still a lightly structured wake.
Lastly, for the simulations with angles of attack of 90 deg, the wake seemed similar be-
tween the different ellipses and more structured. However, the turbulent kinetic energy
in the vortices decreased with higher Reynolds number, which could be caused by higher
Reynolds number leading to lower vortex-shedding.
5.2.2
Pressure Coeﬀicient Distributions and Pressure Coeﬀicients on
the Ellipse
For the different pressure coeﬀicients around the ellipses both a XY Plot around the ellipse
surface and a more visual representation of the pressure coeﬀicient on the ellipse surface
were represented in the following figures. Only the cases for a Reynolds number of 50,000
are presented as otherwise, there would be too many cases presented. The case with a
Reynolds number of 50, 000 was chosen as it is the most representative one because there
were wind tunnel measurements to validate the numerical simulations. First of all the
pressure coeﬀicient plots around the ellipse for the different flow angles of attack for the
ellipse with an aspect ratio of 0.25 are presented, followed by the ellipse with an aspect
ratio of 0.5 and finally the pressure coeﬀicient plot for the ellipse with the aspect ratio of
0.75. The same procedure is applied to the figures with the pressure coeﬀicient through
the ellipse surface. The rest of the plots can be found in section A.4.
In the different figures in Figure 5.11, Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13, it could be seen how
the increase of the angle of attack led to a constant increase in the pressure coeﬀicient
until the case of α = 90o, where the maximum pressure coeﬀicient decreased compared to
the one with an angle of attack of 67.5o. Moreover, for the different ellipses, the pressure
coeﬀicient was smaller for the case of the angle of attack of 0o and aspect ratio of 0.25,
and the pressure coeﬀicient of the ellipse with an aspect ratio of 0.5 was also smaller than
the ellipse with an aspect ratio of 0.75. However, an increase in the angle of attack led to
a higher increase in the pressure coeﬀicient in the smaller aspect ratio ellipses. This led
to higher pressure coeﬀicients in the ellipse with an AR of 0.25 compared to the one with
an AR of 0.5, and higher pressure coeﬀicients in the ellipse with an AR of 0.5 compared
to the one with an AR of 0.75. Lastly, it could be appreciated that although the pressure
coeﬀicient shape was the same on the leading edge of the ellipses, for the different aspect
ratios; the trailing edge pressure coeﬀicient distribution changed for the different aspect
ratios. The higher the aspect ratio, the more distributed the pressure coeﬀicient through
the trailing edge.
For the pressure coeﬀicient figures (Figure 5.14, Figure 5.15, Figure 5.16) it could be
appreciated that the stagnation point for the smaller aspect ratio was smaller for the
smaller aspect ratios. However, for the different angles of attack, the highest aspect ratio
seemed to have smaller stagnation areas compared to smaller aspect ratios. And the other
way, the smaller aspect ratios were more influenced by the inflow angle of attack and had
bigger stagnation areas.
64
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:75==
Figure 5.11: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at Re = 50k for AR 0.25 with different flow angles
of attack from top to bottom (AoA = 0o, 22.5o, 45o, 67.5o, 90o).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
65
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.12: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at Re = 50k for AR 0.5 with different flow angles
of attack from top to bottom (AoA = 0o, 22.5o, 45o, 67.5o, 90o).
66
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:77==
Figure 5.13: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at Re = 50k for AR 0.75 with different flow angles
of attack from top to bottom (AoA = 0o, 22.5o, 45o, 67.5o, 90o).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
67
==PAGE:78==
Figure 5.14: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at Re = 50k for AR 0.25 with
different flow angles of attack from top to bottom (AoA = 0o, 22.5o, 45o, 67.5o, 90o).
68
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:79==
Figure 5.15: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at Re = 50k for AR 0.5 with different
flow angles of attack from top to bottom (AoA = 0o, 22.5o, 45o, 67.5o, 90o).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
69
==PAGE:80==
Figure 5.16: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at Re = 50k for AR 0.75 with
different flow angles of attack from top to bottom (AoA = 0o, 22.5o, 45o, 67.5o, 90o).
70
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:81==
5.2.3
Vortex Shedding Frequency and Strouhal Numbers
For the vortex shedding frequency and Strouhal number study, different plots were made.
First of all, the Strouhal number against the angles of attack was plotted for the different
Reynolds numbers and the different aspect ratios (Figure 5.17). Secondly, the Strouhal
number was plotted against the Reynolds number for the different aspect ratios and dif-
ferent angles of attack (Figure 5.18). Lastly, the Strouhal number was plotted against
the angles of attack for the different aspect ratios and different Reynolds numbers (Fig-
ure 5.19). The same approach was given to the shedding frequencies. This is, first of all,
the shedding frequency against the angles of attack was plotted for the different Reynolds
numbers and the different aspect ratios (Figure 5.20). Secondly, the shedding frequency
was plotted against the Reynolds number for the different aspect ratios and different an-
gles of attack (Figure 5.21). Lastly, the shedding frequency was plotted against the angles
of attack for the different aspect ratios and different Reynolds numbers (Figure 5.22).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Figure 5.17: St through Re for different angles of attack and different AR.
For the Strouhal number against the angles of attack plotted for the different Reynolds
numbers and the different aspect ratios, seen in Figure 5.17, it was seen that the different
Reynolds number had the same tendency inside each aspect ratio. The only difference was
that the Strouhal number increased slightly for higher Reynolds numbers, but the trend
was the same, a reduction in the Strouhal number for increasing angles of attack, with
a tendency to approach a Strouhal number of 0.2, in the case of the ellipses with aspect
ratio of 0.25 and 0.5. For the ellipse with AR of 0.75, the approached Strouhal number
has higher, between 0.25 and 0.3.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
71
==PAGE:82==
0
50
100
150
200
250
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0
50
100
150
200
250
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
0.21
0.22
0.23
0
50
100
150
200
250
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
Figure 5.18: St through Re for different aspect ratios and different angles of attack.
Missing data for AR = 0.25 and Re = 100k and 250k is due to the non-convergence of the
simulations on those cases.
For the Strouhal number plotted against the Reynolds number for the different aspect
ratios and different angles of attack, as seen in Figure 5.18, increasing Reynolds numbers
led to higher Strouhal numbers. Moreover, although the ellipse with smaller aspect ratios
had the highest Strouhal numbers for the angle of attack of 0 deg, by increasing the angles
of attack this trend has reverted and the increase of the angle of attack led to higher
Strouhal number for higher aspect ratios.
For the Strouhal number plotted against the angles of attack for the different aspect ratios
and different Reynolds numbers, as seen in Figure 5.19, it could be appreciated that the
Strouhal number had the same behaviour for all the cases. The different simulations led
to a reduction of the Strouhal number for increasing angles of attack, converging into a
Strouhal number of 0.2.
72
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:83==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 5.19: St through angles of attack for different aspect ratios and different Re.
Missing data for AR = 0.25 and Re = 100k and 250k is due to the non-convergence of the
simulations on those cases.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
73
==PAGE:84==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Figure 5.20:
Shedding frequencies against the different angles of attack for different
Reynolds numbers and aspect ratios.
For the shedding frequencies against the angles of attack plotted for the different Reynolds
numbers and the different aspect ratios, seen in Figure 5.20, it was seen that the different
Reynolds number had the same tendency inside each aspect ratio. The only difference was
that the shedding frequency increased slightly for higher Reynolds numbers, especially for
the ellipses with aspect ratios of 0.5 and 0.75. The trend was similar for the different cases,
with a reduction in the shedding frequency for increasing angles of attack, decreasing to
close to 0 Hz.
For the shedding frequency plotted against the Reynolds number for the different aspect
ratios and different angles of attack, as seen in Figure 5.21, increasing Reynolds numbers
led clearly to higher shedding frequencies. Moreover, although the ellipse with smaller as-
pect ratios had the highest Strouhal numbers for the angle of attack of 0 deg, by increasing
the angles of attack this trend has reverted and the increase of the angle of attack led to
higher shedding frequencies for higher aspect ratios.
74
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:85==
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0
50
100
150
200
250
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
0.21
0.22
0.23
0
50
100
150
200
250
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
Figure 5.21: Shedding frequencies through Re for different aspect ratios and different
angles of attack. Missing data for AR = 0.25 and Re = 100k and 250k is due to the
non-convergence of the simulations on those cases.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
75
==PAGE:86==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Figure 5.22: Shedding frequencies through angles of attack for different aspect ratios and
different Re. Missing data for AR = 0.25 and Re = 100k and 250k is due to the non-
convergence of the simulations on those cases.
For the shedding frequency plotted against the angles of attack for the different aspect
ratios and different Reynolds numbers, as seen in Figure 5.22, it could be appreciated that
the shedding frequency had the same behaviour for all the cases. The different simulations
led to a reduction of the shedding frequency for increasing angles of attack but converged
into different shedding frequencies for each Reynolds number.
5.2.4
Aerodynamic Forces and Coeﬀicients
To have a better understanding of the effect of the different parameters on the forces acting
on the ellipses, the lift and drag coeﬀicients were plotted for different cases. First of all, the
Cl and Cd coeﬀicients were plotted for the different aspect ratios over the different angles
of attack and for the different Reynolds numbers. Subsequently, the coeﬀicient Cl/Cd was
plotted for the different aspect ratios against the angles of attack and for the different
Reynolds numbers of Re = 10k, 25k, 50k. Lastly, the Cl coeﬀicient was plotted against
the angles of attack for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k) and different
aspect ratios. The Cl plots for the Reynolds numbers of 100k and 250k were discarded as
76
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:87==
they were missing many data and the data was not relevant enough, therefore they were
not plotted.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 5.23: Cl and Cd coeﬀicients through the different angles of attack for the different
aspect ratios and different Reynolds numbers. Some data is missing for the ellipse with
AR of 0.25 due to non-converged simulations.
On Figure 5.23 it could be seen for the different plots of lift coeﬀicient that increasing the
angle of attack led to an increase of the lift coeﬀicient. In the case of the ellipse with an
aspect ratio of 0.25, this increase had a maximum at an angle of attack of 45o, afterwards,
the lift coeﬀicient decreased. This was not the case for the other two aspect ratios as the
lift coeﬀicient kept increasing until the angle of attack of 90o, where there was a small
decrease.
On the other side, the drag coeﬀicient had the same trend for the different
ellipses, with a constant increase with the increase of the angle of attack.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
77
==PAGE:88==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Figure 5.24: Cl/Cd coeﬀicient through the different angles of attack for the different aspect
ratios and different Reynolds numbers. Some data is missing for the ellipse with AR of
0.25 due to non-converged simulations.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Figure 5.25: Cl coeﬀicient through the different angles of attack for the different aspect
ratios and different Reynolds numbers.
78
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:89==
For the plots with the Cl/Cd coeﬀicient, on Figure 5.24, it could be seen how for the three
different ellipses the maximum obtained Cl/Cd coeﬀicient was at an angle of 22.5o close to
what the maximum Cl/Cd is for aerodynamic profiles. After the angle of attack of 22.5o,
the coeﬀicient drops. Particularly interesting was the case of the ellipse with an aspect
ratio of 0.75, because the coeﬀicient keeps increasing for some particular Reynolds num-
bers (100k, 250k), although this could be caused by some inconsistency on the numerical
calculations.
Lastly, for the different plots of Cl against the angles of attack for the Reynolds numbers
of 10k, 25k and 50k, it can be seen a similarity between the three ellipses and Reynolds
numbers, where the Cl increases with increasing angle of attack, until an angle of attack
of 45o. This trend was delayed for the angle of attack of 67.5o, for the ellipses with an
aspect ratio of 0.5 and 0.75.
5.2.5
Vorticity and Turbulent Structures
To present a detailed analysis of the vorticity fields and turbulent structures observed in
the wake region of the elliptical profiles the vorticity field visualization was used to provide
a visual understanding of the formation and shedding of vortices, while turbulent kinetic
energy (TKE) contours were used to illustrate the intensity and distribution of turbulent
fluctuations.
Figure 5.26: Vorticity field with an angle of attack of 0 deg for the different cases. From
left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25 - AR 0.5 - AR 0.75),
and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted (Re = 10k −25k −
50k −100k −250k).
The following figures were plotted to understand the complex flow dynamics and turbu-
lence behaviour associated with vortex shedding. Both the vorticity patterns and TKE
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
79
==PAGE:90==
fields were chosen to give a better insight into the interaction between vortices and tur-
bulent structures and their impact on the unsteady aerodynamics of the profiles.
To start with the vorticity fields for the different aspect ratio ellipses and for each angle
of attack (0o, 22.5o, 45o, 67.5o, 90o) were plotted. And secondly, the same procedure was
used for the turbulent kinetic energy fields.
In the first figure (Figure 5.26) it could be seen that the increase in Reynolds number
led to higher vorticity fields behind the different ellipses. On the ellipse with an aspect
ratio of 0.25, vortex-shedding appeared for the cases with Reynolds numbers of 10k and
25k, afterwards, increasing the Reynolds number led to a steady state where no vortex
shedding occurred. In the other two cases (AR 0.25, AR 0.5), increasing the Reynolds
number led to higher vorticity on the vortex shedding, but vortex shedding occurred in
all the cases.
Figure 5.27: Vorticity field with an angle of attack of 22.5 deg for the different cases. From
left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25 - AR 0.5 - AR 0.75), and
from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted (Re = 10k −25k −50k).
For the angle of attack of 22.5 deg, all the cases led to vortex-shedding and the increase
of the Reynolds number led to higher vorticity on the vortex-shedding. For the different
aspect ratios, the smaller aspect ratios led to more separated vortices on the wake, whereas
the increase of the aspect ratio implied a closer vortex-shedding to the ellipse.
80
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:91==
Figure 5.28: Vorticity field with an angle of attack of 45 deg for the different cases.
From left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25 - AR 0.5 -
AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted (Re =
10k −25k −50k −100k −250k).
The figure of the simulation with AR of 0.25 and
Re = 250k is missing due to non-converged simulation.
In the case of an angle of attack of 45 deg, seen in Figure 5.28, the trend seen in the previous
cases continued, where the increase of Reynolds number increased the vorticity. Moreover,
vortex-shedding occurred in all the cases. Furthermore, secondary vortex formations were
seen in the cases with smaller Reynolds numbers, especially for the case with smaller
aspect ratio, where besides the main vortices, smaller vortices could be seen close to the
surface of the ellipse.
In Figure 5.29 apart from the same explanations given in the previous vorticity field
figures, it could be seen that for the ellipse with an aspect ratio of 0.25, the vortex-
shedding starts to behave chaotically, where main vortices are seen in a far field, but close
to the ellipse secondary vortex shedding appeared clearly. For the other two aspect ratios,
vortex-shedding also became more chaotic but there is still a clear presence of a main
vortex-shedding.
Lastly, for an angle of attack of 90 deg, seen in Figure 5.30, most of the vortex structures
are chaotic, especially for increasing Reynolds numbers.
Vorticity also increases with
the increase of the Reynolds number and many secondary vortices are seen through the
different cases.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
81
==PAGE:92==
Figure 5.29: Vorticity field with an angle of attack of 67.5 deg for the different cases. From
left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25 - AR 0.5 - AR 0.75), and
from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted (Re = 10k −25k −50k).
Figure 5.30: Vorticity field with an angle of attack of 90 deg for the different cases.
From left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25 - AR 0.5 -
AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted (Re =
10k −25k −50k −100k −250k).
The figures of the simulation with AR of 0.25 and
Re = 100k&250k are missing due to non-converged simulations.
82
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:93==
Figure 5.31: Turbulent kinetic energy field with an angle of attack of 0 deg for the different
cases. From left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25 - AR 0.5
- AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted (Re =
10k −25k −50k −100k −250k).
Figure 5.32: Turbulent kinetic energy field with an angle of attack of 22.5 deg for the
different cases. From left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25
- AR 0.5 - AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted
(Re = 10k −25k −50k).
For the turbulent kinetic energy field, the different cases separated by the angle of attack
are shown. For the first case where the angle of attack is 0 deg, the figures for the different
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
83
==PAGE:94==
cases are seen in Figure 5.31. On the ellipse with an aspect ratio of 0.25 most of the
turbulent kinetic energy was seen on the vortices or the wake close to the ellipse. The
same explanation applied to the ellipses with aspect ratios of 0.5 and 0.75. The turbulent
kinetic energy dissipated rapidly on the near wake and the only rest of TKE appeared on
the vortices.
In the Figure 5.32, clear vortex-shedding was seen in all the cases and the turbulent kinetic
energy remained in the vortices on the wake.
Figure 5.33: Turbulent kinetic energy field with an angle of attack of 45 deg for the
different cases. From left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25
- AR 0.5 - AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted
(Re = 10k −25k −50k −100k −250k). The figure of the simulation with AR of 0.25 and
Re = 250k is missing due to non-converged simulation.
For the figure with an angle of attack of 45 deg (Figure 5.33), it was seen that for lower
Reynolds numbers most of the turbulent kinetic energy was carried in the vortices already
created in the wake. For increasing Reynolds number, the turbulent kinetic stayed closer
to the surface of the ellipses.
84
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5.34: Turbulent kinetic energy field with an angle of attack of 67.5 deg for the
different cases. From left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25
- AR 0.5 - AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted
(Re = 10k −25k −50k).
Figure 5.35: Turbulent kinetic energy field with an angle of attack of 90 deg for the
different cases. From left to right the different aspect ratio ellipses are plotted (AR 0.25
- AR 0.5 - AR 0.75), and from top to bottom the different Reynolds numbers are plotted
(Re = 10k−25k−50k). The figures of the simulation with AR of 0.25 and Re = 100k&250k
are missing due to non-converged simulations.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
85
==PAGE:96==
In the case of the angle of attack of 67.5 deg, seen in Figure 5.34, similar to the vorticity
fields, the flow behaved more chaotically, and the determination of the flow structures
became more diﬀicult to explain.
For the last case where the angle of attack is 90 deg, most of the turbulent kinetic energy
was concentrated on the vortices in the wake of the ellipses. Moreover, it could be seen
how the turbulent structures for this angle of attack were totally chaotic and unstructured.
86
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:97==
6
Integration and Discussion of
Experimental and Simulation Results
The integration and discussion of the experimental and numerical simulation results ob-
tained from the wind tunnel experiments and computational fluid dynamics simulations
are presented in this section. The findings of both experimental and simulation studies are
brought together, aiming for a cross-check of the numerical simulation results and analy-
sis of the aerodynamic behaviour of the elliptical profiles. The integration of both results
enables the validation of the simulation models, identifies limitations in both approaches
and draws conclusions about the aerodynamic performance of the profiles.
6.1
Comparison and integration of the experimental and
simulation results
To compare the data obtained from the numerical results and the experimental measure-
ments, an approach similar to the one made in previous analysis is going to be done. First
of all, the Cp plots are going to be compared, secondly, the Cl and Cd coeﬀicients are
going to be compared, and lastly, the Strouhal numbers are going to be compared.
6.1.1
Cp Comparison
For the sake of brevity, and knowing that the Cp results on the measurements done in
the wind tunnel are similar in the four measurements done, one case is going to be taken
as an example to do the comparison between the experimental and numerical results. In
this case, the case with an ellipse of AR of 0.5, and Reynolds number of 50,000 is taken
as an example, because of being the middle point both in the studied aspect ratios and
Reynolds numbers.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
87
==PAGE:98==
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 6.1: Pressure coeﬀicient on the wind tunnel measurements and numerical simula-
tions for the ellipse with AR 0.5, Re = 50k and different angles of attack (0o, 45o, 90o).
The left column represents the experimental results, and the right column represents the
numerical results.
As it can be seen in Figure 6.1, overall, the numerical simulations have exhibited fair
agreement with the experimental data, validating the numerical data. However, it is worth
noticing that there were specific discrepancies in the prediction of the pressure coeﬀicient
on the upper camber of the ellipses, where the numerical simulations tended to overpredict
the Cp values. The numerical Cp distribution mirrored the experimental trends, capturing
regions of high and low pressure along the ellipse. However, the discrepancy observed in the
pressure coeﬀicients on the upper camber needs further investigation. The overprediction
of Cp in this specific region could be attributed to the complex flow interactions near the
upper surface. Flow separation, boundary layer effect, or geometric features may have
influenced the results.
As it can be observed, the Cp plots for the angle of attack of 0o, predicted fairly well
compared to the experimental results. Both data showed a minimum of -1 Cp on the left
88
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:99==
of the plot, a sudden increase almost to 1 Cp and lastly, the Cp tended to a value of 0.55
in both cases.
However, when the angle of attack was increased, the flow on the lower camber remained
attached to the ellipse’s surface, leading to good results in the lower region of the ellipse.
However, the high angle of attack led to big flow separation on the upper camber; and as
it has been explained, the turbulence model used in the present study had very limited
accuracy for big flow separations. This may be the most important reason to justify the
discrepancies between both results.
Finally, the plots with an angle of attack of 90o showed the same trend as the ones with
45o; therefore, the flow at such a high angle of attack was also highly separated and led
to non-accurate results.
This trend is observed for all the measurements realized, and therefore, can be concluded
that they are independent of the specific case, and apply to all the measurements.
6.1.2
Cl and Cd Comparison
Lift coeﬀicients and drag coeﬀicients obtained from wind tunnel measurements and nu-
merical simulations are compared in the present section, all the comparisons can be seen
in Figure 6.2. The plotted coeﬀicients are the average drag coeﬀicient, and for the lift
coeﬀicients, the maximum obtained lift coeﬀicients are plotted, as they are the ones which
resemble the lift produced by the vortex shedding.
Overall, the comparison reveals that at non-zero angles of attack, big discrepancies emerged
between the wind tunnel measurements and the numerical simulation results. The numer-
ical simulations tended to overpredict both lift and drag coeﬀicients across the entire range
of angles of attack. This overprediction was more noticeable at higher angles of attack,
maybe due to the fact that at higher angles of attack, the aerodynamic forces experience
more significant changes due to increased flow separation and vortex shedding. However,
at an angle of attack of 0o, both wind tunnel measurements and numerical simulations had
agreement in predicting both lift and drag coeﬀicients. This indicated that the turbulence
model used (k −ω SST) performed well in capturing the zero-lift condition.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
89
==PAGE:100==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Figure 6.2: Lift and Drag coeﬀicients on the wind tunnel measurements and numerical
simulations for different angles of attack (0o, 45o, 90o). The left column represents the Cl
results, the right column represents Cd results, the top row represents Re of 50k and the
bottom row represents Re of 100k.
Further validation and refinement of the numerical models is needed to improve the agree-
ment between both data, utilizing more advanced turbulence models or refining the mesh
resolution in regions of interest.
All in all, the comparison between lift and drag coeﬀicients highlighted the strengths and
limitations of the numerical approach using the k −ω SST turbulence model. While the
numerical simulations demonstrated good agreement at 0o angle of attack, some discrep-
ancies in lift and drag coeﬀicients at non-zero angles of attack suggested the need for
further refinement and validation of the numerical models.
6.1.3
St Comparison
The Strouhal number obtained from the measurements done in the wind tunnel and the
numerical results from the simulations are compared for two different Reynolds numbers
(Re = 50k and 100k) and for both ellipses. The obtained results can be seen in Figure 6.3.
It could be observed that at Reynolds number of 50,000, both wind tunnel measurements
and CFD results had relatively close agreement in predicting the Strouhal number, espe-
cially for high angles of attack. The periodic vortex shedding behaviour was captured,
allowing for close measurements. However, for zero angle of attack, the Strouhal number
is clearly off from the experimental measurements. This was not expected as the proper
measurements of Cp, Cl and Cd were done at that angle of attack.
90
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:101==
On the other hand, at Reynolds numbers of 100,000, a discrepancy between both data was
clear. The numerical simulations tended to overpredict the Strouhal number compared to
the experimental data. This overprediction could be caused by a struggle of the turbulence
model to fully capture the complex flow behaviour at higher Reynolds numbers.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
(b)
Figure 6.3: Strouhal number on the wind tunnel measurements and numerical simulations
for different angles of attack (0o, 45o, 90o). (a) Re = 50k. (b) Re = 100k.
The observed discrepancies in the Strouhal number at higher Reynolds numbers could be
attributed to various factors like the k−ω SST turbulence model being robust at moderate
Reynolds numbers, but encountering challenges in accurately predicting unsteady flow
behaviour, particularly as the Reynolds number increases. Additionally, the simplifications
in the numerical setup, such as the boundary conditions and grid resolution, may impact
the accuracy of the CFD predictions at higher Reynolds numbers.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
91
==PAGE:102==
6.2
Discussion of the Agreement or Discrepancies Between
Wind Tunnel Measurements and Numerical
Simulations
After comparing the data gathered by both wind tunnel measurements and numerical
simulations, it can be concluded that while the k −ω SST turbulence model was used
to compare wind tunnel observations and numerical simulations, the results shed differ-
ences between the two methods for examining vortex shedding in elliptical profiles. The
aerodynamic behaviour of the profiles and the effectiveness of numerical simulations in
reproducing experimental results of lift and drag coeﬀicients, Strouhal numbers, and pres-
sure coeﬀicients was understood.
6.2.1
Pressure Coeﬀicient
For the obtained pressure coeﬀicients, it could be concluded that the CFD results were
able to fully capture the flow behaviour on the surfaces where the flow separation was
small.
At 0o angles of attack, the results agreed completely, as the numerical results
were able to completely capture the shape and values of the pressure coeﬀicient along the
ellipse surface. However, as the angle of attack increased, and therefore, the flow detached
from the ellipse upper surface, the pressure coeﬀicient was not correctly captured as the
measurements were off from the ones obtained in the wind tunnel. However, the values
on the lower camber of the ellipse agreed with the experimental results.
6.2.2
Lift and Drag Coeﬀicients
For the lift and drag coeﬀicients, a similar argument to the one given for the pressure
coeﬀicient can be applied. At 0o angles of attack, as the pressure was correctly captured,
the lift and drag coeﬀicients agreed, again making a point of using the k−ω SST turbulence
model for regions where low flow detachment arises. However, for higher angles of attack,
both lift and drag coeﬀicients did not correctly capture the values from the experimental
results.
6.2.3
Strouhal number
Lastly, it is important to notice the obtained values for the Strouhal number, as this is
the main scope of the present study. While the numerical results had a proper agreement
with the experimental results for 0o angle of attack, in the case of the Strouhal number
this was not the case. The values for 0o angle of attack did not match the ones obtained
in the wind tunnel. However, in the case of higher angles of attack, the results came a
little bit closer in the case of the Strouhal number. Although the reason behind closer
values for higher angles of attack is not completely understood, in the case of 0o, it can be
justified as a diﬀiculty for the turbulence model to predict the complex flow phenomena
of vortex shedding. As it has been explained before, vortex shedding is closely related to
flow separation in the trailing edge of the ellipse, and as mentioned earlier also, RANS
turbulence models have diﬀiculties in predicting flow behaviour on highly separated flows.
Therefore, as vortex shedding is closely related to separated flow, the numerical results do
not agree with the experimental ones.
In conclusion, the comparison of numerical simulations and wind tunnel measurements re-
vealed important details about the similarities and differences between the two approaches
in researching vortex shedding in elliptical profiles. The consistency between the lift and
drag coeﬀicients at zero angles of attack confirmed the accuracy of the symmetric flow
behaviour predictions made by the numerical simulations. However, overall there existed
discrepancies, where the numerical models needs to be improved and validated. The dis-
parities in the lift and drag coeﬀicients at non-zero angles of attack, as well as overpredicted
92
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:103==
Strouhal numbers at higher Reynolds numbers, led to a need for a more precise under-
standing of the aerodynamic behaviour of the profiles. Lastly, it is remarkable to mention
that throughout the integration of experimental and numerical data, a deeper understand-
ing of both the obtained experimental values and the limitations of the turbulence model
was gathered.
6.3
Examination of the Insights Gained from the
Combined Analysis
The combined analysis of wind tunnel measurements and CFD simulations provided valu-
able insights and deepened the understanding of the aerodynamic behaviour of vortex
shedding in elliptical profiles. Although the results did not entirely agree and revealed
limitations in the turbulence model’s ability to capture pressure on detached flow zones,
the integration of experimental and numerical data proved to be a valuable approach.
The comparison of experimental and numerical data was a crucial exercise to assess the
accuracy and reliability of the numerical simulations. It enabled the identification of ar-
eas of agreement and discrepancies between the two approaches, clarified on the strengths
and limitations of the numerical model. The comparison of lift and drag coeﬀicients, pres-
sure coeﬀicients and Strouhal numbers at varying angles of attack and Reynolds numbers
provided valuable insights into the accuracy of the turbulence model under different flow
conditions.
The observed discrepancies in lift and drag coeﬀicients, pressure coeﬀicient on detached
flow surfaces as well as the overprediction of the Strouhal number, highlighted the chal-
lenges and limitations of CFD simulations. Specifically, the k −ω SST turbulence model’s
struggles to capture pressure on detached flow zones emphasized the need for more ad-
vanced turbulence models or higher-fidelity simulations, such as DES or LES, to improve
the accuracy of CFD predictions.
Despite the limitations encountered, the combined analysis of wind tunnel measurements
and CFD simulations showed the clear limitations of the k −ω SST model on detached
flow zones, both on the upper camber of the ellipses on high angles of attack, and the
detached zone on the trailing edge of the ellipse.
6.4
Findings for the Understanding of Vortex Shedding in
Elliptical Profiles
Putting aside the diﬀiculties encountered in the numerical results, it could be deducted
from the results that as seen in the review of previous literature, the ellipse could be seen
as an approximation to both a flat plate or a circular cylinder, depending on the aspect
ratio of the ellipse. The Strouhal number did not depend on the Reynolds number on
a certain range of the Reynolds number, however, it was clearly affected by the angle of
attack of the flow. Although ellipses at 90o had a Strouhal number close to the ones of a
circular cylinder (St ≈0.2), changing the angle of attack led to a change in the Strouhal
number. A lower angle of attack led to a higher Strouhal number, up to 0.525 in the case
of the ellipse with an aspect ratio of 0.5, Reynolds number of 100,000 and 0o of attack.
This is a relevant finding as for the study of the structural behaviour of wind turbines,
it would be relevant to know that the shedding frequency of ellipses have a wide range,
where it could become a major problem if those frequencies coincide with mode-shapes of
the wind turbine.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
93
==PAGE:104==
6.5
Comparison of Shedding-Frequencies with Wind
Turbine Blade Data
Lastly, a brief comparison is going to be given between the shedding-frequencies obtained
from the experimental measurements and natural frequencies from the DTU 10 MW Wind
Turbine [53], which is a reference wind turbine designed by DTU. As a quick introduction
to stability analysis of wind turbines, it can be stated that stability analysis of structures
is required to identify natural frequencies to identify points of resonance in which the
natural frequency of the blade meets the rotational frequency which could potentially lead
to high fatigue loads. By doing a blade-only aeroelastic modal analysis of the DTU 10 MW
wind turbine blades, and investigating 6 modes, the modal frequency of the blades can be
obtained, which refers to the natural frequency at which the blade vibrates in response to
an external excitation or disturbance. The obtained plot of the modal frequencies is the
following one:
Figure 6.4: DTU 10 MW blade only modal frequencies.
Table 6.1: Blade natural frequencies at V = 15 m/s.
Natural Frequencies [Hz] at V = 15 m/s
Mode No.
DTU 10MW
1
0.80
2
0.93
3
1.75
4
2.80
5
3.66
6
5.79
As can be seen in Figure 6.4, and better summarized in Table 6.1, the natural frequencies
of the mode shapes in the blade are quite low and do not coincide with the shedding-
frequencies obtained in the experimental measurements, as seen in Table 4.1 and Table 4.2.
However, it is noticeable to mention that the blades in the DTU 10 MW are very large
(R ≈90 m), and smaller blades increase their natural frequencies. All in all, although the
frequencies do not much and therefore, and resonance problem does not seem to appear,
a more in-depth study is needed.
94
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:105==
7
Discussion and Interpretation of
Results
The interpretation of the results from wind tunnel measurements and CFD simulations
has provided a deeper understanding of the aerodynamic behaviour of vortex shedding in
elliptical profiles and its significance in the context of wind energy applications. In the
present section, the overall results are going to be discussed and interpreted.
7.1
Evaluation of the research objectives and how they
have been addressed
In section 1.2 was stated that the main focus of the present work was to map the value of
the Strouhal numbers through different ellipses with different aspect ratios, inflows with
different Reynolds numbers and angles of attack. Moreover, the main objective could be
split into smaller research objectives. Feedback on the stated research objectives is going
to be given in the present section, which are the following ones:
• Obtain numerical results for computational fluid dynamics simulations for the dif-
ferent case scenarios. Although the numerical simulations have been seen to have
discrepancies with the experimental data, from both numerical simulations and ex-
perimental measurements, diverse data has been gathered, ranging for a wide number
of Reynolds numbers, angles of attack and aspect ratios.
• Obtain experimental measurements of ellipses in a wind tunnel. This research ob-
jective has been completely achieved, obtaining a lot of experimental measurements
for two different ellipses.
• Cross-check the numerical results obtained with the experimental measurements to
ensure the reliability of the numerical results. This objective has also been achieved,
although cross-checking has shown that the numerical results do not align with the
ones from the experimental measurements.
• Compared obtained data with data from previous studies. This research objective
has been achieved, allowing to understand the limitations of the turbulence model
used.
• Conclude if the vortex-induced vibrations on ellipses can be a major problem for
instabilities on wind turbines. A brief comparison with the mode shapes of a blade
has been done, and it seems that the vortex-induced vibrations on ellipses would not
be a major problem for instabilities on wind turbines.
7.2
Discussion of the implications and potential
applications of the findings
The findings from this study have significant implications for the wind energy industry.
Understanding the unsteady aerodynamic behaviour of elliptical profiles and the influ-
ence of vortex shedding on lift and drag coeﬀicients makes possible the optimization of
wind turbine blade designs to improve performance and energy extraction. The Strouhal
number predictions at lower Reynolds numbers provide useful information for predicting
vortex shedding frequencies, which is crucial for designing wind turbine structures that
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
95
==PAGE:106==
can withstand resonant vibrations. The integration of experimental and numerical ap-
proaches has demonstrated the potential for improving aerodynamic predictions, leading
to more cost-effective and reliable wind energy technologies. Moreover, the obtained data
is not only reduced to the study of wind turbine stability, as the elliptical geometry is
commonly used and the study of its aerodynamic characteristics can be beneficial for other
investigations.
7.3
Identification of future research directions and
recommendations
Based on the limitations and challenges encountered in this study, several future research
directions and recommendations are identified. Firstly, investigating the applicability of
advanced turbulence models, such as DES or LES, can improve the accuracy of numerical
simulations, especially at higher Reynolds numbers and angles of attack. Secondly, explor-
ing the impact of surface roughness on aerodynamic forces and vortex-shedding behaviour
will provide valuable insights into refining experimental measurements and numerical sim-
ulations. Thirdly, conducting more extensive experimental studies with varying geometries
and Reynolds numbers can further enhance our understanding of complex flow phenomena
and improve the calibration of numerical models.
Additionally, the integration of machine learning techniques into numerical simulations
could help optimize turbulence models and improve predictions, thereby bridging the
gap between wind tunnel measurements and CFD results.
Furthermore, investigating
the influence of other flow parameters, such as boundary layer thickness and turbulence
intensity, on vortex shedding characteristics will add depth to our understanding of the
aerodynamic behaviour of wind turbine blades.
Recommendations for practical applications include considering the influence of vortex
shedding on blade fatigue and structural integrity. Properly accounting for vortex-induced
vibrations will aid in the design of more robust and durable wind turbines. Moreover,
these findings can guide the development of wind turbine farms, optimizing the layout
and spacing of turbines to minimize the impact of vortex shedding and improve overall
energy extraction.
96
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:107==
8
Conclusion
8.1
Summary of the Key Findings and Contributions of
the Thesis
The examination of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles in this master’s thesis using wind
tunnel data and CFD simulations has produced important findings and made substantial
contributions to the study of the aerodynamics characteristics of ellipses. Understanding
the elliptical profiles’ unstable aerodynamic behaviour, examining the unique characteris-
tics of vortex shedding, and evaluating how effectively numerical models capture compli-
cated flow processes were the research goals. This conclusion contains recommendations
for additional research as well as potential practical applications. It also highlights the
major findings, limitations, and diﬀiculties experienced during the study.
8.2
Key Findings and Contributions
Relevant information on the aerodynamic behaviour of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
was gained from the combined analysis of wind tunnel measurements and CFD simula-
tions. The relevant data obtained in the wind tunnel measurements is one of the main key
findings of the present work, underscoring the significance of numerical simulations for
initial design considerations. The Strouhal number comparison also revealed inconsisten-
cies at higher Reynolds numbers, highlighting the turbulence model’s limits. It was also
found that due to the limitations of the turbulence model, the numerical results for lift
and drag coeﬀicients were overpredicted, together with an overprediction of the pressure
coeﬀicient on the ellipse surface. Moreover, Strouhal number data was obtained which can
be beneficial for future research on the topic.
8.3
Limitations and Challenges Encountered During the
Study
Despite the success in achieving the research objectives stated at the start of the present
work, some limitations and challenges have been encountered during the study.
The
main limitation of the present work was the turbulence model’s limitations to capture
flow behaviour on detached flow zones, which led to discrepancies between the gathered
experimental data and numerical results. Moreover, the use of the chosen turbulence model
was caused by the time limitation inherent of the master thesis. As CFD calculations time
requirements increase proportional to the accuracy of the turbulence model, more accurate
turbulence models (DES or LES) were not possible to use, as there was no available time
to do so. Furthermore, the computational resources also limited the number of simulations
available, the simulations mesh, time-steps and turbulence model.
On the other hand, for the experimental measurements, one of the main limitations was
to 3D print the used models for the measurements, as the design to measure the pressure
along the ellipse (pressure taps, pressure holes), required good quality printing, which
was not always available.
A lot of tryouts were done to understand which geometry
was possible to 3D print, which hole size could be 3D printed, and so on. Additionally,
surface roughness of the 3D printed models posed challenges in accurately representing the
aerodynamic behaviour, needing further investigations into the impact of surface roughness
on experimental and numerical data.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
97
==PAGE:108==
8.4
Suggestions for Further Research and Potential
Practical Applications
To address the limitations encountered, further research is recommended to improve the
accuracy and reliability of numerical simulations. Exploring advanced turbulence models
may provide better predictions at higher Reynolds numbers and angles of attack. Ad-
ditionally, increasing the mesh resolution and refining the numerical setup could lead to
more accurate representations of complex flow phenomena. Moreover, investigating the
influence of surface roughness on aerodynamic forces and vortex-shedding behaviour would
be beneficial in refining experimental and numerical approaches.
In conclusion, this master thesis has explored vortex shedding in elliptical profiles through
wind tunnel measurements and CFD simulations. The wind tunnel measurements offered
a hands-on experience in conducting experiments and obtaining direct aerodynamic data
from physical models. It provided an opportunity to understand the practical aspects of
wind tunnel testing, such as experimental setup, data acquisition, and calibration tech-
niques that has greatly enriched both the study carried out and the work done by the
student. The research has provided findings, fulfilled research objectives, and understood
the limitations and challenges faced in aerodynamic research. By suggesting ways for fur-
ther research and potential practical applications, this study has tried to contribute to
the advancement of wind energy technology and the quest for more eﬀicient and environ-
mentally friendly energy solutions.
98
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
[1]
VESTAS. “Vestas.” (2023), [Online]. Available: https://www.vestas.com/en (visited
on 07/05/2023).
[2]
EUDP. “Predicting wind turbine stability in general inflow.” (2023), [Online]. Avail-
able: https://energiforskning.dk/en/node/15974 (visited on 07/05/2023).
[3]
P. K. Kundu, I. M. Cohen, and D. R. Dowling, Fluid mechanics. Academic press,
2015.
[4]
H. Schlichting and J. Kestin, Boundary layer theory. Springer, 1961, vol. 121.
[5]
A. Roshko, “On the development of turbulent wakes from vortex streets,” Tech.
Rep., 1954.
[6]
C. H. Williamson, “Vortex dynamics in the cylinder wake,” Annual review of fluid
mechanics, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 477–539, 1996.
[7]
C. Williamson and A. Roshko, “Measurements of base pressure in the wake of a
cylinder at low reynolds numbers,” Zeitschrift fur Flugwissenschaften und Wel-
traumforschung, vol. 14, no. 1-2, pp. 38–46, 1990.
[8]
C. Norberg, “Effects of reynolds number and a low-intensity freestream turbulence
on the flow around a circular cylinder,” Chalmers University, Goteborg, Sweden,
Technological Publications, vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 1–55, 1987.
[9]
P. W. Bearman, “Vortex shedding from oscillating bluff bodies,” Annual review of
fluid mechanics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 195–222, 1984.
[10]
F. O., “Messungen ebenen und gewalben platten ergenbisse der aerodynamischen,”
Gottingen Leiferung, vol. IV, no. 1, pp. 96–317, 1932.
[11]
W. Shih, C. Wang, D. Coles, and A. Roshko, “Experiments on flow past rough
circular cylinders at large reynolds numbers,” Journal of Wind Engineering and
Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 49, no. 1-3, pp. 351–368, 1993.
[12]
R. D. Henderson, “Details of the drag curve near the onset of vortex shedding,”
Physics of Fluids, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 2102–2104, 1995.
[13]
M. C. Thompson, A. Radi, A. Rao, J. Sheridan, and K. Hourigan, “Low-reynolds-
number wakes of elliptical cylinders: From the circular cylinder to the normal flat
plate,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 751, pp. 570–600, 2014.
[14]
A. H. Yates, “Fluid-dynamic drag.dr.s. f. hoerner. published by the author, 1958.
400 pp. illustrated. 15 dollars.,” The Aeronautical Journal, vol. 62, no. 571, pp. 3–6,
1958. doi: 10.1017/S0368393100069200.
[15]
C. Grinderslev, N. Nørmark Sørensen, G. Raimund Pirrung, and S. González Hor-
cas, “Multiple limit cycle amplitudes in high-fidelity predictions of standstill wind
turbine blade vibrations,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2201–2213, 2022.
[16]
S. González Horcas, M. H. A. Madsen, N. N. Sørensen, and F. Zahle, “Suppressing
vortex induced vibrations of wind turbine blades with flaps,” Recent Advances in
CFD for Wind and Tidal Offshore Turbines, pp. 11–24, 2019.
[17]
S. Horcas, T. Barlas, F. Zahle, and N. Sørensen, “Vortex induced vibrations of
wind turbine blades: Influence of the tip geometry,” Physics of Fluids, vol. 32,
no. 6, p. 065 104, 2020.
[18]
J. C. Heinz, N. N. Sørensen, F. Zahle, and W. Skrzypiński, “Vortex-induced vibra-
tions on a modern wind turbine blade,” Wind Energy, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 2041–
2051, 2016.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
99
==PAGE:110==
[19]
V.-T. Nguyen and H. H. Nguyen, “Detached eddy simulations of flow induced vi-
brations of circular cylinders at high reynolds numbers,” Journal of Fluids and
Structures, vol. 63, pp. 103–119, 2016.
[20]
M. Hansen, Aerodynamics of wind turbines. Routledge, 2015.
[21]
S. Choi and O. J. Kwon, “Aerodynamic characteristics of elliptic airfoils in high
reynolds numbers,” Journal of aircraft, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 641–650, 2008.
[22]
A. Zahm, R. Smith, and F. Lounders, Forces on elliptic cylinders in uniform air
stream. US Government Printing Oﬀice, 1928.
[23]
S. F. Hoerner and H. V. Borst, “Fluid-dynamic lift: Practical information on aero-
dynamic and hydrodynamic lift,” NASA STI/Recon Technical Report A, vol. 76,
p. 32 167, 1975.
[24]
I. B. Celik, Introductory turbulence modeling, 1999.
[25]
CFD-Online. “Sst k-omega model.” (2011), [Online]. Available: https://www.cfd-
online.com/Wiki/SST_k-omega_model (visited on 05/25/2023).
[26]
S. M. Hasheminejad and M. Jarrahi, “Numerical simulation of two dimensional
vortex-induced vibrations of an elliptic cylinder at low reynolds numbers,” Com-
puters & Fluids, vol. 107, pp. 25–42, 2015.
[27]
J. S. Leontini, M. Griﬀith, D. L. Jacono, and J. Sheridan, “The flow-induced vi-
bration of an elliptical cross-section at varying angles of attack,” Journal of Fluids
and Structures, vol. 78, pp. 356–373, 2018.
[28]
J. Wang, B. Zhou, Z. Yao, J. Yu, Z. Wu, and G. Zhang, “The vortex-induced
vibration of an elliptic cylinder with different aspect ratios,” Ocean Engineering,
vol. 248, p. 110 758, 2022.
[29]
V. Modi and E. Wiland, “Unsteady aerodynamics of stationary elliptic cylinders
in subcritical flow,” AIAA Journal, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 1814–1821, 1970.
[30]
T. Ota, H. Nishiyama, and Y. Taoka, “Flow around an elliptic cylinder in the
critical reynolds number regime,” 1987.
[31]
A. Benazza and E. Blanco, “Detached-eddy simulation applied to flow over an
elliptic airfoil near stall,” 2011.
[32]
A. Benazza, E. Blanco, J. Parrondo, and J. Fernández, “Turbulence models in sym-
metric airfoil simulation,” in 1st International Congress of Energy and Environment
Engineering and Management, Portalegre, Portugal, 2005.
[33]
A. Benazza, E. Blanco, and M. Abidat, “2d detached-eddy simulation around el-
liptic airfoil at high reynolds number,” Journal of Applied Sciences, vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 547–552, 2007.
[34]
C. Kramer, H. Gerhardt, and B. Regenscheit, “Wind tunnels for industrial aero-
dynamics,” Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 16,
no. 2-3, pp. 225–264, 1984.
[35]
S. Mauro, S. Brusca, R. Lanzafame, F. Famoso, A. Galvagno, and M. Messina,
“Small-scale open-circuit wind tunnel: Design criteria, construction and calibra-
tion,” International Journal of Applied Engineering Research, vol. 12, no. 23, pp. 13 649–
13 662, 2017.
[36]
NASA. “Static pressure measurement.” (2021), [Online]. Available: https://www.
grc.nasa.gov/www/k-12/airplane/tunpsm.html (visited on 06/01/2023).
[37]
AEROSENSE. “First wind tunnel tests.” (2021), [Online]. Available: https://www.
aerosense.ai/blog/first-wind-tunnel-tests (visited on 06/01/2023).
[38]
A. Smith, D. Mee, W. Daniel, and T. Shimoda, “Design, modelling and analysis of
a six component force balance for hypervelocity wind tunnel testing,” Computers
& Structures, vol. 79, no. 11, pp. 1077–1088, 2001.
100
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:111==
[39]
G. Higson, “Recent advances in strain gauges,” Journal of Scientific Instruments,
vol. 41, no. 7, p. 405, 1964.
[40]
P. Systems. “Pressure systems.” (2023), [Online]. Available: https://pressuresystems.
com.au/ (visited on 07/05/2023).
[41]
R. Courant, K. Friedrichs, and H. Lewy, “On the partial difference equations of
mathematical physics,” IBM journal of Research and Development, vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 215–234, 1967.
[42]
L. Eça, G. Vaz, M. Hoekstra, et al., “On the role of iterative errors in unsteady flow
simulations,” in 21st Numerical Towing Tank Symposium (NuTTS’18), Cortona,
Italy, 2018.
[43]
M. Ghaffari, C.-Y. Hsu, and A. A. Linninger, “Automatic reconstruction and gen-
eration of structured hexahedral mesh for non-planar bifurcations in vascular net-
works,” in Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, vol. 37, Elsevier, 2015, pp. 635–
640.
[44]
SOLIDWORKS. “Solidworks 2022.” (), [Online]. Available: https://www.solidworks.
com/product/solidworks-3d-cad (visited on 06/12/2023).
[45]
M. CFD. “Different mesh types in cfd.” (), [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
manchestercfd.co.uk/post/all-there-is-to-know-about-different-mesh-types-in-cfd
(visited on 06/26/2023).
[46]
P. Catalano, M. Wang, G. Iaccarino, and P. Moin, “Numerical simulation of the
flow around a circular cylinder at high reynolds numbers,” International journal of
heat and fluid flow, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 463–469, 2003.
[47]
M. C. Ong, T. Utnes, L. E. Holmedal, D. Myrhaug, and B. Pettersen, “Numer-
ical simulation of flow around a smooth circular cylinder at very high reynolds
numbers,” Marine Structures, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 142–153, 2009.
[48]
P. Bradshaw and G. P. Huang, “The law of the wall in turbulent flow,” Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
vol. 451, no. 1941, pp. 165–188, 1995.
[49]
ISO. “Iso 13443:1996, natural gas - standard reference conditions.” (1996), [Online].
Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/20461.html (visited on 06/30/2023).
[50]
STAR-CCM+, Simcenter User Guide. STAR-CCM+, 2023.
[51]
ANIWAA. “Ultimaker extended.” (2023), [Online]. Available: https://www.aniwaa.
com/product/3d-printers/ultimaker-ultimaker-3-extended/ (visited on 07/05/2023).
[52]
PRUSA. “Original prusa i3 mk3s+ 3d printer.” (2023), [Online]. Available: https:
//www.prusa3d.com/product/original- prusa- i3- mk3s- 3d- printer- 3 (visited on
07/05/2023).
[53]
C. Bak, F. Zahle, R. Bitsche, et al., “The dtu 10-mw reference wind turbine,” in
Danish wind power research 2013, 2013.
[54]
T. Von Karman, “Some remarks on the statistical theory of turbulence,” Proc. 5th
Int. Congr. Appl. Mech., Cambridge, MA, vol. 347, 1938.
[55]
D. C. Wilcox et al., Turbulence modeling for CFD. DCW industries La Canada,
CA, 1998, vol. 2.
[56]
D. Tritton, Physical fluid dynamics. the modern university in physics series, 1977.
[57]
A. Smith, T. Cebeci, and D. A. Division, Numerical solution of the turbulent-
boundary-layer equations. Douglas Aircraft Company, Douglas Aircraft Division,
1967.
[58]
P. S. Granville, “Baldwin-lomax factors for turbulent boundary layers in pressure
gradients,” AIAA journal, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1624–1627, 1987.
[59]
P. Spalart and S. Allmaras, “A one-equation turbulence model for aerodynamic
flows,” in 30th aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit, 1992, p. 439.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
101
==PAGE:112==
[60]
T.-H. Shih, W. W. Liou, A. Shabbir, Z. Yang, and J. Zhu, “A new k-epsilon eddy
viscosity model for high reynolds number turbulent flows: Model development and
validation,” Tech. Rep., 1994.
[61]
V. Yakhot, S. Orszag, S. Thangam, T. Gatski, and C. Speziale, “Development of
turbulence models for shear flows by a double expansion technique,” Physics of
Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 1510–1520, 1992.
[62]
T.-H. Shih, A realizable Reynolds stress algebraic equation model. National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration, 1993, vol. 105993.
[63]
D. C. Wilcox, “Reassessment of the scale-determining equation for advanced tur-
bulence models,” AIAA journal, vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1299–1310, 1988.
[64]
F. Menter, “Zonal two equation kw turbulence models for aerodynamic flows,” in
23rd fluid dynamics, plasmadynamics, and lasers conference, 1993, p. 2906.
[65]
B. Baldwin and H. Lomax, “Thin-layer approximation and algebraic model for
separated turbulentflows,” in 16th aerospace sciences meeting, 1978, p. 257.
[66]
CFD-Online. “Reynolds stress model (rsm).” (2017), [Online]. Available: https://
www.cfd-online.com/Wiki/Reynolds_stress_model_(RSM) (visited on 05/28/2023).
[67]
A. M. Jawarneh and G. H. Vatistas, “Reynolds stress model in the prediction of
confined turbulent swirling flows,” 2006.
[68]
B. E. Launder, G. J. Reece, and W. Rodi, “Progress in the development of a
reynolds-stress turbulence closure,” Journal of fluid mechanics, vol. 68, no. 3,
pp. 537–566, 1975.
[69]
C. G. Speziale, S. Sarkar, and T. B. Gatski, “Modelling the pressure–strain corre-
lation of turbulence: An invariant dynamical systems approach,” Journal of fluid
mechanics, vol. 227, pp. 245–272, 1991.
[70]
A. V. Johansson and M. Hallbäck, “Modelling of rapid pressure—strain in reynolds-
stress closures,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 269, pp. 143–168, 1994.
[71]
A. A. Mishra and S. S. Girimaji, “Toward approximating non-local dynamics in
single-point pressure–strain correlation closures,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 811,
pp. 168–188, 2017.
[72]
J. Smagorinsky, “General circulation experiments with the primitive equations: I.
the basic experiment,” Monthly weather review, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 99–164, 1963.
[73]
M. Germano, U. Piomelli, P. Moin, and W. H. Cabot, “A dynamic subgrid-scale
eddy viscosity model,” Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics, vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 1760–
1765, 1991.
[74]
F. Nicoud and F. Ducros, “Subgrid-scale stress modelling based on the square of
the velocity gradient tensor,” Flow, turbulence and Combustion, vol. 62, no. 3,
pp. 183–200, 1999.
[75]
D. You and P. Moin, “A dynamic global-coeﬀicient subgrid-scale eddy-viscosity
model for large-eddy simulation in complex geometries,” Physics of Fluids, vol. 19,
no. 6, 2007.
[76]
T. van Hooff, B. Blocken, and Y. Tominaga, “On the accuracy of cfd simulations of
cross-ventilation flows for a generic isolated building: Comparison of rans, les and
experiments,” Building and Environment, vol. 114, pp. 148–165, 2017.
[77]
CFD-Online. “Large eddy simulation (les).” (2013), [Online]. Available: https://
www.cfd-online.com/Wiki/Large_eddy_simulation_(LES) (visited on 05/29/2023).
[78]
J. Hoffman and C. Johnson, “Stability of the dual navier–stokes equations and eﬀi-
cient computation of mean output in turbulent flow using adaptive dns/les,” Com-
puter methods in applied mechanics and engineering, vol. 195, no. 13-16, pp. 1709–
1721, 2006.
102
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:113==
[79]
CFD-Online. “Direct numerical simulation (dns).” (2012), [Online]. Available: https:
//www.cfd- online.com /Wiki/Direct_numerical_simulation_(DNS) (visited on
05/30/2023).
[80]
P. R. Spalart, “Comments on the feasibility of les for wings and on the hybrid
rans/les approach,” in Proceedings of the First AFOSR International Conference
on DNS/LES, 1997, 1997, pp. 137–147.
[81]
CFD-Online. “Detached eddy simulation (des).” (2008), [Online]. Available: https:
/ / www . cfd - online . com / Wiki / Detached _ eddy _ simulation _ (DES) (visited on
05/30/2023).
[82]
J. B. Barlow, W. H. Rae, and A. Pope, Low-speed wind tunnel testing. John wiley
& sons, 1999.
[83]
T. P. Chong, P. Joseph, and P. Davies, “Design and performance of an open jet wind
tunnel for aero-acoustic measurement,” Applied acoustics, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 605–
614, 2009.
[84]
B. Chanetz, “A century of wind tunnels since eiffel,” Comptes Rendus Mécanique,
vol. 345, no. 8, pp. 581–594, 2017.
[85]
R. Pankhurst, “Aerodynamics at npl, 1917–1970,” Nature, vol. 238, no. 5364, pp. 375–
380, 1972.
[86]
F. Reboul and L. Dala, “Acoustic measurements in a low-speed wind tunnel, type
göttingen,” AIAA journal, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2277–2281, 2012.
[87]
W. Devenport, C. Bak, K. Brown, A. Borgoltz, J. Osterlund, and P. Davidsson,
“Design and operation of hybrid aeroacoustic wind tunnels,” Design and Operation
of Aeroacoustic Wind Tunnel Tests for Group and Air Transport. NATO STO-EN-
AVT-287, 2017.
[88]
J. B. R. Rose, G. Jinu, and C. Brindha, “A numerical optimization of high alti-
tude testing facility for wind tunnel experiments,” Chinese Journal of Aeronautics,
vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 636–648, 2015.
[89]
J. E. Cermak, “Wind-tunnel development and trends in applications to civil engi-
neering,” Journal of wind engineering and industrial aerodynamics, vol. 91, no. 3,
pp. 355–370, 2003.
[90]
D. Janke, Q. Yi, L. Thormann, et al., “Direct measurements of the volume flow
rate and emissions in a large naturally ventilated building,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 21,
p. 6223, 2020.
[91]
B. R. Elbing, L. Daniel, Y. Farsiani, and C. E. Petrin, “Design and validation of a
recirculating, high-reynolds number water tunnel,” Journal of Fluids Engineering,
vol. 140, no. 8, p. 081 102, 2018.
[92]
G. Comte-Bellot, “Hot-wire anemometry,” Annual review of fluid mechanics, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 209–231, 1976.
[93]
COSMOS. “Doppler shift.” (1999), [Online]. Available: https://astronomy.swin.edu.
au/cosmos/D/doppler+shift (visited on 06/01/2023).
[94]
J. Abbiss, T. Chubb, and E. Pike, “Laser doppler anemometry,” Optics & Laser
Technology, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 249–261, 1974.
[95]
C. E. Willert and M. Gharib, “Digital particle image velocimetry,” Experiments in
fluids, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 181–193, 1991.
[96]
H. Kumbruch, “Pitot-static tubes for determining the velocity of air,” Tech. Rep.,
1925.
[97]
M. P. del Valle, J. A. U. Castelan, Y. Matsumoto, and R. C. Mateos, “Low cost
ultrasonic anemometer,” in 2007 4th International Conference on Electrical and
Electronics Engineering, IEEE, 2007, pp. 213–216.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
103
==PAGE:114==
[98]
U. of Bologna. “Spatial filtering effect of miniaturized hot wire anemometer.” (2023),
[Online]. Available: https://site.unibo.it/ciclope/en/work-with-us/cfd-study-of-the-
flow-inside-ventilation-helmet (visited on 06/01/2023).
[99]
A. J. Smits, Flow visualization: techniques and examples. World Scientific, 2012.
[100]
M. Trinder and M. Jabbal, “Development of a smoke visualisation system for wind
tunnel laboratory experiments,” International Journal of Mechanical Engineering
Education, vol. 41, pp. 27–43, 2013.
[101]
E. Marquardt T.; Zheng. “History of 3D printing.” (), [Online]. Available: https:
//blogs.lawrence.edu/makerspace/history/#2 (visited on 06/12/2023).
[102]
M. Placek. “Most used 3D printing technologies worldwide.” (2021), [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.statista.com/statistics/560304/worldwide-survey-3d-printing-top-
technologies/#statisticContainer (visited on 06/12/2023).
[103]
Manufactur3d. “A Comprehensive List of All 3D Printing Technologies.” (2023),
[Online]. Available: https://manufactur3dmag.com/a-comprehensive-list-of-all-3d-
printing-technologies/#Fused_Deposition_Modelling_FDM (visited on 06/12/2023).
[104]
S. Hickey. “Chuck Hull: the father of 3D printing who shaped technology.” (2014),
[Online]. Available: http://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/22/chuck-hull-
father-3d-printing-shaped-technology (visited on 06/12/2023).
[105]
3DPrinting.com. “What is 3D printing?” (), [Online]. Available: https://3dprinting.
com/what-is-3d-printing/ (visited on 06/12/2023).
[106]
F. R. Menter, “Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering ap-
plications,” AIAA journal, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1598–1605, 1994.
[107]
B. E. Launder and B. I. Sharma, “Application of the energy-dissipation model of
turbulence to the calculation of flow near a spinning disc,” Letters in heat and mass
transfer, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 131–137, 1974.
[108]
W. P. Jones and B. Launder, “The calculation of low-reynolds-number phenomena
with a two-equation model of turbulence,” International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1119–1130, 1973.
[109]
C. Online. “Standard k-epsilon model.” (2014), [Online]. Available: https://www.
cfd-online.com/Wiki/Standard_k-epsilon_model (visited on 07/05/2023).
[110]
C. Online. “Sst k-omega model.” (2011), [Online]. Available: https://www.cfd-
online.com/Wiki/SST_k-omega_model (visited on 07/05/2023).
104
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:115==
A
Appendix
A.1
Overview of Turbulence Modeling and Turbulence
Models used in Vortex Shedding
The study of fluid dynamics is highly affected by the presence of turbulence, which is a
very complex phenomenon that arises in an almost infinite number of cases and examples
across many disciplines. The fundamental problem of fluid dynamics is understanding and
predicting theoretical turbulence, especially in the case of CFD. Moreover, turbulence is
a phenomenon that is characterized by its random and chaotic behaviour. Von Kármán
[54] gave the following definition in 1937 of turbulence by quoting G.I. Taylor:
”Turbulence is an irregular motion which in general makes its appearance in fluids,
gaseous or liquid, when they flow past solid surfaces or even when neighbouring streams
same fluid past or over one another.”
Turbulence is characterized by its appearance over a large range of lengths and time scales,
its dependency on time, its three-dimensionality and its need for high Reynolds numbers
to occur. As said, it is also known for its chaotic, irregular and intermittent behaviour
[24].
The equations that describe the motion of viscous fluid flows are the well-known Navier-
Stokes equations. The Navier-Stokes equations are a set of three equations (one for each
spatial dimension), coupled with the continuity equation that are derived from the conser-
vation laws of mass, momentum, and energy. They are partial differential equations that
consider the effect of forces acting on the fluid, such as pressure forces, viscous forces, and
external body forces.
Taking into consideration the three-dimensionality and time-dependency of the Navier-
Stokes equations, Reynolds time-averaging is used to decompose the equations into the sum
of mean and fluctuating parts. This averaging of the equations leads up to the Reynolds-
Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations. The nonlinear terms that arise from RANS
equations are the Reynolds Stress (Rij = −ρv
′
iv
′
j), which in the fluctuating components of
the velocity field. The Reynolds Stress leads to the so-called closure problem, from where
turbulence modelling arises.
The closure problem appears because the different terms of the Reynolds Stress are not
explicitly known and can not be numerically solved from the governing equations as there
are more unknowns than equations. Therefore, by using certain assumptions and simpli-
fications, closure models are introduced in an attempt to close the system of equations.
The different main closure models that exist are going to be quickly introduced together
with other computational methods in order to have a general understanding of the charac-
teristics of them, inspired by the book Turbulence Modeling for CFD by David C. Wilcox
[55].
A.1.1
Algebraic Stress Models (ASM)
The algebraic stress models are considered to be the simplest of all turbulence models
and are known for their simplicity and computational eﬀiciency. Nonetheless, for more
complex turbulent flows, their accuracy is limited; where in those cases more advanced
turbulence models are needed, such as RSM or LES.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
105
==PAGE:116==
Algebraic models rely on the Boussinesq eddy-viscosity approximation, in which it is
assumed that the turbulent stresses in a fluid flow can be represented by an effective
viscosity term, simplifying the treatment of turbulent fluctuations as an additional ”tur-
bulent viscosity” proportional to the local mean strain rate, known as the eddy viscosity
[56].
Moreover, for computational simplicity, the eddy viscosity is computed in terms
of a mixing length. All in all, an algebraic relation between the eddy viscosity and the
used mixing length scale has to be defined prior to the use of the model, leading to an
incomplete model of turbulence.
To use algebraic models, it must be known the specific flow conditions and their appli-
cability and limitations. Moreover, validation with experimental data or more complex
turbulence model simulations is needed to ensure the accuracy of the results from the
algebraic model. Some examples of algebraic models are:
1. Cebeci-Smith Model: This is a two-layer model that uses the mean flow variables,
turbulent length scales and empirical constants to calculate the Reynolds stresses
[57].
2. Baldwin-Lomax Model: Modeled after the Cebeci-Smith model that does not require
the determination of the displacement thickness and the boundary-layer thickness
[58].
A.1.2
One-Equation and Two-Equation Models
The One-Equation and Two-Equation models are based on the turbulence kinetic energy
equation, using the eddy-viscosity models. They both take into account the Boussinesq
eddy-viscosity approximation. However, the difference between one another relies on the
fact that the one-equation models are based on a single transport equation for the tur-
bulence kinetic energy to characterize the turbulent fluctuations in the flow, and are in-
complete. The most common model is the Spalart-Allmaras model, which is expressed in
terms of the eddy viscosity and includes eight close coeﬀicients and three closure functions
[59].
On the other hand, the two-equation models solve two additional transport equations,
usually one for the turbulence kinetic energy (k) and the second for the dissipation rate
(ϵ). These are more advanced turbulence models, compared to the one-equation models
and are complete. The most common models for the two-equation models are:
• k −ϵ: It is based on the two transport equations of the turbulence kinetic energy (k)
and the turbulence dissipation ratio (ϵ). It is widely used but has some limitations to
predict complex turbulence phenomena. Some variations have been made to improve
the model such as: Standard k −ϵ model [60], RNG k −ϵ model[61], or Realizable
k −ϵ model [62].
• k −ω: It is based on the two transport equations of the turbulence kinetic energy
(k) and the specific dissipation rate (ω). It is best for boundary layer flows and flows
with separation regions. Variations and extensions of the model have been made,
such as: Wilcox k −ω model [63], k −ω SST (Shear Stress Transport) model [64]
and BSL (Baldwin-Lomax) model [65]. Special attention is going to be given to the
k −ω SST model as it is relevant to the present study.
– k −ω SST model: The shear stress transport (SST) model combines both the
k −ϵ and the k −ω models. As a baseline, the k −ω model developed by
Wilcox was used, but only for the inner region of the boundary layer. The
model gradually changes from k −ω to k −ϵ in the outer wake region.
A
106
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:117==
blending function (F1) is used that gradually changes from zero to one k −ω
for the desired region. It is known to have good behaviour in adverse pressure
gradients and separating flows, although it could over-predict turbulence in
stagnation regions and regions with strong acceleration. Moreover, the model
under-predicts the amount of separation for severe adverse pressure gradient
flows [25].
A.1.3
Reynolds Stress Models (RSM)
The Reynolds Stress Models (RSM) are advanced turbulence models that provide more
detailed information about the Reynolds stresses by adding additional transport equations
for each individual component of the Reynolds stress tensor. Are considered as the most
complete classical turbulence models [66]. The eddy viscosity approach is dismissed and
each of the components of the Reynolds stress tensor are computed. The model is better
than the rest of RANS models at predicting the turbulent flow field and the interaction
between the turbulent eddies. The model is known for its ability to calculate with good
accuracy complex flow configurations and non-equilibrium phenomena; particularly useful
for swirling flows or flows with high levels of turbulence intensity [67]. Some of the variants
of the model are the Launder-Reece-Rodi (LRR) model [68], the Speziale-Sarkar-Gatski
(SSG) model [69], the Johansson & Hallbäck model [70] and the Mishra & Girimaji model
[71].
A.1.4
Large Eddy Simulation (LES) Models
Large Eddy Simulation (LES) is a CFD method where the large-scale turbulent structures
are resolved, while the smaller-scale turbulence is either modeled or filtered out. It is more
accurate than the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes simulations. The principle behind
LES is that the flow domain is divided into two regions: The large-eddy scales that
are solved and the subgrid scales (SGS). Taking as reference the grid size, the scales
that are bigger than the grid are explicitly solved; however, the scales that are smaller
than the grid size, are not resolved explicitly but are modelled or filtered out. There are
different subgrid scale models, such as the Smagorinsky model [72], the Algebraic Dynamic
model [73], the Wall-Adapting Local Eddy-Viscosity (WALE) model [74] or the Dynamic
Global-Coeﬀicient model [75]. The main advantage of LES is that is very accurate at
predicting flows with large-scale structures and complex turbulent phenomena, such as
flow separation, vortex shedding, or turbulent mixing. Nevertheless, the computational
demand of LES compared to RANS has an increase with a factor of ≈80−100 [76]. LES is
suitable in studies where a very detailed understanding of turbulence is needed. A major
problem in LES appears in flows near solid surfaces, as all the eddies tend to be small,
which limits the Reynolds number for LES [77].
A.1.5
Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS)
Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) directly solves the whole Navier-Stokes equations
without the need for any turbulence models. It provides the highest level of detail as it
resolves all of the turbulent scales, even the smallest ones and all the temporal scales of
turbulence. The grid that requires DNS is very fine, as it needs to capture the smallest
turbulence and the information that provides is very accurate. DNS is usually used in
academic research and is usually used as a validation tool for other lower computational
models such as LES or RANS, and it can be viewed as an additional source of experimental
data. Obviously, the biggest disadvantage of DNS is that the computational cost of it is
very high and the Reynolds number is very limited. Most of the real-life applications of
CFD work on Re ≥106. To accurately resolve a turbulent flow at Re = 106, by using
DNS, it would require somewhere of the order of Re3 = 1018 mesh points in space-time,
which is unrealistic to compute in the near future [78] [79].
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
107
==PAGE:118==
A.1.6
Detached Eddy Simulation (DES)
The last computational method that is described is the detached eddy simulation (DES).
This method is a hybrid CFD approach that combines both RANS and LES developed by
Spalart et al. (1997) [80]. The basis is similar to LES, as in DES the flow is divided into
two regions: the first being the close to near-wall regions where RANS model is used to
resolve the turbulence, and the rest of the flow regions are processed by using LES. In DES
a blending function is used to describe the transition between both models. A suitable
selection of the RANS turbulence model is needed depending on the flow to be studied.
Overall, DES is able of managing a wide range of flow phenomena, such as boundary layer
separation, vortex shedding, and complex flow configurations. When modelling flows with
turbulent transition or separation zones, where both the resolved and modelled turbulence
components are significant, DES is especially helpful.
In engineering applications where accuracy and computational eﬀiciency must be balanced,
DES is frequently utilized. In comparison to pure RANS simulations, it provides more
accurate predictions and can reveal important details about flow physics. However, the
precise flow conditions and the proper calibration of model parameters determine the
accuracy and performance of DES. To ensure accurate results, careful validation against
experimental data or higher-fidelity models is required [81].
A.2
Investigation of Wind Tunnel Measurement
Aerodynamic research depends significantly on experimental measurements, specially when
dealing with CFD calculations, as the models used rely heavily on comparison with ex-
perimental data, in need of validation.
In the present case, the used methodology to
obtain experimental data to compare with, has been wind tunnel measurements, due to
its availability on the project and since it enables controlled testing and evaluation of
airflow around diverse objects and structures. In order to draw attention to the method-
ology, instrumentation, and diﬀiculties in this subject, attention is going to be drawn to
significant works and developments in wind tunnel measurements.
A.2.1
Types of Wind Tunnels
Several different types of wind tunnels exist that are used for aerodynamic research and
testing, depending on the specific applications and requirements that are needed, wind
tunnels are designed differently to adapt to the needed requirements [34].
The most
common types of wind tunnels are the following [82]:
Open-Circuit Wind Tunnel
The so-called open-circuit wind tunnels are characterized by airflow entering the wind
tunnel, by taking it in from the outside environment and released after passing through
the test portion. They usually have a straight path from the inlet through a contraction
and afterwards, into the test section. After the test section the diffuser, a fan section, and
an exhaust of the air are usually placed. They are characterized by large size and high
airspeeds and compared to closed-circuit wind tunnels, which are going to be explained
afterwards, they are more cost-effective and more adaptable to large-scale objects. More-
over, if flow visualization via smoke is needed, there is no need for purging. Nonetheless,
they do not offer the same level of repeatability and control as closed-circuit wind tunnels.
For aerodynamic testing where the flow parameters closely mirror actual air conditions,
open-circuit wind tunnels are especially well suited. The most common types of open-
circuit wind tunnels are with no solid boundaries (open jet[83] or Eiffel type [84]) or solid
boundaries (closed jet or National Physical Laboratory (NPL) [85] type). A scheme of an
open-circuit wind tunnel can be seen in Figure A.1.
108
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:119==
Figure A.1: Open-circuit wind tunnel [35].
Closed-Circuit Wind Tunnel
In closed-circuit wind tunnels, the airflow creates a closed loop inside the tunnel. They
consist of a test section, a contraction section to increase flow velocity, a diffuser section
to slow down the flow, and a fan or compressor system to generate the airflow.
The
flow control is very flexible, flow velocities are adjustable, and the instrumentation is very
precise.
They are widely employed in aerodynamic research and testing, and provide
regulated and repeatable tests. For the aforementioned characteristics, they are widely
used for aerodynamic research and testing. The main types of closed-circuit wind tunnels
are Prandtl, or Göttingen type [86]. One example of a closed-circuit wind tunnel is the
Poul la Cour Tunnel at DTU, and a schematical drawing of it can be seen in Figure A.2.
Figure A.2: Drawing of the Poul la Cour Tunnel [87].
Blow-Down Wind Tunnel
Blow-down wind tunnels are characterized by rapidly discharging a compressed gas, such
as air or nitrogen, into the test section. The airflow is driven by the compressed gas’s
stored energy, and together with it, a decrease in pressure and flow rate is obtained as the
gas expands. In order to reach the requisite flow velocities in blow-down wind tunnels,
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
109
==PAGE:120==
which are frequently used for short-duration experiments, extra measures, such as high-
speed valves or pistons, may be necessary. When compared to other forms of wind tunnels,
they have advantages in terms of simplicity and cost-effectiveness. However, due to the
restricted amount of compressed gas available and their limited run lengths, blow-down
wind tunnels are only appropriate for certain applications where short-duration testing is
suﬀicient. A representative scheme of a blow-down wind tunnel can be seen in Figure A.3.
Figure A.3: Scheme of a blow-down wind tunnel [88].
Boundary-Layer Wind Tunnel
In order to replicate the flow conditions of the atmospheric boundary layer, which is
the area close to the Earth’s surface where the airflow is impacted by surface roughness
and other factors, boundary layer wind tunnels are created. These wind tunnels provide
a large working area with a floor and a method for simulating boundary layers.
The
simulation system is made up of a roughness layer or roughness grid that produces the
desired velocity profiles and turbulence in the atmospheric boundary layer. In order to
investigate the aerodynamics of ground-based structures including buildings, bridges, and
vehicles, boundary layer wind tunnels are frequently utilized. They offer useful details
on how turbulence, atmospheric conditions, and surface roughness affect aerodynamic
performance [89].
A sketch of an atmospheric boundary layer wind tunnel at Leibniz
Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy (ATB) Figure A.4.
Figure A.4: Sketch of the atmospheric boundary layer wind tunnel at ATB [90].
Hydrodynamic Tunnel
Hydrodynamic tunnels, also known as water tunnels, use water as the working fluid to
study fluid dynamics phenomena. They are mainly used to recreate flow behaviours around
underwater structures, marine vehicles or propellers, for example. Water’s transparency
makes it possible for researchers to see the flow patterns closely, which is one benefit
of using water tunnels for research.
It is also possible to precisely manipulate water
characteristics like salinity and temperature, which makes it possible to research particular
110
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:121==
environmental conditions. Applications in marine engineering, naval architecture, and the
offshore industry benefit greatly from the use of water tunnels because they offer insights
into hydrodynamic performance, drag reduction, and cavitation phenomena. Furthermore,
to achieve the same Reynolds numbers as in wind tunnels, water tunnels require less space
and less velocities. A schematic of a high-Reynolds water tunnel can be seen in Figure A.5.
Figure A.5: Schematic of the high-Reynolds number, low turbulence recirculating water
tunnel [91].
A.2.2
Wind Tunnel Instrumentation and Measurement Techniques
Understanding aerodynamic phenomena and verifying numerical models depend on precise
measurement of flow parameters and forces acting on the model to obtain the necessary
data. To obtain a deep understanding of the complex flow characteristics, accurate and
reliable measurements need to be gathered. For that purpose, different measurements can
be done in wind tunnels to gather different data such as pressure measurements, velocity
measurements, force and moment measurements or flow visualization techniques.
The
aforementioned measurement techniques are going to be quickly discussed.
Pressure Measurements
Pressure measurements make possible the understanding of pressure distributions, thus,
being able to determine the calculation of aerodynamic forces and pressures on the model.
Static and dynamic pressures are measured in wind tunnels for those reasons, with the
use of different techniques and instruments [36].
• Pressure taps: Pressure taps are small holes or tubes strategically placed on the wind
tunnel or on the model to be studied to capture the local static pressure. Pressure
transducers are then connected to the pressure taps to convert the pressure into an
electrical signal. A figure describing the pressure taps on a model can be seen in
Figure A.6.
• Pressure transducers: Pressure is directly measured and provides instantaneous data.
Typically small, they can be positioned in critical locations and give high-frequency
responses and compatibility with digital systems.
• Pressure-sensitive paints (PSP): It is a non-intrusive technique used to measure
surface pressure distribution on models. The surface of the model is coated with
a luminous material that produces light at various intensities based on the local
pressure.
The surface pressure distribution can be determined by analyzing the
emitted light, which is recorded by a camera system. PSP offers high-resolution
pressure mapping and spatially resolved pressure measurements.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
111
==PAGE:122==
Figure A.6: Set-up of tubes for the pressure taps [37].
Velocity Measurements
Velocity measurements also help with the understanding of how the flow develops and are
able to give accurate values of velocities all around the research flow. For that purpose,
different techniques may be used in wind tunnels.
• Hot-Wire Anemometry (HWA): A thin wire, normally made of platinum or tung-
sten, is used. The wire has an electric current passing by to heat it up, keeping
the wire temperature constant. As the flow passes over the wire, the resistance of
the wire changes due to convective heat transfer and the electricity needed to keep
the temperature constant is measured, making it possible the determination of the
flow velocity. HWA is an intrusive measuring technique, but gives a high-frequency
response and is capable of measuring mean and fluctuating velocities [92]. A de-
scriptive sketch can be seen in Figure A.7.
• Laser Doppler Anemometry (LDA): Laser Doppler anemometry is based on the
principle of the Doppler shift [93]. Laser light is used to measure the velocity of
particles suspended in the flow. As the particles move, the laser light is scattered
and by analyzing the frequency shift, the velocity can be determined. It has high
spatial resolution and high signal processing. It is a non-intrusive technique and
therefore, it is suitable for cases where minimal disturbance is required [94].
• Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV): PIV is a technique used to measure the velocity
of fluids, such as gases or liquids, in a flow field. It is a common tool used in fluid dy-
namics research and engineering to study the behaviour of fluids and the forces that
act on them. PIV works by injecting small tracer particles into the flow field and
using a high-speed camera to capture images of the particles as they move. These
images are then used to calculate the velocity of the particles at different points
in the flow field. PIV is a non-intrusive measurement technique, meaning that it
does not disturb the flow field being measured. This makes it an important tool for
understanding the complex and dynamic behaviour of fluids in a variety of applica-
tions, including the design of aircraft, cars, and boats, as well as in environmental
studies and industrial processes [95].
112
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:123==
• Pitot-Static Tubes: The first description of a tube used to measure pressure for
velocity determination dates back to Henri Pitot in 1732. Pitot-static tubes make
possible the measurement of total pressure and static pressure of the flow.
By
subtracting the static pressure from the total pressure, the dynamic pressure can be
obtained and therefore, the flow velocity in the measured point can be determined.
Pitot tubes are simple and cost-effective, but intrusive [96].
• Ultrasonic Anemometry: To be able to measure ultrasonic flows, ultrasonic anemom-
etry is used. Sound waves from ultrasonic sensors reflect off of the flow’s particles
or small reflecting surfaces. The Doppler shift in the reflected waves can be used
to calculate the flow velocity. It is a non-intrusive measuring technique, which is
suitable for the study of turbulent flows and boundary layers [97].
Figure A.7: Hot-wire anemometry description [98].
Force and Moment Measurements
To quantify the force and moment acting on the model that is studied in a wind tun-
nel, several techniques do exist, which give reliable information about the performance,
stability, and control characteristics of the model. The most common techniques are the
following:
• Force Balance: In force balance, load cells or strain gauges are used to directly mea-
sure the forces and moments acting on the model under study. All three components
are normally measured (lift, drag, and side force), together with the moments acting
on each axis [38].
• Strain Gauges: Strain gauges are sensors used to measure strain or deformation,
consisting of a length of fine wire lying along the main direction of the wanted
measure. When the strain gauge is subjected to deformation, the length of the wire
changes in proportion to the structural strain, leading to a change in the wire’s
electrical resistance that makes the strain or deformation possible to measure [39].
• Pressure Integration: Pressure integration relies on the integration of the pressure
distribution along the surface of the model to calculate the resulting forces and
moments on the model.
Therefore, accurate pressure measurements need to be
applied and are a very suitable technique when direct force measurements are not
achievable.
Flow Visualization Techniques
Lastly, to visualize flow behaviour and its characteristics around the model in wind tun-
nels some of the most widely known techniques are going to be briefly explained. These
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
113
==PAGE:124==
techniques are very useful to better understand flow patterns, boundary layer behaviour,
separation regions, vortices, and other flow phenomena [99].
• Smoke Flow Visualization: By introducing smoke or fog into the wind tunnel, smoke
flow visualization enables the possibility of making the flow patterns visible, such as
streamline patterns, separation regions, and vortices. Usually, the smoke is generated
by burning oil or releasing vaporized liquids. It is very convenient to understand the
overall flow structure and to visualize large-scale flow patterns. An example of smoke
flow visualization can be seen in Figure A.8.
• Oil Flow Visualization: In the oil flow visualization technique, a thin layer of oil is
applied to the model’s surface before testing. The oil, being coloured or fluorescent,
makes streaks and patterns over the model, following the behaviour of the flow. It is
very useful for studying boundary layers, flow separation or flow attachment regions.
• Tuft Visualization: Attaching tiny tufts or pieces of yarn to the surface of the model
is a part of tuft visualization. The tufts react to the flow as it travels over the model
by bending and orienting in various directions, making it possible for researchers to
learn more about the flow direction, flow attachment, and areas of flow separation
by observing the tufts’ orientation and motion. Tuft visualization offers a quick and
affordable technique to represent flow behaviour, and it works especially well for
investigations of boundary layers.
• Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF): Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF)
is an advanced flow imaging technology which makes use of fluorescent dyes and laser
light to highlight particular flow characteristics. A fluorescent dye is applied to the
model or flow region that changes colour according to the flow conditions (such as
temperature and velocity). The dye is excited by the laser light, which causes it to
emit fluorescent light that is photographed by cameras. High-resolution, quantita-
tive visualization of flow properties including vortices, mixing, and velocity gradients
is made possible by using PLIF.
Figure A.8: Smoke visualisation and flow topology of the airflow around a cylinder. [100].
114
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:125==
A.3
3D Printing Technology
The use of 3D printed models for aerodynamic testing and measurement has become a
relevant topic, as 3D printing allows the fabrication of complex geometries with high
precision and allows the creation of geometries that were not possible with traditional
manufacturing methods. Moreover, it gives a rapid prototyping capability, enabling quick
and cost-effective production of wind tunnel models.
It gives the possibility of itera-
tively designing, printing, and testing multiple models to optimize their design, as well
as customize and scale models with ease. Therefore, it is very suitable for unique test
configurations and it provides a new tool for the production of prototypes.
Giving a more in deep explanation of 3D printing; it is also known as additive manufac-
turing, being a process where a physical object is created by layering material based on
a digital model. The process of 3D printing usually involves several steps. First of all, a
digital model is designed by using Computer Aided Design (CAD) software or obtained
through 3D scanning. This model has to be exported and imported into a 3D printing
software that slices the model into thin layers.
Lastly, the slicer software produces a
G-code file which is used to extrude material to build the object layer by layer [101].
There are several additive manufacturing methods but the most commonly known and
easily accessible 3D printing technique is Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) [102]. FDM
uses the material extrusion principle, in which a solid filament is extruded and melted
through a nozzle and deposited onto a build platform. The material is deposited as it
moves in an XY direction along the nozzle as it follows the design’s geometry. The nozzle
goes up in the Z direction after finishing that layer to start the next one, and so on until
the desired item is created. [103].
In a wide range of industries, 3D printing is used for a variety of purposes, including the
production of industrial and consumer goods, architectural components, and prosthetic
limbs. Traditional 3D printing utilized polymers, but as the technology has advanced,
it is now possible to print meals, fully functional batteries, or even entire houses [104].
Additionally, 3D printers have long been used in education since they allow students to
quickly and affordably implement their ideas [105]. An image of one of the made 3D prints
can be seen in Figure A.9.
Figure A.9: 3D printing of an ellipse.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
115
==PAGE:126==
A.3.1
Matlab code for Pressure Taps Distribution
1
clc, clear all, close all
2
3
% Elipse axis values
4
a = 37.5;
% Mayor axis
5
b = a*3/4;
% Minor axis
6
7
% Ellipse perimeter calculus approx
8
p = 2*pi*sqrt((a^2+b^2)/2);
9
10
%Difference in perimeter between points
11
d_p = [3,6,10,14,20,28,38];
% Old
12
%d_p = [2.5,5,8,12,18,25,34];
% New
13
14
n=361
15
% Points of the ellipse
16
theta = linspace(pi/2.0, pi, n) ;
% Angles
17
x = b*cos(theta);
% x points coordinates
18
y = a*sin(theta);
% y points coordinates
19
20
%--------------------------------------------------------------------------
21
% Curvelength distrubution of points
22
dx=0; dy=0; ds=0; s=x; s(1)=0;
23
for i=1:n-1;
24
dx=x(i+1)-x(i);
dy=y(i+1)-y(i); ds=sqrt(dx*dx + dy*dy); s(i+1)=s(i)+ds;
25
end;
26
xp=interp1(s,x,d_p);
27
yp=interp1(s,y,d_p);
28
%--------------------------------------------------------------------------
29
30
31
%d_p = [3,6,10,14,20,28,36];
% Old
32
phi = zeros(1,length(d_p));
33
34
x_dot = zeros(1,length(d_p));
35
y_dot = zeros(1,length(d_p));
36
37
for i = 1:length(d_p)
38
39
d_theta = d_p(i)/sqrt((a^2+b^2)/2);
40
phi(i) = pi/2 + d_theta;
41
42
% x and y coordinates of the points
43
x_dot(i) = b*cos(phi(i));
44
y_dot(i) = a*sin(phi(i));
45
46
end
47
48
% Adding the missing points in 0º,90º,180º,270º
49
x_axes = [b,0,-b,0];
50
y_axes = [0,a,0,-a];
51
52
% Plotting
53
figure(1); clf;
54
plot(x,y); hold on;
55
56
plot( x_dot, y_dot, 'r.');
57
plot( x_dot,-y_dot, 'r.');
58
plot(-x_dot,-y_dot, 'r.');
59
plot(-x_dot, y_dot, 'r.');
60
61
plot(x_axes,y_axes, 'b.');
116
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:127==
62
plot( xp, yp, 'b.');
63
axis([-1.05*b 1.05*b -1.05*a 1.05*a ])
64
65
axis equal; grid on
66
set(gcf,'Position ',[250 250 750 500]);
67
xlabel('X axis','Interpreter ','latex','FontSize ',15,'fontWeight ','bold ');
68
ylabel('Y axis','Interpreter ','latex','FontSize ',15,'fontWeight ','bold ');
69
title('Pressure Taps Design - AR 0.75','Interpreter ','latex','FontSize ',20,'
fontWeight ','bold')
70
71
ep(1,1)=-a;
ep(1,2)=0.0;
72
ep(2:8,1)=-yp'; ep(2:8,2)=xp';
73
ep(9,1)=0.0;
ep(9,2)=-b;
74
75
for i=1:8;
ep(9+i,1) =-ep(9-i,1);
ep(9+i,2) = ep(9-i,2);
end;
76
for i=1:16; ep(17+i,1)= ep(17-i,1); ep(17+i,2)=-ep(17-i,2); end;
77
78
ep
Figures/08MatlabCodes/PressureTapsDistributionCode.m
A.3.2
Mathematical Model
As has been already stated in section 2.2, different turbulence models exist, all of them
with their advantages and disadvantages. However, a clear tendency exists where the more
accurate models go together with the more computational time needed. The available time
was limited and it played a major role in the selection of the chosen turbulence model.
Although the most suitable turbulence model would be LES, the computational demand
compared to RANS has an increase of a factor of ≈80−100, therefore, LES was discarded.
It was also taken into account that LES for high-Reynolds numbers is still very limited.
Furthermore, DES was thought to be the best option, as it combines both RANS and
LES. However, and once again, DES (as well as LES) required 3D CFD calculations,
which turns to increased computational power as the grid size, numerical operations, time
requirements and storage requirements increase drastically. Although some tryouts were
performed with DES, it was easily noticeable that in the available time it was not a viable
option, and therefore, RANS was chosen as the most suitable approach to the present
study. Following that, and as it has been discussed in prior sections (section 2.2), the
k −ω SST is thought to be the best option, as adverse pressure gradients and separating
flows were expected. Consequently, k −ω SST was the chosen model, and in the present
section, a brief explanation of the mathematical model behind it is going to be given. It
is expected that the reader has a basic knowledge on turbulence modelling, as some steps
are going to be skipped in the derivation of the k −ω SST model.
Assumptions and Boundary Conditions in RANS
The Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes equations make use of some assumptions and spe-
cific boundary conditions that need to be considered in order to understand its derivation.
The basic assumptions used in RANS are:
• Steady-State: Due to time-averaged equations, flow variables do not change with
time.
• Reynolds Averaging: Flow variables can be decomposed into mean and fluctuating
parts.
• Turbulence Closure Model: A relationship between the Reynolds stresses and mean
flow properties are assumed, with the use of additional transport equations.
Boundary conditions in RANS:
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
117
==PAGE:128==
• Velocity Boundary: At the inflow boundary the instantaneous velocity normal to
the boundary is set to the mean velocity value. A turbulence intensity of 1% is set
in the inflow boundary.
• Pressure Boundary: Fixed pressure is stated as equal to the dynamic pressure of the
flow.
• Wall Conditions: The no-slip condition is applied to all the walls, leading to a flow
velocity at the wall being zero.
k −ω SST Model
The mathematical model used combined both the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS)
equations and the k−ω SST turbulence model [106]. The equations that constitute RANS
are briefly summarized.
For an incompressible Newtonian fluid, the Navier-Stokes equation is described as follows:
ρ
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj

= ρgi + ∂σij
∂xj
(A.1)
Where t represents time, gi represents the volume force, xi are the Cartesian coordinates,
and σij is the stress on the fluid, which can be expressed as follows:
σij = −pδij + µ
 ∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

(A.2)
Where p represents pressure, µ is the dynamic viscosity, and δij is the Kronecker delta.
From Equation A.1 and by implementing the continuity equation, averaging each term
and using the Reynolds decomposition, the following equation is obtained:
ρ
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj

= ρgi +
∂
∂xj

σij −ρu′
iu′
j

(A.3)
Equation A.3 is known as the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equation, where
−ρu′
iu′
j is the Reynolds stress that leads to the already mentioned closure problem. More-
over, by implementing some more transformations on Equation A.3 (dividing by ρ both
sides, using the continuity equation...) the following equation is obtained:
∂K
∂t +
∂
∂xα

Kuα + puα −uiµ
 ∂ui
∂xα
+ ∂uα
∂xi

= ρuαgα −Φ
(A.4)
Equation A.4 is the Energy equation for laminar flow, where K is the kinetic energy per
unit volume of fluid, described in Equation A.5, and Φ is the energy dissipation per unit
volume of fluid and per unit time, described in Equation A.6.
K = 1
2ρuiui = 1
2ρ
 u2 + v2 + w2
(A.5)
Φ = µ
 ∂ui
∂xα
+ ∂uα
∂xi
 ∂ui
∂xα
(A.6)
118
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:129==
In a similar way, the equation for the mean flow can be obtained, which is described as
follows in Equation A.7.
∂K0
∂t + ∂
∂xα

K0uα + ρu′
iu′αui + puα −uiµ
 ∂ui
∂xα
+ ∂uα
∂xi

= ρuαgα−Φ0−

−ρu′
iu′α
 ∂ui
∂xα
(A.7)
Where, K0 is the kinetic energy per unit volume of fluid for the mean flow, described in
Equation A.8, and Φ0 is the energy dissipation per unit volume of fluid and per unit time
for the mean flow as described in Equation A.9.
K0 = 1
2ρuiui = 1
2ρ
 u2 + v2 + w2
(A.8)
Φ0 = µ
 ∂ui
∂xα
+ ∂uα
∂xi
 ∂ui
∂xα
(A.9)
Now, by averaging Equation A.4, rewriting Equation A.7 and substracting one from an-
other, the following equation can be obtained:
∂Kt
∂t + ∂
∂xα
"
Ktuα + 1
2ρu′
iu′
iu′α + p′u′α −u′
iµ
 ∂u′
i
∂xα
+ ∂u′α
∂xi
#
= ρu′αg′α−Φt+

−ρu′
iu′α
 ∂ui
∂xα
(A.10)
Equation A.10 is the energy equation for turbulence. Lastly, if Equation A.10 is divided
by ρ, neglecting fluctuations in the body force (g′ = 0), performing some manipulation
of the viscous terms, and using local continuity, it can be transformed to the following
transport equation for k:
∂k
∂t
|{z}
(1)
+ uj
∂k
∂xj
| {z }
(2)
= −u′
iu′
j
∂ui
∂xj
|
{z
}
(3)
−ν ∂u′
i
∂xk
∂u′
i
∂xk
|
{z
}
(4)
+ ∂
∂xj

v ∂k
∂xj
| {z }
(5)
−1
2u′
iu′
iu′
j
|
{z
}
(6)
−1
ρp′u′
j
| {z }
(7)


(A.11)
Where the different terms represent: (1) unsteadiness, (2) convection, (3) production, (4)
dissipation, (5) molecular diffusion, (6) turbulent transport and (7) pressure diffusion.
However, there is still one more transport equation missing to close the turbulence model.
This extra transport equation is the ϵ transport equation for the Standard k −ϵ model and
the ω transport equation for the Wilcox’s k −ω model.
For the Standard k−ϵ model, there exists a wide variety of damping functions in literature,
but there are some which are more common or classical, and their reliability has been
widely investigated. For that reason, the Launder-Sharma model [107] was chosen, which
is known for its ability to model the cases predicting by-pass transition [108].
In the
Launder-Sharma k −ϵ model, more turbulent quantities are elaborated than the mixing
length model. And the turbulence length scale is calculated by solving a transport equation
for the dissipation rate of turbulence energy [109]. Table A.1 gives a summary of the closure
coeﬀicients and damping functions used.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
119
==PAGE:130==
Table A.1: Summary of damping functions and closure coeﬀicients for Launder-Sharma
k −ϵ model.
Launder-Sharma
β∗
0.09
σϵk
1
σϵ
1.3
Dk
2ν

∂
√
k
∂d
2
Eϵ
2ννT

∂2U
∂d2
2
Cϵ1
1.44
Cϵ2
1.92
fϵµ
exp
h
−3.4
(1+RT /50)2
i
fϵ2
1 −0.3exp
 −Re2
T

Moreover, the ϵ transport equation used in the model is the following:
∂ϵ
∂t + uj
∂ε
∂xj
|
{z
}
Material Transport
= Cε1
Πε
k
| {z }
Production
−fϵ2Cϵ2
ε2
k
|
{z
}
Dissipation
+ ∂
∂xj

ν + νT
σϵ
 ∂ϵ
∂xj

|
{z
}
Transport Term
+ 2ννT
 
∂2u
∂x2
j
!2
|
{z
}
Eϵ
(A.12)
Where νT is the eddy viscosity based on the Boussinesq approximation:
τij
ρ = −u′
iu′
j = 2νT Sij −2
3kδij
(A.13)
Where,
Sij = 1
2
 ∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

(A.14)
On the other side, the ω transport equation used in the Wilcox’s k −ω model is the
following:
∂ω
∂t + uj
∂ω
∂xj
|
{z
}
Material Transport
= fω1 Cω1
Πω
k
| {z }
Production
−Cω2ω2
| {z }
Dissipation
+ ∂
∂xj

ν + νT
σω
 ∂ω
∂xj

|
{z
}
Transport Term
(A.15)
Furthermore, ϵ and ω are formally related with the following relationship:
ϵ = ν ∂u′
i
∂xk
∂u′
i
∂xk
= β∗kω
(A.16)
Lastly, if the relationship in Equation A.16 is applied into Equation A.12 and both equa-
tions Equation A.12 and Equation A.15 are compared the following can be seen in the ϵ
transport equation:
120
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:131==
∂ω
∂t + uj
∂ω
∂xj
=
∂
∂xj

ν + νT
σω
 ∂ω
∂xj

+ fω1Cω1
Πω
k −Cω2ω2 + 2ννT
 
∂2u
∂x2
j
!2
(A.17)
And in the ω transport equation:
∂ω
∂t + uj
∂ω
∂xj
=
∂
∂xj

ν + νT
σω
 ∂ω
∂xj

+ fω1Cω1
Πω
k −Cω2ω2
(A.18)
As it can be seen, the only difference in both transport equations is the additional term
2ννT

∂2u
∂x2
j
2
. All in all, a blending function is used to change from the k −ϵ model to
the k −ω model:
2 (1 −F1) ννT
 
∂2u
∂x2
j
!2
(A.19)
Being F1 = 0 when the model is k −ϵ, and F1 = 1 when the model is k −ω. This leads
to the k −ω baseline model (k −ω BSL). The two transport equations for the k −ω BSL
model are:
∂k
∂t + uj
∂k
∂xj
= −u′
iu′
j
∂ui
∂xj
−ν ∂u′
i
∂xk
∂u′
i
∂xk
+
∂
∂xj

v ∂k
∂xj
−1
2u′
iu′
iu′
j −1
ρp′u′
j

(A.20)
∂ω
∂t + uj
∂ω
∂xj
=
∂
∂xj

ν + νT
σω
 ∂ω
∂xj

+ fω1Cω1
Πω
k −Cω2ω2 + 2 (1 −F1) ννT
 
∂2u
∂x2
j
!2
(A.21)
The blending function F1 is defined as: F1 = tanh
 arg4
1

, using tanh as a way to have a
smooth transition between both models. F1 is also used to blend between the empirical
constants used in both models:
Φ = F1Φω + (1 −F1)Φϵ
(A.22)
Where Φω is the model constant in the k −ω model (β∗), and Φϵ is the model constant in
the k −ϵ model (Cµ). In the k −ωSST model, a viscosity limiter is also included:
µt = ρk
ω
|
{z
}
Original
µt =
a1ρk
max(a1ω, SF2)
|
{z
}
SST Model
(A.23)
This limiter gets a better agreement with experimental measurements of separated flow,
where F2 is another blending function: F2 = tanh(arg2
2).
Summarizing, the two transport equations for the k −ωSST with some simplifications are
the following ones: For the turbulence kinetic energy (k):
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
121
==PAGE:132==
∂k
∂t + uj
∂k
∂xj
= Pk −β∗kω +
∂
∂xj

(ν + σkνT ) ∂k
∂xj

(A.24)
And for the specific dissipation rate (ω):
∂ω
∂t + uj
∂ω
∂xj
= αS2 −βω2 +
∂
∂xj

(ν + σωνT ) ∂ω
∂xj

+ 2 (1 −F1) σω2 1
ω
∂k
∂xi
∂ω
∂xi
(A.25)
Lastly, all the different closure coeﬀicients and auxiliary relations used are summarized in
Table A.2 [110].
Table A.2: Summary of closure coeﬀicients and auxiliary relations for k −ω SST model.
Closure Coeﬀicients & Auxiliary Relations (k −ω SST)
F2
tanh
h
max

2
√
k
β∗ωy, 500ν
y2ω
i2
Pk
min

τij ∂ui
∂xj , 10β∗kω

F1
tanh
h
min
h
max
 √
k
β∗ωy, 500ν
y2ω

,
4σω2k
CDkωy2
ii4
CDkω
max

2ρσω2 1
ω
∂k
∂xi
∂ω
∂xi , 10−10
Φ
Φ1F1 + Φ2(1 −F1)
α1
5
9
α2
0.44
β1
3
40
β2
0.0828
β∗
9
100
σk1
0.85
σk2
1
σω1
0.5
σω2
0.856
122
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:133==
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
123
==PAGE:134==
A.4
Pressure Distributions and Pressure Coeﬀicients
Figures for the Different Simulations
Figure A.10: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 0 deg for the simulation with AR
0.25, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k)
124
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:135==
Figure A.11: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 0 deg for the simulation with AR 0.5, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k)
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
125
==PAGE:136==
Figure A.12: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 0 deg for the simulation with AR 0.655, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k)
126
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:137==
Figure A.13: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 22.5 deg for the simulation with AR 0.25, for
the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k and 200k are
missing as they were not performed.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
127
==PAGE:138==
Figure A.14: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 22.5 deg for the simulation with AR 0.5, for
the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k and 200k are
missing as they were not performed.
128
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:139==
Figure A.15: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 22.5 deg for the simulation with AR 0.655, for
the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k and 200k are
missing as they were not performed.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
129
==PAGE:140==
Figure A.16: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 45 deg for the simulation with AR 0.25, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k). The plot for Re = 100k is missing
as the simulation did not converge.
130
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:141==
Figure A.17: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 45 deg for the simulation with AR 0.5, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
131
==PAGE:142==
Figure A.18: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 45 deg for the simulation with AR 0.655, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
132
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:143==
Figure A.19: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 67.5 deg for the simulation with AR 0.25, for
the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k and 200k are
missing as they were not performed.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
133
==PAGE:144==
Figure A.20: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 67.5 deg for the simulation with AR 0.5, for
the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k and 200k are
missing as they were not performed.
134
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:145==
Figure A.21: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 67.5 deg for the simulation with AR 0.655, for
the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k and 200k are
missing as they were not performed.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
135
==PAGE:146==
Figure A.22: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 90 deg for the simulation with AR 0.25, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k and 200k are
missing as they did not converge.
136
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:147==
Figure A.23: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 90 deg for the simulation with AR 0.5, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
137
==PAGE:148==
Figure A.24: Pressure Coeﬀicient Plot at 90 deg for the simulation with AR 0.655, for the
different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
138
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:149==
Figure A.25: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 0 deg for the simulation with AR
0.25, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k)
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
139
==PAGE:150==
Figure A.26: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 0 deg for the simulation with AR
0.5, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k)
140
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:151==
Figure A.27: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 0 deg for the simulation with AR
0.655, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k)
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
141
==PAGE:152==
Figure A.28: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 22.5 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.25, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k
and 200k are missing as they were not performed.
142
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:153==
Figure A.29: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 22.5 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.5, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k
and 200k are missing as they were not performed.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
143
==PAGE:154==
Figure A.30: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 22.5 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.655, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k
and 200k are missing as they were not performed.
144
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:155==
Figure A.31: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 45 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.25, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k). The plot for
Re = 100k is missing as the simulation did not converge.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
145
==PAGE:156==
Figure A.32: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 45 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.5, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
146
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:157==
Figure A.33: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 45 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.655, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
147
==PAGE:158==
Figure A.34: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 67.5 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.25, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k
and 200k are missing as they were not performed.
148
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:159==
Figure A.35: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 67.5 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.5, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k
and 200k are missing as they were not performed.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
149
==PAGE:160==
Figure A.36: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 67.5 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.655, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k
and 200k are missing as they were not performed.
150
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:161==
Figure A.37: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 90 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.25, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k). Plots for Re = 100k
and 200k are missing as they did not converge.
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
151
==PAGE:162==
Figure A.38: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 90 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.5, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
152
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
==PAGE:163==
Figure A.39: Pressure Coeﬀicient figure on the ellipse at 90 deg for the simulation with
AR 0.655, for the different Reynolds numbers (Re = 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 250k).
High Reynolds number unsteady aerodynamic simulation and experiments
of vortex shedding in elliptical profiles
153
