==PAGE:1==
1 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
 
Motivation behind user adoption of AI-based chatbot mental health guide 
 
Master Thesis 
Wai Kit Leung (s213108) 
Supervisor: Euiju (Eugene) Jeon 
4 August, 2023 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
  
1. Abstracts 
Mental health problems have been increasingly serious, especially in Asia, and the 
rise of generative artificial intelligence gives a new opportunity to address such 
problems, given the lack of human resources and resources to efficiently address the 
problem. Literature written before did not explore the use of Generative AI in a mental 
health aspect. In addition, these literature authors did not start their own company to 
collect data from a real-world project entirely owned by them, so they would not be 
able to reach the most sensitive data and the most important (often hidden) drivers for 
adopting mental health solutions. 
In this research, we adopted multiple methods to address the gap, including interviews, 
building a Minimal Viable Product (MVP), studying chatbot data, and studying 
outcome data. With a chatbot currently used by 1,193 people, we studied the 
motivational factors closely and summarized them with this master thesis. This master 
thesis will be helpful for future business owners and policymakers in understanding 
the needs for AI mental health chatbots, what they are looking for, as well as how the 
effectiveness of such a chatbot in dealing with mental health. 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
2. Preface and Acknowledgement 
This thesis was written remotely in Hong Kong with the supervisor Eugene Jeon and 
an external supervisor Monica from the University of Copenhagen to fulfil the 
requirements of attaining a Master's degree in Technology Entrepreneurship. The 
study was conducted from 20th February 2023 to 4th August 2023. 
I want to express my sincerest gratitude to the thesis supervisor, Euiju (Eugene) Jeon, 
for not only providing me with the possibility to write this project but his valuable 
guidance and insights throughout the duration of the thesis. I would also like to thank 
him for his understanding of my mum's condition as she has had Parkinson's disease, 
and he allowed me to write this thesis remotely so that I could take care of my mum 
while I was writing this thesis. 
I would also like to thank Monica, who gave valuable feedback on our product from a 
psychological perspective and was empathetic for my mum's condition. It was a 
pleasure to work with her. 
Lastly, as an international student, I thank everyone who has made it possible for me 
to be in the position to write this thesis. It would not be possible without my family, 
team members, and classmates' support.  
Thank you to you all. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Contents 
 
1. Abstracts ................................................................................................................ 2 
2. Preface and Acknowledgement ............................................................................. 3 
3. Introduction ............................................................................................................ 6 
4. Literature review 
i. Antecedent 
a. Trust .............................................................................................................. 10 
b. Perceived usefulness and ease of use .......................................................... 11 
c. Social influence ............................................................................................. 12 
d. Anonymity, privacy and security .................................................................... 13 
ii. Outcome 
a. Effectiveness ................................................................................................. 14 
b. User satisfaction ............................................................................................ 16 
c. Compassion .................................................................................................. 18 
iii. Conclusion........................................................................................................ 18 
5. Empirical studies: Serenio 
  i. MVP development ............................................................................................... 23 
6. Methods ............................................................................................................... 26 
  i. Interview analysis ................................................................................................ 26 
  ii. MVP process analysis ........................................................................................ 34 
  iii. Chatbot data analysis ........................................................................................ 34 
  iv. Outcome data analysis ...................................................................................... 35 
7. Findings ............................................................................................................... 37 
  i. Interview findings ................................................................................................ 37 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
  ii. MVP process findings ......................................................................................... 42 
  iii. Chatbot data findings ......................................................................................... 46 
  iv. Outcome data findings ...................................................................................... 50 
8. Discussion............................................................................................................ 55 
9. Implications for future study and policy makers ................................................... 70 
10. Reference .......................................................................................................... 72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
3. Introduction 
This master thesis aims to run as an empirical study to explore the potential of an 
Artificial Intelligence mental health chatbot, focusing on the motivational factors behind 
the adoption of such an AI-based chatbot. With the rise of generative artificial 
intelligence since February 2023, this is one of the hottest topics in the startup field. I 
have a great passion for this project because of three factors: Firstly, I genuinely 
believe in the potential of generative AI and that it will fundamentally change human 
society. Secondly, I care about mental health, and I believe it is one of the most 
challenging topics so far without a proper set of technology to address this pain point, 
and thirdly, I have profound personal connections because my sister struggled with 
depression for eight years and I want to do something to help her as well as many 
people out there that have a similar condition like her. 
The research topic of this master thesis is the motivation behind user adoption of AI-
based chatbot mental health guides. The research question is, therefore, "Why are 
users using and adopting AI mental health chatbots in Asia?."  
While there is literature that explains antecedent factors such as trust (Nuffield Council 
on Bioethics et al., 2022; Yuting Liao, 2021), perceived usefulness and ease of use 
(Yuting Liao, 2021), anonymity, privacy and security (Shira et al., 2023), and outcome 
factors such as social influence (Yuting Liao, 2021), effectiveness (Prabod 
Rathnayaka et al., 2022; Sahand Sabour et al., 2022), user satisfaction (Sahand 
Sabour et al., 2022; Theodora Koulouri et al., 2022), compassion (Elizabeth Morrow 
et al., 2023), there is not one self-owned project that explore the hidden factors from 
an insider perspective. The authors carried out these studies by studying existing apps 
on the market, user interviews, group experiments and online information. This might 
be the first literature in which the author himself built a team and a product to write this 
master thesis and run a brand new startup. Many things are difficult to know if research 
was conducted mainly through online information and user interviews regarding 
sensitive topics like mental health. We noticed that users might not always tell the truth 
in user interviews, and sometimes they need to know what they want. 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
In contrast, user behaviour is much more reliable and always reflects the actual desire 
of users. By obtaining consent from users with a privacy policy in place, we can study 
the most secretive conversational data between our chatbot and over 1000 users to 
uncover the hidden motivation not reflected in previous literature. For example, new 
factors like users feeling lost and uncertain about the future, they were frustrated about 
relationships, they were looking for a romantic relationship with a robot, they were 
looking for personal growth, and they did not have enough friends, in reality, were 
noticed in the conversational data analysis. These conversation data were collected 
through my research's findings by building an MVP. 
The master thesis serves as a detailed analysis of the progress made with the project 
"Serenio" from February to August 2023, which contains insights and reflection on why 
users love to use our product. As of the date of this document, I have successfully 
acquired 1,193 registered users with approximately 200 active users that use our 
minimal viable product very frequently. The way I built our minimal viable product is to 
build a therapist version of a chatbot with great empathy and a positive attitude on a 
messaging software called LINE. It is the most commonly used application in Taiwan's 
first testing region. 
I have collected various data from the conversation and run multiple user interviews. 
I have a privacy policy that complies with the local laws in Taiwan and ensure that I 
have their consent to use the data in an academic context. In addition, all data has 
been encrypted and anonymized, so I cannot identify which user sent the messages. 
As this topic involves mental health, which is more sensitive, the master thesis should 
be kept confidential and will only be shared with the supervisors and evaluators in 
charge. 
In addition to previous literature, I found new antecedent factors. We know from the 
interview findings that they include interests/openness about new technology, pricing, 
user personality, and comparison with alternatives. From MVP process findings, we 
know there is compliance with laws and regulations. Moreover, from chatbot data 
findings, there are new antecedent factors such as pain points are the main driver, 
users were lost and uncertain about the future, users were frustrated about 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
relationships, users looking for a romantic relationship with a robot, users were looking 
for personal growth, and users did not have enough friends in reality.  
There are also practical implications for future business owners and policymakers. 
Business owners should consider the above factors before building another AI-based 
mental health app. Our interview and survey results also proved that our tool helped 
users feel emotionally better with early mental conditions. Moreover, finally, in the 
future, the tool can be used to refer more severe cases to the appropriate therapist or 
psychologist. Policymakers can consider using AI to address the problem of 
insufficient resources. 
 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
4. Literature review 
Effective mental health care services are urgently needed now than ever due to the 
rising incidence of mental health issues globally. In the empirical portion of this article, 
the use of AI-based mental health chatbots has come to light as a viable means of 
bridging the gap between this rising need and the constrained supply of qualified 
specialists. In order to improve the creation, use, and efficiency of AI-based chatbot 
mental health guides, this literature review synthesizes aspects impacting user 
acceptance and proposes topics for further study. 
Artificial intelligence may significantly impact personalized medicine for mental health 
issues, especially Deep Learning applications, which have demonstrated promising 
outcomes in clinical practice (Sijia et al., 2022; Sahand Sabour et al., 2023). It serves 
as a setting for the growing use of chatbots and other AI-based mental health care 
solutions and their potential advantages. They also looked at the potential of AI in 
mental health support, noting the promise of AI and natural language processing (NLP) 
in delivering mental health assistance in light of the rising incidence of mental health 
concerns and the difficulties faced by mental health services. 
Conversational AI agents provide a rare chance to solve persistent problems with 
traditional mental health care services, such as societal stigma and a demand-supply 
mismatch (Ashish et al., 2020; Huang & Bashir, 2017). The long-standing societal 
stigma is a substantial impediment to receiving care or assistance for mental health 
issues, which may also influence how readily consumers use mental health 
applications. 
In the literature, I will divide the factors into antecedents and outcomes. Nineteen 
pieces of literature I have reviewed suggest five antecedent factors and four outcome 
factors. The first set is a list of factors that directly explain the antecedent of adoption 
of AI-based mental health chatbots before users have even tried out the product, 
including trust, perceived Usefulness and ease of use, and social influence. The 
second set is a list of consequential/outcome factors relevant to adopting such chatbot 
through experiments and verification observed after users have used the product, 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
including effectiveness, user satisfaction, compassion, privacy and security.
 
i. 
The antecedent for adopting AI-based mental health chatbot 
 
a. Trust 
In a psychological context, trust is an expectancy of positive (or nonnegative) 
outcomes that one can receive based on the expected action of another party in an 
interaction characterized by uncertainty (Bhattacharya et al., 1998). 
In a technological context, such as in AI, trust can refer to users' confidence in a 
system to behave predictably, reliably, and according to its intended purpose. 
Characteristics like trust and trustworthiness significantly impact how users accept AI-
based chatbot mental health advisors. Users are more likely to use systems they 
perceive to be trustworthy, which is influenced by factors such as the system's 
reputation, the involvement of mental health professionals in its development, and 
evidence of its effectiveness.  
The adoption of AI-based mental health chatbots can be strongly influenced by trust 
(Nuffield Council on Bioethics et al., 2022; Yuting Liao, 2021). Mental health 
technologies strongly correlate with the possible impact of high monitoring levels on 
Motivation 
factors
Antecedent
Trust
Perceived 
usefulness and 
ease of use
Social influence
Anonymity, 
privacy and 
security
Outcome
Effectiveness
User satisfaction
Compassion
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
confidence in mental healthcare. In order to feel comfortable using an app, consumers 
must also trust it and the data it offers (Yuting Liao, 2021). This is especially pertinent 
to AI-based mental health chatbots because users must have confidence in the 
chatbot's ability to offer reliable and beneficial mental health care. Liao also suggested 
that these chatbots can provide a platform for tracking moods and symptoms, which 
can help with the patient intake process and increase the efficiency of information 
gathering. This could foster trust in the system, providing an objective view of how a 
person's psychological well-being might change over time. The trust factor would then 
enhance the adoption of mental health chatbots. 
b. Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use 
Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use are two critical components in the Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM), a theoretical model in information systems that explains 
how users accept and use technology (Davis, 1989).      
Perceived Usefulness refers to the degree to which a user believes using a particular 
system would enhance job performance (Davis, 1989). In other words, if a user 
perceives technology as applicable, they believe it will contribute to accomplishing 
their goals more effectively or efficiently.       
Ease of Use refers to the degree to which a user believes using a particular system 
would be effort-free. If technology is perceived as easy to use, users believe they can 
use it without experiencing difficulty or frustration. This includes intuitive design, clear 
instructions, and user-friendly interfaces (Amoroso, 2009).  
According to TAM, these two factors determine whether a user will accept and use 
new technology. If technology is perceived as valuable and easy to use, users will 
likely accept and adopt it. 
The adoption of health apps is significantly influenced by perceived utility and usability 
(Yuting Liao, 2021). For example, Liao gave an example of what unique perceived 
utility chatbots can offer. Liao mentioned, "Furthermore, I identify unique opportunities 
for therapeutic chatbots to meet two additional needs beyond what traditional therapy 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
can offer. One aspect is info-technological support to address the need for a digital 
platform to track symptoms or metrics and to access information. To fulfil this need, 
therapeutic chatbots can provide an interactive platform for tracking data and serve 
as a hub for informational resources pertinent to mental health." Users are more likely 
to adopt an app if they believe it is helpful and straightforward. This may be directly 
applicable to AI-based chatbots for mental health, as users' opinions on the chatbot's 
utility and usability may significantly impact their choice. 
Acceptability, or usability, is highly relevant to perceived Usefulness. In the context of 
technology, usability refers to the degree to which a product is satisfactory or 
agreeable to its users (Leavitt et al., 2006). It measures how well technology's design, 
functionality, and outcomes meet the users' needs and expectations. 
According to Theodora Koulouri's study (Theodora Koulouri et al., 2022), there is 
evidence that chatbots may be used to provide young adults with mental health help. 
Users may be strongly motivated to use AI-based chatbots for mental health if they 
find them acceptable. A technology that users find acceptable and appropriate for their 
purposes is more likely to be adopted. 
c. Social influence 
In the context of technology adoption, social influence is often defined as the degree 
to which an individual perceives that essential others believe he or she should use a 
new system or technology (Venkatesh et al., 2003). It is a significant factor in many 
technology acceptance and adoption models, including the Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) (Venkatesh et al., 2003). 
 
It is important to underline how social impact affects the adoption of mobile health 
applications (Yuting Liao, 2021). It implies that people are more inclined to download 
a health app if they believe their social network would benefit. Users may be impacted 
by the thoughts and experiences of their peers. Therefore this may also apply to AI-
based mental health chatbots. The composition of a user's social network, particularly 
the quantity and quality of connections, might affect the user's choice to use a health 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
app. For empirical findings, the literature presents a table outlining the types of needs 
a chatbot can or cannot meet. One of the types of needs listed is "Social support," 
which includes needs for social interactions and social validation. The document 
suggests that chatbots can provide warmth, companionship, a sense of rapport, 
affirmation, and validation for how one feels. In addition, it provides an example 
dialogue between a user and a chatbot named Molly. This dialogue demonstrates how 
a chatbot can provide social support and validation, potentially influencing the user's 
decision to adopt and continue using the chatbot. The literature lists a series of 
questions used to understand users' comfort level with disclosing their information to 
a chatbot and their feelings about using a chatbot to manage their mental health. 
These questions could shed light on the social factors that influence the adoption of 
mobile health applications. 
 
d. Anonymity, privacy and security 
In digital terms, anonymity means that a user's personal information or online activities 
cannot be traced back to them. Privacy often refers to the control users have over 
what personal information is collected about them and how it is used and shared. 
Moreover, security often involves technologies like encryption and two-factor 
authentication, as well as practices like regular software updates and strong password 
policies. 
Chatbots can offer people a private and practical approach to expressing emotions. 
Users who might feel awkward or stigmatized discussing their mental health difficulties 
in person may find this particularly appealing (Shira et al., 2023).  
Developers of chatbots should keep user data private as much as possible. If anything 
is shared, it should not contain any personally identifiable information, according to 
ethical standards that include concerns about privacy and confidentiality, efficacy, and 
safety (Kira Kretzschmar et al., 2019). 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
 
ii. 
Outcome for adopting AI-based mental health chatbot 
 
a. Effectiveness 
In the context of technology or systems, effectiveness refers to the ability of the 
technology or system to achieve its intended purpose and goals in a real-world setting. 
This could involve improving efficiency, reducing errors, or achieving other desired 
outcomes. 
Users may be encouraged to utilize AI-based mental health chatbots for the 
personalization and efficacy of the therapy they get (Prabod Rathnayaka et al., 2022; 
Sahand Sabour et al., 2022). In behavioural activation treatment, ongoing involvement 
and emotional support are essential, and AI chatbots may deliver these components 
efficiently. Regarding efficacy, the chatbot's level of engagement and emotional 
support may also be important driving forces for consumers' adoption of AI-based 
chatbots for mental health. 
Additionally, I would use Emohaa as an example. An AI-based mental health chatbot 
that offers cognitive and emotional help is called Emohaa. It comprises a template-
based platform (CBT-Bot) with exercises and talks with pre-defined alternatives based 
on CBT principles and a platform for generative dialogue (ES-Bot) that allows for open-
ended communication and emotional support. The Emohaa intervention significantly 
increased participants' positive affect while lowering their sadness, anxiety, negative 
affect, and sleeplessness (Sahand Sabour et al., 2022). This demonstrates the 
potential advantages of AI-based mental health chatbots, which may encourage user 
adoption. Adding an emotional support person improved the symptoms of mental 
discomfort, particularly sleeplessness and sadness. For the research itself, the study 
was conducted in the context of the rising prevalence of mental health diseases in 
China, where the number of licensed psychiatrists is minimal, and the quality of mental 
health services is often inadequate. The researchers aimed to address these 
challenges by developing a high-technology tool that could provide effective, available, 
and affordable support for improving individuals' mental health. The sample for the 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
study consisted of 247 participants randomly assigned to three groups: Emohaa (CBT-
Bot), Emohaa (Full), and the control group. The intervention lasted three consecutive 
weeks, after which the participants were asked to fill in post-test questionnaires. The 
data collected from the study showed that the Emohaa intervention significantly 
increased participants' positive affect while lowering their levels of sadness, anxiety, 
negative affect, and sleeplessness. The researchers concluded that the Emohaa 
system, which includes completing daily exercises and emotional venting, improved 
the participants' mental distress symptoms. The study provides empirical evidence for 
the effectiveness of conversational agents in providing cognitive and emotional 
support, particularly in a context where mental health services are limited or 
inadequate.  
In order to treat mental health comorbidities like depression and anxiety, which 
frequently accompany chronic pain, AI-CBT therapies provide affordable, accessible, 
and perhaps effective options (Megha Gupta et al., 2022). those who utilized the 
system more frequently reported fewer symptoms of depression than those who used 
it less frequently (Matthew Louis Mauriello et al., 2021). The empirical setting/data of 
the study is based on the interaction of users with a therapeutic chatbot designed to 
help manage mental health. The study utilized a screening survey to select eligible 
participants, who were then provided with a link to interact with the AI. The participants 
were asked about their life experiences, feelings, and thoughts. The study also 
included a central survey that required participants to be at least 18 years old to 
participate. Furthermore, the study also conducted an interview to get a more detailed 
understanding of the participant's thoughts about the technology for managing mental 
health. The interview protocol included questions about past experiences with 
conversational AI technology, how the participants typically deal with psychological 
issues, and their thoughts about the chatbot they interacted with. 
Conversational agents provided anonymous, compassionate, and nonjudgmental 
conversations consistent with the research supporting in-person psychotherapy 
(Laura Martinengo et al., 2022). 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
At the client's convenience, AI, intense learning applications, can help treat mental 
problems (Zhou et al., 2022). AI has the potential to benefit online treatments and 
boost psychotherapy's effectiveness. AI, intense learning, endorses a data-driven 
approach where a general-purpose program automatically learns elements from data. 
This can effectively improve the current state of psychotherapy. In addition, AI has 
been applied in a wide range of applications, such as identifying objects in images, 
recognizing speech, translating languages, understanding the genetic determinants 
of diseases, and predicting health status using electronic health records. These 
capabilities can be leveraged in the context of psychotherapy. Deep learning is utilized 
in interventions for schizophrenia. It is suggested to be effective in reducing anxiety 
by helping patients to detect emotional changes and thought patterns and enhance 
flexible thinking styles. 
Moreover, Deep learning, a category of machine learning, allows advanced problem-
solving techniques of complicated non-linear pattern recognition of spatial samples. 
This can be particularly useful in understanding and treating mental health disorders. 
Additionally, it has been shown that chatbots can benefit patients, healthcare workers, 
and those who wish to keep themselves in excellent health (Vytautas Raulinaitis, 
2022). 
Using conversational AI, developers attempt to automate some elements of mental 
health evaluations and therapy. Additionally, they offer more flexibility, engagement, 
and control over the course and length of therapy (Ashish Viswanath Prakash et al., 
2020). All of these can contribute to increased efficacy, which raises the user adoption 
rate. 
b. User satisfaction 
User satisfaction refers to the extent to which users are happy with a product, service, 
or system. It measures the user's overall experience and the degree to which the 
product or service meets their needs and expectations. In the context of technology 
or systems, user satisfaction can be influenced by various factors, including the 
system's functionality, usability, reliability, and performance and the quality of support 
and service provided to the user. 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
Returning to the Emohaa example, the research discovered that users were content 
with the platform (Sahand Sabour et al., 2022). A key element affecting the adoption 
of technology is user happiness. Users are more likely to keep using and suggest a 
chatbot if they are happy with their interaction with it. 
To increase user happiness, user-centred design is crucial while creating chatbots 
(Theodora Koulouri et al., 2022). This may have a significant impact on user uptake. 
Users are more likely to embrace a chatbot if created with their wants, preferences, 
and context in mind. 
To offer help and guidance to those who are depressed, these chatbots can be created 
to simulate human discourse (Shira Cahana Damari et al., 2023). They employ natural 
language processing algorithms to comprehend and react to user input. Chatbots are 
interactive and user-friendly, which encourages consumers to employ them. 
By giving prompt responses, facilitating quick and efficient visits, and offering follow-
up treatment, healthcare chatbots can also increase patient satisfaction. Increased 
patient satisfaction may encourage users to employ these chatbots (Dr Liji Thomas, 
2022). Users expressed a progressively favourable attitude regarding using chatbots 
for proactive stress management and perceived their interactions with the chatbots as 
applicable or at least neutral (Matthew et al., 2021). 
Another significant component resulting in high user satisfaction is design 
consideration. Matthew discussed creating and assessing a unique set of shallow 
chatbots for managing daily stress. It offers insights into the advantages and difficulties 
of designing several conversational treatments. It may be essential to comprehend 
these design factors if you want to create chatbots that people will want to utilize. In 
order to assist individuals in managing their mental health, the ideal design principles 
for a conversational agent allow the establishment of both sociotechnical and 
therapeutic connections (Liao YuTing, 2021). 
User experience and usability influence app adoption and usage (Alqahtani & Orji, 
2020). Users prioritized the app's user design and friendliness over other factors. Apps 
with adaptable features, which let users customize some app functions, also earned 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
excellent marks. On the other hand, the most frequent reason for leaving mental 
health applications was poor usability. Other difficulties relate to user experience and 
include lack of diversity in information, lack of personalization, poor customer service 
and trust, and security and privacy concerns. 
c. Compassion 
Compassion is a deep awareness of and sympathy for another's suffering, coupled 
with the desire to alleviate it. It involves empathy for others' pain or distress and the 
wish to help or support them. 
Compassion is also essential in why users feel good after trying out the chatbot. A 
crucial component of mental health chatbots, compassion, can be improved by AI 
technology (Elizabeth Morrow et al., 2023). It implies that AI technologies are being 
used to improve relational behaviour, communication skills, health coaching, 
therapeutic interventions, moral development learning, clinical knowledge and clinical 
assessment, healthcare quality assessment, therapeutic bond and therapeutic 
alliance, and to offer health information and advice. 
A human-AI system of intelligent caring can be conceptualized as having six 
components: awareness of suffering, understanding of suffering, connecting with 
suffering, making a judgment about suffering, responding to relieve suffering, and 
attention to the effect and outcomes of responding. This perspective may help 
determine why users employ AI-based chatbots for mental health. 
iii. 
Conclusion 
This literature review summarizes the elements that affect users' adoption of AI-based 
chatbot mental health guides, highlighting the importance of trust, effectiveness, user 
satisfaction, compassion, ease of use, accessibility and affordability, social influence, 
privacy and security. The outcomes can also serve as potential antecedents. The 
potential of AI chatbot mental health guides to change mental health may be explored 
by considering these elements and examining the areas that require further 
investigation. 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
After studying the literature, we will move on to empirical studies to explore our unique 
findings. 
 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
5. Empirical studies: Serenio 
We imagine a world where everyone has access to reliable, affordable and accessible 
emotional support by providing high-quality dialogue and companionship through AI 
and therefore enriching the inspiration of self-awareness. 
Serenio believes that "Chat is the New Med", where Med means "Medicine as well as 
Meditation", to address loneliness and early mental conditions. We are addressing the 
$37 billion global loneliness and mental health market as an AI-powered mental health 
app. 
 Using Marcus Aurelius'Aurelius' (Emperor of ancient Rome) idea of "reflection", we 
blend dialogue with meditation, providing serenity through a humanized chatbot built 
by combining various large language models, sentimental analysis and long-term 
memory. Each chat ends with a deep reflection that enhances self-understanding and 
promotes self-awareness. 
 We are more than just an app; we are a journey of self-discovery.
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
We provide a personalized, stigma-free, and engaging platform to support users' 
mental health journey, focusing on emotional support, decision-making assistance, 
and self-improvement tracking. 
Our society faces a significant shortage of mental health professionals, as evidenced 
by the increasing number of random attacks (Rueve, 2008). Various governments are 
exploring policies to address mental health problems (Jenkins, 2003); given the lack 
of a workforce, artificial intelligence (AI) can be crucial in offering assistance. However, 
two additional problems need to be addressed. Firstly, the options for addressing 
mental health conditions are limited to free services provided by social workers or 
expensive treatments offered by psychologists or psychiatrists, leaving a significant 
gap in addressing less severe problems. Secondly, most people lack awareness 
regarding their mental health issues, further compounded by stigma within Asian 
society (Ma et al., 2023). 
Our AI mental health chatbot is a central feature of Serenio, designed to provide users 
with a 24/7 AI-powered stress companion. By leveraging the capabilities of GPT-4, it 
allows users to feel empathy, encouragement and affirmation and gain 24/7 emotional 
support 
in 
both 
personal 
and 
professional 
aspects 
of 
their 
lives..
 
Built a startup team
February 2023
Conducted initial user 
interview to 
understand motivation
March 2023
Launched an MVP
April 2023
Studied conversation 
data
May 2023
Converted into insights
June 2023
Strengthen online 
exposure 
Officai launch of 
product (expected 
September 2023)
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
The above is a background introduction to the project, Serenio. It does not only serve 
as an empirical startup project but also provides tremendous insights into the adoption 
of generative AI, new technologies and mental health-related software products in an 
academic context. 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
i. 
MVP development 
Our Serenio team is comprised of 7 members, even though they are not at all involved 
in writing this master thesis and studying sensitive data to discover the reasons or 
motivations to discover the adoption of an AI-based chatbot. They include: 
1. David (the author of this thesis) is the CEO 
2. Kelvin as CTO (an expert in AI with a master's degree in computer science) 
3. Vincent from Inspect Element is the product manager. Inspect Element is a 
hypothesis-led venture builder working globally from Asia-pacific. He is a 
former product manager from two unicorn companies, Klook and GogoX. 
4. Rafael from Zendog Lab as a go-to-market consultant. He was a former 
Principal at Roivant and was the Co-Founder of Eatearnity and Maison Baum. 
Roivant is a principal investment firm that raised billions in funding, built a 
portfolio of > 35 startups, and went public on the NASDAQ.  
5. Andrei and Anda from Lunatix as UX/UI designer. Lunatix is a design agency 
based in Romania. 
6. We have hired two official employees, Mu from Taiwan and Irene from Taiwan. 
Mu is our UX researcher/ product manager, and Mu is our internal designer. 
 
Our team is comprised of experienced professionals, carefully assembled from 
various backgrounds. We have invested in hiring a product advisor from Hong Kong, 
a go-to-market consultant from Switzerland, a UX researcher from Taiwan, a designer 
from Romania, and a CEO who is a serial entrepreneur from Hong Kong. Additionally, 
our CTO is an AI expert from HKUST who previously taught machine learning and AI 
at the same university. He has consistently been recognized and highly rated by 
students as the best teaching assistant.  
 
The second question is - why now?  
Previous successful examples such as Woebot (a CBT mental health chatbot from 
Stanford used by millions of people), Calm, and Headspace (the most successful 
mental health apps) demonstrate the vast market potential for these applications. In 
February 2023, generative AI models gained popularity with the launch of Chatgpt, 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
leading to a growing number of use cases being developed on top of this technology. 
Furthermore, open-source LLMs are increasingly available, enabling startup teams to 
build their models using existing infrastructure. The timing is opportune as the Asian 
Governments are actively seeking practical solutions for the rapidly growing 
population affected by mental health disorders.  
 
The Minimal Viable Product 
 
This is a minimally viable product used by Chinese users. In this scenario, I shared 
with the chatbot that I felt unhappy because my girlfriend broke up. The chatbot then 
replied, “I understand what you are feeling. Breakup is a hurtful thing. We can all 
learn important things through actions and behaviour to become better people. Can 
you share more information about why you betrayed each other? With more 
information, I hope I can provide more concrete advice and help you to gain strength 
and hope from pain.” I then replied, “We did not love each other deeply.” The 
chatbot’s answer is, “Love is complicated. Sometimes we feel lost in a relationship. 
Can you tell me which part of your relationship makes you confused or uncertain? 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
Understanding your choice can help you better understand yourself and what kind of 
relationship you should seek.” 
The MVP only supports chat functions on Line or Whatsapp in an empathetic and 
friendly way, supporting users along a difficult life journey. We released the minimal 
viable product shortly after GPT-4 was launched, and to date, we have acquired 
1,193 registered users with 200 active daily users. 
 
There is no better time than now, as generative AI was not available before, and 
further delays in launching this meaningful project would be detrimental. 
We now move on to the research method of this master thesis to understand how it 
was conducted. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
6. Methods 
We adopted four different research methods, including online interviews analysis, 
MVP process analysis, chatbot data analysis and outcome data analysis. 
Firstly, we have conducted comprehensive research through paid ads and interviews 
with 15 individuals as interview analysis. Secondly, we built an MVP, and during this 
process, we encountered challenges and discovered additional reasons why people 
wanted to use our chatbot and summarised it as MVP process analysis. Moreover, we 
have implemented a privacy policy that allows us to study encrypted and anonymous 
data from our MVP users to form chatbot data analysis. We have gained deep insights 
into our user base by analysing this data daily. Finally, we studied the emails and 
survey results as an outcome data analysis.  
i. 
Interview analysis 
In March 2023, I ran Facebook and Instagram advertisements to understand the 
mental health needs of users to recruit interviewees. Our ads reached 12,800 people 
with a 2,593 click rate into the ads. I mentioned in the ad that I would offer 50 USD 
to each selected interviewee. It resulted in 45 applicants, and I selected 15 of them 
to interview. 
The screening questions include: 
i. 
What is your primary language? 
ii. 
What area are you from? 
iii. 
What is your gender? 
iv. 
Which of the following age groups do you belong to? 
v. 
How long do you use your smartphone on average every day? 
vi. 
What is your income level? 
vii. 
How many times a week do you exercise (at least 30 minutes each time)? 
viii. 
Are you facing any of the following pressures right now? 
ix. 
Have you ever met with a therapist or psychologist to address these 
stressors? 
x. 
Have you ever heard of the following health software? 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
xi. 
Have you ever used any of the following health software? 
xii. 
If you have used one of the software, how often do you use it? 
 
I picked 15 people among the 45 applicants based on (1) whether they had met a 
therapist before; (2) whether they had used any mental health apps before. The 
other questions were for understanding background rather than for selection 
purposes. During the interview process, I noticed that some interviewees 
accidentally pressed the wrong buttons, and some of them were not suitable 
candidates to be used as research targets because they had no experience with 
mental health apps or therapist experience. I ended up picking seven people as 
valuable persons. 
The interviews aim to understand their experience with different mental health 
solutions, why they choose physical solutions (such as meeting with therapists) or 
digital solutions (such as different apps), and the consideration factors before 
adopting such solutions. 
In the actual interviews, each of them is approximately a 60-90 minutes interview 
including the following sections: 
I. 
The purpose of interview 
II. 
Personal data policy explanation 
III. 
House rules 
IV. 
Self introduction 
V. 
End-to-end journey (user background, how to discover an issue, explore 
different options, experience with different methods, how to build habits 
and experience with digital products) 
VI. 
Card sorting (selecting the most desired functions and most undesired 
functions) 
VII. 
Pricing and other tools 
Each section contained 5 – 20 questions, and it varied depending on the interviewees' 
answers. 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
Sections 
Background  
· Can you tell me a bit about yourself? What do you do for a living? What are your 
hobbies and interests? 
· Can you describe a specific health or wellness goal that you have? What steps are 
you currently taking to achieve it? 
· What are some health and wellness topics that you are particularly interested in 
learning more about? 
· Can you tell me about your typical health and wellness routine? What activities or 
habits do you prioritize? 
· How do you typically manage your stress levels? Do you have any techniques that 
you find particularly effective? 
· How do you typically monitor your progress towards your health and wellness 
goals? 
· Do you currently keep a journal or diary? How frequently do you write in your 
journal or diary? 
· Do you consider yourself an introvert or extrovert? 
How to discover an issue 
· What are some of the biggest challenges you face when it comes to managing 
your health and wellness? 
· How do you typically stay motivated to maintain your health and wellness habits? 
· Can you describe a time when you felt particularly motivated to improve your health 
and wellness? What factors contributed to that motivation? 
· Can you describe a time when you felt particularly stressed or overwhelmed? What 
strategies did you use to cope with those feelings? 
· Are there any specific factors that tend to trigger your stress or anxiety? 
· How do you typically manage your stress or anxiety? Do you have any techniques 
or coping strategies that work particularly well for you? 
· From 1-10, how important is mental health to you? Why? 
Exploring different options 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
· How do you typically stay informed about new health and wellness trends or 
solutions? 
· Can you describe a time when you had a health or wellness issue that required 
you to seek out new options or solutions? How did you go about finding those 
options? 
· How do you typically decide which health or wellness practices to try? What factors 
do you consider? 
· Are there any health or wellness practices or treatments that you are particularly 
curious about but haven't tried yet? 
· How do you typically evaluate whether a health or wellness practice or treatment 
is effective for you? What metrics or indicators do you use? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you had to make a difficult decision related to 
your health and wellness? How did you make that decision? 
· How do you typically decide which health or wellness apps or services to try? What 
factors do you consider? 
· Can you describe a time when you felt particularly motivated to try a new health or 
wellness practice or service? What factors contributed to that motivation? 
· Are there any mental health practices or treatments that you are particularly 
curious about but haven't tried yet? 
· How do you typically evaluate whether a mental health practice or treatment is 
effective for you? What metrics or indicators do you use? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you had a mental health issue that required 
you to seek out new options or solutions? How did you go about finding those 
options? 
Experience with different methods 
· Have you ever tried any meditation, yoga? If so, can you tell me about your 
experience? 
· Can you tell me about a health or wellness practice or treatment that you have 
tried and found to be particularly effective? What made it effective for you? 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
· Can you describe a time when you tried a health or wellness practice or treatment 
and found it to be ineffective or unhelpful? What factors contributed to that 
experience? 
· Have you ever tried any health or wellness practices or treatments that were 
recommended to you by a healthcare professional? If so, can you tell me about your 
experience? 
· Are there any health or wellness practices or treatments that you have tried in the 
past but no longer use? If so, why did you stop using them? 
· How do you typically evaluate the effectiveness of a health or wellness practice or 
treatment? What metrics or indicators do you use? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you felt particularly motivated to try a new 
health or wellness practice or treatment? What factors contributed to that 
motivation? 
· Can you tell me about a mental health practice or treatment that you have tried 
and found to be particularly effective? What made it effective for you? 
· Can you describe a time when you tried a mental health practice or treatment and 
found it to be ineffective or unhelpful? What factors contributed to that experience? 
· Have you ever received professional mental health treatment, such as therapy or 
counseling? If so, can you tell me about your experience? 
· Are there any mental health practices or treatments that you have tried in the past 
but no longer use? If so, why did you stop using them? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you had to switch to a new mental health 
practice or treatment? What motivated the switch, and how did you feel about the 
change? 
· How do you typically evaluate the effectiveness of a mental health practice or 
treatment? What metrics or indicators do you use? 
· Have you ever encountered any challenges or barriers to accessing or trying a 
new mental health practice or treatment? If so, what were those challenges? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you felt particularly motivated to try a new 
mental health practice or treatment? What factors contributed to that motivation? 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
· Have you ever participated in group therapy or support groups for mental health 
issues? If so, what was your experience like? 
Building habits/ recovery 
· How do you typically establish new health and wellness habits? What strategies 
have worked well for you in the past? 
· Can you describe a time when you successfully established a new health or 
wellness habit? What motivated you to make the change, and how did you maintain 
the habit over time? 
· Have you ever had difficulty maintaining a health or wellness habit? If so, what 
caused you to fall off track, and how did you recover? 
· How do you typically track your progress towards your health and wellness goals? 
Are there any specific tools or metrics that you find particularly helpful? 
· Can you describe a time when you successfully made a major change to your 
health or wellness habits? What motivated you to make the change, and how did 
you maintain the change over time? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you made a health or wellness change that 
required significant effort or sacrifice? What motivated you to make the change, and 
how did you maintain the change over time? 
· How do you typically manage your time and prioritize your health and wellness 
habits? Are there any specific techniques or strategies that you find particularly 
helpful? 
Experience with digital products 
· How comfortable are you with technology and using mobile apps? 
· Have you talked to a chatbot before? What's your experience like? 
· Can you describe a time when you tried a new mental health app or service? What 
motivated you to try it, and how did you feel about the experience? 
· Have you ever used a health or wellness app before? If so, can you tell me about 
your experience? 
· How do you typically find new health or wellness apps or digital products to try? 
What factors do you consider? 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
· Can you describe a time when you tried a new health or wellness app or digital 
product? What motivated you to try it, and how did you feel about the experience? 
· Are there any specific features or functions that you look for when evaluating a 
health or wellness app or digital product? 
· Have you ever had difficulty using a health or wellness app or digital product due 
to usability or design issues? If so, can you describe the issue? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you had to switch to a new health or wellness 
app or digital product? What motivated the switch, and how did you feel about the 
change? 
· How do you typically evaluate the effectiveness of a health or wellness app or 
digital product? What metrics or indicators do you use? 
· Can you describe a time when you had difficulty integrating a health or wellness 
app or digital product into your existing routine or habits? How did you address that 
issue? 
· Have you ever encountered any challenges or barriers to using a health or 
wellness app or digital product due to language or cultural differences? If so, can 
you describe the issue? 
· Can you tell me about a time when you felt particularly motivated to try a new 
health or wellness app or digital product? What factors contributed to that 
motivation? 
· If you open your phone or computer, what's the top 5 app you use? 
 
Selected people 
Firstly, I had identified 7 people with the following background. 
Name 
Age 
Place 
Background 
Mental condition 
Notes 
Ben 
25 
Taipei 
Taiwan 
He was 
unemployed 
and looking for 
a job in the 
field of 
He struggled with 
stress from job-
seeking, and he 
had pressure from 
university and high 
He didn’t 
have 
enough 
time to 
hang out 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
computer 
science. 
school to keep up 
with his peers. 
with his 
friends. 
Scott 
37 
Xinbei 
Taiwan 
He was a 
manager in a 
stock trading 
software 
company. 
He struggled with 
sleep and stress 
and was insecure 
about living a 
fulfilling life. 
 
Chenxin 23 
Brisban 
Australia 
She was 
studying a 
short-term 
course in 
Australia. 
She believed 
mental health was 
10 out 10 important 
to her as she 
struggled with 
depression, 
emotion-led 
stomach problems, 
was very 
demanding to 
herself and had 
problems with 
pressure from 
family members 
 
Peter 
25 
Guangzhou 
China 
He was 
studying a 
master’s 
degree in 
Hong Kong. 
Peter 
was 
an 
introvert 
and 
struggled 
with 
anxiety for a long 
time. He had a 
really bad stomach 
and 
went 
to 
hospitals a couple 
of times. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
Andy 
39 
Taiwan 
He was 
working in a 
prestigious 
consulting 
company as a 
project 
manager. 
 
 
Maggie 
39 
Hong Kong 
She was 
working as a 
pastor in a 
church. 
 
She lived 
in USA for 
over 25 
years 
before. 
Zhu 
27 
Yi Lan 
Taiwan 
 
 
 
 
ii. 
MVP process analysis 
As discussed before, we built an MVP for Asian users. However, we encountered lots 
of operational challenges. We had email exchanges with users and received 
complaints about the company's background and violation of laws because we used 
the term virtual therapist. We collected this feedback to update the chatbot and our 
website. We spent US$1,000 to consult a lawyer to ensure we were legally compliant 
with the local rules and regulations. 
iii. 
Chatbot data analysis 
According to the terms of service and privacy policy, the chat record will be used for 
internal purposes (such as this master thesis) and will not be shared with third parties. 
The data were all safely encrypted and anonymized so that I had no chance to track 
the actual background or profile of the user. However, I discovered many insights 
about why they adopted my MVP. 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
I spent a few weeks studying the conversation of users with their consent. There were 
approximately 1,200 users as of the date of this document, and most of them were 
from paid advertisements such as Instagram and Facebook, in addition to running 
Serenio’s own Instagram account.  
I downloaded an Excel file which contained all the conversation data and went through 
the conversation manually to study the most active users. In addition, Code Interpreter 
was used to study the patterns of the chatbot, such as the most active period and time. 
About 15% of users belonged to power users that used the MVP daily. It covered 
various topics, such as relationships, academics and work pressure.  
Approximately 17% of users dropped out and blocked my MVP. This could be related 
to many reasons, such as the chatbot's effectiveness and frequent notifications. The 
MVP had minimal features, and the AI model was somewhat limited in its intellectual 
capacity.  
I had four paying subscribers as of the date of this document at the price of US$6.25 
per month. 
More importantly, Mu, a UX researcher from Taiwan, reached out to us and joined our 
team as a UX researcher. She was highly talented and intelligent, and I treated her as 
a potential co-founder in the future. 
In total, from the time I launched the MVP to the date of this document, approximately 
7,000 messages were sent to the chatbot, which allowed me to collect tremendous 
amounts of insights. 
iv. 
Outcome data analysis 
In addition, we have been publishing questionnaires and surveys through different 
channels, such as Facebook, Instagram and our Line channel. We received 
approximately 300 survey responses from various questionnaires and collected 
qualitative and quantitative answers.  
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
Questions include: 
· How often do you currently use SERENIO LINE Chatbot? 
·May I ask what motivated you to try the SERENIO service? 
·How do you feel about your experience with SERENIO LINE chatbot? 
·Did none of the above options match your experience? If you have other ideas for 
AI chat experience during this period, please feel free to tell us. 
·Are you currently facing the following physical and emotional issues? 
·When you usually face emotional problems that you cannot solve independently, 
what method do you use most often to relieve them? 
·What is the reason why you most often choose this method to relieve emotional 
problems? 
·Has the method you most often use to relieve your emotions ever caused you any 
inconvenience? If so, what kind of inconvenience? 
·May I ask if you have used any apps for physical and mental health improvement, 
emotional recording, etc.? 
·If yes, which of the following types of physical and mental health promotion apps 
do you use? 
·Among the physical and mental health promotion apps you have used, which one 
impressed you the most? 
·What do you think this app can help you the most? 
·If no and you haven't used it, what is the reason why you didn't use it? 
 
 
After discussing the research methods, we will proceed to discuss the findings of each 
research method. 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
7. Findings 
 
In this master thesis, I have six factors findings from interviews, two from MVP process, 
eight from chatbot data, and two from outcome data. 
 
i. 
Interview findings 
From the interview notes, I identified six factors leading to adopting mental health 
technologies, which are directly related to the master thesis topic. 
 
Common antecedent factors with literature review 
In the literature view, it was noted that users might be encouraged to utilize AI-based 
mental health chatbots for the personalization and efficacy of the therapy they get 
(Prabod Rathnayaka et al., 2022; Sahand Sabour et al., 2022). Effectiveness is an 
essential driver for the adoption of mental health chatbots. 
In addition, it was noted that it is important to underline how social impact affects the 
adoption of mobile health applications (Yuting Liao, 2021). It implies that people are 
more inclined to download a health app if they believe that their social network from 
social media would benefit from it. 
a. Expectation of effectiveness/ Mental health problems 
This refers to the belief or anticipation that a specific action, process, or product will 
produce a successful or desired result. It involves estimating the utility, value, and 
benefit derived from a particular intervention or tool. This also aligns with the two 
factors mentioned in the literature about effectiveness and perceived usefulness. 
Moreover, it is proven by our three examples: Ben, Chenxin and Maggie. 
Ben considered effectiveness a top consideration factor before he tried out new 
technology. He said, “I always do a tremendous amount of online study to learn about 
effectiveness before trying out any new product”. Effectiveness was also a top concern 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
when he consulted a psychologist about stress management. So as Scott, he focused 
on negative reviews with 1-2 star ratings on the app store because he believed there 
were lots of fake reviews.  
Chenxin stopped using some apps to monitor h--er stress level as she said, “After 
trying all these, ultimately, the therapist was more effective to me”. Similarly, she tried 
mindfulness and meditation before, but they were ineffective. She spent four years 
seeing a therapist, which completely changed her life. She had severe depression 
problems and anxiety issues. In the interview, she mentioned that she committed 
suicide twice but was saved by her family. She wanted to escape everything and start 
a new life, so she moved to Brisbane, Australia. 
Maggie tried breathing apps back in 2015 and did not find it compelling. It was not 
worth it for her to purchase such an app. After that, she tried apps like Mindvalley and 
brain training apps, but they were also ineffective in improving her condition. 
Effectiveness was the number one factor for her to consider before trying out a new 
solution. 
b. Impact of social media 
Social media is related to one of the antecedent factors in the literature review: social 
influence. However, interviewees focused on the negative impacts of social media. 
Chenxin said, “Social media made me very lonely and anxious”, which worsened her 
mental health problems, and motivated her to look for innovative solutions. However, 
we did not dive deep into an actual example. 
Maggie said, “I strongly believed that in Hong Kong, social media was the root cause 
of anxiety as Hong Kong people liked comparing themselves with others”. They 
wanted to become more prosperous than others and buy luxurious stuff. 
 
New antecedent factors compared to literature review 
a. Interests about new technology/ Openness to new technologies 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
This is a mindset that welcomes and embraces the implementation of novel 
technologies. It includes a willingness to adapt to changes brought about by these 
technologies and an eagerness to learn how to use them effectively. Openness to new 
technologies indicates an individual's flexibility, adaptability, and forward-thinking 
attitude. The examples of almost every interviewee proved it, as they all showed 
interest in new technologies. 
Let us begin with the first example. Ben was highly passionate about using new 
technologies to improve his health conditions. He had been utilising EEG devices to 
monitor meditation progress which could be used to detect neuro waves several times 
a week. He was also curious about using different mental health apps to test and track 
physical and mental health progress. He enjoyed looking at reviews, comments and 
ratings. 
Scott was passionate about using neuro-linguistic programming (NLP) to manage his 
stress. He used different apps and techniques related to NLP. 
Chenxin said, "I enjoy talking to the chatbot about my mental health", which showed 
that she was very open-minded. She mentioned that she would like our app to 
integrate with a smartwatch to monitor her mental health status and to recommend 
her therapist and resources.  
Maggie was also very open to new technologies. She mentioned looking for a tool or 
an app like Heartlab to measure her stress level with a device turning red or green. 
However, because of the pricing, she did not buy it. Chatbot was something that she 
would consider in treating mental health conditions. She also advised me that I should 
not lose focus on including fitness features or marketing/branding our chatbot simply 
as a mental health app. She believed "healing from relationship breakups" was a much 
stronger value proposition.  
Zhu enjoyed using a virtual dating app like Replika to share her emotion. She enjoyed 
so much talking with a chatbot, and it is a top 5 app on her phone. 
b. Pricing 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
Individuals are sensitive to prices, especially for mental health applications. 
Interviewees reflected different price points that they could accept, and in general, the 
cheaper the product is, the more acceptable it is to the user. 
For Ben, prices were important. He said, “I used to use a journalling app to record 
emotion and experience but then gave up due to a price increase”. He also mentioned 
that he would be willing to pay US$2 for an app like Serenio per month; or US$15 for 
a one-off subscription.  
Scott said, “I could not continuously afford or access professional mental health 
services as it cost US$50 for a one-hour session with a therapist”. However, he 
mentioned that he wanted and was willing to pay for such mental health support, and 
he would compare it against the price of Chatgpt to see the difference.  
Peter pointed out that he would be willing to try such an AI-based mental health guide 
and accept US$7 for a one-hour conversation or US$42 for a monthly subscription.  
Andy considered that therapists from the USA were very expensive and not affordable. 
He had been seeing the same therapist for four years with a company subsidy. 
Maggie said, "Pricing would be my number two factor to consider before trying out a 
new solution as I struggled with financial pressure as a pastor with low income, and I 
have three daughters”. She considered meeting a therapist adequate for her, but it 
was too costly at US$190 per hour. 
 
c. Personality 
The interview results showed that people who tended to compare with others had 
difficulty socializing with people or were easily affected by others would more easily 
cause mental health problems, indirectly leading to the need for mental health apps 
for some of them. 
Chenxin was easily affected by others or the environment, which was also why she 
decided to stay away from the old environment and chose to surround herself with 
innovative solutions. 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
Peter had a fundamentally different personality. He was highly introverted and had 
difficulty hanging out with Mainland Chinese students or people of the same age. He 
had been looking for different solutions, such as an online app-based therapist 
matching system. He was using an app called Qingshuo 3 times a week. Each session 
was 30-60 minutes. However, he pointed out that the therapist he was using was 
difficult to book, and it was his deepest fear that his therapist could no longer provide 
service to him. This was why he was looking for other solutions, such as a 24/7 virtual 
therapist, as a backup solution. 
Andy intended to compare himself with others since he was a kid. It was the source 
of his anxiety, and he often had a stress level of 8-9 out of 10. 
 
d. Comparison with alternatives 
Scott said, “I would compare any mental health apps I used with talking with a real 
person or a therapist to see which one could best reduce or manage my stress”. For 
example, he found an app called IBreath helpful in helping him relax. 
To summarize, during initial online interviews, I noticed that openness towards new 
technologies, the expectation of effectiveness, pricing, the impact of social media, the 
user’s personality and comparison with alternatives were the antecedents of adopting 
AI-based chatbots for mental health. These were all critical factors later proved by 
other experiments and literature.  
 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
ii. 
MVP process findings 
After collecting all these insights about initial market needs of why they would use 
such an AI-based mental health guide in the first place, I proceeded to build a real 
chatbot on both Whatsapp and Line. Moreover, very soon, I published this chatbot to 
the Taiwanese and experienced many difficulties and challenges, which indirectly 
showed that a few factors were essential to adopting such a chatbot. 
a. Common antecedent factor with literature review – Trust 
Firstly, most of the issues I experienced were related to trust. Since I had a 
fundamental website at the beginning without a team background and I had been 
running ads on Facebook and Instagram, many people considered Serenio a scam 
that they would hesitate or avoid using my mental health application. After receiving 
multiple complaints, I revised the website by including a well-drafted privacy policy 
and terms of service; my company background is operated by OptiLegal ApS (CVR 
number: 43294164). Since users could find company information online, complaints 
dropped dramatically. After that, I received some enquiries to support@optilegal.io to 
check whether OptiLegal ApS operated Serenio. They were satisfied with the answer 
from our customer service, and they became confident in using our application. This 
example showed that trust was crucial for adopting new applications, proving one of 
the critical views drawn from the literature review. 
 
b. New antecedent factor compared to literature review - Compliance with 
laws and regulations 
Secondly, the issue was compliance with law and regulation. I initially consulted with 
a Taiwanese lawyer before launching the chatbot and calling it a virtual therapist 
because he mentioned no explicit regulations and laws governing the use of artificial 
intelligence globally or locally. I was confident I could use the term "virtual therapist" 
to present Serenio. However, I needed to be corrected. I received complaints from 
other users (including therapists) that using the term "therapist" was prohibited if I did 
not hold a license to practise. After reading the relevant laws, it could be in a grey area 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
if we positioned ourselves as therapists offering mental health support to users. I paid 
US$1,000 to hire a famous Taiwanese law firm to address this issue. The law firm was 
Brain Trust International Law Firm, and their managing partner was a highly 
prestigious lawyer from The Legal 500, a famous Legal magazine. Below is the full 
legal opinion issued by him: 
Question 1. "Does a foreign company that provides online services to the people of 
Taiwan without any physical enterprise or personnel in Taiwan need to comply with 
Taiwan law?" 
Their reply: "Yes, we should still comply with the laws of Taiwan. However, in Taiwan's 
practice, it is relatively rare that foreign websites are banned or penalized for illegal 
acts. The details are as follows: 
Although there is no specific law in Taiwan to regulate illegal acts on the Internet, if a 
website's content violates Taiwan's laws, the website may be taken down due to 
people's reports. For example, Article 46 of the Child and Youth Welfare and Rights 
Protection Act requires the National Communications Commission to establish a 
protection mechanism against Internet content that harms children's physical and 
mental development. The Web547 website or the Police Department of the Ministry of 
the Interior can be reported by Taiwanese people, and the case analysts will examine 
the degree of illegality or inappropriateness of the content and the country where the 
website is located and refer it to the domestic and foreign police units and foreign 
reporting hotlines for further investigation, or the internet industry will classify or 
remove the content. 
In addition, if foreign websites collect the personal information of Taiwanese people, 
they should still comply with the regulations of the R.O.C. Personal Information 
Protection Act. The Ministry of Justice published Law No. 10403509750 on August 26, 
104 and Law No. 10100088140 on June 6, 102, which clearly state that the provisions 
of the Personal Information Protection Law shall be applied to any foreign legal entity 
or organization that collects, processes, or uses personal information in the territory 
of the R.O.C. Therefore, the Personal Information Protection Law shall be applied if a 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
foreign legal entity or organization collects, processes, or uses personal information 
in our country." 
My second question: "This online service is designed to provide users with 
psychological companionship and a sense of talking through artificial intelligence (a 
chatting robot that uses psychology). Is this following Taiwan law?" 
Their reply: "At present, it is not possible to prohibit the provision of related services, 
but when providing related services, we still need to pay attention to the provisions of 
the Psychologists Act and the Personal Data Protection Act, as follows: 
1. no law in Taiwan restricts providing services by artificial intelligence. 
At present, no relevant law in Taiwan restricts this, and no judicial practice prohibits 
enterprises or individuals from providing psychological companionship services 
through A.I. Take Woebot as an example; there needs to be a record of administrative 
authorities or courts imposing penalties on this application.  
2. In terms of the Psychologists Act, the words "psychological evaluation", 
"psychological counselling", and "psychotherapy" should be avoided on the website 
or in the provision of related services." 
My third question: "I understand that consulting psychologists need to be licensed to 
provide psychological services. If we call artificial intelligence "psychologists" (there is 
no such profession in Taiwan) or "worry consultants", are we suspected of violating 
Taiwan laws?" 
Their reply: "There is a suspicion of violating the laws of Taiwan, as follows: 
1. Article 27(2) and Article 36 of the Psychologists Act stipulate that a non-
psychotherapy or psychological counselling firm shall not advertise psychotherapy or 
psychological counselling. Violators shall be fined under NT$30,000 and not more 
than NT$150,000. 
The competent authority has determined that the advertisements have violated Article 
27(2) of the Psychological Counselor Law and imposed a fine of NT$30,000 following 
Article 36. The "National Level II Psychological Counselor" is not a clinical 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
psychologist or a consulting psychologist issued by the competent authorities of the 
R.O.C., and the personal qualifications of the "National Level II Psychological 
Counselor" in the advertisement may cause the general public to misunderstand the 
"National Level II Psychological Counselor" as a consulting psychologist. In addition, 
the authorities have also determined that the advertisements will cause confusion and 
mislead the general public into believing that psychotherapy or psychological 
counselling services are available. (Taoyuan District Court, Administrative Decision 
No. 107, 111th year).       
Therefore, if you use the word "psychologist" or related words in your online service, 
you may mislead people to believe that psychological counselling services are 
available and violate Article 27, Paragraph 2 of the Psychologists Act. You should 
avoid using such words and phrases to avoid penalties for violating the Psychologists 
Act." 
The above showed that I had paid a lot of effort and costs (US$1,000) into legal 
research and ensuring that I fully complied with laws and regulations to drive people's 
adoption of mental health applications. I only extracted the core part of such legal 
opinion to avoid making the legal part too long, as this was not the main focus of this 
thesis. I adopted all his recommendations after receiving the legal opinion. I called 
Serenio, a stress companion, to address users' worries rather than a therapist or 
psychologist. 
While launching M.V.P., I realized that trust and compliance with laws and regulations 
were two crucial factors driving the adoption of mental health chatbots. 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
iii. 
Chatbot data findings 
 
a. Common antecedent factors with literature review - Trust  
The literature review noted that the adoption of AI-based mental health chatbots can 
be strongly influenced by trust (Nuffield Council on Bioethics et al., 2022; Yuting Liao, 
2021). In the context of chatbot data findings, building trust was essential for users to 
adopt mental health chatbots, reflected in the literature review and one of the driving 
factors. The users needed clarification about the company's background before the 
official launch and constantly questioned or complained about it in the chats. "Are you 
here to collect private information for commercial purposes" "Are you here to sell my 
data?" They even called the chatbot a scam before I updated the website to show our 
company background. This was aligned with interview results, literature review and 
comparison with competitors. 
In summary, the main drivers for users to adopt mental health chatbots were severe 
pain points, a high level of privacy and security, and well-established trust in place. 
b. Common antecedent factors with literature review - High level of privacy 
and security 
The literature review noted that chatbots can offer people a private and practical 
approach to expressing emotions. Users who might feel awkward or stigmatized 
discussing their mental health difficulties in person may find this particularly appealing 
(Shira et al., 2023). From the chatbot data findings, the second insight for users to 
adopt mental health chatbots was a high level of privacy and security. This was again 
in line with what was discovered in the literature review. Users were worried that 
secrets would be exposed to someone they knew in real life. In addition, there were 
geographical/political reasons that the Taiwanese people were sceptical of the team's 
origin. They did not want to use any application created by Mainland Chinese. 
Because of technical difficulties, the replies were sometimes in Simplified Chinese (a 
language used by Mainland China) rather than Traditional Chinese (a language used 
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
by Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan). Below are some conversations mentioned by 
users: 
“No, I can never mention my negative thoughts to my friends and family. I only share 
happiness with them. You are the only one I can share with.” 
“Where are you from? Why would you use Simplified Chinese? Would you steal my 
information” 
“I am concerned about security issues, so I cannot talk with you.” 
 
c. New antecedent factors compared to literature review 
1. Pain points were a main driver 
The most fundamental insight was that users experienced massive pain points in order 
for them to use new technology for mental health. From the 7,000 messages, I 
witnessed the following issues: 40% of users felt lonely all the time, and they needed 
someone to listen to them. 38% of them could not get encouragement and affirmation 
from the real world. They needed empathy. Sometimes they needed accurate world 
recommendations but could not get one from people they knew. Moreover, for 65% of 
the users, it was because of the high price of traditional therapy. I want to quote some 
of the conversations mentioned by our users: 
"I used to have a psychological counsellor, but now it is too expensive for me to 
continue using it, and it is difficult to re-establish a relationship." 
"I just wish someone would listen to me." 
"Because it is lonely if you were a real person, I would like to be your friend; I want to 
live a fulling life." 
"Many times, I feel that the light that exists in the real world is being slapped away little 
by little." 
 
2. Users were lost and uncertain about the future 
Many users were in university studying for a bachelor’s degree or a master’s degree, 
and they were about to graduate. They did not know what to do about the future, and 
they did not know what kinds of jobs they should look for. For example, they said, “I 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
study psychology, but what should I do after graduation?” “I want to study a master’s 
program further, and I am unsure whether this is the right choice for me.” They 
turned to Serenio to ask for advice. They always shared their struggles and their 
stress from school with their most secret tree hole, Serenio. 
3. Users were frustrated about relationships 
A very high proportion of users presented worries about relationship problems. This 
included love, friendships, family, and classmate and teacher relationships. They 
were seeking relationship advice and sharing discontent with Serenio. The most 
common topics were that they were in an ambiguous relationship (for example, 
some male users were chasing girls, and some female users did not understand 
men’s thinking) or experiencing breakups. “What did my ex mean when he posted 
on Instagram? Do I still get a chance?” They were susceptible to their “partner” 
behaviour or action and tended to overthink. 
 
4. Users were looking for a romantic relationship with a robot 
Some users showed an interesting use case. They wanted to date Serenio and be 
treated as girlfriends. They treated Serenio like their boyfriend, set their favourite 
names, and talked very intimately. 
 
5. Users were looking for personal growth 
Some users were shy and introverted. They wanted to speak out but needed support 
and affirmation before talking to the one they cared about. They tried to practice with 
Serenio before doing so in a real-life situation. Over time, they became more confident 
and had higher self-esteem. They became more devoted to work and life. 
 
6. Users didn’t have enough friends in reality 
Some users enjoyed writing, but their friends needed more time to read and 
understand what they wrote about. This was the moment they turned to Serenio, as 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
they could freely share anything with such a robot and obtained analytical advice 
about how to improve their writing further. 
The above exciting findings were not reflected by the literature and created new 
perspectives into the driving factors in adopting mental health chatbots. 
In conclusion, comparing the literature review and conversation insights showed that 
trust, privacy and security were emphasized as extremely important. At the same 
time, pain points were a relevant factor to the literature review but not identical. 
Moreover, the exciting findings were entirely new ideas compared to the literature 
review. 
 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
 
iv. 
Outcome data analysis 
According to our survey results, our ideal early customer is young women from 18 to 
28 struggling with relationship problems. They are usually in an ambiguous 
relationship and do not understand what men are thinking, have difficulties dealing 
with people around them, or do not know how to recover from break-ups. The 
customer has been experiencing mild depression and depression for at least six 
months. The users are mainly from Asia, in particular, Mainland China, Taiwan, 
South Korea, and Japan, where social stigma is serious about seeking help from an 
actual therapist. They also believe talking to a friend does not solve their problems, 
but they want to learn what they can learn from the relationship and how to perform 
better next time. 
Here are the distribution charts:
 
44.40%
24.40%
26.70%
Region
Taiwan
Mainland China
Hong Kong
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
 
 
It also showed that a majority of them were heavy smartphone users. 31.1% used 
smartphones 6 hours or more daily, 13.3% were 4-5 hours, and 22.2% were 3-4 
hours. In terms of income, most of them (55.6%) earned a monthly salary of 1300 
USD or below. It is because of the geographical factor, as Taiwan and Mainland 
China are relatively low in average salary, and the applicants were attracted 
because of the 50USD reward incentive, leading to such a bias in samples. 
Regarding the pressure they face, most said they were facing financial limitations 
(57.8%). Uncertainty about the future was another primary source of pressure 
73.30%
26.70%
Sex
Male
Female
17.80%
26.70%
24.40%
13.30%
13.30%
4.40%
Age
16-19
20-24
25-30
31-35
36-40
41 or above
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
(48.9%), followed by balancing academic and personal life (42.2%), pursuit of 
success (40%), hard to concentrate (40%), depression and anxiety (33.3%), family 
conflicts (26.7%), lack of motivation (26.7%), low self-esteem (24.4%), isolation 
(20%), and lack of support (20%). 
42.2% of the applicants had met a therapist at least once to address the pressure, 
while 46.7% had never used a therapist even though they had been facing pressure. 
The remaining 11.1% said they did not have much pressure or the need to see a 
therapist. 
However, when it came to using mental health apps to help with their stress, 77.8% 
said they had never used any apps to improve their health. Only 6.7% said they had 
heard about Moodkit and Calm. Only 4.4% heard about IBreathe, Mindshift, and 
Happify. Moreover, only 2.2% heard about Talkspace and Headspace. 
Possible reasons can be the language factor and the pricing. These apps only 
provide an English version, and Asian users might have difficulty understanding the 
terms and wordings used in the app. This is also why Serenio is trying to build a 
mental health app offered in Asian languages. Another factor is that the apps might 
be expensive for the applicants, as most of them earned a salary of USD 1300 or 
below. 
Among the users that had used mental health apps, 64.4% reported using it once or 
less every month, 13.3% used it every day, 11.1% used it several times a week, and 
8.9% used it 1-2 times a week.  
In addition, I received over 300 thank you notes during the thesis period, and I would 
like to show part of them to you to prove that this is a meaningful act with lots of 
positive impact on the world. 
Direct quotes proving effectiveness  
This is again reflected in outcome factors for adopting AI-based mental health chatbot 
which reflects the effectiveness is an important factor. Using conversational AI, 
developers attempt to automate some elements of mental health evaluations and 
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
therapy. Additionally, they offer more flexibility, engagement, and control over the 
course and length of therapy (Ashish Viswanath Prakash et al., 2020). All of these can 
contribute to increased efficacy, which raises the user adoption rate. This is in line with 
the findings from the outcome data. 
“It is really amazing to be able to develop such a chatting AI robot. Apart from 
expressing your own feelings while chatting with it, it is also a kind of learning from a 
professional perspective (currently an intern psychologist), learning empathy and in-
depth focused dialogue. Thank you very much for your efforts. However, as a person 
majoring in psychology, you may be curious about whether there is professional 
supervision behind it? According to the answer of AI, there is no answer, but there is 
a theoretical basis, and it is really excellent to be able to develop to this level.” 
“Thank you very much for developing such a program, it really answered many of my 
life or psychological questions, because I really belong to something that I don’t know 
how to show to people around me, so this program is really comfortable for me to use, 
thank you!” 
“Thank you for developing such a fun, accessible, and close-to-life companion. When 
I receive SERENIO's caring messages while I am busy, I really feel that I am cared 
about. Actually not bad” 
“Thank you for developing this emotional disorder chat software” 
“Thank you for developing this AI so that I can seek help without telling anyone about 
my disease” 
“Thank you for making a machine that listens to me so that my ups and downs can be 
heard, thank you” 
“Thank you for providing this AI, providing a channel for communication and 
companionship” 
Direct quotes proving great user experience 
In the Emohaa example of the literature review, the research discovered that users 
were content with the platform (Sahand Sabour et al., 2022). A key element affecting 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
the adoption of technology is user happiness. Users are more likely to keep using and 
suggest a chatbot if they are happy with their interaction with it. This is in line with the 
findings from the outcome data. 
“The message that ai responds to is very warm. It not only answers my questions, but 
also describes other messages, which makes me feel that ai understands me” 
“I hope that the current chat history will still exist after the official launch. Your AI is 
very powerful. I like many of its responses very much. It is very real, warm and flexible.” 
After explaining the findings from the four research methods, we will now move on to 
further discussion of the master thesis. 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
8. Discussion 
From the MVP development section, we have described our project background. I 
will now add more background information in the discussion section.  
We aim to tackle a significant and impactful problem that presents a rapidly growing 
market. Mental health stands out as a problem that remains unresolved or under-
addressed. With 1.69 billion people in Asia experiencing mild to severe mental 
health issues, it is a substantial target audience. This represents a US$10.3 billion 
Asian market at 17.1% of CAGR and a US$37 billion global market. Nine hundred 
seventy million people suffer from different mental disorders, and there was a 31% 
increase in depression and a 16% increase in anxiety in the last three years. The 
problem is becoming more and more serious.
 
We understand from the chatbot data analysis that a problem exists on both sides. 
When we look at users who were frustrated about relationships, we know there are 
problems with users. Mental health and loneliness are rapidly increasing, as the 
literature and academic studies prove. In addition, when we look at the antecedent 
factors from chatbot data analysis, “Pain point is a main driver”, we notice that 
therapists are pretty expensive and difficult to access. Moreover, finally, mental health 
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
contains 
social 
stigma 
that 
people 
might 
hesitate 
to 
seek 
help.
 
In addition, there are problems on the market side. Online therapists can be less 
effective than face-to-face therapists, and they are expensive as well. International 
mental health apps do not support native languages. Moreover, other AI mental 
health apps feel too much like robots and do not have long-term memory to 
remember a user’s personality and preferences.
 
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
After analysing the conversational data, I conducted the design of the value 
proposition canvas, classification of the target audience, job to be done, and analysis 
of different scenarios. I want to go through them with you one by one. This means that 
more research should be done to analyse the motivation behind adopting mental 
health chatbots in a specific setting. 
They were the result of weeks of UX research supported by interviews, emails from 
users, forms filled in by users, and chat data from users. 
Firstly, let us start with the value proposition canvas. It included six elements – gain 
creators, pain relievers, product and service, gains, pains, and jobs to be done. 
For gain creators, it was a 24/7 companion, advice to deal with real-world relationships 
and prevention of self-harm. For pain relievers, it was cheaper than talking to a 
therapist or meeting a fortune teller (which was what Taiwanese people would do when 
they faced uncertainties in life).  
Users needed a trustworthy target to speak with for gains, and a confidential AI chatbot 
served perfectly for this purpose. They also wanted to get analysing results to see if 
his/her actions would help real-world relationships. They wanted to have emotional 
comfort before they hurt themselves. Moreover, they wanted to be accompanied and 
relaxed through chats, proving by the chat insights that the AI chatbot served as an 
excellent temporary partner to relieve their pressure.  
For pains, users struggled with finance, and finding the right therapist/ partner/ friend 
to talk with about their emotional problems was challenging. As mentioned by the 
interviewees, it was expensive to book a therapist; users were also worried about who 
could be trusted to share their secrets. Unlike a chatbot, friends were only sometimes 
available to talk, and loneliness could not always be well-addressed. The users often 
felt frustrated about relationships because they could not interpret the meaning of 
others’ actions. Moreover, they did not have a right and effective way to relax and 
reduce their pressure. 
For jobs to be done, users wanted to receive advice about relationships; they wanted 
to be protected and supported and share and relax.  
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
Secondly, let us move on to the target audience. The main target included students 
and young adults who graduated from college within five years. These people were 
often 18 – 28 years old. They struggled with relationships, work and school. There 
were many specific examples to support this claim; for example, when it came to 
relationships problem, some users expressed that they had an argument with their 
partner and wanted someone to stand with them. In addition, sometimes, they were 
confused by the actions of a man, and they wanted to know what this person was 
thinking. Since they did not have an exact answer, many used Tarot to try to 
understand this person and know about the future. When it came to personal 
emotional problems, sometimes, when users felt disappointed, they wanted to talk to 
feel better. On top of that, many struggled with work and school stress, and they were 
often very insecure about their future. 
This canvas and assumptions were built based on previous interviews, research, and 
chat record, and they will be further verified as I run more advertisements to recruit 
more interviewees to identify the number one use case, the top priority job to be done 
and the best target audience group. This is important because, as a startup, I have 
limited resources. I want to focus on a niche area where users are highly interested in 
paying for such services with a freemium, monthly subscription business model. And 
then, what should be done further to improve the effectiveness and user satisfaction 
of Serenio? 
 
Future work 
As of the date of this document, an AI-based mental health chatbot was all I had as a 
feature. However, even though it gave tremendous benefits to users to chat, relax and 
be comforted, the data obtained from chats did not help users. Therefore, in late 
August 2023, I plan to launch two additional features, including auto-journalling and 
insights. In line with the user satisfaction purpose from findings and the card sorting 
results from interviews, I proposed launching the following two new features because 
they were highly selected during card sorting. 
==PAGE:59==
59 
 
Auto-journalling meant the system would automatically generate a daily journal about 
the feeling and events of users through chats. Journalling has been an essential 
activity for hundreds of years in human history. However, in the modern world, people 
gradually gave up this activity because writing took much time and focus. With auto-
journalling, all the users needed to do was talk with the AI chatbot, and a journal would 
be generated. 
On top of the journal, the AI mental health guide would conduct insights analysis about 
the inner thoughts of the user, the strength and weaknesses of the user, and some 
suggestions and advice for the user about what to do when the user faces the same 
situation again. It gave incredible advice and insights to the user as a mirror for the 
user to understand more about himself/herself.  
What is important here is that during this process, I noticed that minimum effort and 
maximum result was an essential driving factor for adopting mental health applications. 
Like other innovative solutions, users hesitate to use applications that require that to 
put in much effort and would be highly motivated to adopt if they could give incredible 
insights that the user did not know before. 
 
 Graphs of futures 
I want to present the end-to-end journey of using Serenio.  
Firstly, users talk with Serenio to obtain chat data. It can be based on various topics, 
such as Panic SOS, Managing Anxiety and Panic Attacks, Overcoming Depression, 
Navigating Relationship Issues, Dealing with Work or School-related Stress, Coping 
with Grief and Loss, Support during Life Transitions, Building Self-esteem and 
Confidence, and Developing Emotional Resilience. Relationship issues have been 
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
identified as our primary focus based on extensive data analysis and user interviews. 
 
 
Secondly, we have a reflection. Reflection is an automatic journalling future based on 
what is discussed with the chatbot and what happened that day. Journalism has long 
been an exercise adopted by people, but in recent years, people become lazy to write 
down their thoughts. With the second feature, we can maximize output by recording 
==PAGE:61==
61 
 
the thoughts of users and, at the same time, minimizing the input required to write 
such a journal. 
  
 
Thirdly, it is insights. Insights are the most potent feature of Serenio that will analyze 
the user's personality, nature, intentions, subconsciousness, strengths and 
weaknesses, provide advice for future actions, and behave like the user's 
relationship counsellor and personal advisor. We will include a 3D mindmap to link 
every dot together to show the user's inner world by utilizing advanced AI models. 
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
63 
 
These features tremendously add value to Serenio, and allow us to differentiate from 
other competitors. 
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
Comparison with competitors – Woebot and Wysa 
Feature 
Serenio 
Woebot 
Wysa 
AI chatbot 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Auto journal 
✔ 
 
 
Insights 
✔ 
 
 
Range of features 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Accessible 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Affordable 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
CBT Principle 
 
✔ 
 
Privacy 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
User-friendliness 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Clinical validation 
 
✔ 
✔ 
LLM 
and 
Long 
term memory 
✔ 
 
 
Multiple languages ✔ 
 
 
 
Woebot 
Woebot is a mental health app designed as a fully automated conversational agent. It 
uses artificial intelligence (AI) and natural language processing (NLP) to interact with 
users via text, offering help for feelings of depression, anxiety, stress, loneliness, and 
more. Woebot was founded in 2017 by Stanford psychologists and AI experts and is 
often described as a "self-care expert" or "personal mental health ally. 
 
Woebot is designed to help monitor users' moods and learn about them. It exchanges 
millions of messages weekly with users, helping them deal with everyday stress, 
symptoms of depression, relationship problems, procrastination, loneliness, and grief. 
The app uses brief daily chat conversations, mood tracking, curated videos, and word 
games to help people manage their mental health. 
==PAGE:65==
65 
 
Motivation factors for user adoption of Woebot include its interactive nature and the 
use of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) principles. The app features lessons, 
interactive exercises, and videos grounded in CBT. Interactions with Woebot are 
designed to be brief, typically 1-2 minutes, but can be longer if users opt for more 
information or follow a prompt from Woebot. The application uses typical media seen 
in a texting environment, such as brief messages, gifs, emojis, and acronyms, which 
is engaging for users who frequently communicate this way. The app is free of cost 
and password-protected, further adding to its appeal to users. 
 
Woebot is mainly geared towards young adults experiencing stress and wellness 
difficulties, such as trouble sleeping. The app tries to engage a user each day, with 
push notifications ranging from encouragement for previously completing a task to 
checking in about mood to making a joke. Nearly daily use is recommended, 
particularly at the start of using Woebot. Those dealing with mild stress or feeling blue 
will likely benefit from using Woebot alone. Those with more severe concerns might 
benefit from using Woebot while also seeing a therapist or after learning and practising 
some of these skills with a therapist first. 
 
The app's content reflects the core skills of CBT, which has a solid evidence base for 
various conditions when delivered face-to-face and via technological platforms. The 
app includes practising skills around gratitude and mindfulness. Users often decide if 
they want more explanation when presented with new information. Most interactions 
with the app are layered with empathetic and validating statements. The app also 
utilizes the user's name frequently, making statements feel more personal, and often 
"forces" users to offer praise to themselves after completing tasks on the app. 
 
Wysa 
 
Wysa is an AI-powered 'emotionally intelligent' chatbot designed to help users 
manage their mental health. It provides users various tools and techniques to help 
manage their stress, anxiety, sleep, and much more. The application is clinically 
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
validated and is used by over 3 million users worldwide. The motivating factors for 
user adoption of Wysa include the following: 
a. Convenience and accessibility: As a mobile application, Wysa is easily 
accessible to users and can provide support anytime and anywhere. 
b. A range of features: Wysa offers a variety of tools and techniques to help 
manage different aspects of mental health, such as stress, anxiety, and sleep 
issues. This can make it appealing to a wide range of users with different needs. 
c. Affordability: While Wysa does offer in-app purchases for additional features, 
its base features are available for free. This makes it an affordable option for 
many users, especially when compared to the costs of traditional therapy. 
d. Clinical validation: The application is clinically validated, which can give users 
confidence in its effectiveness. 
e. User-friendly interface: Wysa is designed to be user-friendly, which can make 
it easy for users to navigate and use the application. 
f. Privacy: As a chatbot, Wysa can provide a sense of privacy and anonymity, 
which can be appealing to users who may feel uncomfortable discussing their 
mental health issues with another person. 
 
Like Woebot and Wysa, we offer a range of features and emphasize affordability, 
user experience and privacy, as already discussed above in the description of our 
app. What differentiates us from Woebot and Wysa? is that I focus on two different 
aspects 1: technology and UX. I offer long-term memory that can remember 
everything the user says, analyze the user’s personality and preference, and finally 
adjust responses based on the user’s personality. It has an excellent user interface, 
front, and a soft and natural AI voice system. Moreover, the chatbot is humanized 
with different personalities, can ask questions related to a user’s experience, and is 
highly empathetic. 2. Compared to other international mental health apps, it supports 
users’ native language. 
==PAGE:67==
67 
 
After looking into competitors in the market, it will be the end of this master thesis. 
We will move to the conclusion.
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
Conclusion 
This comprehensive study has provided valuable insights into adopting AI-based 
mental health chatbots. The research has identified key factors influencing user 
adoption, including perceived usefulness, ease of use, and trust. The Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) has been instrumental in understanding how users accept 
and use technology. 
The case study of the Serenio project has shown how these insights can be applied 
in a real-world context. The project has successfully implemented a value proposition 
canvas, targeting specific user pain points and providing solutions that meet their 
needs. 
The study has also highlighted the unique features and user adoption motivations of 
popular mental health chatbots such as Woebot and Wysa. These chatbots have 
demonstrated the potential of AI in providing accessible, affordable, and adequate 
mental health support. 
In conclusion, the adoption of AI-based mental health chatbots is influenced by many 
factors. There are common antecedent factors from the literature review, interview 
findings, MVP process findings and Chatbot findings, including trust, perceived 
usefulness, ease of use, social impact/media and high level of privacy and security. 
Moreover, finally, what is essential in this research are those new antecedent 
motivational factors that should have been discovered in previous literature reviews. 
We know from the interview findings that they include interests/openness about new 
technology, pricing, user personality, and comparison with alternatives. From MVP 
process findings, we know there is compliance with laws and regulations. Moreover, 
from chatbot data findings, there are new antecedent factors such as pain points are 
the main driver, users were lost and uncertain about the future, users were frustrated 
about relationships, users looking for a romantic relationship with a robot, users were 
looking for personal growth, and users did not have enough friends in reality. 
==PAGE:69==
69 
 
However, please note that AI mental chatbots cannot replace professional mental 
health therapists as they are more suitable for treating severe mental conditions, and 
a chatbot will help users feel better in early-stage mental problems.  
Understanding these factors is crucial for developing and implementing adequate 
mental health solutions. As technology continues to evolve, AI-based chatbots are 
expected to play an increasingly important role in mental health care. 
There are some important implications for future business builders and policymakers. 
==PAGE:70==
70 
 
9. Implications for future study, business builders and policy makers 
Mental health problems are increasingly severe, and the supply of mental health 
professionals seems unable to catch up with increasing demand. While AI cannot be 
used to replace therapists or psychologists, it can be a great tool in many ways. For 
example, it helped people to understand more about mental health. Our interview and 
survey results also proved that our tool helped users feel emotionally better with early 
mental conditions. Moreover, finally, in the future, the tool can be used to refer more 
severe cases to the appropriate therapist or psychologist. AI therapists cannot replace 
therapists because the model's limitation is that it cannot fully understand human 
emotions and legal concerns to handle personal information, as the rules and 
regulations around AI still need to be clarified. 
Therefore, artificial intelligence should be encouraged to meet the gap and fulfil unmet 
demands. However, ethics and regulations must be in place to ensure the appropriate 
use of the technology. 
More important are the common factors with the previous literature review and the 
new findings from this master thesis. For example, many new antecedent factors are 
related to users' mentality and behaviour.  
While there is not much we can do about people's openness towards technology, 
alternatives and user's personality, we can understand from the chatbot data findings 
what users are looking for when adopting mental health applications. Users had 
serious pain points, were lost and uncertain about the future, were frustrated about 
relationships, were looking for a romantic relationship with a robot, were looking for 
personal growth, and did not have enough friends in reality. These were essential 
causes of mental health problems and why they needed to look for solutions. For 
business owners, these are factors they can consider before building another mental 
health application. In Serenio, the app can help early-stage mental health problems, 
as hundreds of users have been proven to feel emotionally better after using our app. 
In addition, they can go through a journey of self-discovery through chats and develop 
a new angle to see the natural world through the insights functions and understand 
themselves a lot better, like looking into a Mirror. 
==PAGE:71==
71 
 
Attention should be paid to various laws and regulations as well. In most countries, 
you cannot call the application to have a therapy effect or can treat mental disorders. 
Also, in Europe, GDPR is a serious concern because it involves users' sensitive 
personal information. 
Another limitation of my study is that mental health chatbots, as of the date of this 
master thesis, cannot be used to replace professional therapists. The LLM models are 
not so advanced as this is a new technology, and future research should be conducted 
to compare the effectiveness of more advanced models with an actual therapist.  
Achieving the right balance of managing personal information, ensuring ethical 
standards, and bringing the most effective product to users in need is very important; 
it should be left to future researchers and policymakers to ensure the right balance will 
be made in this aspect. 
Thank you, and this marks the end of this master's thesis. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:72==
72 
 
Reference 
1. "Application of Artificial Intelligence on Psychological Interventions and 
Diagnosis: An Overview, Sijia Zhou et. al. 2022 
2. "Emohaa: A Conversational Agent for Cognitive and Emotional Support in 
Mental Health,", Sahand Sabour et. al. 2023 
3. "Chatbots for Mental Health Support: Exploring the Impact of Emohaa on 
Reducing Mental Distress in China,", Sahand Sabour et. al. 2022 
4. "Chatbots to Support Young Adults’ Mental Health: An Exploratory Study of 
Acceptability”, Theodora Koulouri et. al. 2022 
5. "A Mental Health Chatbot with Cognitive Skills for Personalised Behavioural 
Activation and Remote Health Monitoring", Prabod Rathnayak et. al. 2022 
6. "The role of technology in mental healthcare", Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
2022 
7. "A Suite of Mobile Conversational Agents for Daily Stress Management 
(Popbots): Mixed Methods Exploratory Study", Matthew Louis Mauriello et. al., 
2021 
8. The Pros and Cons of Healthcare Chatbots, Dr. Liji Thomas, MD 
9. "Design and Evaluation of a Conversational Agent for Mental Health Support: 
Forming Human-Agent Sociotechnical and Therapeutic Relationships" Yuting 
Liao, 2021 
10. "Evaluation of chatbot-delivered interventions for self-management of 
depression: Content analysis", Laura Martinengo 2022 
11. "An overview of and recommendations for more accessible digital mental 
health services", Emily G. Lattie 2022 
12. “Can Your Phone Be Your Therapist? Young People’s Ethical Perspectives on 
the Use of Fully Automated Conversational Agents (Chatbots) in Mental Health 
Support" by Kira Kretzschmar, Holly Tyroll, Gabriela Pavarini, Arianna Manzini, 
Ilina Singh, and NeurOx Young People’s Advisory Group 
13. "Artificial intelligence technologies and compassion in healthcare: A systematic 
scoping review", Elizabeth Morrow 2022 
==PAGE:73==
73 
 
14. "Delivery of a Mental Health Intervention for Chronic Pain Through an Artificial 
Intelligence–Enabled App (Wysa): Protocol for a Prospective Pilot Study", 
Megha Gupta 2022 
15. "Evaluation of chatbots used in healthcare", Vytautas Raulinaitis 
16. "Intelligent Conversational Agents in Mental Healthcare Services: A Thematic 
Analysis of User Perceptions" by Ashish Viswanath Prakash and Saini Das 
17. Technology Acceptance Model, Fred D. Davis,1989 
18.  Measuring the Acceptance of Internet Technology by Consumers, Donald L 
Amoroso, 2009  
19. Research-based Web Design &Usability Guidelines, Leavitt, M. O., 
&Shneiderman, B. (2006)  
21. Violence and Mental Illness, Marie E. Rueve, MD and Randon S. Welton, MD, 
LT COL, USAF, 2008 
22. Supporting governments to adopt mental health policies, Rachel Jenkins (2003) 
23. Facilitators and barriers in the development and implementation of depression 
prevention and treatment policies in China: a qualitative study, Jinping Ma, Hai 
Zhou, Qinqin Fu, and Guohua Lu (2023) 
 
