==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
A techno-economic analysis of a gigawatt 
scale electrolyser system
Weiwei Zhang
DTU Wind-M-0640
July 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0640 
July 2023
Project period: 
January - July 2023
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Shi You
Yi Zheng
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Weiwei Zhang
Title:
A techno-economic analysis of a gigawatt scale 
electrolyser system
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my mentors Shi You and Yi Zheng for their guidance and help.
When I didn’t study ideas and solutions, he patiently provided me with suggestions and solutions
to problems. When I wrote codes and calculation methods were wrong, Yizheng helped me
correct them. At the same time, I feel very lucky to have met them in a foreign country, as
teachers and friends, and I am very grateful to them.
Thanks to my parents, I have the opportunity to come to Denmark to study. During the two
years of studying in Denmark, I experienced a completely different study and life from the past
20 years. I became more independent, purposeful, learned to adapt to new situations, and
learned various life skills. In the face of difficulties in study and life, I have become stronger
through tempering time after time, and I have also found the life I want here. Mom and Dad,
I know that you have been worried about me who is far away, but I want to tell you that I am
really doing well, I love everything here, and I love myself who lives here.
I am grateful to my family and friends who have always supported me. They respect my choice,
encourage me and make me feel warm in a foreign country. Whether it is a domestic friend or
a friend I met in DTU, I am grateful for your help and company along the way.
Back then, when I was a child, I saw the city of Copenhagen on the world map, just because its
name translated beautifully, and I imagined that I would come to Copenhagen to go to school
one day. I never thought that now I am really standing on the land of Copenhagen, studying,
living and growing up. The two years of studying have been a hurry, but the future life is long,
these two years have had an earth­shaking impact on my life. I think my campus life will end
here, but the mentors and friends I have met in the past ten years, every step I have taken, will
always be as bright as stars in my life.
I am coming, a brand new stage in my life, a better me in the future!
DTU Wind
3
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
As we all know, reducing greenhouse gas emissions and achieving carbon neutrality have be­
come global energy goals. In this project, a technical and economic analysis of an electrolyzer
system for the conversion of wind energy into hydrogen on an energy island is carried out. By
setting different scenarios, using mathematical models and establishing DCF models, the elec­
trolyzer technology, the size of the modules that make up the electrolyzer system and different
sizes of gigawatt­scale electrolyzer are verified to choose a more optimal and feasible plan.
The index of technical analysis is from annual hydrogen production, annual water consump­
tion and system load factor. For the economic part, feasibility index are used, they are Capital
Expenditure(CAPEX), Operational Expenditure(OPEX), Net Present Value(NPV) and Levelized
Cost of Hydrogen(LCOH). Financial factors such as inflation, discount factor, depreciation and
tax are also considered. Sensitivity analysis has been done for further economic analysis.
In the first scenario, through comparing 10MW electrolyzer modular of AE and PEM electrolyzer
syste. Basically PEM has a higher hydrogen production but it is also more costly. The Elogen
PEM electrolyzer system shows the highest annual hydrogen production, with a value of 81915
tons, whereas the Pluglower PEM electrolyzer system exhibits the lowest LCOH at 4.45 $/kg.
It is evident that the operation range significantly influences the results in this scenario..
In the second scenario, it can be revealed that system combined with larger scale modular has
lightly higher hydrogen production and similar load factor around 0.497. The highet production
is 81912 tons per year. As for economic aspect, larger size modular has obvious lower LCOH,
the lowest LCOH in this scenario is of 20MW combined electrolyzer system and the value of
which is 4.62 $/kg.
In scenario three, the largest size electrolyzer of 1.5GW has the largest load factor of 0.5238, it
also has the lowest LCOH at 4.5$/kg.
4
DTU Wind
==PAGE:5==
List of Acronyms
AE Alkaline Electrolysis
BoP Balance of Plant
CAPEX Capital Expenditure
DCF Discounted Cash Flow
EBITDA Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization
LCOH Levelized Cost of Hydrogen
LHV Low Heating Value
NPV Net Present Value
OPEX Operational Expenditure
OR Operation Range
OWF Offshore Wind Farm
PEM Proton Exchange Membrane
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PtA Power­to­Ammonia
PtH Power­to­hydrogen
PtM Power­to­Methanol
PtX Power to X
RE Renewable Energy
SOE Solid Oxide Electrolysis
TEA Techno­economic Analysis
DTU Wind
5
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
2
Acknowledgements
3
Abstract
4
List of Acronyms
5
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives and scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
6
2.1
The concept of power to X and hydrogen potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Functional energy island plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Current electrolyzer system scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Techno­economic Analysis Scenario
13
3.1
System introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Technical Analysis of Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Economic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Result
25
4.1
Technical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Economic results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Sensitivity analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion and Conclusion
36
5.1
Result discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Bibliography
39
6
DTU Wind
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
As greenhouse gas emission goes up all over the world, to reach the Paris Agreement’s goal[1],
using hydrogen to take the place of traditional fossil fuels becomes a hot topic in the renewable
transition.
Hydrogen, along with electricity, is the only zero­carbon energy carrier that can substitute tra­
ditional fuels. It is also convenient for storage and low­carbon transportation, making it a prime
candidate for industry decarbonization and heat provision in many countries[2]. The term ’Green
hydrogen’ was first mentioned by NREL in 1995, highlighting that hydrogen, like electricity, can
be produced using renewable energy sources. Electrolysis is one method of producing hydro­
gen, and it is considered a clean and inexhaustible energy source that complements electricity
in the 21st century[3].
To reduce carbon emissions, Europe has constructed the majority of existing green hydrogen
plants and is also focusing on future green hydrogen markets[2]. As announced by the EU
hydrogen strategy, renewable hydrogen obtained via electrolysis will play a key role in the sub­
stitution of fossil­based hydrogen. With the REPowerEU Plan publication in May 2022, an aim
of 10 million tonnes of green hydrogen production and 10 million tonnes of green hydrogen
import in the EU by 2030 is currently being pursued[4]. Denmark sets a goal of 70% emission
reduction by 2030 and complete climate neutrality by 2050[5].
Power to X (PtX) is a way of converting power into different gases. There are diverse ways to
produce hydrogen, the most common way to get hydrogen is by water electrolysis with elec­
tricity, and green hydrogen is generated from renewable energy farms such as wind or solar
plants, so the electrolyzer system is essentially a power­to­X­system.
There are already existing electrolyzer systems ongoing, however, with increasing green hydro­
gen demand and energy island constructing planning, larger scale electrolyzer systems start to
be considered[6]. ISPT has come up with an advanced design of a 1­gigawatt green­hydrogen
plan to match the demand of the Dutch industry and reduce the total cost by optimization de­
sign[7][8]. H2 Energy is planning a 1­GW Power­to­X program in Esbjerg which will contribute
as the largest PtX project to Denmark’s green hydrogen development[9].
1.2
Objectives and scope
• Explore the state­of­the­art electrolyzer systems and different types of electrolyzers, here
Alkaline and polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzers are investigated.
• Design different gigawatt­scale electrolyzer systems, they are respectively the same type
in different power modular scales, different types in the same power modular scale com­
binations, and the same type of electrolyzer system in different system scales.
DTU Wind
1
==PAGE:8==
• Perform technical analysis, specifically from yearly production, water consumption, and
system load factor.
• Conduct an economic analysis, build discounted cash flow (DCF) models concluding eco­
nomic factors: inflation, discounted factor, depreciation, and tax to get levelized cost of
hydrogen (LCOH) and system net present value (NPV).
• Summarize a general analysis above to achieve a well­optimized combination of gigawatt­
scale electrolyzer systems.
1.3
Methodology
Many methods can be used in an electrolyzer system’s techno­economic analysis (TEA). The
techno­economic analysis includes both technical and economic evaluation. Here are some
methods of making TEA for electrolyzer systems:
• System modeling: Design an electrolyzer system that includes all components, such as
stacks, compressors, coolers, etc. Incorporate operation requirements throughout the
process with consideration of each parameter.
• Mathematical modeling: Build up mathematical models to represent every component
in an electrolyzer system, and use mathematical equations to show the whole process
encompassing all the parameters.
• System simulation: Employ energy system simulation tools to develop and analyze an
electrolyzer system. Observe the system’s behavior and performance as parameters are
altered or varied. This will help us understand how the system operates under different
conditions and how it responds to changes in various parameters.
• System performance evaluation: Evaluate technical performance by analyzing vital pa­
rameters such as system efficiency, voltage efficiency, load factor, and lifespan.
• Financial modeling: Build up discounted cash flow (DCF) model, consider capital expen­
diture (CAPEX), operating expenses (OPEX), and electricity and water usage cost when
an electrolyzer system runs. Combining system lifetime and hydrogen selling revenue,
evaluate financial performance.
• Environmental and policy analysis: Assess an electrolyzer system’s feasibility by investi­
gating various policies, for example, the influence of the environment when executing this
project, the potential of hydrogen in the future, and the market’s tendency of hydrogen
production.
• Sensitivity analysis: By adjusting technical parameters and economic factors within a
specified range, create plots to observe the change tendency of each parameter. This
analysis will help identify which factor exerts the most significant influence on the sys­
tem. By optimizing the system based on these influential factors, it becomes possible to
enhance its overall performance.
• Risk analysis: Identify the uncertainties of the system, take different risk factors into con­
sideration, such as market capacity fluctuation, regulatory changes, technical risks during
operation, future potential in economic aspect... These factors are supposed to be ana­
lyzed in order to reveal project scenarios from a long­term perspective.
• Comparative analysis: Compare techno­economic system performance from different
standards, such as electrolyzer type of a system, system scale, and kinds of combina­
2
DTU Wind
==PAGE:9==
tions of the same scale system. Through these comparisons, the evaluation of the most
cost­saving, the most energy­saving, the lowest­risk, the highest production, and the high­
est profit can be illustrated.
Figure 1.1: Flow chart of model structure
Figure1.1 shows the structure of this thesis. Based on different scenarios, the methodology
structure is outlined. The Background section provides insights into the motivation and the
state of the art. Motivation can be referred to as the problem statement, which illustrates the
potential problems and reasons behind undertaking this thesis, and provides a definite under­
standing of the objectives and goals to be achieved. Mathematical modeling is chosen as the
basic method of this report, the electrolyzer system working process is transferred into the
mathematical equation which contains all the parameters needed. The modeling started with a
DTU Wind
3
==PAGE:10==
single modular electrolyzer system, then multiple modular combined systems were finally ap­
plied to a maximum 1.5­gigawatt power system. Two kinds of tools are used for the modeling,
respectively Python and Excel, Python is applied for technical analysis while Excel is used to
build Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) models for economic analysis. For scenario design, three
scenarios are being considered. The first scenario involves comparing different electrolyzer
types, all of the same scale. The second scenario explores different combinations of the same
electrolyzer type. The last scenario compares the same type of electrolyzer system in different
sizes. These scenarios are important as they allow for a comprehensive analysis of the elec­
trolyzer system, facilitating a better understanding of the optimal configuration and technology
choice for the project. In the analysis section, annual hydrogen production, water consump­
tion, and system load factor are considered as three main results of technical performance, and
the feasibility indicators are introduced for economic analysis. For example CAPEX, OPEX,
levelized cost of hydrogen, and net present value of plants.
There are some obvious limitations of this methodology:
• The model in this methodology considers the whole system structure only, the details such
as materials and internal designs of each component are not considered, which makes a
difference in a real existing electrolyzer system.
• Wind speed data and electrolyzer parameters are taken from open resources, this will
lead to uncertainty of data. Furthermore, there are 100 groups of wind speed data in total,
99 of them are modified from the first group tendency, which also results in uncertainty.
• The electrolyzer efficiency curve is modified from a modeling result in reference, and in
reality, electrolyzers from different combinations should have different efficiency qualities,
however, in this method, all researched electrolyzers used the same efficiency curve,
which causes the real performance of different companies’ electrolyzers are not showed
specifically.
• The change of electrolyzers property along with start, stop, and stand­by are not consid­
ered in the method, so the exact working performance which arouses the three mentioned
statuses can not be shown.
• The efficiency curve fitting formula coefficient retaining six decimal places may result in
significant production differences during calculations due to the large order of magnitude.
Such high precision in coefficient values can amplify the variations in the output, leading
to considerable discrepancies in the results.
• No markets prediction in economic analysis, wind electricity price and hydrogen selling
price are all changed with constant financial indicators. What is more, no loan was con­
sidered when given this investment. This approach simplifies the analysis by assuming
constant financial conditions and not considering potential fluctuations in market prices.
• During the calculation, general investment data from various sources worldwide is used.
However, obtaining specific data, such as rental prices for large­scale electrolyzer sys­
tems in particular countries, is challenging. As a result, the analysis may not consider
differences between countries in terms of rental costs or other factors. The calculations
are based on broad data to provide a more generalized perspective on the feasibility and
economic aspects of the electrolyzer system.
4
DTU Wind
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Outline
In this master thesis, a total of five chapters are used to explain each part of the work.
• Chapter 1: Introduces the background, research objectives, research methods, and gen­
eral outline.
• Chapter 2: Presents the past research results, and compiled the existing electrolyzer
system calculated data.
• Chapter 3: Describes the methods used in this paper in detail, from wind farm power
generation to the design and workflow of the electrolyzer system, as well as the analysis
method for the output results of the system.
• Chapter 4: The results of technical and economic analysis are presented separately, in­
cluding annual hydrogen production, water consumption, electrolyzer system load factor,
LCOH, and sensitivity analysis.
• Chapter 5: Mainly draw conclusions on all work, discuss results from the last chapter and
future work.
DTU Wind
5
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature Review
2.1
The concept of power to X and hydrogen potential
Power to X is a conception of transiting electricity power to different gases such as hydrogen,
ammonia, and methanol. It is widely recognized as the most popular method for transform­
ing renewable energy resources into hydrogen­based products. Renewable Energy Resources
(RER), such as photovoltaic energy and wind energy, which can offer unlimited energy poten­
tial and generate minimal greenhouse gas emissions during their operation are primary choices.
Through the Power to X process, these sustainable energy sources can be efficiently harnessed
to produce clean hydrogen and other valuable gases, contributing to an environmental­friendly
and more sustainable energy future.
According to the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at the Univer­
sity of Minnesota, the most well­developed method among the Power­to­X (PtX) approaches is
power­to­hydrogen (PtH), surpassing power­to­methanol (PtM) and power­to­ammonia (PtA).
This conclusion was drawn by comparing the three PtX methods based on round­trip efficiency.
The paper takes various parameters into consideration, including the technology’s working prin­
ciple, current development state, energy efficiency, dynamic flexibility, and future prospects.
Through a comprehensive analysis of these factors, the study highlights PtH as the most promis­
ing and well­established approach among the PtX methods for transforming electricity into valu­
able hydrogen fuel, paving the way for a more sustainable energy future.[10].
Water electrolysis is also researched by the Biomass Technology Laboratory (BTL) of Univer­
sité de Sherbrooke. Through illustrating the working principle, advantages and disadvantages
of alkaline water electrolysis (AE), proton exchange membrane electrolysis (PEM), and solid
oxide electrolysis (SOE), it is approved that AE technology is the most cost­saving due to its
mature stack and PEM technology has higher efficiency in PtX, while SOE still needs to be
improved because of limitations such as high operation requirements, lifetime and processing
stability[11]. Manuel Götz and his group reviewed over 60 reports of PtX and made specific
comparisons among three technologies, the gave out one conclusion that AE system CAPEX
is predicted to be much lower than PEM system till 2016[12].
As power­to­X technology gets more and more recognized, its commercial and industrial ap­
plications have also increased. According to the Institute of Energy and Climate Research of
Germany, 220 PtX projects from 20 different countries are identified by 2020[13]. This paper has
a big amount collection of PtX projects, which includes information on past and future projects
along the timeline and national distribution, it also gives out the electricity resource of various
types. The following figure2.1 shows the research results.
6
DTU Wind
==PAGE:13==
(a) Historical Power­to­X projects
commissioned in Europe countries[13]
(b)
Historical
development
of
Power­to­X
projects with regard to electricity supply. RE,
renewable energy[13]
(c) Newly installed capacities of PtX projects in
Europe, (A) commissioned between 2016 and
2020, (B) planned for 2021–2025.[13]
(d) Historical development of the involvement
of countries in Power­to­X projects[13]
Figure 2.1: 220 PtX projects research overviews
From figure2.1a, there is a dramatic increase of PtX projects commissioned in Europe countries
from the year 2011 to 2024, Germany takes the biggest proportion among all. Figure 2.1b
illustrates the electricity resource change tendency during the developing period, where direct
renewable energy (RE) contributes most and the certificate for RE usage is generally going up
from 2010 to 2024. Figure 2.1c gives out the historical and future projects map respectively of 5
years before and after 2020. Figure 2.1d shows the increasing tendency of installation capacity
of power to X projects of different Europe countries between 2003 and 2020.
Hydrogen, being a crucial future fuel, is expected to play a substantial role in various sectors
such as industry, transportation, buildings, and power generation. Its utility is predicted to con­
tinue growing in the coming years. According to statistics from McKinsey & Company, there are
over 680 large­scale hydrogen projects publicly announced worldwide. More than half of these
projects are aimed at large­scale industrial usage, while over 60 projects are in the gigawatt­
scale category. This significant interest in hydrogen projects underscores its potential impor­
tance in meeting global energy demands and transitioning to a cleaner and more sustainable
energy landscape[14].
As figure2.2 describes, hydrogen investment will be doubled twice from 2030 to 2050, most of
the production comes from renewable energy and low­carbon ways, investment scale of 2050
expend to 10 times of 2030. The production and utilization of hydrogen will become an irre­
versible trend.
DTU Wind
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Hydrogen investment estimation from 2025 to 2050[15]
Tasneem Abbasi and S.A. Abbasi have researched different renewable hydrogen production
approaches in 2021 and summarized their feasibility, it is said that solar hydrogen has very
low producing efficiency due to the PV panels, and solar thermal hydrogen need very high
temperature up to 4000 °C for operation, wind­to­hydrogen is more feasible as the current cost
is 5.5$/kg hydrogen, and the price will decline as wind technology develop.
2.2
Functional energy island plan
An energy island serves as a means to transport renewable energy­generated electricity, pro­
viding a convenient solution for energy storage and boosting production capacity. In line with
the climate agreement of 22nd June 2020, Denmark has committed to constructing two energy
islands in the North Sea and the Baltic Sea. This ambitious plan is set to be realized by the year
2030, underscoring Denmark’s dedication to harnessing renewable energy sources and driving
towards a more sustainable and greener energy future.[16].
The energy island of the North Sea is supposed to be the largest energy island in the world,
which is expected to reach at least 3­4 Gw and potentially to be 10 Gw scale in the future.
ACCIONA, Boskalis, DEME, and MT Højgaard International are chosen by Copenhagen In­
frastructure Partners (CIP) to construct the first energy island according to COWI report[17].
The electricity production of the North Sea energy island is going to be twice of all the other
offshore wind farm production in Denmark, excepting meeting the demand of millions of nearby
householders, the excess output is supposed to be used as a hybrid electricity supplement of
neighbor countries such as Germany, Netherlands, and even Belgium, shown as figure2.4. Be­
sides, it will provide the electricity resource of power to X projects, it could be also part of energy
storage.
8
DTU Wind
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Two energy islands positions[6]
Figure 2.4: The North Sea energy island makes Denmark and Belgium electricity neighbours[18]
The Energy Island in the Baltic Sea is planned to have a capacity of approximately 3 GW.
With this capacity, it can supply electricity to over 3 million nearby households and neighboring
countries like Germany and Sweden. The excess electricity energy can be utilized for other
purposes, such as Power­to­X technology. The Baltic Energy Island project is a collaborative
effort involving DTU (Technical University of Denmark), Ørsted, Siemens Gamesa, Energinet
(Danish transmission system operator), Bornholm Regional Municipality, Bornholms Energi &
Forsyning (a utility company), and the Port of Rønne. This joint effort brings together expertise
and resources to develop a significant renewable energy infrastructure in the Baltic Sea, con­
tributing to the transition towards cleaner and sustainable energy solutions in the region[19].
DTU Wind
9
==PAGE:16==
Locations of mentioned two energy islands show in figure 2.5. Figure2.5a illustrates the fea­
sibility area of the projects and location of the North Sea energy island, figure2.5b located the
offshore wind farm in Baltic Sea energy island.
(a) Map of the North Sea energy
island[20]
(b) The location of energy island in Baltic
Sea[20]
Figure 2.5: Locations of energy islands respectively in the North Sea and Baltic Sea
There are more 100% renewable energy islands are evaluated:
• Hong Kong Peng Chau island project: By analyzing six different renewable resources,
this project finally gets three possible ways of establishing a completely renewable energy
island, they are wind, solar, and wave, as wave energy technology is not mature enough
and very costly, solar­wind mix is the best choice of developing ”zero energy island”[21].
• Samsø energy island: As of 1977, Denmark established its first energy island, which suc­
cessfully fulfilled all the electricity demand and provided 70% of the heat demand on the
island for a decade using sustainable energy sources. This early achievement demon­
strated the feasibility and effectiveness of employing renewable energy to meet significant
portions of the energy needs on the island[22].
• Sifnos case: Through the statistics of the energy consumption on Sifnos island, the op­
eration of the hybrid power plant is simulated, and through the dynamic evaluation, it is
concluded that the energy island system is economically and technically feasible[23].
• Netherlands 1 gigawatt green hydrogen plant: in 2022, Netherlands is going to put the
1GW scale hydrogen plant plan to meet the Dutch industry needs and help with energy
transition[24].
2.3
Current electrolyzer system scale
As PtX technology gets widely used, more research about producing green hydrogen through
water electrolysis is published. Due to the difference in system scale, electricity resource, and
technology types, the annual hydrogen production and production cost vary, which leads to
levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH) changes.
Table 2.1 is the collection of past research, through calculating the cost of hydrogen production
per kilogram, the influence of electricity price, electrolyzer technology, and system scale can be
seen. What is more, as electrolyzer and renewable system technology get more mature, the
10
DTU Wind
==PAGE:17==
cost of buying electricity and operation will reduce, and LCOH will decrease as a consequent
result.
Table 2.1: Literature review based on different electricity resources, electrolyzer technologies,
and years
Electricity
Resource
Electrolyzer
Technology
System Scale(MW)
Eleftrolyzer Power
Consumption(kWh/kg)
LCOH ($/kg)
Year
PV[25]
AE/PEM
1
50­58
3.64­4.25
2020
Wind[26]
AE
0.1
55.6
2.12­2.26
2020
wind[27]
PEM
2.3
52.5­53.4
5.30­5.80
2018
Grid[28]
PEM
113
54.3
5.12
2007
Wind[29]
AE
10
43
3.6­7.3
2030
Wind[29]
PEM
10
45
3.2­6.7
2030
The existing PEM system hydrogen production cost is as figure2.6. The average PEM elec­
trolysis hydrogen production cost is around 4.5$/kg, the lowest price is about 2.5$/kg and the
highest price can reach 6.8$/kg.
Figure 2.6: Existing PEM Hydrogen Production Costs [30]
AE and PEM are two of the most common electrolyzer technologies put into commercial and
industrial use. Alkaline electrolyzer experienced high development between 1920 and 1930, it
is the most mature electrolyzer technology which can produce at the scale of 50MW and larger.
PEM electrolyzer technology gets developed several decades later, with most of the scale at
50­200 kW, some can reach gigawatt scale when under limited constructing conditions[31]. The
largest existing PEM electrolyzer is constructed in Canada by 2021, it has a capacity of 20 MW
and is able to produce a maximum of 8.2­tonne low­carbon hydrogen every day[32]. Norway is
building a large green hydrogen electrolyzer plant with 1100 Nm3/h output[33]. China has been
putting efforts into the largest green hydrogen electrolyzer plant at 260 MW scale using alkaline
technology[34].
Jonathon Yates, Rahman Daiyan, and their group use the Monte Carlo method to investigate
the impact factors of LCOH of an independent photovoltaic­driven electrolyzer system. They
found that increasing the electrolyzer efficiency and reducing the capital cost of PV and elec­
trolyzers such as scaling up system output can improve LCOH. They also compared AE and
PEM technology and the AE system has lower LCOH than the PEM system under most of the
conditions, however, the reduction of energy consumption can help with lowing PEM system
DTU Wind
11
==PAGE:18==
LCOH[25].
DOE Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program Record[30] collect data from different institutions about
PEM electrolyzer systems powered by mixed resources of both gird and renewable electricity,
the overall LCOH is between the range of 2.5­6.8 $/kg. The paper from Gunther Glenk and
Stefan Reichelstein calculates the LCOH as a 0.29 kW scale wind to hydrogen system at 3.53
$/kg which is predicted to decrease in the future[35].
Australian hydrogen market study published on 24th May 2021 summarized the rule of elec­
trolyzer cost change influenced by a scale factor and gives the factor of 0.95 when double
the system scale. Besides, it compared electrolyzers between 0­50 MW capital cost, and it
is convinced that the Chinese electrolyzer at this scale range is not significantly cheaper than
European electrolyzer when thinking about the efficiency[36].
12
DTU Wind
==PAGE:19==
3
Techno­economic Analysis Scenario
In this chapter, three scenarios based on the same wind resource are analyzed in the thesis
work. The three cases are respectively:
• Scenario 1: 1GW (67 * 15MW) offshore wind farm, 1GW electrolyzer plant, 101 groups of
10MW electrolyzer modular combination use AE and PEM technology.
• Scenario 2: 1GW offshore wind farm, 1GW alkaline electrolyzer system,respectively of
201 * 5MW, 101 * 10MW, 60 * 17MW, 51 * 20MW combination.
• 1GW (67 * 15MW) , 1.2GW (80 * 15MW) and 1.5GW (100 * 15MW) offshore wind farm,
1GW (101 * 10MW), 1.2GW (120 * 10MW) and 1. GW (150 * 10MW) alkaline electrolyzer
system.
By default, the locations of the three scenarios are the same, wind speed and direction of an
offshore wind farm can be modified on the basis of existing data, without considering the spe­
cific location’s influence on the whole system. This approach allows the model to be easily
expanded and applied to other cases, as it does not depend on the particular characteristics of
a specific location.
The project’s lifetime is 25 years, the validation year will be 2028 and officially enter operation
in 2030. This is thought out because of the carbon­neutral goal in 2030, and detailed allocation
of project preparation and operation time is of vital importance in economic analysis.
Table 3.1: Overview of three scenarios and sub­scenarios
Scenario
Wind Cacacity
Electrolyzer Modular
Modular Amount
System Scale
1
1GW
AE 10MW
101
1GW
1GW
PEM 10MW
101
1GW
1GW
PEM 10MW
101
1GW
2
1GW
AE 5MW
201
1GW
1GW
AE 10MW
101
1GW
1GW
AE 17MW
60
1GW
1GW
AE 20MW
51
1GW
3
1GW
AE 10MW
101
1GW
1.2GW
AE 10MW
120
1.2GW
1.5GW
AE 10MW
150
1.5GW
The three cases are designed to explore the impact of different factors on the electrolyzer sys­
tem. The reference electrolyzer system consists of an alkaline system with 101 groups of 10
MW modular units. In scenario 1, two sub­scenarios using PEM technology are selected to
DTU Wind
13
==PAGE:20==
compare their technological influence. Scenario 2 evaluates the impact of different modular
sizes used to build the electrolyzer system, with scales of 5MW, 10MW, 17MW, and 20MW be­
ing considered. Scenario 3 aims to determine the techno­economic feasibility of expanding the
entire electrolyzer system. Three different system sizes of 1GW, 1.2GW, and 1.5GW are cho­
sen for this evaluation. Through these scenarios, the study seeks to gain valuable insights into
the performance, efficiency, and economic viability of various configurations of the electrolyzer
system, enabling better decision­making for future implementations. The scenarios are shown
in table 3.1.
3.1
System introduction
3.1.1
Wind resource
This project is based on the off­shore wind farm (OWF) located in the North Sea approximately
100km off the coast of Denmark[37], the energy island is surrounded by off­shore wind farms,
and an electrolyzer plant is built on the island as innovative green energy technology, an elec­
trolyzer plant consists of multiple electrolyzers modular including other components.
The wind speed data is taken from Østerd website, it is a 10­minute statistic for wind measure­
ments from Lidars installed at Anholt offshore wind farm[38]. Anholt offshore wind farm, the
largest offshore wind farm in Denmark, which is also one of the largest offshore wind farms in
the world, is supposed to be a good object referred to[39].
Figure 3.1: Annual wind speed curve from Østerd
Wind presents different speeds and directions even in the same plant because of tiny location
differences and internal influences between wind turbines such as blocks. To modify the differ­
ence in wind speed according to different turbine locations in a big wind farm, the NORMINV
function is used based on the wind speed data from Østerd resource. Define Østerd wind speed
data as reference wind speed, 99 more groups of wind speed in total are modified. Define the
14
DTU Wind
==PAGE:21==
original Østerd wind speed as ’Wind Speed 1’ shown as figure3.1, the modified wind speed is
’Wind Speed 2’, ’Wind Speed 3’, and so on...Every group of wind speeds corresponds to the
wind received by each turbine.
The offshore wind turbine used in this project is Vestas 15 MW turbine, the turbine information
is in table 3.2, the large capacity of the wind turbine performs well in large­scale wind farms.
With an efficiency of 42%, the rotor diameter is 236 meters, the cut­in speed is the lowest speed
that can make the turbine start to work, and the cut­off speed is a speed is the speed where
the turbine has to shut down to avoid damage, they are respectively 3 m/s and 31 m/s. Rated
speed is the speed when a wind turbine has the highest production efficiency, the rated speed
here is 11 m/s.
Table 3.2: Vestas 15­MW offshore wind turbine information
Type
Efficiency
Cut­in wind
speed (m/s)
Cut­off wind
speed (m/s)
Rotor diameter (m)
Vestas 15­MW
Wind Turbine
42%
3
31
236
Use wind power calculation equation to get wind power production:
Wind Power = 1
2 · ρ · A · V 3 · η
(3.1)
Where A is the swept area of turbines resulting from wind turbine diameter, V represents wind
speed, η is the wind turbine working efficiency at 42%, and ρ is air density with a constant value
of 1.225 kg/m³.
The wind farm scale here depends on the number of turbines. For example, 67 groups of
turbines can generate 1005MW wind power in total as figure 3.2, and 100 groups of turbines
produce a wind power amount of 1500MW as figure 3.3.
Figure 3.2: 1005 MW Wind Power vs. Time
DTU Wind
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: 1500 MW Wind Power vs. Time
3.1.2
Electrolyzer information
In this report, mainly two types of electrolyzers are applied, respectively alkaline and PEM
electrolyzers, their working principle can be illustrated by a chemical process. The alkaline
electrolyzer working principle is as equation 3.2, of which at the cathode, water molecules are
decomposed into H+ and OH−, H+ gets electrons to generate hydrogen atoms, and further
generates hydrogen molecules (H2); OH−passes through the porous diaphragm under the
action of the electric field force between the cathode and the anode, and reaches the anode,
the loss of electrons at the anode generates a water molecule and an oxygen molecule.
Overall Reaction : 2H2O(l) →2H2(g) + O2(g)
(3.2a)
Anode : 2OH−
(aq) →1/2O2(g) + H2O(l) + 2e−
(3.2b)
Cathode : 2H2O(l) + 2e−→H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq)
(3.2c)
For the PEM electrolyzer, the working principle is as equation 3.3, when the PEM electrolyzer is
in operation, water molecules undergo an oxidation reaction on the anode side, lose electrons,
and generate oxygen and H+. Subsequently, the electrons are transduced to the cathode
through the external circuit, and H+ are conducted to the cathode through the proton exchange
membrane under the action of the electric field, and a reduction reaction occurs on the cathode
16
DTU Wind
==PAGE:23==
side, and electrons are obtained to generate (H2).
Overall Reaction : 2H2O(l) →2H2(g) + O2(g)
(3.3a)
Anode : H2O(l) →1/2O2(g) + 2H+
(aq) + 2e−
(3.3b)
Cathode : 2H+
(aq) + 2e−→H2(g)
(3.3c)
Working principle can be also shown as figure3.4.
(a) AE
(b) PEM
Figure 3.4: Alkaline (AE);Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) working principle
In order to make the electrolyzer objects studied in this project applied to the market better,
here directly uses the data provided by the existing electrolyzer companies on the webpage.
Electrolyzer information is given as table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Electrolyzer information, *reference electrolyzer
Electrolyzer
Type
Company
Maximum capacity
Operation range
* HYLINK
AE
Sunfire
10 MW
25%­100%
EX­4250D
PEM
PlugPower
10 MW
10%­100%
multi MW system
PEM
Elogen
10 MW
0.1%­100%
DQ1000
AE
John Cokerill
5 MW
40%­100%
A3880
AE
Nel Hydrogen
17 MW
15%­100%
20MW electrolyzer
module
AE
Thyssenkrupp
20 MW
10%­100%
According to the table above, choose 10 MW scale AE HYLINK from Sunfire company as the
reference electrolyzer with an operation range (OR) between 25%­100%. Operation range is
the range within which the electrolyzer is going to start work and reach the maximum capac­
ity. In comparison groups, two PEM electrolyzers of 10 MW from PlugPower and Elogen are
picked up, the OR of which are respectively from 10% and 0.1% to full load. Three other AE at
5 MW, 17 MW, and 20 MW are chosen, with operation ranges of 40%­100%, 15%­100%, and
10%­100%.
DTU Wind
17
==PAGE:24==
Apart from different capacities and operation ranges, all electrolyzers are considered to work
the same voltage of 50 HZ, operation temperature is 5­30 oC, pressure is 30 bar without com­
pression and the output hydrogen purity is up to 99.99%.
The efficiency of conversion from electrical power to chemical energy is defined as electrical
efficiency to evaluate the system[40]. The efficiency has a significant impact on hydrogen pro­
duction, higher efficiency represents less electricity is used to generate the same amount of
hydrogen. Electrolyzer efficiency can be calculated by the heating value through the water
electrolysis process:
H2O(l) + 237.2KJ/mol electricity + 48.6KJ/mol heat →H2 + 1/2O2
(3.4)
According to equation 3.4, efficiency calculation can be converted to the quotient of hydrogen
heat value and electrical energy used[41]. This equation represents the water electrolysis re­
action, where liquid water undergoes electrolysis to produce hydrogen gas and half of a mole
of oxygen gas. The energy input is represented by 237.2 kJ/mol of electricity, and 48.6 kJ/mol
of heat is involved in the reaction.
Efficiency(HHV ) = HHV ofH2 produced
electricity used
(3.5)
Efficiency(LHV ) = LHV ofH2 produced
electricity used
(3.6)
In this project, all the electrolyzer systems run at low­temperature conditions and use the LHV
value of 33.3 kWh/kg hydrogen for energy calculation.
The electrolyzer efficiency curve is modeled according to past research[42][40]. Under wind
to hydrogen conditions, the electrolyzer efficiency is averaged at 62%[43], so the efficiency is
taken as a spot when the radio of input power and maximum capacity changes. The quintic fit
is used as a general tendency of past research curves, with an R­Squared value at 0.9967, the
efficiency fitted equation and curve are as equation 3.7 and figure 3.5:
E = −2.657344x5 + 0.7.518072x4 −7.463015x3 + 2.748507x2 −0.095210 + 0.568469
(3.7)
Where E stands for efficiency and x is the proportion of input power and maximum capacity.
18
DTU Wind
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.5: Electrolyzer efficiency curve
3.1.3
System composition
Generally, an electrolyzer system contains the following elements: Electrolyzers, water purifiers,
separators, compressors, storage tanks, and coolers. Use figure 3.6 to show the electrolyzer
system working process here. In this report, wind electricity is the only source of electricity,
desalinated water is electrolyzed by an electrolyzer and broken down into hydrogen and oxygen,
the following gases go through a separator, compressor, and cooler, and finally, hydrogen is
stored in the storage tank. In this project, every component is attached to the electrolyzer as
an electrolyzer modular.
Figure 3.6: Electrolyzer system composition
DTU Wind
19
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Technical Analysis of Scenarios
3.2.1
Annual Hydrogen Production
Hydrogen production is decided by the electrolyzer efficiency and maximum load of the elec­
trolyzer, the efficiency is changeable as the input changes, so the relation between electrolyzer
input power, electrolyzer efficiency, and hydrogen production is described as equation 3.8:
WH2 =
∑Pinput · Et
LHV
(3.8)
Pinput is the input power of the electrolyzer in every unit of time, the unit of it is kWh, Et is
electrolyzer efficiency in each unit of time, hydrogen LHV here is the heating value released
during the hydrogen combustion of a specific amount of it, the value used in this calculation is
33.3 kWh/kg[44].
3.2.2
System load factor calculation
The load factor is the ratio of the average load and maximum load of the electrolyzer, if the
load factor is higher, it shows that the utilization rate of electricity of this electrolyzer system
is high, on the contrary, the utilization is low. A higher load factor means the system is more
energy­saving. The yearly load factor electrolyzer is calculated as equation 3.9:
Load factor =
∑Pinput
∑Pcapacity
(3.9)
Of which ∑Pinput is the total input power used by the electrolyzer system, and ∑Pcapacity is
the total power over the whole year when the electrolyzer works at full­load.
3.2.3
Water consumption
Based on past research, an alkaline electrolyzer can produce 1 kg hydrogen when consum­
ing 11 kg desalinated water, and a PEM electrolyzer consumes 10 kg desalinated water when
generating 1 kg hydrogen[45]. The water consumption equation is 3.10:
Wwater = WH2 · Comsumption/kg
(3.10)
3.3
Economic Analysis
In this part, several parts of the economic analysis are expounded in detail. Economic analysis
is crucial in project feasibility studies, so plenty of feasibility parameters are presented in this
section. Mainly three parts are discussed, they are capital expenditures (CAPEX), operational
expenditures (OPEX), and feasibility index. Multiple financial indexes are applied such as infla­
tion rate, discount factor, depreciation rate, and tax rate. Sensitivity analysis is also investigated
as a key point.
Here the pre­steps of wind farm working costs are not taken into account, only the costs asso­
ciated with electrolyzer capital costs and consequent costs such as operation and maintenance
20
DTU Wind
==PAGE:27==
are focused. That is to say, the wind­related cost is considered only when the system buys
electricity from wind farms.
3.3.1
Capital expenditures (CAPEX)
The capital cost of the electrolyzer system concludes the cost of electrolyzer stacks and sub­
systems. The subsystem is composed of several elements: compressors, air separators, water
desalination, balance of plants, and others. It is hard to get the exact cost values from compa­
nies due to data privacy, but the proportion of each part is available by investigation.
In particular, capital cost includes direct cost and indirect cost. Direct cost is the cost of elec­
trolyzer stacks and balance of plant (BoP), without installation­related cost. The direct cost has
a range between 540 $/kW and 1548 $/kW for the AE system and 401 $/kW to 2039 $/kW
for the PEM system based on the research result of year 2030, averagely cost for both type
system is 1060 $/kW, since system in this project is in very large scale, then maximum cost
of 2548 $/kW AE and 2039 $/kW PEM values are used. Indirect cost concludes electrolyzer
import cost, system installation cost (labor cost and materials cost), project contingency and
engineering service, and license cost. These indirect costs are weight by proportion listed in
table3.4.
Table 3.4: Indirect CAPEX cost proportion
Types
Proportion of direct cost
Base Year
Electrolyzer import
10%
2030
Installation
Labour
9%
2030
Material
10%
2030
Engineering service and license
1%
2030
Project contingency
15%
2030
Indirect costs conclude electrolyzer import cost, which is 10% of direct cost. Installation cost is
19% of direct cost whereas labor and material cost respectively take charge of 9% and 10%.
Engineering service and license cost is 1% of direct cost and project contingency has a propor­
tion of 15%[45].
The direct CAPEX and indirect CAPEX above are estimated to decrease in the future as technol­
ogy development[45]. Besides, in scenario 2 calculation, the scale factor is considered as 0.95
when doubling the modular scale due to the cost saving through system size expanding[36].
3.3.2
Operational expenditures (OPEX)
Operational expenditures are the cost of ongoing system operation and maintenance costs
during the whole electrolyzer system lifespan. The life span of the electrolyzer system in this
report is assumed 25 years. OPEX is always strongly influenced by system consumption, and
it is an essential factor of overall economic evaluation.
OPEX can be divided into many types, for example, electricity consumption, water desalination,
and consumption, maintenance cost, operation costs such as system monitor and controlling,
and stack replacement which is decided by the stack duration.Table3.5 presents the OPEX
distribution in this project.
DTU Wind
21
==PAGE:28==
Table 3.5: OPEX cost
Type
cost
Base year
O&M
2.5% of direct cost per year
2030
Stack replacement
5% of direct cost over lifespan
2030
Electricity consumption
PPA wind 41 $/kWh
2030
Water consumption
5 $/kL desalinated water
2030
What needs to be raised is, here operation cost and maintenance cost are calculated together
as O&M cost. Stack replacement cost is ranged between 5%­40% of direct cost over a lifetime,
in this part it is assumed as 5%. A power purchase agreement (PPA), is a long­term contract
between the power suppliers and customers, simply described as that during which time buyers
buy energy at a pre­agreed price. Such agreements play a key role in financing independently
owned generators, especially renewable energy producers such as solar farms or wind farms.
3.3.3
LCOH
LCOH is a way to evaluate the cost of a type of hydrogen production technology, it is decided
by CAPEX, OPEX, hydrogen production, and system lifetime. The total hydrogen production
amount is measured in terms of average energy consumption or hydrogen mass and volume,
such as kilowatt­hours (kWh) of electricity or kilogram (kg) and normal cubic meter (Nm3) of
hydrogen. Here the mass is used, and the unit of LCOH is $/kg.
The formula of LCOH calculation is described as equation 3.11.
LCOH =
(CAPEX + OPEX · Lifetime)
(Y early hydrogen production) · Lifetime
(3.11)
3.3.4
Financial conceptions
In addition to CAPEX, OPEX, and LCOH, there are other financial concepts related to economic
feasibility. These financial concepts encompass factors that are considered when making in­
vestment decisions. Sensitivity analysis is conducted to further the influence of financial factors.
In this section of the study, these conceptions are mentioned:
• Inflation: Inflation is an essential factor in economic studies. It is a percentage change
during a specific period that leads to the price change of products, use the inflation rate to
get inflation results. The inflation rate is usually counted annually, as a prediction of 2028
in Denmark, its value is always 2% [46].
Some reasons cause inflation, for example, demand­pull inflation, is due to the dramat­
ically increasing demand which exceeds presently available production and leads to the
tense of price increases. Cost­push inflation is because the production cost rises such
as material shortage or material price increase, which makes factory production cost go
up, as a consequence the final product gets more expensive when selling to buyers. The
third reason for inflation could be inflation expectations, it happens when a company and
customers predict the price as an increasing tendency[47].
22
DTU Wind
==PAGE:29==
• Discounted factor: Also known as a present value factor, the discount factor is a measure
to transfer the future value of money into present value. Since the same amount of money
has different values over time because of some factors such as the inflation rate, the value
is supposed to be unified using the mathematical way, that is to say, the discounted factor
is to weigh money from different years in the same year.
The calculation formula is as equation 3.12:
Discounted factor =
1
(1 + r)n
(3.12)
Where r is the discount rate, n is the system lifetime. In this project, r takes a constant
number of 4%, lifetime is settled at 25 years.
• Depreciation: Depreciation arises due to the depreciation caused by wear and tear, tech­
nological innovation, and other reasons after the electrolyzer plant is used. Calculating
depreciation is a way to comprehensively calculate the depreciation process of the system
after use into the cost, which can help the statistics of the total assets of the system and
the evaluation of investment.
Mainly two methods are used for calculating depreciation. The most common way is
straight­line depreciation, which means averagely distributing the depreciation over the
whole life span of the system, the depreciation rate is as formula 3.13:
Straight −line depreciationrate = Total depreciation
Lifetime
(3.13)
Another way to calculate it is declining balance depreciation, this method assumes that
the depreciation is greatest at the beginning of the system’s use and that the depreciation
gradually decreases until there is almost no depreciation as time grows[48]. Here uses the
straight­line depreciation calculation and a total of 15% in total depreciation is assumed.
• Tax: Tax is the money charged by the government on a business or individual, which is
legally enforced. There are different types of tax, they are respectively income tax, selling
tax, property tax, consumption tax, terrifies and capital gain tax. In Denmark, the tax rate
is around 22%[48].
• Earnings before interests, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA): EBITDA is the
gross profit before income tax, depreciation, and amortization, it determines the payable
tax together with tax and depreciation.
• Hydrogen selling price: Hydrogen selling price can decide how much the system will earn
during its lifetime, according to past research, hydrogen is sold at a price of at least 3.53
$/kg in a German case, the price is going down in the future[49]. In this project, different
selling prices are tried to see the profits of different systems.
• Net present value (NPV): NPV is a final metric to investigate the feasibility of a project
investment. It is the sum of discounted cash flows (DCF) during the system’s lifetime,
during this calculation, the future money value is transferred into current value, NPV is the
comprehensive performance of the above factors, it is the direct way to see if a project is
DTU Wind
23
==PAGE:30==
worth to invest as well.
• Sensitivity Analysis: Sensitivity analysis is a measure applied in financial analysis and
decision­making to assess how changes in key variables or assumptions affect the result
of the investment. It helps assess the sensitivity of results to different scenarios and gives
insights into the potential risks related to decision makings.
In this part, a single variable is chosen to make sensitivity analysis, and the change pro­
portion is assumed by actual situations. The following factors are used to test sensitivity,
they are inflation rate, discount rate, CAPEX, OPEX, hydrogen selling price, wind electric­
ity price, and water price.
Taking NPV as the only and most intuitive parameter for observing sensitivity, by observ­
ing the variation range of NPV within a certain change rate, the factor that has the greatest
impact on project investment is obtained.
24
DTU Wind
==PAGE:31==
4
Result
In this chapter, various graphs will be presented to illustrate the techno­economic results and
sensitivity analysis. Each graph will be accompanied by a description explaining what it repre­
sents and the key findings it reveals. These graphs will offer a clear and visual representation
of the thesis’s findings, making it easier to comprehend the complex relationships between dif­
ferent variables and the overall economic viability of the electrolyzer system.
4.1
Technical results
4.1.1
Electrolyzer power
Figure 4.1 shows the electrolyzer system working power all over the year using reference Sunfire
10 MW scale electrolyzer. Compared with wind power, there are almost no non­overlapping
parts except the last electrolyzer working status as figure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Total electrolyzer power over annual working time in 1GW Sunfire system
Figure 4.2a presents the last electrolyzer working power over a year, each spot represents
the electricity power received from offshore wind farms. Many spots distribute at non­working
status, showing that the electricity they got from wind farms does not reach the lowest operation
range, parts of spots display the maximum working capacity and others perform between the
lowest and highest working power field as figure 4.2b.
DTU Wind
25
==PAGE:32==
(a) Overall working status
(b) Working detail during a random period
Figure 4.2: The last Sunfire electrolyzer annually workings status
4.1.2
Hydrogen production
Graph 4.3 illustrates the yearly hydrogen production from the electrolyzer systems in three sce­
narios.
Figure 4.3: Annual hydrogen production of 3 Scenarios
• In scenario 1 and scenario 2, all kinds of electrolyzers present similar hydrogen production
around 80000 tons per year. The main reason could be that the same efficiency curve is
used in the calculation, most of the electrolyzers in the system are full­loaded.
• To provide more detail as shown in a graph 4.4a and 4.4b, in scenario 1, Sunfire AE
system, PlugPower PEM system, and Elogen PEM system respectively have hydrogen
production at 81878 tons, 81909 tons and 81915 tons from small to large. As for scenario
2, the electrolyzer system which is composed of 5MW, 10MW, 17MW, and 20MW own a
production amount of 81861 tons, 81877 tons, 81900 tons, and 81912 tons, it shows an
increasing tendency when single modular size increases. The small difference in hydro­
gen production amount comes from the lowest operation range, when the operation range
is lower, it is easier for the last electrolyzer to start work and have generation.
26
DTU Wind
==PAGE:33==
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 4.4: Annual hydrogen of scenario 1 and 2
• In scenario 3, among AE system with scales from 1GW, 1.2GW, and 1.5GW, the 1GW
system has a yearly hydrogen production at 81,878 tons, 1.2 GW system produce over
1.2 times of 1GW system hydrogen of 109,577 tons, similarly, 1.5 GW has an annual
production of 136,976 tons which is 1.67 times of 1 GW system production.
From the observations, it is evident that hydrogen production and system scale exhibit
nonlinear relationships. As the system scale increases, the amount of hydrogen produced
grows at a faster rate compared to the expansion of the system itself. This non­linear
relationship indicates that larger­scale systems can achieve more significant hydrogen
production gains relative to the incremental increase in the system’s size, this may result
from the load water from the 101st electrolyzer in the Sunfire 1GW system, it will never
work in full­loaded status due to the maximum wind limitation. At the same time, the size
expanding rate and hydrogen production increasing rate is linear between the 1.2GW and
1.5GW scale system, because the last electrolyzer of them can work at full­load.
4.1.3
Water consumption
The yearly water consumption of 3 scenarios is as figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Annual water consumption of 3 Scenarios
DTU Wind
27
==PAGE:34==
• Generally, the AE system ranges differently in water consumption with PEM system in
scenario 1, and the AE system consumes more water in the 1GW electrolyzer system.
Sunfire AE system consumes 900,654 tons of water, two other PEM system uses a similar
amount of water at 81,910 tons as figure 4.6a. The water consumption in this thesis is
taken from the literature, which is a generally applicable value, but in actual work, the
water consumption per unit of hydrogen production in a PEM electrolyzer is larger than
that of the AE electrolyzer, because the PEM electrolyzer requires purer water.
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 4.6: Annual water consumption of scenario 1 and 2
• In scenario 2 as figure 4.6b, there is very small difference in the water consumption of
1GW AE electrolyzer system combined of different­scale modular: 5MW, 10MW, 17MW,
20MW. It can be seen that as the modular scale increases, the yearly water consumption
increases. The difference comes from the hydrogen production difference, which traces
back to the source is the difference of the lowest operation range.
• In scenario 3, 1.2GW and 1.5GW electrolyzer systems respectively have overall water
consumption of 1205 kilo tons and 1507 kilo tons, compared with 901­kilo tons water
usage of 1GW system, they are respectively 1.34 and 1.68 times than 1GW system water
consumption. The non­linear relationship between the water consumption change rate
and the system scale change rate shows that expanding the system scale will cost more
water along with the hydrogen production growth.
4.1.4
System load factor
Figure 4.7 illustrates the result of the system load factor of all scenarios.
28
DTU Wind
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.7: System load factor of 3 Scenarios
• In scenario 1, as shown in figure 4.8a, three electrolyzer systems have load factors at
around 0.498, very small difference is Sunfire AE system has the lowest load factor at
0.4976 while the Elogen PEM system has the highest of 0.4979.
• In scenario 2, the load factor shows an increasing tendency when the modular scale is
increasing, 5MW modular combined system has the lowest capacity factor while 20MW
modular combined system has the highest value.
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 4.8: Load factor of scenario 1 and 2
• In scenario 3, the load factor is increasing as the electrolyzer system scale increases, 1GW
system’s load factor is 0.4976, 1.2GW and 1.5GW systems have load factors respectively
0.5237 and 0.5238.
4.2
Economic results
4.2.1
CAPEX
Figure 4.9 shows electrolyzer system CAPEX of all kinds of electrolyzer systems in this project.
DTU Wind
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.9: CAPEX of 3 Scenarios
• In scenario 1, the CAPEX of Sunfire 10MW AE system, PlugPower 10MW PEM system
and Elogen 10MW PEM system are respectively 2188.9 million dollars, 2183.1 million
dollars, and 2183.1 million dollars.
• In scenario 2, the CAPEX in AE system is decreasing when the modular scale rises, from
5W to 20 MW modular combination, their CAPEX are respectively 2292.7m$, 2188.9m$,
2133.2m$ and 2100m$. This explains that when the modular size goes up, the capital
cost is less.
• In scenario 3, CAPEX increases linearly with the increase of the system size.
figure 4.10 illustrates the Breakdown of each part in the capital cost among the overall cost
of the system lifespan. Electrolyzer and other system component is the most costly as direct
CAPEX, takes over 19.87% in total cost, the indirect cost has a proportion of 7.95% in total cost,
among which are electrolyzer import cost, construction cost, engineering service and license
cost, and project contingency are respectively 1.99%. 3.77%, 0.2% and 1.99%.
Figure 4.10: Breakdown of CAPEX in Sunfire 1GW AE system
Direct CAPEX occupies the largest proportion of CAPEX, and direct CAPEX is determined by
the electrolyzer technology and the system size, so optimizing the cost of electrolyzer technol­
ogy is the best way to save direct CAPEX thereby saving CAPEX.
30
DTU Wind
==PAGE:37==
4.2.2
OPEX
The annual OPEX of Sunfire 1GW AE system is as figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: OPEX of 3 Scenarios
• In scenario 1, the Elogen PEM system has the highest OPEX cost while the PlugPower
PEM system has the lowest among the three, this revealed that OPEX is not decided by
electrolyzer type.
• In scenario 2, OPEX is decreasing as the modular size increases although the change is
very small. From 5MW to 20MW modular combined system, their OPEX every year are
respectively 229.2m$, 227.2m$, 226.2m$, and 225.6m$.
• In scenario 3, OPEX generally goes up when the whole system size is increasing, how­
ever, the change is nonlinear, which shows more OPEX is needed if the system scale
gets larger.
Figure 4.12 tells the breakdown of Sunfire 1GW electrolyzer system yearly OPEX proportion of
direct CAPEX. The most costly part is buying wind electricity, which takes over 11.55% of direct
CAPEX every year, annual O&M cost is 2.5% of direct CAPEX, and water consumption cost
0.29% yearly, the total cost of stack replacement over a lifetime is 5% of direct CAPEX. Since
the cost of purchasing wind power occupies a large proportion, reaching an appropriate wind
power price agreement is conducive to saving OPEX.
DTU Wind
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.12: Breakdown of OPEX in Sunfire 1GW AE system
4.2.3
NPV
When settling a hydrogen selling price at 5$/kg, the NPV of electrolyzer systems in all scenarios
is shown in graph 4.13.
Figure 4.13: NPV of 3 Scenarios where the hydrogen selling price is 5$/kg
• In scenario 1, the AE system has the highest NPV of 643 million dollars, as for two PEM
systems, the PlugPower electrolyzer system gains 521 m$ during 25 years, however,
the Elogen electrolyzer system even loses money during the lifespan. High CAPEX and
especially high OPEX of the Elogen electrolyzer system contributes to its cost challenges
which lead to the overall money loss.
• In scenario 2, the NPV of systems is increasing as the modular scale increases. When
hydrogen selling price is 5$/kg, their NPV from low to high are 510$, 643$, 715$, 758$.
The growth rate from 5MW to 10MW is the most obvious.
• In scenario 3, the larger the scale is of the system, the higher the NPV value gets from
the system. The growth rate from 1GW to 1.2GW is more dramatic than it is from 1.2GW
to 1.5GW.
32
DTU Wind
==PAGE:39==
4.2.4
LCOH
LCOH results are shown in figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: LCOH of 3 Scenarios
• From all scenarios, the 1GW PlugPower PEM system has the lowest LCOH value of 4.45
$/kg while the 1GW Elogen PEM system has the highest LCOH value of 5.25$/kg. The
average LCOH value range is 4.68$/kg.
• In scenario 1, it is clear that in a 1GW electrolyzer system, LCOH ranges very differently if
using different types of electrolyzer, even the same technology type of electrolyzer show
very different results. The lowest among them is 4.45$/kg belonging to the PlugPower
electrolyzer system, and the highest LCOH is up to 5.25$/kg of the same PEM technology
electrolyzer system from Elogen company.
• In scenario 2, LCOH is declining when the system modular scale reduces. The LCOH
values from 5MW to 20MW are 4.78$/kg, 4.70$/kg, 4.65$/kg, 4.62$/kg respectively.
• In scenario 3, 1GW system has the highest LCOH value of 4.7$/kg, 1.2 GW and 1.5 GW
systems have similar LCOH values at around 4.5$/kg.
4.3
Sensitivity analysis results
Figure 4.15, figure 4.16, and figure 4.17 are the results of sensitivity analysis. They are divided
into three groups, one group includes CAPEX, OPEX, and hydrogen selling price. The second
group of graphs will present the sensitivity analysis results for the inflation rate and discount
rate. The last group is about wind electricity price and water price sensitivity analysis.
DTU Wind
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.15: CAPEX,OPEX, and hydrogen selling price sensitivity analysis
Figure 4.15 above shows the sensitivity results of CAPEX, OPEX, and hydrogen selling price:
• It is very obvious that hydrogen selling price is the most sensitive factor on NPV among the
three. Within the factor value change rate from ­25% to 25%, NPV changes with hydrogen
selling price from ­1200m$ to 1800m$. The second sensitive factor is OPEX, and CAPEX
influences the least on NPV.
• As the Hydrogen selling price increases, NPV increases, in contrast, as CAPEX and OPEX
increase, NPV is decreasing.
• CAPEX, OPEX, and hydrogen selling price are all linear with NPV.
Figure 4.16: Inflation rate and discount rate sensitivity analysis
Figure 4.16 is the sensitivity results of the inflation rate and discount rate:
• Inflation rate has a proportional effect on NPV while the discount rate has an inverse
proportion on NPV.
34
DTU Wind
==PAGE:41==
• The influence of inflation rate and discount rate on NPV is nonlinear, as the change rate
increases, the influence is also increasing.
• Discount rate has strong inflation than the inflation rate on NPV changing value. When
the discount rate changes a lot, NPV will have a very big change.
Figure 4.17: Wind electricity price and water price sensitivity analysis
Figure 4.17 above shows the sensitivity results of wind electricity and water price.
• Wind price has a very obvious influence on NPV, even a very small change rate makes a
big difference. From ­10% to 10% change rate of it, NPV decreases from over 900 million
dollars to less than 400 million dollars.
• Water price has almost no influence on NPV due to its low proportion on OPEX.
DTU Wind
35
==PAGE:42==
5
Discussion and Conclusion
5.1
Result discussion
This part will discuss and summarize the results in the last chapter aiming at technical results,
economic results, and sensitivity analysis, the reasons for causing the results will be revealed
and suggestions for saving costs and making an investment will be illustrated.
5.1.1
Technical results discussion
Without considering the energy loss from the wind farm to the electrolyzer system, almost all
overlapping part of the electrolyzer system’s total power curve and wind electricity curve is
because almost all electricity is used in this process except the last working electrolyzer, which
is not full­loaded due to the electricity leftover which is lower than the lowest operation range.
Logically speaking, in scenario 1, three systems are supposed to have the same production
value, what makes them similar but different is that they use the same efficiency curve, but
not the same operation range, Sunfire electrolyzer has an operation range from 25% of full
load, but PlugPower and Elogen electrolyzer has the lowest range respectively from 10% and
0.1%, as a consequence the last working electrolyzer is easier to start because of the lower
range. Water consumption results from hydrogen production, but the AE system is more water
costly when generating the same amount of hydrogen, this makes a large difference in yearly
water consumption. Load factor equals maximum energy load divided by consumed energy,
three sub­cases have the same maximum load, so it is also the operation range that makes
a difference. Results in scenario 2 can be explained by the operation range difference and
consequent water consumption as well.
In scenario 3, hydrogen production is supposed to increase linearly with electrolyzer amounts,
this principle works for system scale from 1.2GW scale to 1.5GW scale instead of 1GW scale to
the others, that is because the wind electricity leftover never makes the last electrolyzer in the
1GW system never working at full load, but the last working electrolyzer in 1.2GW and 1.5GW
system are always under almost the same working condition. Besides, the reason for making
a difference in larger­scale systems is that during the process of modifying wind electricity,
turbines from closer positions still have different wind conditions which makes the electricity
difference received by electrolyzers.
5.1.2
Economic results discussion
Aiming at economic results, what influences most of CAPEX is electrolyzer technology types,
PEM electrolyzer costs more because of the technical difficulties, leading to a high direct CAPEX
value and following a high indirect value. In scenario 2, the increasing modular scale is influ­
enced by the scale factor, which means a larger­scale modular system is more cost­saving in
the beginning. Using the same electrolyzer modular to build a large­scale system, the capital
cost is linear in this project, however, some other factors may make a difference such as land
rental cost, if larger scale system asks for larger land, it will cost more money, at the same time,
the larger rental cost may cause discount from land providers, there is no specific numerical
value to reflect this relationship.
36
DTU Wind
==PAGE:43==
Wind electricity and water consumption weigh most in OPEX, electrolyzer technology is very
important since AE systems need more water, and higher generation costs more water as well.
The electrolytes’ causticity is one reason for the high maintenance cost of AE system[12]. Be­
sides, cheaper electricity price provides more profit on project investment. During the same
lifespan, OPEX, CAPEX, and hydrogen production together determine the system profit NPV,
any of them can not be ignored in the evaluation. For example, the Elogen PEM electrolyzer
system has the highest production in scenario 1, however, it also has the highest OPEX due to
water and electricity usage, these together create a very high LCOH on this system and lead to
money loss over its lifetime, it is not feasible to invest. Scenario three tells that building a larger
size of electrolyzer can low down LCOH because of the scale factor.
According to sensitivity results, it provides a measure of improving system profit. Approach for
saving CAPEX: for example, choosing electrolyzer with a high return on investment, leasing
equipment rather than buying a brand new one, or asking for a loan from the bank, in this way,
the system owner can leave cash for renting or later OPEX. To save OPEX, the more energy­
saving component could be used such as low­costly cooler and compressors, it is also feasible
to do pre­maintenance to avoid higher costs after equipment gets broken. If it is an AE system,
making electrolyzers work continuously is no doubt an acceptable approach because it takes a
long time to restart[12]. What’s more, make an agreement with a supplier to get a discount on
buying big amount of components and electricity. As hydrogen selling price is the most sensitive
factor, increasing it can receive high revenue quickly, it should also be noticed that a suitable
hydrogen price makes products competitive in the markets, if the price is too high, it will cause
production storage and loss of money.
Although the inflation rate and the discount rate are predictable, there are still a lot of uncertain­
ties and risks in investment. it is of vital importance to make long­term contracts with suppliers
and customers to avoid the sudden change in electricity price, water price, and hydrogen selling
prices. Another way to face the inflation change in the energy system is to buy more original
materials when the price is low, store the hydrogen production and sell it when the price is high.
5.2
Conclusion
Herein, this thesis develops a techno­economic fame work on a gigawatt scale hydrogen­
generating electrolyzer system. Set up three scales to investigate which kind of electrolyzer
system is more optimized in different situations. Here are the conclusions:
• Choosing an electrolyzer with high efficiency and high output has a great impact on improv­
ing the load factor of the system, but at the same time, water consumption and electricity
consumption will lead to increased costs. It is necessary to comprehensively consider the
issues of output, efficiency, and cost to achieve the best investment solution.
• In scenario 1, the Sunfire AE system earns the most over 25 years, it has a fair LCOH
value at 4.7$/kg when the hydrogen selling price is 5$/kg, this system will earn 643 million
dollars. PlugPower PEM system has a lower LCOH of 4.45$/kg, however, it earns 120
million dollars less due to its high OPEX, at the same time, the Elogen PEM electrolyzer
system is losing money, so in this scenario invest 1GW Sunfire AE electrolyzer system is
the best choice.
• In scenario 2, larger modular combined AE systems are both favored choices, 20MW
modular composed system is more preferred because of its lower CAPEX and OPEX and
DTU Wind
37
==PAGE:44==
higher NPV, at the same time, it also has the lowest LCOH. A larger modular consisting
system in a gigawatt­scale system is more feasible.
• In scenario 3, if a larger electrolyzer system is planned, the feasibility of the scheme has
almost no relationship with the scale of the system. What needs to be considered is
the larger project implementation process, whether there will be additional expenditures
and additional discounts such are land rental, so as to judge whether the project is worth
investing in.
In conclusion, this analysis of a gigawatt­scale electrolyzer system demonstrates which kind of
selection is efficient, profitable, reliable, and cost­saving technology for hydrogen production.
5.3
Future work
After this thesis work, there are still lots of tasks to do in the future.
• In the process of calculating hydrogen production, the efficiency of each electrolyzer can
be simulated to achieve a more realistic production simulation.
• Consider the starting sequence and cooling time of the electrolyzer, such as the elec­
trolyzer’s start, stop, and stand­by, to make the electrolyzer system working process more
practical.
• When calculating CAPEX and OPEX, if the actual cost of each component could be found,
comparing the impact of components on the system economy, and considering different
investment methods for components and land, such as purchase or lease, investment
optimization can be reflected in more detail.
• Assess the impact of the environment, market regulation, and potential risks. Conduct
environmental hazard assessments and enter into market surveillance agreements to as­
sess potential risks, and ensure that regulations safeguard investment and operation of
future electrolyzer systems.
• Optimizing electrolyzer system design and operation. By studying the impacts of different
parameters such as air pressure, temperature, and component working conditions on the
system, the efficiency of hydrogen production in the electrolyzer system can be optimized,
and the initial investment and later operating costs can be saved and calculated as well.
38
DTU Wind
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Contributors to Wikimedia projects. Paris Agreement ­ Wikipedia. [Online; accessed 16.
Jul. 2023]. July 2023. URL: https : / / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = Paris _
Agreement&oldid=1163365759.
[2]
Anthony Velazquez Abad and Paul E. Dodds. “Green hydrogen characterisation initia­
tives: Definitions, standards, guarantees of origin, and challenges”. In: Energy Policy 138
(Mar. 2020), p. 111300. ISSN: 0301­4215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111300.
[3]
[Online; accessed 4. Apr. 2023]. Jan. 2022. URL: https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/
pdfs/greenhyd.pdf.
[4]
Hydrogen. [Online; accessed 4. Apr. 2023]. Apr. 2023. URL: https://energy.ec.europa.
eu/topics/energy-systems-integration/hydrogen_en.
[5]
Global Climate Action Strategy. [Online; accessed 16. Jun. 2023]. June 2023. URL: https:
//um.dk/en/foreign-policy/new-climate-action-strategy.
[6]
Denmark’s Energy Islands. [Online; accessed 16. Jun. 2023]. June 2023. URL: https:
//ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/energy-islands/denmarks-energy-islands.
[7]
Hydrohub GigaWatt Scale Electrolyser. [Online; accessed 4. Apr. 2023]. Nov. 2022. URL:
https://ispt.eu/projects/hydrohub-gigawatt.
[8]
A One­GigaWatt Green­Hydrogen Plant. Jan. 2022. URL: file : / / /C : /Users / 16346 /
Desktop/Thesis/reference/A%20One-GigaWatt%20Grenn-Hydrogen%20Plant-Hydrohub%
20Innovation%20Program.pdf.
[9]
Invest in Denmark helps H2 Energy provide 1 GW electrolyser in Esbjerg. [Online; ac­
cessed 4. Apr. 2023]. Apr. 2023. URL: https://investindk.com/cases/plug-power-will-
provide-1-gw-electrolyser-for-h2-energy.
[10]
Matthew J. Palys and Prodromos Daoutidis. “Power­to­X: A review and perspective”. In:
Comput. Chem. Eng. 165 (Sept. 2022), p. 107948. ISSN: 0098­1354. DOI: 10.1016/j.
compchemeng.2022.107948.
DTU Wind
39
==PAGE:46==
[11]
Bruna Rego de Vasconcelos and Jean­Michel Lavoie. “Recent Advances in Power­to­X
Technology for the Production of Fuels and Chemicals”. In: Front. Chem. 7 (June 2019),
p. 454241. ISSN: 2296­2646. DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00392.
[12]
Manuel Gtz et al. “Renewable Power­to­Gas: A technological and economic review”. In:
Renewable Energy 85 (Jan. 2016), pp. 1371–1390. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: 10.1016/j.
renene.2015.07.066.
[13]
Christina Wulf, Petra Zapp, and Andrea Schreiber. “Review of Power­to­X Demonstration
Projects in Europe”. In: Front. Energy Res. 8 (Sept. 2020), p. 547456. ISSN: 2296­598X.
DOI: 10.3389/fenrg.2020.00191.
[14]
Bernd Heid et al. “Five charts on hydrogen’s role in a net­zero future”. In: McKinsey &
Company (Oct. 2022). URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/sustainability/our-
insights/five-charts-on-hydrogens-role-in-a-net-zero-future.
[15]
[Online; accessed 1. Jul. 2023]. Oct. 2022. URL: https: / / hydrogencouncil. com / wp -
content/uploads/2022/10/Global-Hydrogen-Flows.pdf.
[16]
This is what the world’s first energy island may look like. [Online; accessed 30. Jun. 2023].
Nov. 2022. URL: https://stateofgreen.com/en/news/this-is-what-the-worlds-first-energy-
island-may-look-like.
[17]
Energy island partnership brings project one step closer to realisation. [Online; accessed
30. Jun. 2023]. June 2023. URL: https://www.cowi.com/about/news-and-press/energy-
island-partnership-brings-project-one-step-closer-to-realisation.
[18]
North Sea energy island can make Denmark and Belgium electricity neighbours. [Online;
accessed 30. Jun. 2023]. Feb. 2020. URL: https://en.energinet.dk/About-our-news/
News/2021/02/12/Elia-PR/?listId=3187dd0d-12d9-4de8-9f78-ea5c9d11227c.
[19]
Bornholm to become international hub for green technologies. [Online; accessed 30. Jun.
2023]. June 2023. URL: https://www.dtu.dk/english/newsarchive/2022/08/bornholm-
bliver-international-innovationshub-for-groenne-teknologier.
[20]
Denmark’s Energy Islands. [Online; accessed 30. Jun. 2023]. June 2023. URL: https:
//ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/energy-islands/denmarks-energy-islands.
40
DTU Wind
==PAGE:47==
[21]
Bar Bac. “Towards a Zero Energy Island”. In: Renewable Energy 34.3 (Mar. 2009), pp. 784–
789. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2008.04.027.
[22]
Renewable Energy Island | VisitSamsoe.dk. [Online; accessed 19. Jul. 2023]. Aug. 2022.
URL: https://www.visitsamsoe.dk/en/inspiration/energy-academy.
[23]
Dimitris Al Katsaprakakis and Manolis Voumvoulakis. “A hybrid power plant towards 100%
energy autonomy for the island of Sifnos, Greece. Perspectives created from energy co­
operatives”. In: Energy 161 (Oct. 2018), pp. 680–698. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: 10.1016/j.
energy.2018.07.198.
[24]
Hydrohub GigaWatt Scale Electrolyser. [Online; accessed 21. Jul. 2023]. May 2023. URL:
https://ispt.eu/projects/hydrohub-gigawatt.
[25]
Jonathon Yates et al. “Techno­economic Analysis of Hydrogen Electrolysis from Off­Grid
Stand­Alone Photovoltaics Incorporating Uncertainty Analysis”. In: Cell Rep. Phys. Sci.
1.10 (Oct. 2020), p. 100209. ISSN: 2666­3864. DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrp.2020.100209.
[26]
Mostafa Rezaei, Nafiseh Naghdi­Khozani, and Niloofar Jafari. “Wind energy utilization
for hydrogen production in an underdeveloped country: An economic investigation”. In:
Renewable Energy 147 (Mar. 2020), pp. 1044–1057. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: 10.1016/j.
renene.2019.09.079.
[27]
M. Mohsin, A. K. Rasheed, and R. Saidur. “Economic viability and production capacity
of wind generated renewable hydrogen”. In: Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43.5 (Feb. 2018),
pp. 2621–2630. ISSN: 0360­3199. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.12.113.
[28]
[Online; accessed 1. Jul. 2023]. Aug. 2014. URL: https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/
files/2014/08/f18/fcto_2014_electrolytic_h2_wkshp_colella1.pdf.
[29]
Muhammad Haider Ali Khan et al. “Designing optimal integrated electricity supply config­
urations for renewable hydrogen generation in Australia”. In: iScience 24.6 (June 2021),
p. 102539. ISSN: 2589­0042. DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.102539.
[30]
[Online; accessed 1. Jul. 2023]. Jan. 2022. URL: https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/
pdfs/20004-cost-electrolytic-hydrogen-production.pdf.
DTU Wind
41
==PAGE:48==
[31]
Katherine Ayers et al. “Perspectives on Low­Temperature Electrolysis and Potential for
Renewable Hydrogen at Scale”. In: Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 10.1 (June 2019),
pp. 219–239. ISSN: 1947­5438. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-060718-030241.
[32]
HTW Editorial Team. “World’s largest PEM electrolyzer installed in Canada | Hydrogen
Tech World.com”. In: Hydrogen Tech World.com (Nov. 2021). URL: https://hydrogentechworld.
com/worlds-largest-pem-electrolyzer-installed-in-canada.
[33]
Ajsa Habibic. “”World’s largest” electrolyser arrives in Norway to scale up green hydrogen
projects”. In: Offshore Energy (Sept. 2022). URL: https://www.offshore- energy.biz/
worlds-largestelectrolyser-arrives-in-norway-to-scale-up-green-hydrogen-projects.
[34]
Record breaker | World’s largest green hydrogen project, with 150MW electrolyser, brought
on line in China. [Online; accessed 1. Jul. 2023]. Feb. 2022. URL: https://www.rechargenews.
com/energy-transition/record-breaker-world-s-largest-green-hydrogen-project-with-
150mw-electrolyser-brought-on-line-in-china/2-1-1160799.
[35]
[Online; accessed 1. Jul. 2023]. Sept. 2019. URL: https://d-nb.info/1193929474/34.
[36]
[Online; accessed 1. Jul. 2023]. May 2021. URL: https://www.cefc.com.au/media/
nhnhwlxu/australian-hydrogen-market-study.pdf.
[37]
North Sea Energy Island. [Online; accessed 6. Jul. 2023]. July 2023. URL: https : / /
northseaenergyisland.dk/en.
[38]
Offshore wind data. [Online; accessed 4. Apr. 2023]. Apr. 2023. URL: https://orsted.com/
en/our-business/offshore-wind/wind-data.
[39]
Anholt Offshore Wind Farm ­ Denmark’s largest offshore wind farm. [Online; accessed 4.
Apr. 2023]. Apr. 2023. URL: https://ramboll.com/projects/re/anholt-offshore-wind-farm.
[40]
[Online; accessed 13. Apr. 2023]. Apr. 2023. URL: https://pubs-acs-org.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/doi/pdf/10.1021/ef060491u.
[41]
[Online; accessed 4. Apr. 2023]. Sept. 2013. URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy10osti/
47302.pdf.
[42]
Techno­economic analysis of hydrogen production from PV plants. 2022. URL: file:///C:
/Users/16346/Downloads/Techno-economic_analysis_of_hydrogen_production_fr.pdf.
42
DTU Wind
==PAGE:49==
[43]
Simone Pascuzzi et al. “Electrolyzer Performance Analysis of an Integrated Hydrogen
Power System for Greenhouse Heating. A Case Study”. In: Sustainability 8.7 (July 2016),
p. 629. ISSN: 2071­1050. DOI: 10.3390/su8070629.
[44]
Contributors to Wikimedia projects. Heat of combustion ­ Wikipedia. [Online; accessed
21. Jul. 2023]. May 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heat_of_
combustion&oldid=1153485259.
[45]
Muhammad Haider Ali Khan et al. “Designing Optimal Integrated Electricity Supply Config­
urations for Renewable Hydrogen Generation in Australia”. In: iScience 24.6 (May 2021),
p. 102539. ISSN: 2589­0042. DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.102539.
[46]
Denmark ­ Inflation rate 2028 | Statista. [Online; accessed 12. Jul. 2023]. July 2023. URL:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/318356/inflation-rate-in-denmark.
[47]
Causes of Inflation | Explainer | Education. [Online; accessed 12. Jul. 2023]. July 2023.
URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/education/resources/explainers/causes-of-inflation.html.
[48]
Course 46205. Feasibility Studies of Energy Projects. Lecture Note. Year of Publication.
[49]
[Online; accessed 12. Jul. 2023]. Sept. 2019. URL: https://d-nb.info/1193929474/34.
DTU Wind
43
